 The Green Wing Special is the final episode of the British sitcom Green Wing . It was first broadcast in Australia and Belgium on 29 December 2006 . It was aired on 4 January 2007 in the United Kingdom . The episode is sometimes billed as a Christmas special , although the episode contains nothing Christmas related . The special is 90 minutes long , around twice the length of a normal episode . 
 The special continues the plot from the end of the second series of Green Wing , which ended with Caroline Todd ( played by Tamsin Greig ) becoming engaged to Guy Secretan ( Stephen Mangan ) , " Mac " Macartney ( Julian Rhind @-@ Tutt ) learning that he was going to die , Alan Statham ( Mark Heap ) and Joanna Clore ( Pippa Haywood ) fleeing from the police after they murdered Joanna 's cousin , and Karen Ball ( Lucinda Raikes ) having a dramatic change of personality after she fell out of a window . While this was the final episode of Green Wing , an alternative ending was produced in case a third series was written . There was an argument between the cast and the writers about which ending should have been used . The special received mixed views from both critics and fans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins at a funeral , attended by Guy , Caroline , Boyce ( Oliver Chris ) , Martin Dear ( Karl Theobald ) and Sue White ( Michelle Gomez ) . References made in the episode lead the viewer to first believe that it is Mac 's funeral , but then a giant picture of Angela Hunter ( Sarah Alexander ) , who left the hospital in series two , appears . The cause of her death is not fully explained , although comments made by the characters indicate she died in a hunting accident with a moose . The plot then splits between three groups of characters . 
 = = = Caroline , Guy and Mac = = = 
 Mac returns to work after a month 's leave . When Caroline meets him she implies that she is engaged to Guy . Mac and Guy are then drunk in a bar , where Mac tells Guy he is going to die in a couple of weeks and makes Guy promise he will not tell Caroline . However , Guy tells Martin , who then complains to him about his selfishness . However , Caroline walks in and overhears the argument . Meanwhile , Mac suggests to Sue that she finds someone else to love . Caroline confronts Mac about marrying her . Mac defends himself by saying it would be better for her to marry Guy because he will live longer . Guy later decides to do the right thing , and tells Mac to propose to Caroline because they love each other . Caroline and Mac therefore become engaged and later marry , where the majority of the core cast are in attendance . At the wedding , Sue is seen with a new boyfriend . The special ends with Caroline floating away into the sky holding a mass of helium balloons . 
 = = = Alan and Joanna = = = 
 After being rescued by Martin while they were teetering over the edge of a cliff in a stolen campervan , Alan and Joanna are on the run , believing the police are after them for the murder of Joanna 's cousin . They go to a garage to get the van checked for faults , but as they leave , Joanna accidentally runs over the mechanic by putting the van in the wrong gear and reversing into him . They then try to rob a corner shop and Joanna tells Alan to sit on the shopkeeper to restrain her , but this causes Alan to accidentally suffocate her . Back at the hospital , Boyce begins to miss Alan after discovering his replacement is worse than him . Boyce 's plotline with Alan is concluded when Alan telephones him to say goodbye , almost confirming the strange love they have for each other , but instead telling him ( in code ) that he is " Flying west " . 
 Later , Alan and Joanna are stopped by a policeman on suspicion of stealing the campervan . Joanna gets her peanut @-@ butter sandwich and smears it in the policeman 's face . Alan and Joanna have an argument about the minute odds of the policeman having a peanut allergy and going into anaphylaxis , while in the background this is actually happening . They then carry the body of the policeman into the van . Soon , having run out of food and petrol , Alan changes the engine to run on alcohol and fermented excrement . The plan is of no use however , as the van explodes . They soon reach the beach and Joanna gives Alan three options : Give themselves up , swim the Channel to Spain or commit suicide . As Alan is not keen on the Spanish , they choose the third option and they are last seen walking naked into the sea , presumably to their deaths - although the alternate ending shows them hanging on to a buoy sometime later . 
 = = = Admin girls = = = 
 Having fallen out of a window , Karen walks into the office dressed smartly and <unk> . However , she has lost a hand and her nose whistles when she has an orgasm . When the girls realise that Joanna is not there to control them they start going wild . They start off by doing mild things such as swapping desks and tipping up litter , then become wilder by interviewing people and asking people to pull their trousers down . Slowly , the scene turns into a " Lord of the Flies " situation . They soon begin to argue and Harriet Schulenburg ( Olivia Colman ) decides to become the new Joanna . Martin is captured by Naughty Rachel ( Katie Lyons ) , Kim Alabaster ( Sally Bretton ) and Karen , chanting " Kill the doctor " at him . Martin calls for his mummy ( Joanna ) , but when Harriet comes out into the office she proclaims she is the " new mummy in town " , and he is dragged into the office . However , Martin somehow manages to escape by means unknown . 
 = = Production = = 
 The production on the special was similar to that of the other episodes , with the hospital scenes being shot in the usual locations ( the Northwick Park Hospital in Middlesex and the North Hampshire Hospital in Basingstoke ) . The script was written by the usual eight @-@ person team led by Victoria Pile , and produced and directed by the same people who recorded all the previous episodes . The special was recorded at the same time as the second series . The exterior scenes were harder to shoot . In the beginning funeral scene , one of the mourners is Alan Yentob , who had been filming an episode of the BBC One documentary series Imagine . Stephen Mangan said that Martin 's mime during the funeral was one of his favourite moments in Green Wing . The opening titles of the episode differ from the others as it does not use the normal theme tune , " Last Week " , ( as it is named in the original television soundtrack ) and instead uses the track , " Camel " . 
 There were some improvised scenes . These included a scene in the beginning of the episode where Alan and Joanna are in a middle of a field and the scene begins with a low @-@ angle shot . Later , when Alan is " humping " Joanna , the scene suddenly becomes a crane shot . This is because the crew at the time had a crane camera after they had finished filming the final scenes in series 2 where Alan , Joanna and Martin are teetering over the edge of a cliff in the stolen camper van . The camper van scenes were the hardest to shoot , especially the scene where the van explodes , as this had to be done in one take . Another problem was the smell of the van , which Pippa Haywood said , " smelt of old dogs . " The van also suffered other problems such as bits of the steering wheel and gear stick coming off . Julian Rhind @-@ Tutt commented that the scene where Alan and Boyce talk together for the last time was one of the most moving scenes in the whole of Green Wing . The wedding was shot at Hall of <unk> Abbey in Kent , where the crew had difficulty filming due to bad weather . The show also features a guest appearance from Jeremy Sheffield near the end of the episode as Sue 's new boyfriend . 
 The DVD of the special was released on 8 January , four days after its premiere in the UK . Features include the alternate ending , a " Behind the Scenes " featurette , 20 minutes of deleted scenes and commentary from many of the main cast , which includes commentary from some foreign relatives of Michelle Gomez who had not seen the show before . Three extra deleted scenes from the special were later released in " The Definitive Collection " DVD boxset . 
 = = = Alternative ending = = = 
 An alternative ending was made for the special which was never broadcast , but was put as an extra on the DVD . In this version of the ending , when Mac sees Caroline floating away , he runs down the stairs and out of the castle to save her . Caroline begins to descend , and both Mac and Guy grab hold of one her legs to bring her down , but instead they are lifted into the air with her . While the three fly away Caroline exclaims " We 're all going to die ! " , to which Mac quite sternly says " Caroline , there 's something I 've been meaning to tell you " , opening the possibility that Mac is not going to die . Meanwhile , Alan and Joanna , after walking into the sea , are last seen hanging onto a buoy waiting to drown . They are still talking and waiting for the ocean to drown them . 
 This ending was the favourite amongst the actors . Mangan said that the alternative ending was the best moment in the whole of Green Wing . However , the alternative ending was rejected and the writers favoured the ending that was eventually broadcast . It is believed that the alternative ending would have been broadcast if a third series was being made , as that ending was much more ambiguous , since Alan and Joanna are still seen alive and Mac tells Caroline that he still has something to say . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When the special was first broadcast , it was watched by 1 @.@ 7 million viewers , 11 % of the total audience . However , these ratings are poor compared to other programmes . For example , an episode of Desperate Housewives shown the previous night attracted 2 @.@ 8 million viewers . Responses from critics were mixed . Matt Baylis said , " Like a homegrown ER on laughing gas , this show will be sorely missed , " and Ian Johns said , " It was like a Richard Curtis romcom , albeit one force @-@ fed magic mushrooms . " Sam Wollaston in The Guardian wrote that it was one of the funniest shows on British television , alongside the satirical sitcom The Thick of It , saying , " The Thick of It is clever @-@ funny , Green Wing is mad @-@ funny . " Wollaston said that while the dramatic element of the show , such as Mac 's death , were good , it was Alan and Joanna 's storyline that was most entertaining . " Mark Heap and Pippa Haywood , who play them , have been the shining lights in an already glittering show . They , and it , will be sorely missed , " he said . David Butcher in the Radio Times said that , " Green Wing 's sublime comic acting and a vein of shrieking madness in the writing make it very hard to beat . " 
 Paul Whitelaw however attacked both the series and the special saying , " This final installment was typically awful , more so considering its length . " Fans of the show thought that while the special was good , it was not the greatest episode of Green Wing made . Some thought the special concentrated too much on the drama instead of the comedy . Some were confused by the final ending and others complained about the lack of appearances made by Sue White . 
 = Charles Mathias = 
 Charles McCurdy " Mac " Mathias Jr . ( July 24 , 1922 – January 25 , 2010 ) was a Republican member of the United States Senate , representing Maryland from 1969 to 1987 . He was also a member of the Maryland House of Delegates from 1959 to 1960 , and of the United States House of Representatives , representing the 6th congressional district of Maryland from 1961 to 1969 . 
 After studying law and serving in the United States Navy during World War II , Mathias worked as a lawyer and was elected to the state legislature in 1958 . In 1960 , he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Western Maryland . He was re @-@ elected three times ( 1962 , 1964 , 1966 ) , serving in the House for eight years , where he aligned himself with the then @-@ influential liberal wing of the Republican Party . 
 Mathias was elected to the Senate in 1968 , unseating the incumbent Democrat , Daniel Brewster , who twenty years earlier had been his roommate while attending the University of Maryland School of Law . He continued his record as a liberal Republican in the Senate , and frequently clashed with the conservative wing of his party . For a few months in late 1975 and early 1976 , Mathias considered running an insurgent presidential campaign in an attempt to stave off the increasing influence of conservative Republicans led by Ronald Reagan . 
 His confrontations with conservatives cost him several leadership positions in the Senate , including chairmanship of the Judiciary Committee . Despite isolation from his conservative colleagues , Mathias played an influential role in fostering African American civil rights , ending the Vietnam War , preserving the Chesapeake Bay , and constructing the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . He retired from the Senate in 1987 , having served in Congress for twenty @-@ six years ( eight years in the U.S. House of Representatives and eighteen years in the U.S. Senate ) . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mathias was born in Frederick , Maryland , the son of Theresa ( née Trail ) and Charles Mathias , Sr. His father was politically active , and he was a descendant of several Maryland legislators . After graduating from Frederick High School , Mathias graduated from Haverford College in Pennsylvania in 1944 . He went on to attend Yale University and received a law degree from the University of Maryland School of Law in 1949 . Around this time , Mathias met his future wife , Ann Bradford , at a birthday party for his law school roommate Daniel Brewster . Ann Bradford is the daughter of former Massachusetts governor Robert F. Bradford . 
 In 1942 , during World War II , Mathias enlisted in the United States Navy and served at the rank of seaman apprentice . He was promoted to ensign in 1944 and served sea duty in the Pacific Ocean , including the recently devastated Hiroshima , from 1944 until he was released from active duty in 1946 . Following the war , Mathias rose to the rank of captain in the United States Naval Reserve . 
 Mathias briefly served as assistant Attorney General of Maryland from 1953 to 1954 . From 1954 to 1959 , he worked as the City Attorney of Frederick , where he supported civil rights for African Americans . He played a role in desegregating the local Opera House movie theater , which restricted African American seating to the back of the theater . Mathias also worked to relocate the Frederick post office and helped protect a park in the city . In 1958 , he was elected to the Maryland House of Delegates , serving from 1959 to 1960 . As a delegate , he voted in favor of Maryland ratifying the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which secured African American rights following the American Civil War . With his support , the legislature ratified the amendment in 1959 , nearly 100 years after it was first introduced . 
 = = In the House of Representatives = = 
 On January 4 , 1960 , Mathias declared his candidacy for the House seat of Maryland 's 6th congressional district . He officially began his campaign in March , establishing public education and controls on government spending as two of his priorities should he be elected . In the primary elections of May 1960 , Mathias handily defeated his two rivals , garnering a 3 – 1 margin of victory . 
 Mathias ' opponent in the general election was John R. Foley , a former judge who had unseated DeWitt Hyde in a Democratic landslide in the state two years prior . Both candidates attacked each other 's voting records , with Foley accusing Mathias of skipping more than 500 votes in the House of Delegates and having the " worst Republican record in Annapolis " . Mathias previously accused Foley of voting " present " ( a de facto abstention ) in the House too often , and argued Foley 's inaction led to inflation and higher taxes . Mathias prevailed over Foley on election day in November 1960 , unseating the one @-@ term incumbent and becoming the first representative from Frederick County since Milton Urner in 1883 . 
 During his eight @-@ year career in the House , Mathias established himself as a member of the liberal wing of the Republican Party , which was the most influential at the time . He was the author of the " Mathias Amendment " to the unsuccessful 1966 civil rights bill on open housing . Concerning environmental issues , Mathias sponsored legislation to make the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal a national park , and supported other conservation initiatives along the Potomac River . He also served on the Judiciary Committee and the Committee on the District of Columbia . As a member of the D.C. Committee , Mathias was a proponent of establishing home rule in the District of Columbia . 
 = = United States Senate career = = 
 = = = Election of 1968 : unseating Brewster = = = 
 Leading up to the United States Senate elections of 1968 , Mathias ' name was frequently mentioned as a potential challenger to Democratic incumbent Daniel Brewster , his college roommate . Representative Rogers Morton of Maryland 's 1st congressional district was also considering a run at Brewster 's seat , but was dissuaded by Republican party leaders in the state in favor of a Mathias candidacy . Their decision was largely due to the geography of Mathias ' seat . As representative of the 6th district , he already had established name recognition in both the Baltimore and Washington , D.C. , metropolitan areas , the more densely populated and liberal areas of the state . Mathias ' seat was also more likely to stay under Republican control , unlike Morton 's seat , which was located on the socially conservative but Democratic @-@ voting Eastern Shore of Maryland . Mathias had also established a more liberal voting record , which was argued to serve him better in the state with a 3 @-@ 1 Democratic advantage in registered voters . 
 Mathias officially declared his candidacy for the Senate on February 10 , 1968 , calling for troop reductions in the Vietnam War , and identifying urban blight , racial discrimination , welfare reform , and improving public schools as major issues . As the campaign drew on , the two primary issues became the war and crime . Mathias argued that the extensive bombing campaigns in North Vietnam should be reduced , while Brewster had argued for increasing bombardment . Brewster adopted a hard line stance on law and order , while Mathias advocated addressing the precipitating causes of poverty and the low standard of living in urban ghettos . Campaign finances were also an issue , with controversy erupting over Brewster 's receipt of $ 15 @,@ 000 in campaign contributions from his Senate staff and their families . On November 5 , 1968 , Mathias was elected , garnering 48 % of the vote to Brewster 's 39 % and perennial candidate George P. Mahoney 's 13 % . 
 = = = First term ( 1969 – 1975 ) : conflict with Nixon = = = 
 Mathias began his first term in the Senate in January 1969 and laid out his legislative agenda soon thereafter . He was appointed to the District of Columbia committee , where he argued in favor of home rule in the district and providing D.C. residents full representation in both chambers of Congress . Both were positions he carried over from his career in the House . In December 1970 he finally gained passage of legislation creating the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National Historical Park . He also served as chair of the Special Committee on Termination of the National Emergency from 1971 to 1977 , which produced Senate Report 93 @-@ 549 . 
 Over the course of his first term , Mathias was frequently at odds with his conservative colleagues in the Senate and the Richard Nixon administration . In June 1969 , Mathias joined with fellow liberal Republican Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania in threatening a " rebellion " unless the Nixon administration worked harder to protect African American civil rights . He also warned against Republicans using the " Southern strategy " of attracting conservative George Wallace voters at the expense of moderate or liberal voters . Mathias voted against two controversial Nixon Supreme Court nominees , Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell , neither of whom was confirmed . Mathias was also an early advocate for setting a timetable for withdrawal of troops from Vietnam , and was against the bombing campaigns Nixon launched into Laos . In October 1972 , Mathias became the first Republican on Ted Kennedy 's Judiciary subcommittee and one of only a few in the nation to support investigation of the Watergate Scandal , which was still in its early stages . 
 Mathias ' disagreements with the administration became well @-@ known , causing columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak to name him the " new supervillain ... in President Nixon 's doghouse " . Evans and Novak also commented that " not since [ Charles Goodell ] was defeated with White House connivance has any Republican so outraged Mr. Nixon and his senior staff as Mathias . The senator 's liberalism and tendency to bolt party lines have bred animosity in the inner sanctum " . Due to their differing ideologies , there was speculation that Mathias was going to be " purged " from the party by Nixon in a similar manner as Goodell in 1971 , but these threats disappeared after the Watergate scandal escalated . By the numbers , Mathias sided with the Nixon administration 47 % of the time , and voted with the majority of his Republican colleagues in the Senate 31 % of the time , during his first term . 
 In early 1974 , the group Americans for Democratic Action rated Mathias the most liberal member of the GOP in the Senate based on twenty key votes in the 1973 legislative session . At 90 percent , his score was higher than most Democrats in the Senate , and was fourth highest amongst all members . Issues considered when rating senators included their positions on civil rights , mass transit , D.C. home rule , tax reform , and reducing overseas troop levels . The League of Women Voters gave Mathias a 100 % on issues important to them , and the AFL @-@ CIO agreed with Mathias on 32 out of 45 key labor votes . Conversely , the conservative group Americans for Constitutional Action stated Mathias agreed with their positions only 16 % of the time . 
 = = = Election of 1974 : challenge from Mikulski = = = 
 As a Republican representing heavily @-@ Democratic Maryland , Mathias faced a potentially difficult re @-@ election bid for the 1974 election . State Democrats nominated Barbara Mikulski , then a Baltimore City Councilwoman who was well @-@ known to residents in her city as a social activist , but with limited name recognition in the rest of the state . Mathias was renominated by Republicans , fending off a primary election challenge from conservative doctor Ross Pierpont . Pierpont was never a substantial threat to Mathias , whose lack of competition was due in part to fallout from the Watergate scandal . 
 As an advocate for campaign finance reform , Mathias refused to accept any contribution over $ 100 to " avoid the curse of big money that has led to so much trouble in the last year " . However , he still managed to raise over $ 250 @,@ 000 , nearly five times Mikulski 's total . Ideologically , Mikulski and Mathias agreed on many issues , such as closing tax loopholes and easing taxes on the middle class . On two issues , however , Mathias argued to reform Congress and the U.S. tax system to address inflation and corporate price fixing , contrary to Mikulski . In retrospect , The Washington Post felt the election was " an intelligent discussion of state , national , and foreign affairs by two smart , well @-@ informed people " . 
 With Maryland voters , Mathias benefited from his frequent disagreements with the Nixon administration and his liberal voting record . On November 5 , 1974 , he was re @-@ elected by a 57 % to 43 % margin , though he lost badly in Baltimore City and Baltimore County , where Mikulski was popular . 
 = = = Second term ( 1975 – 1981 ) : unease with the growth of conservatism = = = 
 In 1975 , Mathias co @-@ introduced legislation with Illinois Senator Adlai Stevenson III that would prohibit foreign aid to South Vietnam after June 30 , 1975 . 
 Mathias expressed concerns with the state of his party leading up to the 1976 presidential election , specifically its shift further to the right . Referring to the nomination contest between Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan , Mathias remarked that the party leadership was placed " in further isolation , in an extreme — almost fringe — position " . On November 8 , 1975 , he hinted at entering some presidential primary elections to steer the party away from what he saw as a strong conservative trend . Over the next few months , Mathias continued to show signs of entering the election , but never campaigned aggressively and lacked any political organization . Columnist George Will commented that Mathias was " contemplating a race — a stroll , really — for the presidency " , in reference to his staid campaign . 
 After four months of consideration , Mathias decided in March 1976 to not seek the presidency , and asked for his name to be withdrawn from the Massachusetts primary ballot , where it had been added automatically . He had also been considering an independent bid , but said raising money would be too difficult under campaign finance laws . Upon his withdrawal , Mathias stated he would work with the Republican Party in the upcoming elections . However , despite his pledge to support the Republican candidate , Mathias ' criticism of the party did not wane , stating that " over and over again during the primaries , I have felt uncomfortably like a member of the chorus in a Greek tragedy " . In a further criticism of his party 's neglect of liberal voters , Mathias commented : 
 I 've had to deal with some hard truths ... People don 't like to hear we 've got only 18 percent of the electorate . They pretend it 's not important that our following among blacks , and young people , and urban communities is not what it should be ... But I feel it 's of the greatest importance that if there 's to be a Republican Party , we look these facts in the face . 
 Mathias ' short candidacy did not endear him to the conservative wing of the Maryland Republican Party organization . In June 1976 , he lost a vote by state Republicans to determine who would represent Maryland on the platform committee at the 1976 Republican National Convention . Instead , the group chose George Price , a conservative member of the Maryland House of Delegates from Baltimore County . At one point , Mathias was close to being denied attendance to the convention altogether as an at @-@ large delegate , but a last minute compromise ensured all Republican congressional representatives seats as at @-@ large delegates . Mathias maintained a low profile during the convention , and received harsh criticism from some of the conservative delegates from Maryland who attended . 
 At the beginning of the new Congress in 1977 , Mathias was in line for several potential committee promotions to ranking member . However , Mathias ' outspoken criticism of the party in the previous election cycle aroused enmity amongst his colleagues . On the Judiciary Committee , Mathias had the most seniority of any other member except Strom Thurmond of South Carolina , who already held another ranking membership on the Armed Services Committee . Only one ranking membership was allowed per senator , so Thurmond resigned his ranking membership on the Armed Services Committee to circumvent Mathias serving as ranking member of the Judiciary Committee . Mathias was also prevented from assuming leadership positions on the Government Operations Committee following a power struggle , and on the Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights . On the latter subcommittee , Mathias had more seniority than any other member . However , party leaders were uneasy with the idea of allowing Mathias to team up with liberal Democrat and subcommittee chairman Birch Bayh , and voted instead for William L. Scott as ranking member . 
 = = = Election of 1980 : uncertain party renomination = = = 
 After these slights , speculation was raised that Mathias would leave the Republican Party , especially as the 1980 elections were approaching . Several prominent conservatives in the state , such as U.S. Representatives Marjorie Holt and Robert Bauman , were considering challenging Mathias for his seat . In contrast , the Democratic side of the aisle had fewer challengers , suggesting Mathias would win renomination more easily if he were to switch parties . However , Mathias chose to remain as a Republican , and teamed up with eight other Republican senators to express their dissatisfaction with the hard @-@ line wing of the party . Mathias later stated that he had never seriously considered switching parties . 
 When it came time to nominate members to the 1980 Republican National Convention , Maryland Republicans voted for Mathias and Bauman as co @-@ chairmen of the delegation to represent the liberal and conservative wings of the party , respectively . The 1980 nomination contest lacked the " fierce ideological bickering that marked the 1976 state convention " , in which Mathias was nearly excluded as a delegate . 
 Despite initial concerns that a strong conservative would run in the 1980 Republican primary , Mathias did not face any major opposition for his seat . He easily won his party 's nomination , and was re @-@ elected by a substantial margin in November . His Democratic counterpart in the election , Edward T. Conroy , positioned himself as more conservative than Mathias . Conroy also made national defense the primary issue of his campaign , where he accused Mathias of being weak . Mathias countered , stating he had voted for over $ 1 @.@ 1 trillion in defense spending during his career in the Senate . By winning easy re @-@ election , Mathias became the first Maryland Republican to win election to a third Senate term , and also the only Republican to win the city of Baltimore up to that point . He also secured support from several precincts of Baltimore 's Democratic political machine , and several labor unions . 
 = = = Final term ( 1981 – 1987 ) = = = 
 After Republicans gained control of the Senate in 1981 , Mathias sought the chairmanship of the Judiciary Committee but was relegated to the relatively mundane chairmanship of the Rules Committee . He was also appointed chairman of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Efficiency and the District of Columbia , and accepted a seat on the influential Foreign Relations Committee , though he had to sacrifice his seat on the Appropriations Committee to do so . In 1982 , Mathias chaired a bipartisan Senate inquiry into the methods used by the FBI in the <unk> corruption investigation , which found that dozens of officials had been named for accepting bribes without basis . He also served as co @-@ chair of the Joint Committee on Printing from 1981 to 1983 and 1985 to 1987 , and as a member of the Joint Committee on the Library from 1983 to 1987 . 
 Leading up to the 1986 elections , it was unclear whether Mathias would seek a fourth term . His support of President Reagan was lukewarm , which had further isolated him ideologically from his Republican colleagues . One delegate at the Maryland state party convention had even called Mathias " liberal swine " for his record . Additionally , his frequent difficulties in securing a committee chairmanship along with his low attendance rate were raising questions regarding his ability . However , Mathias was showing signs of seeking re @-@ election in 1985 , and dismissed any claims of ineffectiveness . Mathias claimed " within a matter of minutes , I can talk to any member of the Cabinet ; and I could go see them within 24 hours .... It was no accident that the Chesapeake Bay was mentioned in the President 's State of the Union address . That took a lot of hard work " . 
 Despite initial indications otherwise , Mathias announced on September 27 , 1985 , that he would not seek a fourth term . His announcement concerned Republican party officials in the state , who feared that local Republicans had poorer election chances without Mathias at the top of the ticket . At the national level , Mathias ' announcement came shortly after news that Republican Paul <unk> of Nevada would be retiring as well . The departure of two Republican senators from swing or Democratic @-@ leaning states was treated by Republican party leaders as a poor sign of the party 's chances in the upcoming elections . Linda Chavez won the Republican primary for the Senate seat , and she lost to Democrat Barbara Mikulski . 
 Mathias remained active in his final days in the Senate , playing an important role in removing a death penalty provision in a 1986 Senate drug bill after threatening filibuster , and in preparing impeachment proceedings against federal judge Harry E. Claiborne . Mathias ' last day in the Senate was January 3 , 1987 , at which point he was succeeded by Barbara Mikulski . 
 = = Legacy and post @-@ Senate life = = 
 Mathias held a retirement party at the Baltimore Convention Center on July 14 , 1986 , which had over 1 @,@ 200 attendees . The proceeds from the event , at $ 150 per person , were used to establish a foreign studies program at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies in his name . Mathias planned to teach at Johns Hopkins following his departure from the Senate . 
 Donald P. Baker of The Washington Post commented that Mathias ' lasting reputation would be that of a maverick . Though he was elected to the House in 1960 as a moderate / conservative , his life in the Congress moved him to the center , and he frequently deviated from the party line and sided with Democrats . The fact that he " went out of his way to disassociate himself from [ Ronald Reagan ] " in the 1980 elections had hindered his chances at a chairmanship . Mathias also established a record on civil rights , having played an important role in passing a fair housing bill while he was in the House , and also in establishing a national holiday for Martin Luther King Jr . He held liberal views on abortion , defense spending , and the Equal Rights Amendment , and , along with Senator John Warner of Virginia , was one of the sponsors of a bill to authorize the construction of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial . In discussing Mathias ' retirement , Tom Wicker of The New York Times commented that " he was fair , flexible , concerned , able to rise above partisanship but not above responsibility " . When Wicker asked him which senators he respected the most , Mathias listed J. William Fulbright ( D ) , Jacob Javits ( R ) , John Sherman Cooper ( R ) , Cliff Case ( R ) , Phil Hart ( D ) , Mike Mansfield ( D ) , and George Aiken ( R ) , because " each one of those people would take an issue on his own responsibility ... They 'd simply come to the conclusion that this was the right thing for the country " . 
 On environmental issues , Mathias established a record as a strong advocate of the Chesapeake Bay . After touring the bay shoreline in 1973 , he sponsored legislation that led to a study by the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) two years later , which was one of the first reports that made the public aware of harmful levels of nutrients and toxins in the waters . As a result , the report was one of the catalysts for cleanup efforts , and evolved into the Chesapeake Bay Program . In recognition , the Charles Mathias Laboratory , part of the Smithsonian Institution , was established in 1988 as a research facility to analyze human impact on the bay . In 1990 , the Mathias Medal was established by Maryland Sea Grant at the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science as further acknowledgment of Mathias ' environmental record . In 2003 , thirty years after he launched a study of the Chesapeake , Mathias was recognized by the Army Corps of Engineers for the influential role he played initiating restoration efforts . 
 From 1987 to 1993 , Mathias was a partner at the law firm of Jones , Day , Reavis and Pogue . In 1991 , Mathias was chosen by the U.S. Federal Reserve Board to lead a committee to supervise the operations of First American <unk> , Inc . Prior to his arrival , First American had been secretly acquired by Bank of Credit and Commerce International , which resulted in a major banking scandal . Mathias was appointed chairman of the board of First American in November 1992 , replacing former U.S. Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach . He continued as chairman of First American until 1999 . 
 After his retirement , Mathias served on numerous boards and committees . He was a member of the Governor 's Commission on State Taxes and Tax Structure ( 1989 – 1990 ) , a member of the Maryland Civil War Heritage Commission ( 1992 – 1995 ) , a member of the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the <unk> , co @-@ chair of the Task Force on the Presidential Appointment and Senate Confirmation Process ( 1996 ) , a member of the board of the George C. Marshall International Center , a member of the board of the Center for Responsive Politics , a member of the board of WorldSpace Satellite Radio , and board member emeritus of Brown University 's Watson Institute for International Studies . Additionally , Mathias served on the Board of Trustees of Enterprise Foundation ( now Enterprise Community Partners ) from 1980 through 2001 . 
 As of 2008 , Mathias practiced law in Washington , D.C. , and was a resident of Chevy Chase , Maryland . On October 28 , 2008 , Mathias endorsed Sen. Barack Obama in the United States presidential election , 2008 . 
 Mathias died from complications of Parkinson 's disease at his home on January 25 , 2010 . 
 = GRB 970228 = 
 GRB 970228 was the first gamma @-@ ray burst ( GRB ) for which an afterglow was observed . It was detected on 28 February 1997 at 02 : 58 UTC . Since 1993 , physicists had predicted GRBs to be followed by a lower @-@ energy afterglow ( in wavelengths such as radio waves , x @-@ rays , and even visible light ) , but until this event , GRBs had only been observed in highly luminous bursts of high @-@ energy gamma rays ( the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation ) . 
 The burst had multiple peaks in its light curve and lasted approximately 80 seconds . <unk> in the light curve of GRB 970228 suggested that a supernova may have occurred as well . The position of the burst coincided with a galaxy about 8 @.@ 1 billion light @-@ years away ( a redshift of z = 0 @.@ 695 ) , providing early evidence that GRBs occur well beyond the Milky Way . 
 = = Observations = = 
 A gamma @-@ ray burst ( GRB ) is a highly luminous flash of gamma rays , the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation . GRBs were first detected in 1967 by the Vela satellites , a series of spacecraft designed to detect nuclear explosions . 
 GRB 970228 was detected on 28 February 1997 at 02 : 58 UTC by the Gamma @-@ Ray Burst Monitor ( <unk> ) and one of the Wide Field Cameras ( <unk> ) on board BeppoSAX , an Italian – Dutch satellite originally designed to study X @-@ rays . Within a few hours , the BeppoSAX team determined the burst 's position with an error box — a small area around the specific position to account for the error in the position — of 3 arcminutes . The burst was also detected by the Ulysses space probe . 
 The burst was located at a right ascension of 05h <unk> <unk> and a declination of + 11 ° 46 ′ 53 @.@ 0 ″ in optical images taken with the William Herschel Telescope on La Palma , providing the first arcsecond @-@ accuracy localization of any Gamma @-@ ray burst . It lasted around 80 seconds and had multiple peaks in its light curve . Gamma @-@ ray bursts have very diverse time profiles , and it is not fully understood why some bursts have multiple peaks and some have only one . One possible explanation is that multiple peaks are formed when the source of the gamma @-@ ray burst undergoes precession . 
 = = Afterglow = = 
 In 1993 , Bohdan <unk> and James E. Rhoads published an article arguing that , regardless of the type of explosion that causes GRBs , the extreme energetics of GRBs meant that matter from the host body must be ejected at relativistic speeds during the explosion . They predicted that the interaction between the ejecta and interstellar matter would create a shock front . Should this shock front occur in a magnetic field , accelerated electrons in it would emit long @-@ lasting synchrotron radiation in the radio frequencies , a phenomenon that would later be referred to as a radio afterglow . Jonathan Katz later concluded that this lower @-@ energy emission would not be limited to radio waves , but should range in frequency from radio waves to x @-@ rays , including visible light . 
 The Narrow Field Instruments on board BeppoSAX began making observations of the GRB 970228 's position within eight hours of its detection . A transient x @-@ ray source was detected which faded with a power @-@ law slope in the days following the burst . This x @-@ ray afterglow was the first GRB afterglow ever detected . Power @-@ law decays have since been recognized as a common feature in GRB afterglows , although most afterglows decay at differing rates during different phases of their lifetimes . 
 Optical images were taken of GRB 970228 's position on 1 and 8 March using the William Herschel Telescope and the Isaac Newton Telescope . Comparison of the images revealed an object which had decreased in luminosity in both visible light and infrared light . This was the burst 's optical afterglow . Deeper follow @-@ up observations using the New Technology Telescope showed that the afterglow coincided with a distant , small galaxy : the first evidence of the extragalactic , cosmological nature of Gamma @-@ ray bursts . After the gamma @-@ ray bursts itself had faded away , very deep observations taken with the Keck telescopes showed the underlying galaxy to have a redshift of 0 @.@ 695 . The predicted radio afterglow was never detected for this burst . At the time of this burst 's discovery , GRBs were believed to emit radiation isotropically . The afterglows from this burst and several others — such as GRB 970508 and GRB <unk> — provided early evidence that GRBs emit radiation in collimated jets , a characteristic which lowers the total energy output of a burst by several orders of magnitude . 
 = = Supernova relation = = 
 Daniel Reichart of the University of Chicago and Titus Galama of the University of Amsterdam independently analyzed GRB 970228 's optical light curve , both concluding that the host object may have undergone a supernova explosion several weeks before the gamma @-@ ray burst occurred . 
 Galama analyzed the light curve of the burst and found that its luminosity decayed at different rates at different times . The luminosity decayed more slowly between March 6 and April 7 than it did before and after these dates . Galama concluded that the earlier light curve had been dominated by the burst itself , whereas the later light curve was produced by the underlying Type Ic supernova . Reichart noted that the late afterglow was redder than the early afterglow , an observation which conflicted with the then @-@ preferred relativistic fireball model for the gamma @-@ ray burst emission mechanism . He also observed that the only GRB with a similar temporal profile was GRB 980326 , for which a supernova relation had already been proposed by Joshua Bloom . 
 An alternative explanation for the light curves of GRB 970228 and GRB 980326 involved dust echoes . Although GRB 980326 did not provide enough information to definitively rule out this explanation , Reichart showed that the light curve of GRB 970228 could only have been caused by a supernova . Definitive evidence linking gamma @-@ ray bursts and supernovae was eventually found in the spectrum of GRB <unk> and the afterglow of GRB <unk> . However , supernova @-@ like features only become apparent in the weeks following a burst , leaving the possibility that very early luminosity variations could be explained by dust echoes . 
 = = Host galaxy = = 
 During the night between 12 and 13 March , Jorge Melnick made observations of the region with the New Technology Telescope . He discovered a faint nebular patch at the burst 's position , almost certainly a distant galaxy . Although there was a remote chance that the burst and this galaxy were unrelated , their positional coincidence provided strong evidence that GRBs occur in distant galaxies rather than within the Milky Way . This conclusion was later supported by observations of GRB 970508 , the first burst to have its redshift determined . 
 The position of the burst 's afterglow was measurably offset from the centroid of the host galaxy , effectively ruling out the possibility that the burst originated in an active galactic nucleus . The redshift of the galaxy was later determined to be z = 0 @.@ 695 , which corresponds to a distance of approximately 8 @.@ 123 × 109 ly . At this distance , the burst would have released a total of 5 @.@ 2 × 1044 J assuming isotropic emission . 
 = <unk> = 
 Phumdis are a series of floating islands , exclusive to the Loktak Lake in Manipur state , in northeastern India . They cover a substantial part of the lake area and are heterogeneous masses of vegetation , soil and organic matter , in different stages of decay . The largest single mass of phumdi is in the southeastern part of the lake , covering an area of 40 km2 ( 15 @.@ 4 sq mi ) . This mass constitutes the world ’ s largest floating park , named Keibul Lamjao National Park . The park was formed to preserve the endangered Eld 's deer subspecies , called sangai in the Manipuri language , indigenous to this area . 
 Phumdis are used by the local people for constructing their huts for fishing and other livelihood uses , and are inhabited by about 4000 people . <unk> are artificial circular phumdis , built by the villagers as enclosures for fish farming ; aquaculture has caused proliferation of the phumdis in the lake . 
 = = Traditional practice = = 
 Although phumdi vegetation has existed for centuries , it was not until 1886 that the Manipur Gazetteer recorded that wetlands with floating islands were used by inhabitants for fishing . Before the <unk> barrage was constructed in 1986 , 207 <unk> ( huts or sheds ) were reported on the phumdis , but after the dam was completed in 1999 , the Loktak Development Authority ( LDA ) reported 800 such structures . Many of the huts are reported to have been converted into permanent dwellings and about 4 @,@ 000 people live in these floating huts , earning their living as fishermen . The huts are constructed using plastic ropes , heavy rocks , wood , bamboo , zinc plates and iron rods . <unk> , artificial circular phumdis , which were built by the villagers as enclosures for fish farming , are present on the lake , and this aquaculture has caused further proliferation of the phumdis . A tourist lodge has been built on one of the phumdis in Sandra Island . 
 = = Ecological composition = = 
 The floating mass of matted vegetation , organic debris , and soil that constitutes a phumdi has a thickness that varies from a few centimetres to two metres . Its humus is black in colour and porous , with a spongy texture . Only 20 % of a phumdi 's thickness floats above the water surface ; the other 80 % remains submerged . Before the construction of the Loktak Hydroelectric Project , the park area containing phumdis was merely marshy land , but since the commissioning of the project , two ecosystems have emerged . One , the body of open water , covers one @-@ third of the area and the other , the phumdi , covers the remaining two @-@ thirds . 
 The life @-@ cycle of the phumdis has generally been subject to seasonal variation . During the monsoon season when the water level is high , the phumdis float , but during the dry season , as the water level falls , the phumdis touch the lake bed and absorb nutrients from it . When the wet season returns , they again float , and the biomass , which has enough nutrients stored in the plants ' roots , survives . However , the contemporary situation , with high water levels in the lake throughout the year , has meant that the process of ' feeding ' on lake – bottom nutrients has been seriously disturbed , resulting in a loss of biomass and a thinning of the islands each year . In January 1999 , it was reported that a large section of phumdi in the north of the park had shattered into pieces and drifted away from the park area , threatening the habitat of the sangai . 
 Changes in the water regime due to the construction of the <unk> barrage across the Manipur River have caused changes in the vegetation composition of the phumdis . A study was instituted , from October 2005 to July 2006 , to record the vegetation composition and productivity of phumdis in areas of ranging thickness , water depth and soil pH , accumulating data in both summer and winter . The study recorded 83 plant species of 21 families ( Poaceae and Cyperaceae formed the dominant families ) ; 81 species were recorded in summer and 48 in winter . The Diversity indices of the plant species were recorded ; they were a richness of 48 , diversity of 0 @.@ 29 and evenness of 0 @.@ 47 in summer . In winter , the respective figures were 81 , 0 @.@ 17 and 0 @.@ 52 . Species richness was found to be different in 48 samples of thin phumdis , 53 samples of thick phumdis and 14 samples on hard ground . The eight plant communities identified during winter and summer were <unk> , Leersia <unk> , Oenanthe <unk> , Phragmites <unk> , <unk> triceps , Pteridium aquilinum , Zizania latifolia and <unk> perfoliata . Zizania latifolia recorded the highest productivity with ( 13 @.@ 90 ± 5 @.@ 01 ) g / m2 for winter and ( 102 @.@ 96 ± 26 @.@ 03 ) g / m2 for summer . Greater productivity was recorded in summer ( 65 @.@ 96 g / m2 ) than winter ( 15 @.@ 76 g / m2 ) . Variation of productivity of annuals and perennials were noted according to seasons and type of phumdis . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 The largest of all the phumdis in the lake is situated in the southeastern region of the Loktak Lake , which forms the Keibul Lamjao National Park . This park is the last natural refuge of the endangered Manipur brow @-@ antlered deer ( Cervus <unk> <unk> ) , locally known as the sangai , one of the three sub species of the Eld 's deer listed as an endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . 
 Apart from the brow @-@ antlered deer , which is the flagship species of the park , other fauna found in the park are mammals , reptiles , and migratory and resident avifauna species . 
 Mammal species consist of hog deer ( C. porcinus ) , wild boar ( Sus <unk> ) , large Indian civets ( Viverra civetta , Viverricula indica ) , common otter ( Lutra lutra ) , fox , jungle cat , Asian golden cat , bay bamboo rat , musk shrew , common shrew , flying fox , and sambar ( Cervus unicolor ) . 
 Reptile species found in the park are the keel back tortoise , viper , krait , cobra , water cobra , banded krait ( Bungarus fasciatus ) , Asian rat snake ( beauty rat snake ) , <unk> ’ viper ( <unk> ) , checkered garter snake , python and common lizard ( viviparous lizard ) . Python molurus is an endangered species found in the park . 
 Prominent bird species seen in the park are both migratory and resident avifauna species . Some of the avifauna are the East Himalayan pied kingfisher , black kite , lesser sky @-@ lark , northern hill myna , Burmese pied myna , North Indian black drongos , lesser eastern jungle crow , yellow headed wagtail , <unk> duck , blue @-@ winged teal , ruddy shell duck , hooded crane , Burmese sarus crane , Indian white @-@ breasted <unk> and crimson @-@ breasted pied woodpecker . 
 = = Environmental issues = = 
 The proliferation of phumdis , coupled with severe infestation of the lake by water hyacinth , has substantially impeded water circulation and caused an increase in siltation and deposit of pollutants in the lake ecosystem . The building materials used to build huts on the phumdi blocks sunlight from reaching the lower depths of the lake water , which has resulted in formation of vertical profiles of the lake water body and decomposition . Further , pesticides and insecticides are used for catching fish or as insect repellent . Degradation is in the form of <unk> , which , as it decays , releases toxic gases such as methane , hydrogen sulfide , and reduces dissolved oxygen ( DO ) . This causes the lake water to degenerate into a eutrophic condition , creating a dead water zone called the <unk> . Above the <unk> is a thin layer , known as <unk> , where fish survive to some degree . The <unk> is becoming increasingly thick , causing not only pollution of the lake water , but an increase in the shallow part of the lake . 
 It has been reported that the construction of <unk> Barrage has altered the Loktak Lake and its ecosystem . Siltation has reduced the water holding capacity and has consequently had a negative impact on the power generation capacity at the Loktak Hydro Electric Power Project . <unk> of the phumdi in the Keibul Lamjao area has affected the habitat of the sangai , and other <unk> , avifauna and flora are on the decline ; the 35 species ( 5 mammals , 3 birds , 9 reptiles , 3 amphibians , 12 fishes , 2 molluscs and 1 annelid ) are reported to be disappearing gradually . 
 It is also reported that the soil of the park formed by the phumdis is highly acidic , with unsuitable pH conditions for many species of plants to grow and flourish . Further , the acidity of the soil has also adversely affected the fish breeding farms . Recent reports indicate that locals are slicing the phumdis into sizeable pieces and towing them with canoes to sell to fish culture owners . 
 A scientific study of the water quality parameters of physico @-@ chemical and microbiological characteristics and role of phumdis in the Loktak Lake has been conducted by collecting surface water samples on monthly basis from 15 stations , representing 5 zones ; northern , western , eastern , middle and southern . The test results indicated that water quality in the phumdi area was poor in the northern and southern zones of the lake ; test results indicated low dissolved oxygen , low pH ( normal range for pH in surface water systems is 6 @.@ 5 to 8 @.@ 5 ) high CO2 and high Biochemical Oxygen Demand ( <unk> ) but the water quality was good in the open water area . Assessment of the total nitrogen content of the <unk> species of phumdis indicated that the following were present in descending order : Salvinia natans ( 1 @.@ 8 % ) , Zizania latifolia ( 1 @.@ 6 % ) , <unk> sp . ( 1 @.@ 3 % ) , <unk> mutica ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) , Cyperus <unk> ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) , Echinochloa <unk> ( 1 @.@ 0 % ) , Phragmites <unk> ( 1 @.@ 0 % ) and <unk> <unk> ( 0 @.@ 94 % ) . The test results confirmed the fact that the phumdis were efficient in absorbing nutrients from the lake water . However , they deteriorated water quality due to reduced light penetration and accumulation of organic matter in the lake ecosystem . 
 = = Management strategies = = 
 A detailed study has been conducted by the Loktak Development Authority ( LDA ) in collaboration with Wetlands International – South Asia , supported by the India – Canada Environment Facility , implementing a project on Sustainable Development and Water Resources Management of the Loktak Lake . The project addresses the issues relating to water management , sustainable fisheries development , community participation and development , catchment area treatment and conservation of wildlife . The Planning Commission of the Government of India , decided in September 2008 that these policies would be implemented over a period of 5 – 6 years at an estimated cost of over <unk> crores ( US $ 100 million ) , and extended the area under management to also incorporate the water of <unk> and other rivers and their tributaries , which are primarily responsible for polluting the Loktak Lake . 
 In order to resolve the problem of the excessive growth of phumdis that affects the lake ecosystem and local community , a study sponsored by the India – Canada Environment Facility was undertaken by the Tata Energy Research Institute ( <unk> ) to examine efficient ways of converting phumdis into briquettes as fodder and fuel pellets , which could be used to meet both energy demands within the region . Two options for the biomass conversion were studied . The first involved making briquettes of vegetative part of phumdis for use as fodder while the second proposed to <unk> the lower part of phumdis for use as fuel . The study observed that phumdis have nutritional potential as feed material due to its higher crude fibre and crude protein content , but the inorganic content in the root and mat zone was found to be unsuitable for the purpose . The second option of making briquettes from the upper vegetative portion of the phumdis by mixing 12 % de @-@ oiled rice bran was found to be feasible for using them as fodder . The lower portion , which was <unk> to make fuel pellets , was found to be suitable for use as fuel . Such pellets were found to have an average calorific value of 3 @,@ 400 calories per kilogram ( 14 @,@ 200 kJ / kg ) with ash content of 27 % . Cost economics were worked out and the study had found it to be “ an economically viable and an attractive proposition for the benefit of local population . ” The study concluded that extraction of phumdi from the lake could also generate income for the local people who are dependent on the lake for their livelihood . Such a step would protect the lake from the adverse effects of proliferation of phumdis and maintain the ecological balance of the lake , thus converting the waste into wealth . The Planning Commission has also concurred with project proposals to engage interested individuals and private enterprises to begin the commercial venture of manufacturing compost from the phumdis and thus improve the environment of the Keibul Lamjao National Park . The project also envisages removal of 3630 artificial phumdis and compensation to their owners ; this is reported to have been implemented . 
 Another method adopted in the past to tackle the phumdis was by way of diverting them towards the <unk> River . However , as this approach had not been very successful , the State Government planned to construct a canal at Tera <unk> Khong <unk> to divert the phumdis to Manipur River . Other methods adopted by the Loktak Development Authority ( LDA ) to control phumdis and water hyacinth include introducing weevils for the biological control of water hyacinth , which was carried out in collaboration with the Horticulture Institute of Bangalore . Reports have shown this to be an effective method in controlling water hyacinth . 
 A lake restoration plan based on a decentralised bioreactor system to eliminate the organic load that enters the lake in the form of non @-@ point and point source pollutants has also been mooted . Phumdis could be harvested in a sustainable manner by conversion into fuel and compost by installing ‘ Plug Flow <unk> ’ in a modular manner around the lake perimeter . Laboratory tests of key species of phumdis have proved its potential to produce biogas . The bioreactors could also be used to treat sewage and thus arrest flow of organic matter into the lake . 
 In a recent workshop organized by the LDA on " Management of Phumdis " in the Loktak Lake , which involved presentations by locals , the emphasis was on the need to open the barrage for eight months per year ( January , April and June – September ) to clear the phumdis , control floods and wash away the silt and waste that had accumulated over time . The LDA is also implementing action plans that are economically viable and technically feasible which would result in livelihood enhancement such as evolving an attractive resettlement plan for the phumdi dwellers backed by remunerative livelihood programs and examine the introduction of fishing nets instead of <unk> , the circular shaped Phumdis floating in the lake , planted or cultured artificially for catching fish . 
 = Kongsfjord Telemetry Station = 
 Kongsfjord Telemetry Station ( Norwegian : Kongsfjord <unk> ) was a satellite ground station located nearby Ny @-@ Ålesund in Svalbard , Norway . It was used between 1967 and 1974 as one of the four initial ground stations which were part of the European Space Tracking Network ( ESTRACK ) serving the European Space Research Organization 's ( ESRO ) first generation of satellites . The station provided radio tracking , telemetry and commanding services as well as data download . Although owned by ESRO , the facilities were constructed and operated by the Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( NTNF ) . 
 Plans for the station 's construction started in the early 1960s and negotiations between ESRO and Norwegian authorities started in 1964 , despite Norway 's lack of membership in ESRO . An initial disagreement of whether to locate the facility by Ny @-@ Ålesund or Longyearbyen was overcome , and an agreement was signed on 14 December 1964 . However , it was followed up by numerous protests from the Soviet Union , which claimed the installation would violate the demilitarized zone clause of the Svalbard Treaty , as the station had the potential to be used for military satellites and intelligence . The protests were rejected by Norwegian authorities , and construction started in May 1965 . The Soviet Union attempted several inspections ; one resulted in the crash of a Soviet helicopter . Operations commenced in 1967 , but the facility was closed in 1974 as the facility was not suitable for new satellites with higher orbits . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first official inquiries into establishing ionosphere research in Svalbard was taken by <unk> Harang , then head of the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment ( FFI ) , in October 1950 . Two similar facilities , a completed one at Kjeller and one under construction in Tromsø , had already been initiated . The proposal , regarded by Harang as primarily a military project , was initially issued to the United States . It was considered by US Joint Chiefs of Staff , who saw it as a possible excuse to populate Spitsbergen as a counter @-@ measure to the Soviet mining communities . However , nothing came of the plans before the International Geophysical Year in 1957 – 58 , when an ionosphere research station was established as Isfjord Radio and moved to Ny @-@ Ålesund in 1963 . Although unrelated to the telemetry station , this was the initiation of technology services in Ny @-@ Ålesund . 
 In 1960 , Norway entered a cooperation with the United States , which resulted in the construction of the Norwegian Space Centre at Andøya . In 1964 , ESRO was established as a Western European reaction to the rapidly developing Soviet and American space programs . Norway chose to only join as an observer , partially because of the close cooperation with the US and partially because of the cost . However , Norwegian space research scientists participated in ESRO programs . 
 Preliminary work in the planning of ESRO operations concluded that the ESTRACK network would initially consist of four radio tracking and telemetry stations and three optical tracking stations . In addition to Svalbard , tracking and telemetry stations were built on the Falkland Islands , in Fairbanks , Alaska and in <unk> , Belgium . France actively opposed the Svalbard location , as Norway was not a member of ESRO . The ESRO secretariat wanted to quicken the location decision , as it was necessary to have all four in operation before the launch of the ESRO @-@ 1 and ESRO @-@ 2 satellites . 
 The initial proposal had called for locating the station in Ny @-@ Ålesund due to its topographical advantage . In January 1964 , ESRO started informal discussions with the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs , who stated that they had no initial objections . By then , supported by Store Norske Spitsbergen Kulkompani , ESRO instead proposed situating the station at Longyearbyen because it was less remote and would incur lower costs . This was opposed by Norwegian authorities ; mining in Ny @-@ Ålesund had ceased after the 1963 Kings Bay Affair and the authorities wanted permanent activity in the town . An official request was made by ESRO in February , and in May , official political support for the project was awarded . The main motivation was to establish a permanent space technology center in Norway that could stimulate further scientific growth . 
 = = = Soviet protests = = = 
 The Svalbard Treaty establishes Svalbard as both a free economic zone and a demilitarized zone , allowing a Soviet presence but hindering Norway from installing military fortifications . The Soviet Union objected to the creation of the telemetry program and threatened to establish a counter @-@ station . The basis was that the ground station was seen as having a military potential , that most ESRO members were also members of North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and that Norway lacked sufficient competence to control whether or not military activities would take place at the station . Norwegian authorities responded that the installation was to be used for scientific and peaceful activities under Norwegian control . Further , because of treaty only prohibited fortifications and not military activity as such , Norway held the right to conduct military scientific research and operate intelligence operations on the archipelago . 
 To minimize Soviet opposition , Norway attempted to move the debate from the political to the specialist scene , while at the same time establishing a protocol for Norwegian control and operation of the facility . To achieve this , Norwegian authorities worked towards establishing an inspection procedure to insure that the facilities remained solely used for ' peaceful activities ' . This would particularly focus on the regular inspection of auxiliary equipment . To <unk> the issue further , the government appointed the semi @-@ independent NTNF as the operator of the facility . The first oral consultations between the Soviet embassy and the Norwegian government took place in November 1964 . 
 In the Norwegian Government 's internal evaluation , FFI stated that as long as regular inspections were carried out , there was little chance of military use of the installations , in particular because of the limited technical equipment which would be installed . The Norwegian Intelligence Service held a different opinion , and stated that if the right equipment was installed , the ground station could be used to listen to information from Soviet satellites in the area and that it would require a very competent inspector to find such equipment . Allowing Soviet inspectors access to the station was discussed politically , but this was quickly discarded as it would establish an unwanted precedent and would undermine the Norwegian sovereignty of the archipelago . 
 Discussions between ESRO and Norwegian authorities continued , with ESRO pressing for a quick decision , while Norway was stalling the negotiations . This was carried out to allow time to develop solid counter @-@ policy against the Soviet Union as well as to gain support for the installation to be located at <unk> outside Ny @-@ Ålesund . On the other hand , ESRO threatened to instead build the installation in northern Sweden and northern Canada and abandon the Svalbard plans . An agreement was reached between ESRO , Norwegian authorities and NTNF was on 14 December 1964 . It established both the location and that NTNF would be Norway 's party . The agreement allowed the station to be located in Ny @-@ Ålesund in exchange for Norwegian authorities building and operating the facility . While ESRO accepted NTNF as the Norwegian party , they wanted to receive a guarantee from the Norwegian authorities . However , to minimize Soviet criticism , the ministry was not interested in giving direct guarantees and asked that ESRO solely negotiate with NTNF . 
 The official Soviet protest was issued on 17 February 1965 in a letter to the Norwegian government . Specifically , it stated that Norway would be violating Article 9 of the Svalbard Treaty , that the installation could be used for intelligence assessment and that Norway should have consulted the Soviet Union before making the decision . The issue was discussed by the Norwegian Cabinet of State six days later . Minister of Justice and acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Oscar Christian Gundersen regarded the protest as moderate and that it fell into a series of Soviet protests against any activity on Svalbard that could remotely be considered a potential cover @-@ up for military activity . An official response was sent on 23 March , which rejected all the Soviet objections . It stated that Norwegian authorities had made agreements with ESRO that Norway would make sufficient inspections to insure that Article 9 was followed , it pointed out the open and civil nature of ESRO and rejected the Soviet claims that they had the right to be consulted in advance . 
 Norwegian Prime Minister Einar Gerhardsen visited the Soviet Union in May 1965 , in which Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin warned against the installation and stated that the Soviet Union would build a counter @-@ station . In June , the Soviet Consul in Barentsburg came on an inspection to the installation , and on 2 July a Soviet helicopter crashed at the construction site after having , presumably unintentionally , touched a mast . Soviet demands to have permanent Soviet inspectors of the facility were rejected . The Svalbard Treaty does not include any verification procedure , and as such no signatories have the right to conduct inspections . 
 After the station opened , Soviet protests persisted . The issue was raised at official visits to the Soviet Union by Norwegian politicians in 1966 , 1967 and 1968 . The Soviet Consul in Barentsburg visited Ny @-@ Ålesund in 1968 and attempted to make inspections of the installation . On 28 August 1968 , Norway and the Soviet Union agreed for a one @-@ time , two @-@ day Soviet inspection of the station . The last protest against the installation was made in April 1969 . 
 = = = Construction and operation = = = 
 The agreement with ESRO was approved by the Parliament of Norway on 9 July 1965 and the final contract was signed on 13 August . It included clauses that secured non @-@ members access to use the station if there was sufficient capacity , that Norwegian authorities were granted all necessary information about the installation 's use , and that NTNF would approve all auxiliary installations . 
 For NTNF , the establishment brought by an organizational change . While it had previously also conducted space research , the operations of installations had been placed with FFI . As FFI was a branch of the military , this structure could not be used in Svalbard . Thus NTNF had to organize an operative branch for the ground station . The responsibility for operating the telecommunications facilities was awarded to the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration . The ground station needed a computer . FFI offered to deliver a Simulation for Automatic Machinery , while the alternative was to purchase a PDP @-@ 8 computer from Digital Equipment Corporation . As NTNF was responsible for the country 's technological development , they chose to award the contract to FFI on the condition that they pay for a PDP @-@ 8 if they were not able to deliver a computer themselves . 
 Construction started in May 1965 and NTNF planned to use as much of the mining company Kings Bay 's facilities as they could . NTNF was allowed to use buildings as needed for free . In exchange , NTNF maintained the entire village and paid insurance on the buildings they used . Movable property used by NTNF was bought for a moderate price . NTNF had to build several new buildings in addition to utilities such as power cables and water , sewer and heating pipes . The new pipes had to be installed after the previous pipes , installed in 1956 , had been subject to frost burst . Instead of building the pipes in a culvert , they were instead placed in wooded boxes above ground . During the summer of 1965 , 65 people were working on construction , although it fell to between 40 and 45 during the winter . The following winter , only five people overwintered . 
 To allow ease of access and in case of emergencies , an ad hoc airport was built . Originally , Ny @-@ Ålesund Airport , Hamnerabben was simply a section of the road between the radomes and the settlement which was 850 meters ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) long and 40 meters ( 130 ft ) wide . The gravel was bound with waste oil and with gates at each end . To allow traffic to operate as usual during use , a small bypass road was also built . 
 A royal decree on 26 October 1967 established an Oslo @-@ based chief inspector who was to inspect the facility at least once per year , and a local inspector who would inspect the facility at least once per week . The Norwegian Telecommunications Administration 's assistant director of radio technology , Per Mortensen , was appointed chief inspector , while the manager of Ny @-@ Ålesund 's coast radio station was appointed assistant inspector . The ground station and auxiliary facilities were ready for operation in 1967 . Through its history , the station had five managers : Henning Nielsen ( 1965 – 67 ) , Roald <unk> ( 1967 – 68 ) , Ewald <unk> ( 1968 – 70 ) , Einar <unk> ( 1970 – 72 ) and Kristian <unk> ( 1972 – 74 ) . 
 After the initial ESRO program was initiated , the agency moved towards satellites with a higher orbital eccentricity and escape orbits . The facilities in Ny @-@ Ålesund were unsuitable for telemetry with such satellites , as they would operate at a different frequency , the size of the antenna dish was too small and the ground station 's geographical position was out of range . Because of the change of ESRO 's focus , the need for a telemetry station on Svalbard disappeared after the termination of ESRO 's initial program , and the facility was closed in 1974 . 
 Since the closing of the mines in 1963 , the mining company Kings Bay had been working to establish Ny @-@ Ålesund as a research town . The telemetry station acted as an important stepping stone for research activity , and the plans for development of Ny @-@ Ålesund as a permanent research community continued past 1974 . In 1997 , Svalbard Satellite Station opened in Longyearbyen , which is among other stations used by ESTRACK . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The ground station was located at <unk> , also known as Hamnerabben , a hill 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) west of the settlement in Ny @-@ Ålesund , at the far end of the airport . It consisted of a 360 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 900 sq ft ) one @-@ story operations center and two antennas . The largest antenna , used for sending , had a diameter of 21 @-@ meter ( 69 ft ) , while the receiving antenna had a diameter of 17 meters ( 56 ft ) . Each was placed on a 4 @-@ meter ( 13 ft ) cubed , 25 tonnes ( 25 long tons ; 28 short tons ) concrete foundation and surrounded with a plastic radome . Both antennas were automated to ensure that they were aimed at the satellite when they were in use . The receiving antenna was used both to download information about the satellites ' condition and surroundings , as well as data download , which was stored on magnetic tape . The uplink was used to give the satellites orders . 
 Kongsfjord Telemetry Station constituted one of the four initial ESTRACK ground stations which provided radio tracking and telemetry communication with ESRO 's low Earth orbit satellites . The ground station communicated with the satellites in the 136 – 137 MHz band . This was optimal for low @-@ orbit satellites , allowed for a small antenna dish but gave a low bit rate . The various satellites using the facility conducted measurements of solar radiation , cosmic radiation , the polar ionosphere , and ionizing and dynamic effects regarding electric currents and magnetic disturbances . 
 The facility had a Simulation for Automatic Machinery computer built by FFI which allowed for real @-@ time operations with the data . Telecommunications systems were operated by the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration , which established a two @-@ way radio station at Ny @-@ Ålesund . Communication from the satellites was relayed by radio to Ski and onwards with a leased line to the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt , Germany . Return information was relayed via a radio station at <unk> . Magnetic tapes were sent to Darmstadt every other week , first via aircraft to Longyearbyen and then onwards to Germany . NTNF hired a nurse and had the Amundsen House refitted as a clinic for the duration of the telemetry station 's operation . 
 = In My City = 
 " In My City " is the debut single by Indian recording artist and actress Priyanka Chopra , featuring American rapper will.i.am. The song was produced by RedOne , Rush and Brian Kennedy , and was co @-@ written by Ester Dean , who provides additional vocals . The demo version of " In My City " was first played by will.i.am to Chopra , who was impressed with the track and decided to record it . The song is a homage to Chopra 's nomadic childhood and journey from being a small @-@ town girl to being a successful actor . " In My City " premiered on 13 September 2012 , at the NFL Network 's Thursday Night Football . The next day , the song was released for digital downloads to Nokia Music Store along with CD single . 
 " In My City " received mixed reviews from music critics ; some complemented Chopra 's vocals , while some criticised the generic sound of the song . In India , " In My City " was a commercial success . It sold 130 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and was certified triple platinum . The accompanying video for " In My City " was directed by Joseph Kahn and was released in January 2013 . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " In My City " was written by Brian Kennedy , Ester Dean , RedOne , Rush , Brett James , Dante Jones , will.i.am. RedOne also produced the track with producer Rush , and worked on the instrumentation and programming . American rapper will.i.am played Chopra a demo of " In My City " and advised her to record it . Chopra liked the song and decided to proceed with the recording . 
 Brian Kennedy assisted with the production , while Trevor Muzzy , will.i.am and Aubrey " Juice " Delaine engineered the track . The song was recorded at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , and mixed by Muzzy ( mixing engineer ) under RedOne Productions Ltd . Chopra and will.i.am were in the studios for two days while recording ; Chopra said she poured her " blood and soul " into it . Gene Grimaldi mastered the track at Oasis Mastering Studios in Burbank , California . " In My City " also features background vocals from Dean , RedOne , Rush and Muzzy . 
 " In My City " talks about resonating with the party culture of urban cities . Chopra said that the song was not inspired by one city , since her father was an army doctor , and her family travelled all over India to cities like Jamshedpur , Lucknow , Delhi , Pune , <unk> , Chandigarh , Mumbai and Ladakh . Chopra told the Hindustan Times that the song was " about being proud of where I come from . It 's inviting the world to my city and my city could be anywhere . " The song pays homage to her nomadic childhood and her journey from being a small @-@ town girl to being a successful actor . 
 = = Release = = 
 " In My City " was released in India 12 hours before its US NFL launch because Chopra wanted her fans in India to hear it before the American release . A press release said that " Priyanka has always been very clear that India would hear her music first . So all plans have been worked out to ensure that . She will be in India for the launch when the song and special video will air during the TV telecast of NFL . " The song was showcased in an event on 13 September in Mumbai , which was transmitted live on the YouTube and Bollywood Hungama websites . 
 " In My City " debuted on 13 September 2012 , on the NFL Network 's sports programme Thursday Night Football . Chopra filmed a video that aired every Thursday night before and after Thursday Night Football on the NFL Network . The day after the NFL launch , the song was released on CD single as well as for digital download in India . 
 Nokia provided exclusive downloads of the song and was chosen as a key feature for Blenders Pride Fashion Tour . " In My City " was released to the iTunes Store of the United States on 2 October 2012 , for digital downloads . In an interview with The Economic Times , the singer expressed her nervousness about the single release , describing it as the culmination of a two @-@ year journey which " has been the toughest yet most enriching experience of my life while also marking the beginning of an exciting new chapter . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Hindustan Times writer Robin Bansal was impressed with the song , and called it " [ e ] <unk> , peppy , and electrifying from the start ... The song explodes after a point in its massiveness and stays in the head . The impeccable notes and pitch makes one wonder if it 's really Priyanka . " He added that the song had a high tempo and pitch , making it more like a track by The Black Eyed Peas . Chopra refuted the claims that her voice was digitally modulated , and said she has a high range in her voice , and that she always had an accent while speaking English . <unk> <unk> from The Times of India described the lyrics as simple and beautiful , and complemented Chopra 's accent and voice . 
 Neha <unk> of The Hindu was extremely disappointed with the track , calling it " musically generic " and " lyrically filled with platitudes " . She gave a negative review of the production , and panned Chopra 's " auto @-@ tuned " vocals . <unk> wrote that <unk> 's rapping " does little to relieve the monotony ; indeed , it manages to increase it , because of how predictable his exhortations are " , and that apart fulfilling a desire for " the sort of over @-@ produced music that typically fills up a fast @-@ food chain store " , the song is indistinguishable " from the large body of repetitive , unoriginal dance @-@ pop " . Writing for the US online news portal <unk> , Jason <unk> did not agree with early reviews that said " In My City " sounded like the music of The Black Eyed Peas . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " In My City " was a commercial success in India , and reached number @-@ one on the International downloads chart of Nokia Music Store India . The CD single debuted at the top of the pan @-@ India Planet M and Music World retail chain charts . According to the Los Angeles Times , the single broke records by selling more than 130 @,@ 000 copies within the first week of its release . The single was certified triple platinum by the Indian Music Industry ( IMI ) . In the United States the single was unsuccessful , with 5 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week on iTunes according to Nielsen SoundScan , and did not receive radio play . 
 Chopra expressed her amazement at the single 's success in India . She said , " I am so overwhelmed ! I can 't even begin to explain what I 'm feeling ... it 's so amazing that it 's been just a few days since launch and my debut single is now No. 1 on the charts . Thank you so much for the support and appreciation . This means the world to me . " At the fourth Nokia Music Connect video conference , Chopra said that the commercial numbers for " In My City " were all the more surprising , since the music sales in the Indian market is not that much . Universal Music MD , India , <unk> <unk> Sanyal said that the label was surprised with the instant sales of the song . " We have been in the non @-@ film music business for a while and I must admit to mounting engines across all platforms that have been fired like never before on Priyanka 's global single debut . But to see these results so quickly is beyond gratifying , " Sanyal said , before saying that the single debut would be followed by many promotional campaigns targeting different multimedia facets . 
 = = Promotions = = 
 " In My City " was first promoted during a TV spot for the NFL Network 's " Thursday Night Football " show , where the single was the music bed . The single was played every Thursday in pre @-@ game shows and began on 13 September . A different promo aired every week with Chopra wearing jerseys of each of the two teams playing that week . Chopra also said that 33 different looks were designed for the commercial based on the teams . 
 The single was also promoted at Blenders Pride Fashion Tour in cities across India , and was used as the anthem for the tour . On 26 October 2012 , Chopra promoted " In My City " by DJ @-@ ing in four clubs in the National Capital Region , including Hard Rock Cafe and Buzz in Delhi , and Striker and Seven Degrees in Gurgaon . Chopra mingled with the crowd as she <unk> and DJed , followed by a playing her single . In Bangalore , Chopra visited several clubs with DJ Nash to promote " In My City " . At a Reliance Digital store in Mumbai , Chopra spent time with autistic children and played her song to them . The event was broadcast live on YouTube and on screens in Reliance Digital stores across India . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A promotional video documenting the recording of " In My City " debuted during an NFL game on 13 September 2012 . Later , Chopra posted on her Twitter account that she was in Los Angeles to shoot an official music video for the track . The video , directed by Joseph Kahn , was released on 29 January 2013 . 
 The video begins with Chopra coming out of a BMW and sending a message with her cellphone to her friends . They all get it , and join her in dancing the song . In the middle , there is an Indian @-@ African influenced drum beat with elaborate choreography . The song continues with more dancing , until it ends with Chopra and all her friends laughing . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 " In My City " was played on 8 May 2013 broadcast of American Idol during a clip when the Top 3 visit their home towns . 
 " In My City " was selected as the theme song for 2013 season of the NFL ' network Thursday Night Football . 
 " In My City " was selected as the theme song for the 2016 Centennial Cup America . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Digital Download / CD single 
 " In My City " ( featuring will.i.am ) – 3 : 40 
 Digital Remixes EP 
 " In My City " ( R3hab and <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 54 
 " In My City " ( Maestro Remix ) – 5 : 57 
 " In My City " ( LA Riots Remix ) – 5 : 28 
 " In My City " ( Mr. Morris Remix ) – 3 : 12 
 " In My City " ( Wideboys Remix ) – 6 : 34 
 " In My City " ( <unk> Remix ) – 5 : 32 
 " In My City " ( DesiHits Rishi Rich Remix ) – 3 : 58 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of the CD single . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Emperor Norton = 
 Joshua Abraham Norton ( <unk> – January 8 , 1880 ) , known as Emperor Norton , was a citizen of San Francisco , California , who in 1859 proclaimed himself " Norton I , Emperor of the United States " and subsequently " Protector of Mexico " . 
 Born in England , Norton spent most of his early life in South Africa . After the death of his mother in 1846 and his father in 1848 , he emigrated to San Francisco with an inheritance from his father 's estate , arriving in November 1849 aboard the Hamburg ship <unk> with $ 40 @,@ 000 ( inflation adjusted to $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 2015 US Dollars ) . Norton initially made a living as a businessman , but he lost his fortune investing in Peruvian rice . 
 After losing a lawsuit in which he tried to void his rice contract , Norton became a less and less public figure . He reemerged in September 1859 , laying claim to the position of Emperor of the United States . Although he had no political power , and his influence extended only so far as he was humored by those around him , he was treated <unk> in San Francisco , and currency issued in his name was honored in the establishments he frequented . 
 Though some considered him insane or eccentric , citizens of San Francisco celebrated his regal presence and his proclamations , such as his order that the United States Congress be dissolved by force and his numerous decrees calling for a bridge crossing connecting San Francisco to Oakland , and a corresponding tunnel to be built under San Francisco Bay . Similar structures were built long after his death in the form of the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge and the Transbay Tube , and there have been campaigns to rename the bridge " The Emperor Norton Bridge " . 
 On January 8 , 1880 , Norton collapsed at the corner of California and Dupont ( now Grant ) streets and died before he could be given medical treatment . At his funeral two days later , nearly 30 @,@ 000 people packed the streets of San Francisco to pay homage . Norton has been immortalized as the basis of characters in the literature of writers Mark Twain , Robert Louis Stevenson , Christopher Moore , Maurice De <unk> , Selma Lagerlöf , and Neil Gaiman . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Genealogical and other research indicates that Norton 's parents were John Norton ( d . August 1848 ) and Sarah Norden , English Jews — John , a farmer and merchant ; Sarah , a daughter of Abraham Norden and a sister of Benjamin Norden , a successful Jewish merchant — who moved the family to South Africa in early 1820 as part of a government @-@ backed colonization scheme whose participants came to be known as the 1820 Settlers . 
 Most likely , Norton was born in the Kentish town of Deptford , today part of London . 
 Pinning down Norton 's exact date of birth has proved difficult . His obituary in the San Francisco Chronicle , " following the best information obtainable , " cited the silver plate on his coffin which said he was " aged about 65 , " suggesting that 1814 could be the year of his birth . But Norton 's biographer , William Drury , points out that " about 65 " was based on nothing more than the guess that Norton 's landlady offered to the coroner at the inquest following his death . In a 1923 essay published by the California Historical Society , Robert Ernest Cowan claimed that Norton was born on February 4 , 1819 . However , the passenger lists for the Belle Alliance , the ship that carried Norton and his family from England to South Africa , indicate he was two years old when the ship set sail in February 1820 . The February 4 , 1865 , edition of the Daily Alta California newspaper included an item in which the Alta wished Emperor Norton a happy 47th birthday , indicating that his birth date was February 4 , 1818 ( not 1819 , as Cowan claimed ) — a date that would line up with the Belle Alliance passenger listing from two years later . Moreover , it has been shown that Robert Ernest Cowan appears to have falsified the 1865 Alta item to advance his claim of an 1819 birth date and that persistent online claims for an 1819 birth date , which can be traced to the early years of the Internet , are of doubtful provenance . 
 Norton emigrated from South Africa to San Francisco in 1849 after receiving a bequest from his father 's estate . He enjoyed a good deal of success in the real estate market , and by the early 1850s had parlayed an initial nest egg of $ 40 @,@ 000 into a fortune of $ 250 @,@ 000 . Norton thought he saw a business opportunity when China , facing a severe famine , placed a ban on the export of rice , causing the price of rice in San Francisco to skyrocket from four to thirty @-@ six cents per pound ( 9 to 79 cents / kg ) . When he heard the <unk> , which was returning from Peru , was carrying 200 @,@ 000 pounds ( 91 @,@ 000 kg ) of rice , he bought the entire shipment for $ 25 @,@ 000 ( or twelve and a half cents per pound ) , hoping to corner the market . 
 Shortly after he signed the contract , several other shiploads of rice arrived from Peru , causing the price of rice to plummet to three cents a pound . Norton tried to void the contract , stating the dealer had misled him as to the quality of rice to expect . From 1853 to 1857 , Norton and the rice dealers were involved in a protracted litigation . Although Norton prevailed in the lower courts , the case reached the Supreme Court of California , which ruled against Norton . Later , the Lucas Turner and Company Bank foreclosed on his real estate holdings in North Beach to pay Norton 's debt . He filed for bankruptcy and by 1858 was living in reduced circumstances at a working class boarding house . 
 = = Declares himself emperor = = 
 By 1859 , Norton had become completely disgruntled with what he considered the inadequacies of the legal and political structures of the United States . On September 17 , 1859 , he took matters into his own hands and distributed letters to the various newspapers in the city , proclaiming himself " Emperor of these United States " : 
 At the peremptory request and desire of a large majority of the citizens of these United States , I , Joshua Norton , formerly of Algoa Bay , Cape of Good Hope , and now for the last 9 years and 10 months past of S. F. , Cal . , declare and proclaim myself Emperor of these U. S. ; and in virtue of the authority thereby in me vested , do hereby order and direct the representatives of the different States of the Union to assemble in Musical Hall , of this city , on the 1st day of Feb. next , then and there to make such alterations in the existing laws of the Union as may ameliorate the evils under which the country is laboring , and thereby cause confidence to exist , both at home and abroad , in our stability and integrity . 
 The announcement was first reprinted for humorous effect by the editor of the San Francisco Bulletin . Norton would later add " Protector of Mexico " to this title . Thus commenced his unprecedented and whimsical 21 @-@ year " reign " over America . 
 In his self @-@ appointed role of emperor , Norton issued numerous decrees on matters of the state . After assuming absolute control over the country , he saw no further need for a legislature , and on October 12 , 1859 , he issued a decree formally abolishing the United States Congress . In it , Norton observed : 
 ... fraud and corruption prevent a fair and proper expression of the public voice ; that open violation of the laws are constantly occurring , caused by mobs , parties , factions and undue influence of political sects ; that the citizen has not that protection of person and property which he is entitled . 
 Norton ordered all interested parties to assemble at Platt 's Music Hall in San Francisco in February 1860 to " remedy the evil complained of " . 
 In an imperial decree the following month , Norton summoned the Army to depose the elected officials of the U.S. Congress : 
 WHEREAS , a body of men calling themselves the National Congress are now in session in Washington City , in violation of our Imperial edict of the 12th of October last , declaring the said Congress abolished ; 
 WHEREAS , it is necessary for the repose of our Empire that the said decree should be strictly complied with ; 
 NOW , <unk> , we do hereby Order and Direct Major @-@ General Scott , the Command @-@ in @-@ Chief of our Armies , immediately upon receipt of this , our Decree , to proceed with a suitable force and clear the Halls of Congress . 
 Norton 's orders were ignored by the Army , and Congress likewise continued without any formal acknowledgement of the decree . Further decrees in 1860 dissolved the republic and forbade the assembly of any members of the former Congress . Norton 's battle against the elected leaders of America persisted throughout his reign , though it appears he eventually , if grudgingly , allowed Congress to exist without his permission . Hoping to resolve the many disputes that had resulted in the Civil War , in 1862 Norton issued a mandate ordering both the Roman Catholic Church and the Protestant churches to publicly ordain him as " Emperor " . 
 His attempts to overthrow the elected government having been ignored , Norton turned his attention to other matters , both political and social . On August 12 , 1869 , " being desirous of allaying the dissensions of party strife now existing within our realm " , he abolished the Democratic and Republican parties . The failure to treat Norton 's adopted home city with appropriate respect is the subject of a particularly stern edict that often is cited as having been written by Norton in 1872 — although evidence for the authorship , date or source of this decree remains elusive : 
 Whoever after due and proper warning shall be heard to utter the abominable word " Frisco , " which has no linguistic or other warrant , shall be deemed guilty of a High <unk> , and shall pay into the Imperial Treasury as penalty the sum of twenty @-@ five dollars . 
 Norton was occasionally a visionary , and some of his Imperial Decrees exhibited profound foresight . He issued instructions to form a League of Nations , and he explicitly forbade any form of conflict between religions or their sects . Norton saw fit to decree the construction of a suspension bridge or tunnel connecting Oakland and San Francisco , his later decrees becoming increasingly irritated at the lack of prompt obedience by the authorities : 
 WHEREAS , we issued our decree ordering the citizens of San Francisco and Oakland to appropriate funds for the survey of a suspension bridge from Oakland Point via Goat Island ; also for a tunnel ; and to ascertain which is the best project ; and whereas the said citizens have hitherto neglected to notice our said decree ; and whereas we are determined our authority shall be fully respected ; now , therefore , we do hereby command the arrest by the army of both the Boards of City Fathers if they persist in neglecting our decrees . 
 Given under our royal hand and seal at San Francisco , this 17th day of September , 1872 . 
 The intent of this decree , unlike many others , actually came to fruition ; construction of the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge began on July 9 , 1933 and was completed on November 12 , 1936 . The construction of Bay Area Rapid Transit 's Transbay Tube was completed in 1969 , with Transbay rail service commencing in 1974 . 
 = = Norton 's Imperial acts = = 
 Norton spent his days inspecting San Francisco 's streets in an elaborate blue uniform with gold @-@ plated epaulettes , given to him by officers of the United States Army post at the Presidio of San Francisco . He also wore a beaver hat decorated with a peacock feather and a rosette . He frequently enhanced this regal posture with a cane or umbrella . During his inspections , Norton would examine the condition of the sidewalks and cable cars , the state of repair of public property , and the appearance of police officers . Norton would also frequently give lengthy philosophical expositions on a variety of topics to anyone within earshot . 
 During the 1860s and 1870s , there were occasional anti @-@ Chinese demonstrations in the poorer districts of San Francisco . Riots , sometimes resulting in fatalities , took place . During one incident , Norton allegedly positioned himself between the rioters and their Chinese targets ; with a bowed head , he started reciting the Lord 's Prayer repeatedly until the rioters dispersed without incident . 
 Norton was loved and revered by the citizens of San Francisco . Although penniless , he regularly ate at the finest restaurants in San Francisco ; restaurateurs took it upon themselves to add brass plaques in their entrances declaring " [ by ] Appointment to his Imperial Majesty , Emperor Norton I of the United States . " Norton 's self @-@ penned Imperial seals of approval were prized and a substantial boost to trade . No play or musical performance in San Francisco would dare to open without reserving balcony seats for Norton . 
 A rumor started by the devoted Norton caricaturist Ed Jump claims he had two dogs , Bummer and Lazarus , which were also San Francisco celebrities . Though he did not own the dogs , Norton ate at free lunch counters where he shared his meals with the dogs . 
 In 1867 , a policeman named Armand Barbier arrested Norton to commit him to involuntary treatment for a mental disorder . The Emperor 's arrest outraged the citizens and sparked scathing editorials in the newspapers . Police Chief Patrick Crowley ordered Norton released and issued a formal apology on behalf of the police force . Crowley wrote " that he had shed no blood ; robbed no one ; and despoiled no country ; which is more than can be said of his fellows in that line . " Norton <unk> granted an Imperial Pardon to the errant policeman . All police officers of San Francisco thereafter saluted Norton as he passed in the street . 
 Norton did receive some tokens of recognition for his position . The 1870 U.S. census lists Joshua Norton as 50 years old and residing at 624 Commercial Street ; his occupation was listed as <unk> [ sic ] . It also noted he was insane . Norton also issued his own money to pay for his debts , and it became an accepted local currency in San Francisco . These notes came in denominations between fifty cents and ten dollars ; the few surviving notes are collector 's items . The city of San Francisco also honored Norton . When his uniform began to look shabby , the San Francisco Board of Supervisors bought him a suitably regal replacement . Norton sent a gracious thank you note and issued a " patent of nobility in perpetuity " for each supervisor . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 During the later years of Norton 's reign , he was the subject of considerable speculation . One popular story suggested he was the son of Emperor Napoleon III , and that his claim of coming from South Africa was a ruse to prevent persecution . Another popular story suggested Norton was planning to marry Queen Victoria . While this claim is unsupported , Norton did write to the Queen on several occasions , and he is reported to have met Emperor Pedro II of Brazil . Rumors also circulated that Norton was supremely wealthy — only affecting poverty because he was miserly . 
 A number of decrees that were probably fraudulent were submitted and duly printed in local newspapers , and it is believed that in at least a few cases , newspaper editors themselves drafted fictitious edicts to suit their own agendas . The San Francisco Museum and Historical Society maintains a list of the decrees believed to be genuine . 
 On the evening of January 8 , 1880 , Norton collapsed on the corner of California Street and Dupont Street ( now Grant Avenue ) in front of Old St. Mary 's Church while on his way to a lecture at the California Academy of Sciences . His collapse was immediately noticed and " the police officer on the beat hastened for a carriage to convey him to the City Receiving Hospital . " Norton died before a carriage could arrive . The following day the San Francisco Chronicle published his obituary on its front page under the headline " Le Roi est Mort " ( " The King is Dead " ) . In a tone tinged with sadness , the article respectfully reported that , " [ o ] n the reeking pavement , in the darkness of a moon @-@ less night under the dripping rain ... , Norton I , by the grace of God , Emperor of the United States and Protector of Mexico , departed this life " . The Morning Call , another leading San Francisco newspaper , published a front @-@ page article using an almost identical sentence as a headline : " Norton the First , by the grace of God Emperor of these United States and Protector of Mexico , departed this life . " 
 It quickly became evident that , contrary to the rumors , Norton had died in complete poverty . Five or six dollars in small change had been found on his person , and a search of his room at the boarding house on Commercial Street turned up a single gold sovereign , then worth around $ 2 @.@ 50 ; his collection of walking sticks ; his rather battered saber ; a variety of headgear ( including a stovepipe , a derby , a red @-@ laced Army cap , and another cap suited to a martial band @-@ master ) ; an 1828 French franc ; and a handful of the Imperial bonds he sold to tourists at a fictitious 7 % interest . There were fake telegrams purporting to be from Emperor Alexander II of Russia , congratulating Norton on his forthcoming marriage to Queen Victoria , and from the President of France , predicting that such a union would be disastrous to world peace . Also found were his letters to Queen Victoria and 98 shares of stock in a defunct gold mine . 
 Initial funeral arrangements were for a pauper 's coffin of simple redwood . However , members of the Pacific Club , a San Francisco businessman 's association , established a funeral fund that provided for a handsome rosewood casket and arranged a suitably dignified farewell . Norton 's funeral on Sunday , January 10 , was solemn , mournful , and large . Paying their respects were members of " ... all classes from capitalists to the pauper , the clergyman to the pickpocket , well @-@ dressed ladies and those whose garb and bearing hinted of the social outcast . " Some accounts say as many as 10 @,@ 000 people lined the streets , and that the funeral cortège was two miles ( 3 km ) long . San Francisco 's total population at the time was 230 @,@ 000 . Norton was buried in the Masonic Cemetery , at the expense of the City of San Francisco . 
 In 1934 , Emperor Norton 's remains were transferred , as were all graves in the city , to a grave site of moderate splendor at Woodlawn Cemetery , in Colma . The grave is marked by a large stone inscribed " Norton I , Emperor of the United States and Protector of Mexico " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although details of his life story may have been forgotten , Emperor Norton was immortalized in literature . Mark Twain , who resided in San Francisco during part of Emperor Norton 's public life , modeled the character of the King in Adventures of Huckleberry Finn on Joshua Norton . 
 Robert Louis Stevenson made Norton a character in his 1892 novel , The Wrecker . Stevenson 's stepdaughter , Isobel Osbourne , mentioned Norton in her autobiography , This Life I 've Loved . She said that Norton " was a gentle and kindly man , and fortunately found himself in the friendliest and most sentimental city in the world , the idea being ' let him be emperor if he wants to . ' San Francisco played the game with him . " 
 Since 1974 , there has been an annual memorial service at his grave in Colma , just outside San Francisco . 
 In January 1980 , ceremonies were conducted in San Francisco to honor the 100th anniversary of the death of " the one and only Emperor of the United States . " 
 The Emperor 's Bridge Campaign , a San Francisco @-@ based nonprofit launched in September 2013 , works to honor the life and advance the legacy of Emperor Norton . 
 He is considered a patron saint of Discordianism . 
 = = = Efforts to rename the San Francisco @-@ Oakland Bay Bridge = = = 
 In 1939 , the group E <unk> Vitus commissioned and dedicated a plaque commemorating Emperor Norton 's call for the construction of a suspension bridge between San Francisco and Oakland , via Yerba Buena Island ( formerly Goat Island ) . The group 's intention was that the plaque be placed on the newly opened San Francisco @-@ Oakland Bay Bridge itself . This was not approved by the bridge authorities , however ; and , sometime shortly after World War II , the plaque was installed at the Cliff House . In the 1990s , the plaque was moved to the Transbay Terminal . When the Terminal was closed and demolished in 2010 , as part of the project to construct a new Transbay Transit Center , the plaque was placed in storage , where it remains . 
 There have been two recent campaigns to name all , or parts , of the Bay Bridge for Emperor Norton . 
 In November 2004 , after a campaign by San Francisco Chronicle cartoonist Phil Frank , then @-@ San Francisco District 3 Supervisor Aaron Peskin introduced a resolution to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors calling for the entire bridge to be named for Emperor Norton . On December 14 , 2004 , the Board approved a modified version of this resolution , calling for only " new additions " — i.e. , the new eastern span — to be named " The Emperor Norton Bridge " . Neither the City of Oakland nor Alameda County passed any similar resolution , so the effort went no further . 
 In June 2013 , eight members of the California Assembly , joined by two members of the California Senate , introduced a concurrent resolution to name the western span of the bridge for former California state Speaker and San Francisco Mayor Willie Brown . In response , there have been public efforts seeking to revive the earlier Emperor Norton effort . One effort , an online petition , was started in August 2013 and calls for the entire bridge to be named for Emperor Norton . This petition has received coverage from local media . 
 The Emperor 's Bridge Campaign is carrying forward the bridge @-@ naming effort . The Campaign is using the example of numerous California state @-@ owned bridges that have multiple names to call for an " Emperor Norton " name simply to be added as a second name for the Bay Bridge , rather than for the bridge to be renamed altogether . The organization is exploring the possibility of offering state ballot proposition to this effect in 2018 , the 200th anniversary of Emperor Norton 's birth . 
 = Banded houndshark = 
 The banded houndshark ( Triakis scyllium ) is a species of houndshark , in the family Triakidae , common in the northwestern Pacific Ocean from the southern Russian Far East to Taiwan . Found on or near the bottom , it favors shallow coastal habitats with sandy or vegetated bottoms , and also enters brackish water . This shark reaches 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in length . It has a short , rounded snout and mostly narrow fins ; the pectoral fins are broad and triangular , and the trailing margin of the first dorsal fin is almost vertical . It is gray above and lighter below ; younger sharks have darker saddles and dots , which fade with age . 
 Nocturnal and largely solitary , the banded houndshark preys on benthic invertebrates and bony fishes . It is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos sustained by yolk . After mating during summer , females bear as many as 42 pups following a gestation period of 9 – 12 months . The banded houndshark poses no danger to humans and adapts well to captivity . It is caught as bycatch off Japan , Taiwan , and likely elsewhere in its range ; it may be eaten but is not as well @-@ regarded as related species . Because fishing does not appear to have diminished this shark 's population , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first scientific description of the banded houndshark was authored by German biologists Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle , based on a dried specimen from Japan , in their 1838 – 41 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen . They gave it the specific epithet scyllium , derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( " dogfish " ) , and placed it in the genus Triakis . Within the genus , it is placed in the subgenus Triakis along with the leopard shark ( T. ( Triakis ) semifasciata ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Native to the northwestern Pacific Ocean , the banded houndshark occurs from the southern Russian Far East to Taiwan , including Japan , Korea , and eastern China ; records from the Philippines are questionable . This common , benthic shark is found over continental and insular shelves , mostly close to shore but also to a depth of 150 m ( 490 ft ) . It frequents sandy flats and beds of seaweed and eelgrass ; additionally it is tolerant of brackish water and enters estuaries and bays . 
 = = Description = = 
 The banded houndshark is a moderately slender @-@ bodied species growing up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long . The snout is short , broad , and rounded ; the widely separated nostrils are each preceded by a lobe of skin that does not reach the mouth . The horizontally oval eyes are placed high on the head ; they are equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) and have prominent ridges underneath . The mouth forms a short , wide arch and bears long furrows at the corners that extend onto both jaws . Each tooth has an upright to oblique knife @-@ like central cusp flanked by strong cusplets . There are five pairs of gill slits . 
 Most of the fins are fairly narrow ; in adults the pectoral fins are broad and roughly triangular . The moderately tall first dorsal fin is placed about halfway between the pectoral and pelvic fins , and its trailing margin is nearly vertical near the apex . The second dorsal fin is about three @-@ quarters as high as the first and larger than the anal fin . The caudal fin has a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a prominent ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe ; in young sharks the lower caudal fin lobe is much less distinct . This species is gray above , with darker saddles and scattered black spots that fade with age ; the underside is off @-@ white . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The banded houndshark is nocturnal and generally solitary , though several individuals may rest together , sometimes piled atop one another inside a cave . It feeds mainly on crustaceans ( including shrimps , crabs , hermit crabs , and mantis shrimps ) , cephalopods ( including octopus ) , and spoon worms ; polychaete worms , tunicates , peanut worms , and small , bottom @-@ living bony fishes ( including flatfishes , conger eels , herring , jacks , drums , and grunts ) are occasionally consumed . Shrimp and spoon worms are important prey for sharks up to 70 cm ( 28 in ) long ; cephalopods predominate in the diets of larger sharks . 
 Mating occurs during the summer , and involves the male swimming parallel to the female and gripping her pectoral fin with his teeth ; thus secured , he then twists the aft portion of his body to insert a single clasper into her cloaca for copulation . The banded houndshark is aplacental viviparous , in which the developing embryos are sustained to birth by yolk . Females bear litters of 9 – 26 pups after a gestation period of 9 – 12 months , though litters as large as 42 pups have been recorded . The newborns measure 18 – 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) long . Males mature sexually at 5 – 6 years old , when they are 93 – 106 cm ( 37 – 42 in ) long , and live up to 15 years . Females mature sexually at 6 – 7 years old , when they are 106 – 107 cm ( 42 – 42 in ) long , and live up to 18 years . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms Callitetrarhynchus gracilis , <unk> <unk> , and Phyllobothrium <unk> , the leech Stibarobdella macrothela , and the copepods <unk> <unk> , <unk> punctatus , Kroyeria <unk> , and Pseudopandarus <unk> . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the banded houndshark is commonly displayed in public aquariums in China and Japan , and has reproduced in captivity . Individuals have survived in captivity for over five years . This species is often caught incidentally off Japan in gillnets and set nets ; the meat is sometimes sold , but is considered to be of poorer quality than that of other houndsharks in the region . It is caught in lesser numbers off Taiwan , and is probably also fished off Korea and northern China . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the banded houndshark under Least Concern , as it remains abundant throughout its range . Off Japan , it can be found in rocky areas that provide refuge from fishing pressure . 
 = Morchella importuna = 
 Morchella importuna is a species of fungus in the family Morchellaceae described from North America in 2012 . It occurs in gardens , woodchip beds , and other urban settings of northern California and the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada . The fungus has also been reported from Turkey , Spain , France , Switzerland , Canada and China , although it is unknown whether this is a result of accidental introductions . It is considered a choice edible mushroom . The fruit bodies develop a distinctive ladder @-@ like pattern of pits and ridges on the surface of their conical caps . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Officially described in 2012 , Morchella importuna was one of 14 new North American species that resulted from the Morel Data Collection Project . The type locality was in King County , Washington . It was previously identified as phylogenetic species Mel @-@ 10 in a 2011 publication , and erroneously as the " Classic North American Black Morel " in 2005 , where it was lumped together with Morchella angusticeps , and what has since been described as M. brunnea . The specific epithet importuna , which means " inconsiderate " or " assertive " , refers to the morel 's habit of causing " consternation and distress among gardeners and homeowners whose territory has been invaded " . 
 As argued in a recent study by Richard et al. however , the name Morchella importuna is probably a later synonym of an old European taxon , such as Morchella elata , Morchella <unk> or Morchella hortensis . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of M. importuna are 6 – 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) high . The cap is 3 – 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) high and measures 2 – 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) wide at its widest point . It is conical to widely conical or occasionally egg @-@ shaped . Its surface has pits and ridges , with 12 – 20 primary vertical ridges and numerous <unk> horizontal ridges , creating a <unk> appearance . The cap is attached to stipe with a sinus about 2 – 5 mm both deep and wide . The ridges are smooth or finely velvety and colored pale to dark gray when young , becoming dark grayish brown to nearly black in age . They are bluntly rounded when young , but later become sharpened or eroded . Pits are vertically elongated in all stages of development . They have a smooth or finely velvety texture . The pits open and deepen with development , progressing from gray to dark gray when immature to grayish brown , grayish olive or brownish yellow at maturity . The stipe measures 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) high and 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide , and is often somewhat thicker near the base . Its whitish to pale brownish surface is smooth or finely mealy with whitish granules . It develops longitudinal ridges and grooves ( particularly near the base ) as the fruit body matures . The flesh is whitish to watery tan , measuring 1 – 3 mm thick in the hollow cap ; in the stipe , this tissue is sometimes arranged as chambers or layers . The sterile inner surface of the cap is whitish and pubescent ( covered with short soft " hair " ) . 
 The ascospores are elliptical , smooth , and measure 18 – 24 by 10 – 13 µm . The cylindrical , hyaline ( translucent ) , asci are eight @-@ spored , measuring 220 – 300 by 12 – 25 µm . Paraphyses are septate , measuring 150 – 250 by 7 – 15 µm . They are cylindrical with variably shaped tips : rounded to roughly club @-@ shaped , pointy , or fuse @-@ shaped . Elements on the sterile ridges are septate and measure 25 – 300 by 10 – 30 µm . Terminal cells are cylindrical with a rounded tip that is variably shaped similar to the paraphyses . Both the paraphyses and the terminal cells are hyaline or brownish in dilute ( 2 % ) potassium hydroxide . 
 As a member of the Morchella elata group of black morels , M. importuna is sought after as a choice edible mushroom . Raw morels are poisonous and should always be cooked . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The rare Pacific Northwest morel Morchella <unk> , known only from its type collection , is quite similar in appearance to M. importuna . The former species is distinguished by its finely velvety surface . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 A saprobic fungus , Morchella importuna fruit bodies grow in wood chips , gardens , and planters in urban areas . Kuo suggests that it has mycorrhizal tendencies when grown in an environment with trees . Known primarily from northern California and the Pacific Northwest region of the United States , it has been reported from British Columbia ( Canada ) , California , Washington , Nevada , and Oregon , although there have been a few isolated reports of the morel from the Midwestern United States and from eastern North America . Fruiting occurs in the spring , from March until May . Identified as phylogenetic species " Mel @-@ 10 " , Morchella importuna has also been found in Turkey and China , but it remains unclear whether dispersal between these distant locations occurred naturally or through accidental introduction by humans . 
 = Birth control = 
 Birth control , also known as contraception and fertility control , is a method or device used to prevent pregnancy . Planning , making available , and use of birth control is called family planning . Birth control methods have been used since ancient times , but effective and safe methods only became available in the 20th century . Some cultures limit or discourage access to birth control because they consider it to be morally , religiously , or politically undesirable . 
 The most effective methods of birth control are sterilization by means of vasectomy in males and tubal ligation in females , intrauterine devices ( IUDs ) , and implantable birth control . This is followed by a number of hormone based methods including oral pills , patches , vaginal rings , and injections . Less effective methods include physical barriers such as condoms , diaphragms and birth control sponges and fertility awareness methods . The least effective methods are spermicides and withdrawal by the male before ejaculation . Sterilization , while highly effective , is not usually reversible ; all other methods are reversible , most immediately upon stopping them . Safe sex practices , such as with the use of male or female condoms , can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections . Other methods of birth control do not protect against sexually transmitted diseases . Emergency birth control can prevent pregnancy if taken within the 72 to 120 hours after unprotected sex . Some argue not having sex as a form of birth control , but abstinence @-@ only sex education may increase teenage pregnancies if offered without birth control education , due to non @-@ compliance . 
 In teenagers , pregnancies are at greater risk of poor outcomes . Comprehensive sex education and access to birth control decreases the rate of unwanted pregnancies in this age group . While all forms of birth control can generally be used by young people , long @-@ acting reversible birth control such as implants , IUDs , or vaginal rings are more successful in reducing rates of teenage pregnancy . After the delivery of a child , a woman who is not exclusively breastfeeding may become pregnant again after as few as four to six weeks . Some methods of birth control can be started immediately following the birth , while others require a delay of up to six months . In women who are breastfeeding , progestin @-@ only methods are preferred over combined oral birth control pills . In women who have reached menopause , it is recommended that birth control be continued for one year after the last period . 
 About 222 million women who want to avoid pregnancy in developing countries are not using a modern birth control method . Birth control use in developing countries has decreased the number of deaths during or around the time of pregnancy by 40 % ( about 270 @,@ 000 deaths prevented in 2008 ) and could prevent 70 % if the full demand for birth control were met . By lengthening the time between pregnancies , birth control can improve adult women 's delivery outcomes and the survival of their children . In the developing world women 's earnings , assets , weight , and their children 's schooling and health all improve with greater access to birth control . Birth control increases economic growth because of fewer dependent children , more women participating in the workforce , and less use of scarce resources . 
 = = Methods = = 
 Birth control methods include barrier methods , hormonal birth control , intrauterine devices ( IUDs ) , sterilization , and behavioral methods . They are used before or during sex while emergency contraceptives are effective for up to a few days after sex . Effectiveness is generally expressed as the percentage of women who become pregnant using a given method during the first year , and sometimes as a lifetime failure rate among methods with high effectiveness , such as tubal ligation . 
 The most effective methods are those that are long acting and do not require ongoing health care visits . Surgical sterilization , implantable hormones , and intrauterine devices all have first @-@ year failure rates of less than 1 % . Hormonal contraceptive pills , patches or vaginal rings , and the lactational amenorrhea method ( LAM ) , if used strictly , can also have first @-@ year ( or for LAM , first @-@ 6 @-@ month ) failure rates of less than 1 % . With typical use first @-@ year failure rates are considerably high , at 9 % , due to incorrect usage . Other methods such as condoms , diaphragms , and spermicides have higher first @-@ year failure rates even with perfect usage . The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends long acting reversible birth control as first line for young people . 
 While all methods of birth control have some potential adverse effects , the risk is less than that of pregnancy . After stopping or removing many methods of birth control , including oral contraceptives , IUDs , implants and injections , the rate of pregnancy during the subsequent year is the same as for those who used no birth control . 
 In those with specific health problems , certain forms of birth control may require further investigations . For women who are otherwise healthy , many methods of birth control should not require a medical exam — including birth control pills , injectable or implantable birth control , and condoms . Specifically , a pelvic exam , breast exam , or blood test before starting birth control pills do not appear to affect outcomes and , therefore , are not required . In 2009 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) published a detailed list of medical eligibility criteria for each type of birth control . 
 = = = Hormonal = = = 
 Hormonal contraception is available in a number of different forms , including oral pills , implants under the skin , injections , patches , IUDs and a vaginal ring . They are currently available only for women , although hormonal contraceptives for men have and are being clinically tested . There are two types of oral birth control pills , the combined oral contraceptive pills ( which contain both estrogen and progesterone ) and the progestogen @-@ only pills ( sometimes called <unk> ) . If either is taken during pregnancy , they do not increase the risk of miscarriage nor cause birth defects . Both types of birth control pills prevent fertilization mainly by inhibiting ovulation and thickening cervical mucous . Their effectiveness depends on the user remembering to take the pills . They may also change the lining of the uterus and thus decrease implantation . 
 Combined hormonal contraceptives are associated with a slightly increased risk of venous and arterial blood clots . Venous clots , on average , increase from 2 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 8 per 10 @,@ 000 women years which is still less than that associated with pregnancy . Due to this risk , they are not recommended in women over 35 years of age who continue to smoke . The effect on sexual desire is varied , with increase or decrease in some but with no effect in most . Combined oral contraceptives reduce the risk of ovarian cancer and endometrial cancer and do not change the risk of breast cancer . They often reduce menstrual bleeding and painful menstruation cramps . The lower doses of estrogen released from the vaginal ring may reduce the risk of breast tenderness , nausea , and headache associated with higher dose estrogen products . 
 Progestin @-@ only pills , injections and intrauterine devices are not associated with an increased risk of blood clots and may be used by women with previous blood clots in their veins . In those with a history of arterial blood clots , non @-@ hormonal birth control or a progestin @-@ only method other than the injectable version should be used . Progestin @-@ only pills may improve menstrual symptoms and can be used by breastfeeding women as they do not affect milk production . Irregular bleeding may occur with progestin @-@ only methods , with some users reporting no periods . The progestins <unk> and <unk> minimize the androgenic side effects but increase the risks of blood clots and are thus not first line . The perfect use first @-@ year failure rate of the injectable progestin , Depo @-@ Provera , is 0 @.@ 2 % ; the typical use first failure rate is 6 % . 
 = = = Barrier = = = 
 Barrier contraceptives are devices that attempt to prevent pregnancy by physically preventing sperm from entering the uterus . They include male condoms , female condoms , cervical caps , diaphragms , and contraceptive sponges with spermicide . 
 Globally , condoms are the most common method of birth control . Male condoms are put on a man 's erect penis and physically block ejaculated sperm from entering the body of a sexual partner . Modern condoms are most often made from latex , but some are made from other materials such as polyurethane , or lamb 's intestine . Female condoms are also available , most often made of nitrile , latex or polyurethane . Male condoms have the advantage of being inexpensive , easy to use , and have few adverse effects . Making condoms available to teenagers does not appear to affect the age of onset of sexual activity or its frequency . In Japan about 80 % of couples who are using birth control use condoms , while in Germany this number is about 25 % , and in the United States it is 18 % . 
 Male condoms and the diaphragm with spermicide have typical use first @-@ year failure rates of 18 % and 12 % , respectively . With perfect use condoms are more effective with a 2 % first @-@ year failure rate versus a 6 % first @-@ year rate with the diaphragm . Condoms have the additional benefit of helping to prevent the spread of some sexually transmitted infections such as HIV / AIDS . 
 Contraceptive sponges combine a barrier with a spermicide . Like diaphragms , they are inserted vaginally before intercourse and must be placed over the cervix to be effective . Typical failure rates during the first year depend on whether or not a woman has previously given birth , being 24 % in those who have and 12 % in those who have not . The sponge can be inserted up to 24 hours before intercourse and must be left in place for at least six hours afterward . Allergic reactions and more severe adverse effects such as toxic shock syndrome have been reported . 
 = = = Intrauterine devices = = = 
 The current intrauterine devices ( IUD ) are small devices , often ' T ' -shaped , often containing either copper or levonorgestrel , which are inserted into the uterus . They are one form of long @-@ acting reversible contraception which are the most effective types of reversible birth control . Failure rates with the copper IUD is about 0 @.@ 8 % while the levonorgestrel IUD has a failure rates of 0 @.@ 2 % in the first year of use . Among types of birth control , they along with birth control implants result in the greatest satisfaction among users . As of 2007 , IUDs are the most widely used form of reversible contraception , with more than 180 million users worldwide . 
 Evidence supports effectiveness and safety in adolescents and those who have and have not previously had children . IUDs do not affect breastfeeding and can be inserted immediately after delivery . They may also be used immediately after an abortion . Once removed , even after long term use , fertility returns to normal immediately . 
 While copper IUDs may increase menstrual bleeding and result in more painful cramps hormonal IUDs may reduce menstrual bleeding or stop menstruation altogether . <unk> can be treated with NSAIDs . Other potential complications include expulsion ( 2 – 5 % ) and rarely perforation of the uterus ( less than 0 @.@ 7 % ) . A previous model of the intrauterine device ( the <unk> shield ) was associated with an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease , however the risk is not affected with current models in those without sexually transmitted infections around the time of insertion . 
 = = = Sterilization = = = 
 Surgical sterilization is available in the form of tubal ligation for women and vasectomy for men . There are no significant long @-@ term side effects , and tubal ligation decreases the risk of ovarian cancer . Short term complications are twenty times less likely from a vasectomy than a tubal ligation . After a vasectomy , there may be swelling and pain of the scrotum which usually resolves in a week or two . With tubal ligation , complications occur in 1 to 2 percent of procedures with serious complications usually due to the anesthesia . Neither method offers protection from sexually transmitted infections . 
 This decision may cause regret in some men and women . Of women aged over 30 who have undergone tubal ligation , about 5 % regret their decision , as compared with 20 % of women aged under 30 . By contrast , less than 5 % of men are likely to regret sterilization . Men more likely to regret sterilization are younger , have young or no children , or have an unstable marriage . In a survey of biological parents , 9 % stated they would not have had children if they were able to do it over again . 
 Although sterilization is considered a permanent procedure , it is possible to attempt a tubal reversal to reconnect the fallopian tubes or a vasectomy reversal to reconnect the vasa deferentia . In women the desire for a reversal is often associated with a change in spouse . Pregnancy success rates after tubal reversal are between 31 and 88 percent , with complications including an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy . The number of males who request reversal is between 2 and 6 percent . Rates of success in fathering another child after reversal are between 38 and 84 percent ; with success being lower the longer the time period between the original procedure and the reversal . Sperm extraction followed by in vitro fertilization may also be an option in men . 
 = = = Behavioral = = = 
 Behavioral methods involve regulating the timing or method of intercourse to prevent introduction of sperm into the female reproductive tract , either altogether or when an egg may be present . If used perfectly the first @-@ year failure rate may be around 3 @.@ 4 % , however if used poorly first @-@ year failure rates may approach 85 % . 
 = = = = Fertility awareness = = = = 
 Fertility awareness methods involve determining the most fertile days of the menstrual cycle and avoiding unprotected intercourse . Techniques for determining fertility include monitoring basal body temperature , cervical secretions , or the day of the cycle . They have typical first @-@ year failure rates of 24 % ; perfect use first @-@ year failure rates depend on which method is used and range from 0 @.@ 4 % to 5 % . The evidence on which these estimates are based , however , is poor as the majority of people in trials stop their use early . Globally , they are used by about 3 @.@ 6 % of couples . If based on both basal body temperature and another primary sign , the method is referred to as <unk> . Overall first @-@ year failure rates of < 2 % to 20 % have been reported in clinical studies of the <unk> method . 
 = = = = Withdrawal = = = = 
 The withdrawal method ( also known as coitus interruptus ) is the practice of ending intercourse ( " pulling out " ) before ejaculation . The main risk of the withdrawal method is that the man may not perform the maneuver correctly or in a timely manner . First @-@ year failure rates vary from 4 % with perfect usage to 22 % with typical usage . It is not considered birth control by some medical professionals . 
 There is little evidence regarding the sperm content of pre @-@ ejaculatory fluid . While some tentative research did not find sperm , one trial found sperm present in 10 out of 27 volunteers . The withdrawal method is used as birth control by about 3 % of couples . 
 = = = = Abstinence = = = = 
 Though some groups advocate total sexual abstinence , by which they mean the avoidance of all sexual activity , in the context of birth control the term usually means abstinence from vaginal intercourse . Abstinence is 100 % effective in preventing pregnancy ; however , not everyone who intends to be abstinent refrains from all sexual activity , and in many populations there is a significant risk of pregnancy from <unk> sex . 
 Abstinence @-@ only sex education does not reduce teenage pregnancy . Teen pregnancy rates are higher in students given abstinence @-@ only education , as compared with comprehensive sex education . Some authorities recommend that those using abstinence as a primary method have backup method ( s ) available ( such as condoms or emergency contraceptive pills ) . Deliberate non @-@ penetrative sex without vaginal sex or deliberate oral sex without vaginal sex are also sometimes considered birth control . While this generally avoids pregnancy , pregnancy can still occur with <unk> sex and other forms of penis @-@ near @-@ vagina sex ( genital rubbing , and the penis exiting from anal intercourse ) where sperm can be deposited near the entrance to the vagina and can travel along the vagina 's lubricating fluids . 
 = = = = Lactation = = = = 
 The lactational amenorrhea method involves the use of a woman 's natural postpartum infertility which occurs after delivery and may be extended by breastfeeding . This usually requires the presence of no periods , exclusively breastfeeding the infant , and a child younger than six months . The World Health Organization states that if breastfeeding is the infant 's only source of nutrition , the failure rate is 2 % in the six months following delivery . Six uncontrolled studies of lactational amenorrhea method users found failure rates at 6 months postpartum between 0 % and 7 @.@ 5 % . Failure rates increase to 4 – 7 % at one year and 13 % at two years . Feeding formula , pumping instead of nursing , the use of a pacifier , and feeding solids all increase its failure rate . In those who are exclusively breastfeeding , about 10 % begin having periods before three months and 20 % before six months . In those who are not breastfeeding , fertility may return four weeks after delivery . 
 = = = Emergency = = = 
 Emergency contraceptive methods are medications ( sometimes misleadingly referred to as " morning @-@ after pills " ) or devices used after unprotected sexual intercourse with the hope of preventing pregnancy . They work primarily by preventing ovulation or fertilization . They are unlikely to affect implantation , but this has not been completely exclude . A number of options exist , including high dose birth control pills , levonorgestrel , mifepristone , ulipristal and IUDs . <unk> pills , when used within 3 days , decrease the chance of pregnancy after a single episode of unprotected sex or condom failure by 70 % ( resulting in a pregnancy rate of 2 @.@ 2 % ) . <unk> , when used within 5 days , decreases the chance of pregnancy by about 85 % ( pregnancy rate 1 @.@ 4 % ) and might be a little more effective than levonorgestrel . <unk> is also more effective than levonorgestrel while copper IUDs are the most effective method . IUDs can be inserted up to five days after intercourse and prevent about 99 % of pregnancies after an episode of unprotected sex ( pregnancy rate of 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 % ) . This makes them the most effective form of emergency contraceptive . In those who are overweight or obese levonorgestrel is less effective and an IUD or ulipristal is recommended . 
 Providing emergency contraceptive pills to women in advance does not affect rates of sexually transmitted infections , condom use , pregnancy rates , or sexual risk @-@ taking behavior . All methods have minimal side effects . 
 = = = Dual protection = = = 
 Dual protection is the use of methods that prevent both sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy . This can be with condoms either alone or along with another birth control method or by the avoidance of penetrative sex . If pregnancy is a high concern using two methods at the same time is reasonable , and two forms of birth control is recommended in those taking the anti @-@ acne drug isotretinoin , due to the high risk of birth defects if taken during pregnancy . 
 = = Effects = = 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Contraceptive use in developing countries is estimated to have decreased the number of maternal deaths by 40 % ( about 270 @,@ 000 deaths prevented in 2008 ) and could prevent 70 % of deaths if the full demand for birth control were met . These benefits are achieved by reducing the number of unplanned pregnancies that subsequently result in unsafe abortions and by preventing pregnancies in those at high risk . 
 Birth control also improves child survival in the developing world by lengthening the time between pregnancies . In this population , outcomes are worse when a mother gets pregnant within eighteen months of a previous delivery . Delaying another pregnancy after a miscarriage however does not appear to alter risk and women are advised to attempt pregnancy in this situation whenever they are ready . 
 Teenage pregnancies , especially among younger teens , are at greater risk of adverse outcomes including early birth , low birth weight , and death of the infant . In the United States 82 % of pregnancies in those between 15 and 19 are unplanned . Comprehensive sex education and access to birth control are effective in decreasing pregnancy rates in this age group . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 In the developing world , birth control increases economic growth due to there being fewer dependent children and thus more women participating in the workforce . Women 's earnings , assets , body mass index , and their children 's schooling and body mass index all improve with greater access to birth control . Family planning via the use of modern birth control is one of the most cost @-@ effective health interventions . For every dollar spent , the United Nations estimates that two to six dollars are saved . These cost savings are related to preventing unplanned pregnancies and decreasing the spread of sexually transmitted illnesses . While all methods are beneficial financially , the use of copper IUDs resulted in the greatest savings . 
 The total medical cost for a pregnancy , delivery and care of a newborn in the United States is on average $ 21 @,@ 000 for a vaginal delivery and $ 31 @,@ 000 for a Caesarean section as of 2012 . In most other countries the cost is less than half . For a child born in 2011 , an average US family will spend $ 235 @,@ 000 over 17 years to raise them . 
 = = Prevalence = = 
 Globally , as of 2009 , approximately 60 % of those who are married and able to have children use birth control . How frequently different methods are used varies widely between countries . The most common method in the developed world is condoms and oral contraceptives , while in Africa it is oral contraceptives and in Latin America and Asia it is sterilization . In the developing world overall , 35 % of birth control is via female sterilization , 30 % is via IUDs , 12 % is via oral contraceptives , 11 % is via condoms , and 4 % is via male sterilization . 
 While less used in the developed countries than the developing world , the number of women using IUDs as of 2007 was more than 180 million . Avoiding sex when fertile is used by about 3 @.@ 6 % of women of childbearing age , with usage as high as 20 % in areas of South America . As of 2005 , 12 % of couples are using a male form of birth control ( either condoms or a vasectomy ) with higher rates in the developed world . Usage of male forms of birth control has decreased between 1985 and 2009 . Contraceptive use among women in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa has risen from about 5 % in 1991 to about 30 % in 2006 . 
 As of 2012 , 57 % of women of childbearing age want to avoid pregnancy ( 867 of 1520 million ) . About 222 million women however were not able to access birth control , 53 million of whom were in sub @-@ Saharan Africa and 97 million of whom were in Asia . This results in 54 million unplanned pregnancies and nearly 80 @,@ 000 maternal deaths a year . Part of the reason that many women are without birth control is that many countries limit access due to religious or political reasons , while another contributor is poverty . Due to restrictive abortion laws in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa , many women turn to unlicensed abortion providers for unintended pregnancy , resulting in about 2 – 4 % obtaining unsafe abortions each year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The Egyptian Ebers Papyrus from 1550 BCE and the <unk> Papyrus from 1850 BCE have within them some of the earliest documented descriptions of birth control : the use of honey , acacia leaves and lint to be placed in the vagina to block sperm . It is believed that in Ancient Greece <unk> was used as birth control which , due to its effectiveness and thus desirability , was harvested into extinction . 
 In medieval Europe , any effort to halt pregnancy was deemed immoral by the Catholic Church , although it is believed that women of the time still used a number of birth control measures , such as coitus interruptus and inserting lily root and rue into the vagina . Women in the Middle Ages were also encouraged to tie weasel testicles around their thighs during sex to prevent pregnancy . The oldest condoms discovered to date were recovered in the ruins of Dudley Castle in England , and are dated back to 1640 . They were made of animal gut , and were most likely used to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases during the English Civil War . Casanova , living in 18th century Italy , described the use of a lambskin covering to prevent pregnancy ; however , condoms only became widely available in the 20th century . 
 = = = Birth control movement = = = 
 The birth control movement developed during the 19th and early 20th centuries . The Malthusian League , based on the ideas of Thomas Malthus , was established in 1877 in the United Kingdom to educate the public about the importance of family planning and to advocate for getting rid of penalties for promoting birth control . It was founded during the " Knowlton trial " of Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh , who were prosecuted for publishing on various methods of birth control . 
 In the United States , Margaret Sanger and Otto <unk> popularized the phrase " birth control " in 1914 . Sanger was mainly active in the United States but had gained an international reputation by the 1930s . At the time , under the Comstock Law , distribution of birth control information was illegal . She jumped bail in 1914 after her arrest for distributing birth control information and left the United States for the United Kingdom to return in 1915 . Sanger established a short @-@ lived birth @-@ control clinic based in the Brownville section of Brooklyn , New York in 1916 , which was shut down after eleven days and resulted in her arrest . The publicity surrounding the arrest , trial , and appeal sparked birth control activism across the United States . 
 The first permanent birth @-@ control clinic was established in Britain in 1921 by Marie Stopes working with the Malthusian League . The clinic , run by midwives and supported by visiting doctors , offered women 's birth @-@ control advice and taught them the use of a cervical cap . Her clinic made contraception acceptable during the 1920s by presenting it in scientific terms . In 1921 , Sanger founded the American Birth Control League , which later became the Planned Parenthood Federation of America . In 1924 the Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics was founded to campaign for municipal clinics ; this led to the opening of a second clinic in Greengate , Salford in 1926 . Throughout the 1920s , Stopes and other feminist pioneers , including Dora Russell and Stella Browne , played a major role in breaking down taboos about sex . In April 1930 the Birth Control Conference assembled 700 delegates and was successful in bringing birth control and abortion into the political sphere – three months later , the Ministry of Health , in the United Kingdom , allowed local authorities to give birth @-@ control advice in welfare centres . 
 In 1936 the U.S. court ruled in U.S. v. One Package that medically prescribing contraception to save a persons life or well being was not illegal under the Comstock Law ; following this decision , the American Medical Association Committee on Contraception revoked its 1936 statement condemning birth control . A national survey in 1937 showed 71 percent of the adult population supported the use of contraception . By 1938 347 birth control clinics were running in the United States despite their advertisement still being illegal . First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt publicly supported birth control and family planning . In 1966 , President Lyndon B. Johnson started endorsing public funding for family planning services , and the Federal Government began subsidizing birth control services for low @-@ income families . The Affordable Care Act , passed into law on March 23 , 2010 under President Barack Obama , requires all plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace to cover contraceptive methods . These include barrier methods , hormonal methods , implanted devices , emergency contraceptives , and sterilization procedures . 
 = = = Modern methods = = = 
 In 1909 , Richard Richter developed the first intrauterine device made from silkworm gut , which was further developed and marketed in Germany by Ernst Gräfenberg in the late 1920s . Gregory Pincus and John Rock with help from the Planned Parenthood Federation of America developed the first birth control pills in the 1950s , such as <unk> / <unk> , which became publicly available in the 1960s through the Food and Drug Administration under the name <unk> . Medical abortion became an alternative to surgical abortion with the availability of prostaglandin analogs in the 1970s and mifepristone in the 1980s . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Legal positions = = = 
 Human rights agreements require most governments to provide family planning and contraceptive information and services . These include the requirement to create a national plan for family planning services , remove laws that limit access to family planning , ensure that a wide variety of safe and effective birth control methods are available including emergency contraceptives , make sure there are appropriately trained healthcare providers and facilities at an affordable price , and create a process to review the programs implemented . If governments fail to do the above it may put them in breach of binding international treaty obligations . 
 In America , Griswold v. Connecticut overturned a state law prohibiting dissemination of contraception information based on a constitutional right to privacy for marital relationships . In 1971 , Eisenstadt v. Baird extended this right to privacy to single people . 
 In 2010 , the United Nations launched the Every Woman Every Child movement to assess the progress toward meeting women 's contraceptive needs . The initiative has set a goal of increasing the number of users of modern birth control by 120 million women in the world 's 69 poorest countries by the year 2020 . Additionally , they aim to eradicate discrimination against girls and young women who seek contraceptives . The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists ( <unk> ) recommended in 2014 that oral birth control pills should be over the counter medications . 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 Religions vary widely in their views of the ethics of birth control . The Roman Catholic Church officially only accepts natural family planning , although large numbers of Catholics in developed countries accept and use modern methods of birth control . Among Protestants there is a wide range of views from supporting none to allowing all methods of birth control . Views in Judaism range from the stricter Orthodox sect to the more relaxed Reform sect . Hindus may use both natural and artificial contraceptives . A common Buddhist view is that preventing conception is acceptable , while intervening after conception has occurred is not . In Islam , contraceptives are allowed if they do not threaten health , although their use is discouraged by some . 
 = = = World Contraception Day = = = 
 September 26 is World Contraception Day , devoted to raising awareness and improving education about sexual and reproductive health , with a vision of a world where every pregnancy is wanted . It is supported by a group of governments and international NGOs , including the Office of Population Affairs , the Asian Pacific Council on Contraception , Centro <unk> Salud y Mujer , the European Society of Contraception and Reproductive Health , the German Foundation for World Population , the International Federation of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology , International Planned Parenthood Federation , the Marie Stopes International , Population Services International , the Population Council , the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) , and Women Deliver . 
 = = = Misconceptions = = = 
 There are a number of common misconceptions regarding sex and pregnancy . <unk> after sexual intercourse is not an effective form of birth control . Additionally , it is associated with a number of health problems and thus is not recommended . Women can become pregnant the first time they have sexual intercourse and in any sexual position . It is possible , although not very likely , to become pregnant during menstruation . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 = = = Females = = = 
 Improvements of existing birth control methods are needed , as around half of those who get pregnant unintentionally are using birth control at the time . A number of alterations of existing contraceptive methods are being studied , including a better female condom , an improved diaphragm , a patch containing only progestin , and a vaginal ring containing long @-@ acting progesterone . This vaginal ring appears to be effective for three or four months and is currently available in some areas of the world . For women who rarely have sex , the taking of the hormonal birth control levonorgestrel around the time of sex looks promising . 
 A number of methods to perform sterilization via the cervix are being studied . One involves putting <unk> in the uterus which causes scarring and infertility . While the procedure is inexpensive and does not require surgical skills , there are concerns regarding long @-@ term side effects . Another substance , <unk> , which functions in the same manner is being looked at . A device called <unk> , which expands when placed in the fallopian tubes and blocks them , was approved in the United States in 2002 . 
 = = = Males = = = 
 Methods of male birth control include condoms , vasectomies and withdrawal . Between 25 and 75 % of males who are sexually active would use hormonal birth control if it was available for them . A number of hormonal and non @-@ hormonal methods are in trials , and there is some research looking at the possibility of contraceptive vaccines . 
 A reversible surgical method under investigation is reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance ( <unk> ) which consists of injecting a polymer gel , styrene maleic anhydride in dimethyl sulfoxide , into the vas deferens . An injection with sodium bicarbonate washes out the substance and restores fertility . Another is an <unk> device which involves putting a urethane plug into the vas deferens to block it . A combination of an androgen and a progestin seems promising , as do selective androgen receptor modulators . Ultrasound and methods to heat the testicles have undergone preliminary studies . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Neutering or spaying , which involves removing some of the reproductive organs , is often carried out as a method of birth control in household pets . Many animal shelters require these procedures as part of adoption agreements . In large animals the surgery is known as castration . Birth control is also being considered as an alternative to hunting as a means of controlling overpopulation in wild animals . Contraceptive vaccines have been found to be effective in a number of different animal populations . 
 = The Other Woman ( Mad Men ) = 
 " The Other Woman " is the eleventh episode of the fifth season of the American television drama series Mad Men and the 63rd episode of the series overall . It is co @-@ written by Semi Chellas and Matthew Weiner , and directed by Phil Abraham . It aired on AMC in the United States on May 27 , 2012 . 
 The episode takes place in January 1967 . Pete asks Joan to make a personal and moral sacrifice to ensure the company lands the Jaguar account . Meanwhile , the creatives work long nights to come up with the perfect pitch for the presentation . Don becomes furious after learning of the impact Megan 's new profession will have on their life . Feeling unappreciated , Peggy has lunch with Freddy Rumsen , who encourages her to make a move . Later , Peggy meets with Ted Chaough , from rival firm CGC , and accepts an offer for chief copywriter at CGC . 
 " The Other Woman " was critically acclaimed , with some critics calling it one of the best episodes of the series . Jon Hamm , Elisabeth Moss , and Christina Hendricks were lauded by journalists for their performances in this episode . " The Other Woman " was watched by 2 @.@ 07 million viewers and received an adult 18 – 49 rating of 0 @.@ 6 , marking a slightly higher viewership than the previous episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The SCDP Jaguar team discusses taglines . Stan suggests one using the word " mistress " , but Don reminds him the client would not want to hear that word in an advertisement and excuses himself . Peggy asks Don 's approval of one of her projects but he tells her that she is in charge until Jaguar is done . She watches as a lobster lunch is delivered to the Jaguar team . 
 Ken and Pete dine with Herb Rennet , head of the Dealers Association and a member of Jaguar 's selection committee . Herb suggests SCDP ’ s competitive standing might be improved if they arrange an evening for him with Joan . Pete tells Joan about Herb 's proposal . Shocked , she asks how Pete would feel if someone asked that of his wife Trudy . He asks Joan how much it would take to convince her . She replies that he " couldn 't afford it " . 
 <unk> in for Ginsberg while he works on Jaguar , Peggy attends a conference call with Chevalier Blanc . The company wants to pull the Hard Day 's Night ad but she spontaneously comes up with changing the existing ad to targeting women instead and wins the client over . 
 Pete presents Herb 's proposal at a partners meeting , guaranteeing SCDP will lose the account if they do not comply . Don spurns the idea and leaves , but the remaining partners reluctantly agree to offer Joan $ 50 @,@ 000 . They decide to withhold Christmas bonuses and extend their credit line to cover the cost . 
 Don instructs the Jaguar team to ditch the mistress concept because it is vulgar . Later , Harry praises Peggy 's work on Chevalier Blanc . She tells Don the client ultimately went with the same ad as before , only in a Paris setting . Don says Ginsberg will take over once the Jaguar pitch is finished , prompting Peggy to reply that she is not in charge of everything . Don pulls some money from his wallet and condescendingly tosses it in Peggy 's face , telling her that if she wants to go to Paris , she should just go . Ken tries to comfort her , saying that Don is just upset about Jaguar , to which she replies that she does not care . 
 Lane advises Joan to demand a 5 % partnership stake in the company , adding that , when he thought he was essential to the future of the firm , he settled for much less than he felt was due him . Joan later tells Pete she wants a partnership , comprising 5 % of the business and voting rights , in exchange for her spending the night with Herb . Pete asks how to make the arrangements , to which she icily and rhetorically asks if she has to do it all . Pete later tells Don about the arrangement with Joan . Don visits Joan 's apartment to dissuade her . She thanks him and wishes him luck on the presentation , but it is eventually revealed that , unbeknownst to Don , her sexual encounter with Herb had already taken place . 
 Pete tells Trudy he wants an apartment in the city , but she refuses , telling him that his love affair with Manhattan is over and that they have not even been trying for a second child . 
 The next day , Megan tells Don that her audition gained her a callback for Little Murders and rehearsals begin shortly in Boston . He voices his displeasure at her being gone for three months . She accuses him of expecting her acting career to fail . When the callback does not go well , she tells him that , if she has to choose between him and the play , she would choose him , but will hate him for it . He assures her that he does not want her to fail , and they kiss . 
 Ginsberg approaches Don with a new Jaguar concept , portraying the car as an unattainable woman : " Jaguar : At last , something beautiful you can truly own . " Don smiles . Over lunch with Freddy Rumsen , Peggy gripes about her exclusion from Jaguar . Freddy suggests she leave SCDP and offers to help . The next day , Don presents the pitch to Jaguar . Herb smiles as Don unveils the tagline . Joan inquires of Don about the presentation . 
 Peggy meets Ted Chaough from Cutler Gleason and Chaough to discuss job opportunities and he praises her work . She writes her job requirements , " Copy Chief $ 18 @,@ 000 / year " , on a piece of paper and slides it across the table to him . Chaough crosses out $ 18 @,@ 000 and writes $ 19 @,@ 000 . 
 The following day , Roger summons all the partners to his office to learn the fate of their Jaguar presentation . Don locks eyes with Joan when she joins them , realizing that she has , in fact , slept with Herb . Roger receives the congratulatory confirmation call from Jaguar , and the office erupts in celebration . In Don 's office , Peggy informs him she has accepted a job with CGC . He thinks she is asking for a raise and attempts to negotiate salary , but she tells him it is not about money . She holds back tears as he kisses her hand . She walks out of the office and smiles as she waits for an elevator . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by Semi Chellas and Matthew Weiner , and directed by Phil Abraham . Weiner said in August 2012 that he intended for Peggy 's departure from SCDP to be in " The Other Woman " , which is centered on Joan : " [ the episode is ] literally about the quantification and value of women in the workplace and the relationship of their sexuality to it . I knew that on a subconscious level at the writing stage , because of the way the stories went together . As these stories fold in together , it starts to become about that , but it was always about what you have to do to get ahead , in a very simple way , and the opportunities to get ahead . " 
 The nonlinear narrative involving Joan 's storyline and Don 's Jaguar pitch was " a solution to how to tell the story " according to Weiner . " The ordering of those events really was a problem and we got to a point where we can either show Don doing the pitch , or show Joan being with the guy , but we can 't do them both , " he said , explaining that he felt " if Don gives the pitch after [ the audience has ] seen Joan do this , no one is going to listen to a word that he says . It doesn 't matter how good it is . [ The audience is ] not going to believe he could have won . " 
 Chellas " had this great idea , this elliptical thing , which we really loaded up with cues so that you would know at the end that Don was too late . Seeing Joan in there , taking the necklace off , and Joan 's mother taking Don 's hat into the room where Joan was , and then Joan putting on the green robe and coming out , seeing that behind @-@ the @-@ scenes moment the second time really cemented it . " Weiner said this allowed them to " show Joan going through with it 24 hours beforehand , and then show Don giving this pitch that the audience is convinced is a great pitch . Then you slowly dissolve back to the reality of Don coming in [ to work ] pretty happy , Joan asking how it went , and Roger having this dead response — ' it was one of his good ones ' — and Don wondering why Joan 's not more excited . " 
 Abraham spoke about shooting a scene of the episode in August 2012 : 
 Sometimes the toughest moments come where you least expect them . In this episode , that moment was Don throwing money in Peggy 's face . It was a pivotal story point and didn 't seem like it would be a hard beat to hit . During rehearsal when Jon Hamm threw the money at Lizzie Moss , it beaned her right between the eyes , inadvertently , but it was exactly what the scene required . Of course when we go to shoot the scene after setting the lights , Jon tosses the money at her , but it 's just not eliciting the same response . Lizzie tells me it would really help her if Jon just nailed her with the cash again . It 's harder than you think to have perfect aim with loose bills in your pocket when your target is 13 feet ( 4 m ) away . It took a few more takes than anyone had patience for , but when the cash finally landed where it needed to , it took Lizzie by surprise all over again , and that was the moment you ended up seeing onscreen . 
 While discussing the prostitution plot , Christina Hendricks said , " This is a very confusing situation for Joan and for everyone involved . First off , it 's just completely insulting . Second of all , it 's quite an opportunity . Then all of a sudden you put the money involved or the opportunity involved or you put a label on it , then it becomes a scary road to go down . " Hendricks said that Joan 's motivation was " protection [ for ] her child . " Hendricks felt that Joan saw herself as an equal in a way to the other partners after going through with the deal , as Joan had seen them do worse things over her thirteen years in employment . 
 Vincent Kartheiser called the storyline an example of an " amoral " business tactic . Kartheiser described Pete as doing " what he thinks he needs to do to get the account . I don 't know if that 's always such a good thing , but it 's common in business . And I think in that situation , Pete represents that type of businessman . " Matthew Weiner and Jared Harris both characterized Lane 's decision as two @-@ fold — he gave Joan the best advice for her and for himself . 
 Jon Hamm praised the prostitution sequence as " Very elegant paired with Don 's pitch to Jaguar . This idea of something beautiful that you could possess , that you could own . It 's one thing when you 're talking about a car . It 's something else when you 're talking about a human being . " 
 Elisabeth Moss said she was not told by Weiner that Peggy would be leaving SCDP " until we were shooting episode 10 , the one right before it . It was unusual that he didn 't tell me . He usually tells me what 's happening , pitches me things to ask me how they sound . " Moss ' initial reaction " was just one of feeling like there was really no other logical way to go for her . After everything that had happened for five years , she can 't just keep butting her head up against that wall . [ ... ] She 's becoming her own person and she needs to have her own place not under Don . " Moss also said , " I will thank [ Weiner ] forever for not telling me . It would have made my life harder . I knew about Peggy 's baby in season one . I fought against it , to play it as she was living it , feeling it , and not be in my head . Not knowing Peggy would quit allowed me to find it for myself , to really feel Peggy 's growing frustration with Don all season . " 
 According to Moss , Peggy " has the capability of being a Don Draper , and there can 't be two of them in the office . " The goodbye scene between Don and Peggy was a difficult one to shoot . Moss said , " That scene was a really , really tough scene to do . They didn 't tell me they were going to do this , but they told Jon to hold my hand and not let it go . Then he did , and I lost it . Every single one of those tears were absolutely real . She wants to stay with all of her heart . She does not want to leave , but she knows she has to . " Hamm said there was " respect , understanding , and admiration between those two characters . This is the exact right time for her to leave . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim from television journalists and has been described by critics as " a knockout episode in a season full of knockout episodes , " funny in some parts , poignant in others , and downright heartbreaking " The storyline involving Joan 's prostituting herself to secure the Jaguar account for Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce came in for particular analysis and scrutiny among journalists , as related to its execution and use of themes of female sexuality and sexual objectification . Alan Sepinwall fought with himself over the execution of the prostitution story in this episode , asking , " If you buy that the partners would be willing to sell Joan , and that Joan would feel the same way , then this is an all @-@ time great episode of the series . But if you don 't , then it 's Weiner and company making the characters act against their natures to fit the theme . " Sepinwall described the story as " something that so fundamentally changes the way you view a number of major characters , and the show that uses them , that it has to be just about perfect to work , and maybe not even then . " Todd VanDerWerff opined that , " ' The Other Woman ' shouldn ’ t work . It ’ s so obviously constructed to be a ' message ' episode , and the message is far from subtle : No matter what we try to do to make them equal , men are always going to turn women into objects on some level , because that ’ s just how men perceive them . " VanDerWerff compared it to the " Employee of the Month " episode of The Sopranos , even going so far as to call " The Other Woman " a stronger episode . 
 The final scene in which Peggy leaves both Don and the agency was pinpointed by critics as a standout sequence . Maureen Ryan said , " the scene between Don and Peggy was tremendous , but Jon Hamm and Elisabeth Moss are always magnificent together . It 's no coincidence that their final pose — Don at Peggy 's waist , kissing her hand — recalled Don 's brutal reconciliation with Megan a few weeks ago , kneeling , begging her to stay with him . " 
 Weiner was " surprised " by the reaction to Joan 's storyline : 
 I knew it was a dramatic moment , and I expected it to be treated as drama , because the stakes were so high , and we knew Joan so well . But I also felt on some level , if we hadn 't used the word prostitution in there , it was more about the public nature of what was going on , and also their love for Joan , and the fact that she was put in this position that was so upsetting to people . I was stunned , though , by the suggestion that there were some people questioning about whether she would have actually done this or not . That shocked me . Maybe what they were saying is they were questioning whether they would have done it , but I was hoping , certainly judging on the history of the show and what Joan has done , obviously this is not the first time this has been an issue for her . 
 In August 2012 , Hamm said " The Other Woman " was his favorite episode of the fifth season of Mad Men , and spoke about the reaction to Joan 's storyline : 
 When [ " The Other Woman " ] aired , people were sort of outraged by the Joan storyline , like , " Oh my God , how could she do that ? What is she thinking ? " I kind of looked at it and I was like , Wait a minute : Joan 's not a saint , first of all . She 's having an affair with her boss while she 's married . She 's slept with at least one other person in the office . So let 's back off that thing . And she 's also making a very sort of prudent financial decision and very much trading one thing for another . I found the kind of psychological thing of that very interesting . 
 In August 2012 , Moss said the final scene was her favorite of the season : " It would 've been so easy to have it be tears and trauma and music , but it 's so simple , almost over before you know it . It brings you to a dark , sad place then gives you this slap in the face when she turns to the elevator and smiles . Matt [ Weiner ] and I didn 't feel it was a sad thing . It says to the audience , ' No , you don 't get to cry all night about this . ' " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 This episode received writing and directing nominations for the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 Due to their nomination , Jon Hamm , Elisabeth Moss , and Christina Hendricks all submitted this episode for consideration for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series , Lead Actress , and Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , respectively , for the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 This episode also won the Writers Guild of America Award for Episodic Drama . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Other Woman " was watched by 2 @.@ 07 million viewers and received an adult 18 – 49 rating of 0 @.@ 6 , marking a slightly higher viewership than the previous episode . 
 = Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich of Russia = 
 Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich of Russia ( Russian : <unk> ́ л <unk> ; 4 December [ O.S. 22 November ] 1878 – 13 June 1918 ) was the youngest son and fifth child of Emperor Alexander III of Russia and youngest brother of Nicolas II . 
 At the time of his birth , his paternal grandfather Alexander II of Russia was still the reigning Emperor of All the Russias . Michael was fourth @-@ in @-@ line to the throne following his father and elder brothers Nicholas and George . After the assassination of his grandfather in 1881 , he became third @-@ in @-@ line , and in 1894 after the death of his father , second @-@ in @-@ line . George died in 1899 , leaving Michael as heir @-@ presumptive to the throne . 
 The birth of Nicholas 's son Alexei in 1904 temporarily moved Michael back to second @-@ in @-@ line , but Alexei inherited the blood @-@ clotting disorder haemophilia and was not expected to live . Michael caused a commotion at the imperial court when he took Natalia <unk> Wulfert , a married woman , as a lover . Nicholas sent Michael to Orel , to avoid scandal , but this did not stop Michael , who travelled frequently to see his mistress . After the couple 's only child , George , was born in 1910 , Michael brought Natalia to St. Petersburg , where she was shunned by society . In 1912 , Michael shocked Nicholas by marrying Natalia , in the hope that he would be removed from the line of succession . Michael and Natalia left Russia to exile abroad in France , Switzerland and England . 
 After the outbreak of World War I , Michael returned to Russia , assuming command of a cavalry regiment . When Nicholas abdicated on 15 March [ O.S. 2 March ] 1917 , Michael was named as his successor instead of Alexei . Michael , however , deferred acceptance of the throne until ratification by an elected assembly . He was never confirmed as Emperor , and following the Russian Revolution of 1917 , he was imprisoned and murdered . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Michael was born at Anichkov Palace on Nevsky Prospekt in Saint Petersburg , as the youngest son and penultimate child of Tsarevitch Alexander of Russia and his wife , Maria Feodorovna ( known before her marriage as Princess Dagmar of Denmark ) . His maternal grandparents were King Christian IX of Denmark and Louise of Hesse @-@ Kassel . His paternal grandmother Empress Maria Alexandrovna ( known before her marriage as Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine ) died before his second birthday . His paternal grandfather , Emperor Alexander II of Russia , was assassinated on 1 March 1881 , and as a result Michael 's parents became Emperor and Empress of All the Russias before his third birthday . After the assassination , the new Tsar Alexander III moved his family , including Michael , to the greater safety of Gatchina Palace , which was 29 miles southwest of Saint Petersburg and surrounded by a moat . 
 Michael was raised in the company of his younger sister , Olga , who nicknamed him " Floppy " because he " flopped " into chairs ; his elder siblings and parents called him " Misha " . Conditions in the nursery were modest , even spartan . The children slept on hard camp beds , rose at dawn , washed in cold water , and ate a simple porridge for breakfast . Michael , like his siblings , was taught by private tutors and was cared for by an English nanny , Mrs Elizabeth Franklin . 
 Michael and Olga frequently went on hikes in the forests around Gatchina with their father , who took the opportunity to teach both of them woodsmanship . Physical activities such as equestrianism were also taught at an early age , as was religious observance . Though Christmas and Easter were times of celebration and extravagance , Lent was strictly observed — meat , dairy products and any form of entertainment were avoided . Family holidays were taken in the summer at Peterhof Palace and with Michael 's grandparents in Denmark . 
 Michael was almost 16 when his father fell fatally ill ; the annual trip to Denmark was cancelled . On 1 November 1894 , Alexander III died at the untimely age of 49 . Michael 's eldest brother , Nicholas , became Tsar , and Michael 's childhood was effectively over . 
 = = Military career and public duties = = 
 Michael 's mother , Dowager Empress Marie , moved back to Anichkov Palace with Michael and Olga . Like most members of his family , Michael was enrolled in the military . He completed training at a gunnery school and joined the Horse Guards Artillery . In November 1898 , he attained legal adulthood , and just eight months later became heir presumptive to Nicholas as the middle brother , George , was killed in a motorcycle accident . George 's death and the subsequent change in the line of succession highlighted that Nicholas did not yet have a son . As the succession was limited to males , his three daughters were ineligible . When Nicholas 's wife , Alexandra , became pregnant in 1900 she hoped that the child would be male . She manoeuvred to get herself declared Regent for her unborn child in the event of Nicholas 's death , but the government disagreed and determined Michael would succeed regardless of the unborn child 's gender . She was delivered of a fourth daughter the following year . 
 Michael was perceived as unremarkable , quiet and good @-@ natured . He performed the usual public duties expected of an heir to the throne . In 1901 , he represented Russia at the funeral of Queen Victoria and was given the Order of the Bath . The following year he was made a Knight of the Garter in King Edward VII 's coronation honours . In June 1902 , Michael transferred to the Blue Cuirassier Regiment and moved to Gatchina , where the regiment was based . Since coming of age , Michael had assumed financial independence , and his assets included the largest sugar refinery in the country , capital amounting to millions of roubles , a collection of motor vehicles , and country estates at <unk> in Russian Poland and Brasovo near Orel . 
 Michael was heir presumptive until 12 August 1904 , when the birth of Tsarevich Alexei to Nicholas and Alexandra provided an heir apparent . Michael again became second @-@ in @-@ line to the throne , but was named as co @-@ Regent for the boy , along with Alexandra , in the event of Nicholas 's death . 
 = = Romances = = 
 In 1902 , Michael met Princess Beatrice of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . They fell in love and began to correspond in her native English . Michael spoke both French and English fluently . At first it seemed they would marry ; however , the Orthodox Church prohibited the marriage of first cousins , and Michael 's father and Beatrice 's mother were siblings . Nicholas refused to permit the marriage , and to Michael 's and Beatrice 's mutual dismay , their romance ended . 
 Michael 's attention turned to Alexandra <unk> ( September 1875 , Orel region – 1923 , Berlin ) , known affectionately as " Dina " , who was his sister Olga 's lady @-@ in @-@ waiting . Dina 's father , Vladimir <unk> , was a lawyer , and Dina was a commoner . Michael rejected the notion , proposed by his friends , that he keep her as a mistress , and in July 1906 he wrote to Nicholas asking permission to marry her . Nicholas and Dowager Empress Marie were appalled . Both felt that royalty should marry royalty , and according to Russian house law any children of a marriage between a royal and a commoner would be ineligible for the succession . Nicholas threatened to revoke Michael 's army commission and exile him from Russia if he married without his permission . Marie had Dina dismissed as Olga 's lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , and took Michael to Denmark until mid @-@ September . 
 Shortly after his return to Russia , three British newspapers announced on 24 September 1906 that Michael was to marry Princess Patricia of Connaught , but neither he nor Patricia knew anything about it . Buckingham Palace issued a denial . Nevertheless , two years later , in October 1908 , Michael visited London , and he and Patricia were " paired " at social engagements . It seems likely that Michael 's mother was plotting to get him married to a more suitable bride , and the originator of the false report , Reuters correspondent Guy Beringer , read too much into the plans . Michael and Dina were planning to elope , but their plans were stymied as Dina was under surveillance by the Okhrana , Nicholas 's secret police , and she was prevented from travelling . Under family pressure , and unable to see Dina , by August 1907 , Michael appeared to be losing interest . Dina went to live abroad . She never married and believed herself to be Michael 's rightful fiancée , but their romance was over . 
 In early December 1907 , Michael was introduced to Natalia <unk> Wulfert , the wife of a fellow officer , and from 1908 they began a deep friendship . Natalia was a commoner , who had a daughter from her first marriage . By August 1909 , they were lovers , and by November 1909 , Natalia was living apart from her second husband in an apartment in Moscow paid for by Michael . In an attempt to prevent scandal , Nicholas transferred Michael to the Chernigov Hussars at Orel , 250 miles from Moscow , but Michael travelled from there several times a month to see Natalia . Their only child , George , named after Michael 's dead brother , was born in July 1910 , before her divorce from her second husband was finalised . To ensure that the child could be recognised as his rather than as Wulfert 's , Michael had the date of the divorce back @-@ dated . Nicholas issued a decree giving the boy the surname " Brasov " , taken from Michael 's estate at Brasovo , which was a tacit acknowledgement that Michael was the father . 
 In May 1911 , Nicholas permitted Natalia to move from Moscow to Brasovo and granted her the surname " <unk> " . In May 1912 , Michael went to Copenhagen for the funeral of his uncle King Frederick VIII of Denmark , where he fell ill with a stomach ulcer that was to trouble him for years afterwards . After a holiday in France , where he and Natalia were trailed by the Okhrana , Michael was transferred back to Saint Petersburg to command the Chevalier Gardes . He took Natalia to the capital with him , and set her up in an apartment , but she was shunned by society , and within a few months he had moved her to a villa in Gatchina . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 In September 1912 , Michael and Natalia spent a holiday abroad , and as usual they were trailed by the Okhrana . In Berlin , Michael announced that he and Natalia would drive to Cannes , and instructed his staff to follow by train . The Okhrana were under instructions to follow by train rather than car , and so Michael and Natalia would be unaccompanied on their journey south . Michael 's journey was a deliberate ruse . On the way to Cannes , the couple diverted to Vienna , where they were married on 16 October 1912 by Father <unk> at the Serbian Orthodox Church of Saint Sava . A few days later , after travelling through Venice and Milan , they arrived at Cannes , where George and Natalia 's daughter from her first marriage joined them . Two weeks after the marriage Michael wrote to his mother and brother to inform them . They were both horrified by Michael 's action . His mother said it was " unspeakably awful in every way " , and his brother was shocked that his brother had " broken his word ... that he would not marry her " . 
 Nicholas was particularly upset because his heir , Alexei , was gravely ill with haemophilia , which Michael cited as one of his reasons for marrying Natalia . Michael feared that he would become heir presumptive again on Alexei 's death , and would never be able to marry Natalia . By marrying her now , he would be removed from the line of succession early , and preclude the prospect of losing Natalia . In a series of decrees over December 1912 and January 1913 , Nicholas relieved Michael of his command , banished him from Russia , froze all his assets in Russia , seized control of his estates , and removed him from the Regency . Society in Russia was shocked at the severity of Nicholas 's reprisal , but there was little sympathy for Natalia . She was not entitled to be known as Grand Duchess ; she instead used the style " Madame or Countess <unk> " . 
 For six months , they stayed in hotels in France and Switzerland , without any decrease in their standard of living . They were visited by Michael 's sister Grand Duchess Xenia and cousin Grand Duke Andrew . In July 1913 , they saw Michael 's mother in London , who told Natalia " a few home truths " , according to Xenia 's diary . After another trip to continental Europe , Michael took a one @-@ year lease on Knebworth House , a staffed and furnished stately home 20 miles north of London . Michael 's finances were stretched as he had to rely on remittances sent from Russia at Nicholas 's command , and Nicholas still controlled all his estates and assets . 
 = = War = = 
 Upon the outbreak of World War I , Michael telegraphed the Tsar requesting permission to return to Russia to serve in the army , providing his wife and son could come too . Nicholas agreed , and Michael travelled back to Saint Petersburg , via Newcastle , Norway , Sweden and Finland . Michael had already leased <unk> in Sussex , an estate larger than Knebworth , and had planned to move there on the expiry of the Knebworth lease . He moved his furniture and furnishings there . The war was not expected to last long , and the couple assumed they would be moving back to England at the end of the war . In the meantime , Michael offered its use to the British military . At Saint Petersburg , now named Petrograd , they moved into a villa at 24 <unk> street , Gatchina , that Michael had bought for Natalia . Natalia was not permitted to live at any of the imperial palaces . 
 He was promoted from his previous rank of colonel to major @-@ general , and given command of a newly formed division : the Caucasian Native Cavalry , which became known as the " Savage Division " . The appointment was perceived as a demotion because the division was mostly formed from new Muslim recruits rather than the elite troops that Michael had commanded previously . The six regiments in the division were each composed of a different ethnic group : Chechens , <unk> , <unk> , Tatars , Circassians and <unk> , commanded by Russian officers . The men were all volunteers as conscription did not apply to the Caucasus , and although it was difficult to maintain discipline , they were an effective fighting force . For his actions commanding his troops in the Carpathian mountains in January 1915 , Michael earned the military 's highest honour , the Order of St. George . He , unlike his brother , the Tsar , was a popular military leader . 
 By January 1915 , the horrific nature of the war was apparent . Michael felt " greatly embittered towards people in general and most of all towards those who are at the top , who hold power and allow all that horror to happen . If the question of war were decided by the people at large , I would not be so passionately averse to that great calamity . " Michael confessed in a letter to his wife that he felt " ashamed to face the people , i.e. the soldiers and officers , particularly when visiting field hospitals , where so much suffering is to be seen , for they might think that one is also responsible , for one is placed so high and yet has failed to prevent all that from happening and protect one 's country from this disaster . " 
 At the start of the war , Michael wrote to Nicholas asking him to legitimise his son so , he argued , that the boy would be provided for in the event of Michael 's death at the front . Eventually , Nicholas agreed to make George legitimate and granted him the style of " Count Brasov " by decree on 26 March 1915 . 
 = = Retreat = = 
 By June 1915 , the Russians were in retreat . When Grand Duke Constantine died that month , Michael was the only member of the imperial family absent from the funeral in Petrograd . Natalia chided him for his absence , and Michael retorted that it was simply wrong for his relatives to abandon their units to attend Constantine 's funeral at such a time . The American war correspondent , Stanley Washburn , reported that Michael wore " a simple uniform with nothing to indicate his rank but shoulder straps of the same material as his uniform " . Michael was " unaffected and democratic " and " living so simply in a dirty village " . Natalia was appalled that Michael eschewed fancy uniforms and decorations for life at the front , but he was convinced " that at such a difficult time I must serve Russia and serve here at the front " . 
 In July 1915 , Michael caught diphtheria but recovered . The war was going badly for Russia , and the following month Nicholas appointed himself Supreme Commander of the Russian forces . The move was not welcomed . Nicholas 's bad decisions included instructing Michael to authorise a payment to a friend of Rasputin 's , an army engineer called <unk> , who claimed to have invented a devastating flame @-@ thrower . The claim was bogus , and <unk> was arrested for fraud , but Rasputin intervened and he was released . Michael appeared gullible and naive ; a friend of Natalia 's said he " trusted everybody ... Had his wife not watched over him constantly , he would have been deceived at every step . " 
 In October 1915 , Michael regained control of his estates and assets from Nicholas , and in February 1916 was given command of the 2nd Cavalry Corps , which included the Savage Division , a Cossack division , and a Don Cossack division . However , the slights against him by the Tsar 's retinue continued ; when he was promoted to lieutenant @-@ general in July 1916 , unlike all other Grand Dukes who attained that rank he was not appointed as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Tsar with the rank of adjutant @-@ general . Michael admitted that he " always despised Petrograd high society ... no people are more devious than they are ; with a few exceptions , they are all scum . " Michael made no public political statements , but it was assumed that he was a liberal , like his wife , and British consul Bruce Lockhart thought he " would have made an excellent constitutional monarch " . 
 Throughout the summer of 1916 , Michael 's corps was involved in the Brusilov Offensive . The Guards Army suffered heavy losses under the incompetent leadership of Michael 's uncle , Grand Duke Paul , who was removed from command . In contrast , Michael was awarded a second gallantry medal , the Order of St. Vladimir with Swords , for his part in actions against the enemy , and was belatedly made an adjutant @-@ general . The poor progress of the war and their almost constant separation depressed both Michael and Natalia . Michael was still suffering from stomach ulcers , and in October 1916 he was ordered to take leave in the Crimea . 
 Before leaving for his sister Xenia 's estate at Ai @-@ Todor , 12 miles from Yalta , he wrote a candid letter to his brother warning him that the political situation was tense : 
 I am deeply concerned and worried by what is happening around us . There has been a shocking alteration in the mood of the most loyal people ... which fills me with a most serious apprehension not only for you and for the fate of our family , but even for the integrity of the state order . 
 The public hatred for certain people who allegedly are close to you and who are forming part of the present government has , to my amazement , brought together the right , the left and the moderate ; and this hatred , along with the demands for changes are already openly expressed . 
 = = Increasing public unrest = = 
 Michael , and other members of the imperial family including Grand Dukes Alexander , George , Nicholas and Dmitri and Grand Duchess Elizabeth , warned against the growing public unrest and the perception that Nicholas was governed by his German @-@ born wife Alexandra and the self @-@ styled holy man Rasputin . Nicholas and Alexandra refused to listen . In December 1916 , Dmitri and four of his friends killed Rasputin . Michael learned of the murder at Brasovo , where he was spending Christmas with his family . On 28 December , according to the French ambassador , there was a failed attempt to assassinate Alexandra ; the lone assailant was caught and hanged the next day . The Duma President Mikhail Rodzianko , Grand Duchess Marie Pavlovna and British ambassador Buchanan joined calls for Alexandra to be removed from influence , but Nicholas still refused to take their advice . Plots and gossip against Nicholas and Alexandra continued to build . 
 In January 1917 , Michael returned to the front to hand over command of his corps ; from 29 January he was Inspector @-@ General of Cavalry stationed at Gatchina . General Aleksei Brusilov , Michael 's commander on the south @-@ eastern front , begged him to tell the Tsar of " the need for immediate and drastic reforms " , but Michael warned him , " I have no influence ... My brother has time and time again had warnings and entreaties of this kind from every quarter . " Brusilov recorded in his memoirs , " [ Michael ] was an absolutely honourable and upright man , taking no sides and lending himself to no intrigues ... he shunned every kind of gossip , whether connected with the services or with family matters . As a soldier he was an excellent leader and an unassuming and conscientious worker . " 
 Through February , Grand Duke Alexander , Duma President Rodzianko , and Michael pressured Nicholas and Alexandra to yield to popular demands . Public unrest grew , and on 27 February in Petrograd soldiers joined demonstrators , elements of the military mutinied , and prisoners were freed . Nicholas , who was at army headquarters in Mogilev , prorogued the Duma , but the deputies refused to leave and instead set up their own rival government . After consulting Rodzianko at the Mariinsky Palace in Petrograd , Michael advised Nicholas to dismiss his ministers and set up a new government led by the leader of the majority party in the Duma . His advice was supported by General Mikhail Alekseyev , Nicholas 's chief of staff . Nicholas rejected the suggestion and issued futile orders for troops to move on Petrograd . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 On the night of 27 – 28 February 1917 , Michael attempted to return to Gatchina from Petrograd , where he had been in conference with Rodzianko and from where he had telegraphed the Tsar , but revolutionary patrols and sporadic fire prevented his progress . Revolutionaries patrolled the streets , rounding up people connected with the old regime . Michael managed to reach the Winter Palace , where he ordered the guards there to withdraw to the Admiralty , because it afforded greater safety and a better tactical position and because it was a less politically charged location . Michael himself took refuge in the apartment of an acquaintance , Princess Putyatina , on <unk> street . In the neighbouring apartments , the Tsar 's Chamberlain Nikolai Stolypin and the Procurator of the Holy Synod were detained by revolutionaries , and in the house next door General Baron <unk> was killed when his house was stormed by a mob . 
 On 1 March , Rodzianko sent guards to Putyatina 's apartment to ensure Michael 's safety , and Michael signed a document drawn up by Rodzianko and Grand Duke Paul proposing the creation of a constitutional monarchy . The newly formed Petrograd Soviet rejected the document , which became irrelevant . Calls for the Tsar 's abdication had superseded it . 
 = = Abdication of Nicholas II = = 
 On the afternoon of 15 March [ O.S. 2 March ] 1917 , Emperor Nicholas II , under pressure from generals and Duma representatives , abdicated in favour of his son , Alexei , with Michael as Regent . However , later that evening , he reconsidered his decision . Alexei was gravely ill with haemophilia , and Nicholas feared that if Alexei was Emperor , he would be separated from his parents . In a second abdication document , signed at 11 @.@ 40 p.m. but marked as having been issued at 3 @.@ 00 p.m. , the time of the earlier one , Nicholas II declared : 
 We have judged it right to abdicate the Throne of the Russian State and to lay down the Supreme Power . Not wishing to be parted from Our Beloved Son , We hand over Our Succession to Our Brother the Grand Duke Michael Aleksandrovich and Bless Him on his accession to the Throne . 
 By early morning , Michael was proclaimed as " Emperor Michael II " to Russian troops and in cities throughout Russia , but his accession was not universally welcomed . While some units cheered and swore allegiance to the new Emperor , others remained indifferent . The newly formed Provisional Government had not agreed to Michael 's succession . When Michael awoke that morning , he discovered not only that his brother had abdicated in his favour , as Nicholas had not informed him previously , but also that a delegation from the Duma would visit him at Putyatina 's apartment in a few hours time . The meeting with Duma President Rodzianko , the new Prime Minister Prince Lvov , and other ministers , including Pavel <unk> and Alexander Kerensky , lasted all morning . Putyatina laid on a lunch , and in the afternoon two lawyers ( Baron Nolde and Vladimir Nabokov ) were called to the apartment to draft a manifesto for Michael to sign . The legal position was complicated as the legitimacy of the government , whether Nicholas had the right to remove his son from the succession , and whether Michael actually was Emperor were all open to question . After further discussion , and several drafts , the meeting settled on a declaration of conditional acceptance as an appropriate form of words . In it , Michael deferred to the will of the people and acknowledged the Provisional Government as the de facto executive , but neither abdicated nor refused to accept the throne . He wrote : 
 Inspired , in common with the whole people , by the belief that the welfare of our country must be set above everything else , I have taken the firm decision to assume the supreme power only if and when our great people , having elected by universal suffrage a Constituent Assembly to determine the form of government and lay down the fundamental law of the new Russian State , invest me with such power . 
 Calling upon them the blessing of God , I therefore request all the citizens of the Russian Empire to submit to the Provisional Government , established and invested with full authority by the Duma , until such time as the Constituent Assembly , elected within the shortest possible time by universal , direct , equal and secret suffrage , shall manifest the will of the people by deciding upon the new form of government . 
 Commentators ranging from Kerensky to French ambassador Maurice Paléologue regarded Michael 's action as noble and patriotic , but Nicholas was appalled that Michael had " kowtowed to the Constituent Assembly " and called the manifesto " rubbish " . 
 The hopes of the monarchists that Michael might be able to assume the throne following the election of the Constituent Assembly were overtaken by events . His renunciation of the throne , though conditional , marked the end of the Tsarist regime in Russia . The Provisional Government had little effective power ; real power was held by the Petrograd Soviet . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 Michael returned to Gatchina , and was not permitted to return to his unit or travel beyond the Petrograd area . On 5 April 1917 , he was discharged from military service . By July , Prince Lvov had resigned as Prime Minister to be replaced by Alexander Kerensky , who ordered ex @-@ Emperor Nicholas removed from Petrograd to Tobolsk in the Urals because it was " some remote place , some quiet corner , where they would attract less attention " . On the eve of Nicholas 's departure , Kerensky gave permission for Michael to visit him . Kerensky remained present during the meeting , and the brothers exchanged awkward pleasantries " fidgeting all the while , and sometimes one would take hold of the other 's hand or the buttons of his uniform " . It was the last time they would ever see each other . 
 On 21 August 1917 , guards surrounded the villa on <unk> street where Michael was living with Natalia . On the orders of Kerensky , they were both under house arrest , along with Nicholas Johnson , who had been Michael 's secretary since December 1912 . A week later , they were moved to an apartment in Petrograd . Michael 's stomach problems worsened , and with the intervention of British ambassador Buchanan and foreign minister Mikhail Tereshchenko , they were moved back to Gatchina in the first week of September . Tereshchenko told Buchanan that the Dowager Empress would be allowed to leave the country , for England if she wished , and that Michael would follow in due course . The British , however , were not prepared to accept any Russian Grand Duke for fear it would provoke a bad public reaction in Britain , where there was little sympathy for the Romanovs . 
 On 1 September 1917 , Kerensky declared Russia a republic . Michael wrote in his diary : " We woke up this morning to hear Russia declared a Republic . What does it matter which form the government will be as long as there is order and justice ? " Two weeks later , Michael 's house arrest was lifted . Kerensky had armed the Bolsheviks after a power struggle with the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , and in October there was a second revolution as the Bolsheviks seized power from Kerensky . With a permit to travel issued by Peter <unk> , a former colleague of Michael 's from the Savage Division who was now a commander in Petrograd , Michael planned to move his family to the greater safety of Finland . They packed valuables and prepared to move , but their preparations were seen by Bolshevik sympathisers and they were placed once more under house arrest . The last of Michael 's cars were seized by the Bolsheviks . 
 The house arrest was lifted again in November , and the Constituent Assembly was elected and met in January 1918 . Despite being the minority party , the Bolsheviks dissolved it . On 3 March 1918 ( N.S. ) , the Bolshevik government signed the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk , which effectively ceded vast areas of the former Russian Empire to the Central Powers of Germany , Austria @-@ Hungary and the Ottoman Empire . On 7 March 1918 , Michael and his secretary Johnson were re @-@ arrested on the orders of Moisei <unk> , the Head of the Petrograd secret police , and imprisoned at the Bolshevik headquarters in the Smolny Institute . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 On 11 March 1918 , <unk> sent Michael and Johnson to Perm , a thousand miles to the east , on the order of the Council of the People 's Commissars , which included both Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin . The journey , by freight train in a coach without windows or heat , took eight days at an average speed of 5 miles per hour . At first , Michael was billeted in a hotel , but two days after his arrival he was jailed by the local Soviet . Natalia lobbied the Commissars in Petrograd for his release , and on 9 April 1918 he was set at liberty within Perm . He moved into the best room in the best hotel in Perm , along with Johnson and two <unk> , valet Vasily Chelyshev and former chauffeur Borunov . Natalia feared for George 's safety , and in March 1918 , she arranged for Michael 's son to be smuggled out of Russia by his nanny with the help of Danish diplomats and the <unk> . 
 In May , Natalia was granted a travel permit to join Michael . Accompanied by family friends , Prince <unk> and Margaret <unk> , she arrived at Perm before the Orthodox Easter , and they spent about a week together . Meanwhile , as part of the truce between the Bolsheviks and the Central Powers , prisoners @-@ of @-@ war from Austria – Hungary were being shipped out of Russia . Czech troops were strung out along the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway , on their way to Vladivostok , where they were due to take ship . The Czechs , however , were not going home to fight for the Austrian empire , but to fight for a separate homeland independent from Austria . The Germans demanded that the Bolsheviks disarm the Czechs , who fought back , seized the railway , joined forces with Russians fighting against the Bolsheviks , and advanced westwards toward Perm . With the approach of the Czechs , Michael and Natalia feared that she would become trapped there , possibly in a dangerous situation , and so on 18 May she left unhappily . By early June , Michael was again ill with stomach trouble . 
 = = Murder = = 
 On 12 June 1918 , the leader of the local secret police , Gavril Myasnikov , with the connivance of other local Bolsheviks , hatched a plan to murder Michael . Myasnikov assembled a team of four men , who all , like him , were former prisoners of the Tsarist regime : Vasily <unk> , Ivan <unk> , Andrei Markov , and Nikolai <unk> . Using a forged order , the four men gained entry to Michael 's hotel at 11 @.@ 45 p.m. At first , Michael refused to accompany the men until he spoke with the local chairman of the secret police , Pavel <unk> , and then because he was ill . His protestations were futile , and he got dressed . Johnson insisted on accompanying him , and the four men plus their two prisoners climbed into two horse @-@ drawn three @-@ seater traps . They drove out of the town into the forest near <unk> . When Michael queried their destination , he was told they were going to a remote railway crossing to catch a train . By now it was the early hours of 13 June . They all alighted from the carriages in the middle of the wood , and both Michael and Johnson were fired upon , once each , but as the assassins were using home @-@ made bullets , their guns jammed . Michael , whether wounded or not is unknown , moved towards the wounded Johnson with arms outstretched , when he was shot at point @-@ blank range in the head . Both <unk> and Markov claimed to have fired the fatal shot . Johnson was shot dead by <unk> . The bodies were stripped and buried . Anything of value was stolen , and the clothes were taken back to Perm . After they were shown to Myasnikov as proof of the murders , the clothes were burned . The Ural Regional Soviet , headed by Alexander <unk> , approved the execution , either retrospectively or beforehand , as did Lenin . Michael was the first of the Romanovs to be executed by the Bolsheviks , but he would not be the last . Neither Michael 's nor Johnson 's remains were ever found . 
 The Perm authorities distributed a concocted cover story that Michael was abducted by unidentified men and had disappeared . Chelyshev and Borunov were arrested . Shortly before his own arrest , Colonel Peter <unk> , a former Imperial army officer also exiled to Perm , managed to send Natalia a brief telegram saying that Michael had disappeared . <unk> , Chelyshev and Borunov were all killed by the Perm Bolsheviks . Soviet disinformation about Michael 's disappearance led to unfounded rumours that he had escaped and was leading a successful counter @-@ revolution . In the ultimately forlorn hope that Michael would ally with Germany , the Germans arranged for Natalia and her daughter to escape to Kiev in German @-@ controlled Ukraine . On the collapse of the Germans in November 1918 , Natalia fled to the coast , and she and her daughter were evacuated by the British Royal Navy . 
 On 8 June 2009 , four days short of the 91st anniversary of their murders , both Michael and Johnson were officially rehabilitated . Russian State Prosecutors stated , " The analysis of the archive material shows that these individuals were subject to repression through arrest , exile and scrutiny ... without being charged of committing concrete class and social @-@ related crimes . " 
 Michael 's son George , Count Brasov , died in a car crash shortly before his 21st birthday in 1931 . Natalia died penniless in a Parisian charity hospital in 1952 . His stepdaughter Natalia <unk> married three times , and wrote a book about her life entitled Stepdaughter to Imperial Russia , published in 1940 . 
 = = Regimental affiliations and commands = = 
 = = = Russian = = = 
 Life @-@ Guards Horse Artillery Brigade – lieutenant , 1898 
 Life @-@ Guards Her Imperial Majesty Empress Maria Feodorovna 's Cuirassier Regiment – captain and squadron commander , 1902 
 17th Hussar <unk> <unk> Grand Princess <unk> Feodorovna Hussars – colonel , commanding , 1910 
 Life @-@ Guards Her Imperial Majesty Empress Maria Feodorovna 's Chevalier Guards Regiment – colonel , commanding , 1912 
 Caucasian Native Mounted Division – major @-@ general , commanding , 1914 
 Second Cavalry Corps , Seventh Army – lieutenant @-@ general , 1916 
 Inspector @-@ General of Cavalry , 1917 
 = = = Foreign = = = 
 <unk> @-@ Regiment Kaiser Alexander III von <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> , Prussian / Imperial German Army – colonel and regimental chief , December 1901 , during an official visit to Berlin 
 à la suite Imperial German Navy 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Russian = = = 
 Knight of the Order of St. <unk> of St. Alexander Nevsky ( by statute of the Order of St. Andrew ) 
 Order of the White Eagle ( by statute of the Order of St. Andrew ) 
 Order of St. Anne First Class ( by statute of the Order of St. Andrew ) 
 Order of St. Stanislaus First Class ( by statute of the Order of St. Andrew ) 
 Alexander III Commemorative Medal , 1896 
 Nicholas II Coronation Medal , 1896 
 Knight , Fourth Class , Order of St. Vladimir ( civil ) 
 Order of St. George , Fourth Class ( for actions in the Carpathian Mountains , while in command of the Caucasian Native Cavalry Division ) , January 1915 
 St. George Sword , 27 June 1915 
 Knight , Fourth Class , Order of St. Vladimir , with swords ( for actions during the Brusilov Offensive , while in command of the 2nd Cavalry Corps ) , 1916 
 = = = Foreign = = = 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary - 1897 
 Knight , III Class , Order of the Dannebrog , Denmark - before May 1901 
 Knight , IV Class , Order of the Redeemer , Greece - before May 1901 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath of Great Britain - 15 February 1901 
 Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle of Prussia - 15 December 1901 - during an official visit to Berlin 
 Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece of Spain - 26 December 1901 
 Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour of France 
 Knight of the Order of the Garter of Great Britain - 15 July 1902 
 Knight of the Order of the Elephant of Denmark 
 Knight , Grand Cross , Order of St. Olaf , Norway 
 Knight Grand Commander ( with collar ) , Royal House Order of Hohenzollern , Prussia 
 Knight , Grand Cross , with Crown , House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis ( a.k.a. " Order of Merit " ) , Oldenburg 
 Knight of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation of Italy 
 Knight , Grand Cross , Military Order of Christ , Portugal 
 Knight , Grand Cross , Royal Military Order of Aviz ( a.k.a. " Order of St. Benedict of Aviz " ) , Portugal 
 Knight , Grand Cordon , Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum , Japan 
 Knight , Most Illustrious Order of the Royal House of Chakri , Kingdom of Siam ( Thailand ) 
 Knight of the Royal Order of the Seraphim , Sweden - 1908 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Gimme More = 
 " Gimme More " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fifth studio album , Blackout ( 2007 ) . It was released on September 18 , 2007 by Jive Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Nate " Danja " Hills , James " Jim Beanz " Washington , Keri Hilson and Marcella Araica , while production was handled by Jack Black and vocal production was handled by Washington and Hilson . " Gimme More " was recorded in 2006 during Spears 's second pregnancy , and was one of the first solo productions by Danja . The song opens with an intro in which Spears says the phrase " It 's Britney , bitch " . Musically , " Gimme More " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song with breathy vocals and influences from other genres , such as electro music . The track closes with a speak @-@ sing outro by Danja . 
 " Gimme More " received positive reviews from critics , praising the music and Spears 's breathy vocals . The song peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , becoming her fifth top ten hit and also her second highest @-@ peaking single at the time . It also peaked at the top of the charts in Canada and Ireland , and reached top five positions in 14 countries . The accompanying music video premiered on October 5 , 2007 . It displayed Spears as a stripper and featured a break from Spears 's highly choreographed music videos . It received mixed to negative reviews from critics , who panned Spears 's pole dancing as well as the lack of storyline . An alternate cut was leaked on July 18 , 2011 . 
 Spears performed " Gimme More " at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , wearing a black , jeweled @-@ encrusted bikini . The performance was panned by many critics , who commented extensively on her " singing " , dancing and wardrobe , with one deeming it as " one of the worst to grace the MTV Awards " . Chris Crocker uploaded a video in response to the criticism titled " Leave Britney Alone ! " , which made him an Internet celebrity and attracted attention from the media . Spears has also performed " Gimme More " at the Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) and Britney : Piece of Me ( 2013 ) . " Gimme More " has been covered and sampled by many artists , including Sia and Marié Digby . The song 's opening line , " It 's Britney , bitch " , became a catch phrase in popular culture . The song appears in the best selling video game Grand Theft Auto V on the Non @-@ Stop Pop station . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Gimme More " was co @-@ written by Jim Beanz , Marcella " Ms. Lago " Araica , Nate " Danja " Hills and Keri Hilson , while being produced by Danja . Spears started working with Danja in July 2006 . He explained that the creative process was not difficult at first since he was " left to do pretty much whatever I wanted to " , and " if she felt it , she was gonna ride with it . If she didn 't , you ’ d see it in her face . " Hilson said that she wrote the song with Spears in mind after Danja played her the instrumental , adding , " I just started singing , ' Give me , Give me , ' and added a little more in and just having fun and messing around really . " Spears began recording the track in Las Vegas in August 2006 , while she was seven months pregnant with her second child , Jayden James . Recording continued at Spears ' house in Los Angeles , California , three weeks after she gave birth . Hilson commented that " She gave 150 percent . [ ... ] I don ’ t know any other mother that would do that . " In an interview with Rhapsody , Danja commented that he added a speak @-@ sing outro to " stake [ his ] claim " , since " Gimme More " was one of his first solo productions . " There 's a lot riding on my future , because people think I ’ m around because of Tim and they don ’ t really know what I ’ m capable of " , he said . The song was mixed by Ms. Lago at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles . Background vocals were provided by Hilson and Beanz . " Gimme More " was released as the album 's lead single and premiered on New York City @-@ based radio station Z100 's web site . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Gimme More " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song with influences of electro . According to the sheetmusic published at Musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , it is set in a moderate dance groove and composed in the key of G minor , with 113 beats per minute , with Spears vocal range spanning over two octaves from F # 3 to C6 . The melody incorporates " low electronic lines " whereas the beat has been described by Bill Lamb of About.com as " disco @-@ ish " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy compared Spears 's vocals to those of her single " I 'm a Slave 4 U " ( 2001 ) . Lamb described them as " teasing [ ... ] backed by moaning and heavy breathing " reminiscent of Donna Summer 's " Love to Love You Baby " ( 1975 ) . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine felt the song was reminiscent of Sabrina 's " Boys ( Summertime Love ) " ( 1987 ) . 
 " Gimme More " is constructed in the common verse @-@ chorus form . The song opens with a spoken intro in which Spears says the line " It 's Britney , bitch " . The chorus consists of the repetition of the hookline " Gimme gimme " , that ends with a constantly pitch @-@ shifted " More " . The song closes with a speak @-@ sing outro by Danja in which he says the lines " Bet you didn 't see this one coming / The Incredible Lago , the legendary Ms. Britney Spears / and the unstoppable Danja " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Gimme More " received positive reviews from critics . Dennis Lim of Blender named the song one of the highlights of the album , calling it " hypnotic pole @-@ dance pop " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called the song " futuristic and thrilling " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy said that " somehow , out of personal chaos , pop greatness has emerged . [ Danja ] melds tack @-@ sharp beats and a deliciously scuzzy bassline to create a dancefloor throb that feels devilishly sexy " . While reviewing The Singles Collection , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters called " Gimme More " " the best dance track she has done since ' Toxic ' " . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said the track set the mood for Blackout , adding that " the electronic beats and bass lines are as thick as Ms. Spears ’ s voice is thin [ ... ] she delivers almost nothing but <unk> come @-@ ons and defiant invitations to nightclub decadence " . New Musical Express compared Spears 's vocals to " a sex addict ’ s cry for help " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said some of the songs of Blackout , " really show off the skills of the producers " , exemplifying " Gimme More " , " Radar " , " Break the Ice " , " Heaven on Earth " and " Hot as Ice " . 
 Bill Lamb of About.com gave the song three and a half stars and commented , " It does seem that Britney 's bump @-@ and @-@ grind singing style that we first heard 8 years ago on ' ... Baby One More Time ' is still intact , and the ' It 's Britney , bitch ' announcement that opens the song implies a significant amount of fire remains . The opening alone bumps the song 's rating up by half a star " . Roger Friedman of Fox News dubbed the line as " cocky and fun " . Eric R. Danton of The Hartford Courant wrote , " The comedy starts right away , when she plays the role of your drunk friend calling at 3 a.m. , slurring , ' It 's Britney , bitch ' " . Mike Schiller of PopMatters called the opening line " real value ... kind of hilarious " and added that the " inserted “ more ” syllables in the chorus only add to the feel that this is a genetically engineered sort of dancefloor banger " . Popjustice named " Gimme More " the tenth best song of 2007 . The <unk> listed it as the second most infectious song of the year . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On September 22 , 2007 , " Gimme More " debuted at number 85 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . On October 13 , 2007 , the song peaked at number three on the chart . The same week , it also peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Digital Songs , due to digital sales of 179 @,@ 000 downloads . It became her fifth top ten hit in the Hot 100 , as well as her highest peaking since " ... Baby One More Time " . On February 13 , 2008 , the single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) selling 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . On December 15 , 2007 , it peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs . As of March 2015 , " Gimme More " has sold 1 @,@ 810 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . It is her seventh best @-@ selling digital single in the country . In Canada , the song debuted at number 53 on September 22 , 2007 . On October 13 , 2007 , it peaked at number one and climbed from number 42 , becoming the chart 's " Greatest Gainer " . It was certified two times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales of 160 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Australia , the single debuted at number three on the Australian Singles Chart on October 15 , 2007 . It received a gold certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments over 35 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , it debuted at number 24 on October 1 , 2007 . The following week , it peaked at number 15 . " Gimme More " was also successful in Europe , peaking at number two in the European Hot 100 Singles . In the United Kingdom , " Gimme More " debuted and peaked at number three on October 21 , 2007 ( for the week ending date October 27 , 2007 ) . According to The Official Charts Company , " Gimme More " has sold 210 @,@ 000 copies there . It also reached the top five in Belgium , Czech Republic , Belgium , Denmark , Ireland , Norway and Sweden and peaking inside the top ten in Austria and Finland . " Gimme More " has sold almost three million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Gimme More " was filmed at the end of July 2007 at a warehouse in downtown Los Angeles , California . It was directed by Jake <unk> , who was handpicked by Spears . According to People , the production was Spears 's " concept and vision " . During filming , Spears was spotted wearing a short black dress , black boots and a black hat . On September 13 , 2007 , it was reported by The New York Times that the music video was being " tweaked with input from her advisers " since " [ the ] gritty , stripper @-@ themed clip [ ... ] may jolt fans who are more accustomed to the slick , tightly choreographed videos that made her an MTV staple " . The music video premiered exclusively in the iTunes Store on October 5 , 2007 and in all other outlets , including TRL on October 8 , 2007 , and on BET 's 106 & Park on November 13 , 2007 . 
 The video begins with a blonde Spears sitting and laughing in a bar with two female friends , but stops to look at a brunette Spears calling out to her on a small stage in front of them , wearing a leather vest , a studded belt , panties and fishnet stockings while sporting a tattoo on her biceps . She dances erotically around a pole and up against a mirror . Throughout the video , she continues to dance and flip her hair while special effects lights flash around her as the camera moves slightly in and out of focus to the beat of the song . The video 's light systems change from black and white with aura @-@ like blue and pink hues to full blown color . Around the middle of the video , she is joined by two alter egos of her female friends , who also dance around the pole . The blonde Spears and her friends , while watching the dancing , later draw their attention to an attractive man sitting with his friends at a table across the bar . 
 The music video received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly said " The moral of the story is , if you ’ re going to build an entire video around a stripper pole , then you better work said pole like a nine @-@ to @-@ five . Drop it like it ’ s hot . [ ... ] Alas , in the case of " Gimme More , " I ’ ve seen sexier pole work during an afternoon of fly @-@ fishing " . Andrei Harmsworth of Metro commented " To her credit , the video is slightly less disappointing than her mimed performance of the track at the Video Music Awards last month but it is still smeared with the same smutty hallmarks " . Dose said the video " sucks less than you think " and added " Spears appears lucid , sometimes happy , and awards @-@ worthy editing makes her appear to be standing upright competently throughout " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said the lightning effects and digital body enhancement of the video " indicate a predilection toward maintaining an image that no longer reflects reality . It doesn 't point to an artist who refuses to evolve , but rather one who doesn 't know how — or isn 't being allowed to . " IGN writer Sketch Longwood called it one of Spears ' hottest videos , adding that she " proves to be quite skilled in the art of teasingly slinking around . " While reviewing the alternate version of the video in July 2011 , Becky Bain of Idolator stated that " Spears 's last few videos — particularly the joyfully silly clip for ' I Wanna Go ' — more than make up for the travesty that was the pop star 's video for ' Gimme More ' [ ... ] The stripper concept was a poor choice , the barely @-@ there outfits were ill @-@ fitting , the ' choreography ' was a joke , the editing was sloppy . " 
 An alternative version of the video leaked online on July 18 , 2011 , and included new scenes , which featured Spears strutting down the street in a black outfit and laying down in a zebra @-@ print bed with a cat . The scenes of blonde Spears were cut . Becky Bain of Idolator said that " Neither the deleted nor added parts add or subtract anything from the experience . This video was kind of doomed no matter how it was edited together . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 = = = MTV Video Music Awards = = = 
 After days of media speculation , it was confirmed on September 6 , 2007 , that Spears would open the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards at the Pearl Theatre in the Palms Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas , Nevada , on September 9 , 2007 . It was also announced that she was going to perform " Gimme More " , with a magic act from illusionist Criss Angel in some parts of the performance . However , the bit is thought to have been rejected by the show 's organizers at the last minute . The executive producer of the 2007 VMAs Jesse <unk> contacted Spears since she wanted to start the show in " a very big and dramatic way " , and was confident that Spears would deliver and set the tone for the rest of the night . She also said Spears was excited after she was approached by MTV to perform . On September 7 , 2007 , Spears started rehearsing at the Pearl Theater . An exclusive video from the rehearsal was posted on MTV.com the following day . The performance began with a close @-@ up of the back of Spears 's head , and continued with Spears turning to the camera and lip synching the first lines of Elvis Presley 's 1958 song " Trouble " , " If you 're lookin ' for trouble , you came to the right place / If you 're lookin ' for trouble , look right in my face . " " Gimme More " began , and the camera panned out to reveal Spears wearing a black , jewel @-@ encrusted bikini and black boots . She was accompanied by male and female dancers dressed in black outfits . Several pole dancers danced in smaller stages around the audience . The backdrop videos featured images of chandeliers floating and silhouettes of women , which were compared by Gil Kaufman of MTV to the gun barrel and title sequence of the James Bond series . At the end of the performance , Spears smiled and thanked the audience before leaving the stage . 
 The performance was universally panned by critics . Jeff Leeds of The New York Times said that " no one was prepared for Sunday night ’ s fiasco , in which a listless Ms. Spears teetered through her dance steps and mouthed only occasional words in a wan attempt to lip @-@ synch her new single " . Vinay Menon of the Toronto Star commented Spears " looked hopelessly dazed . She was wearing the expression of somebody who had been deposited at the Palms Casino Resort by a tornado , one that promptly twisted away , taking her clothing and sense of purpose . [ ... ] [ She was ] lumbering , in slow motion , as if somebody had poured cement into her streetwalker boots " . David Willis of BBC stated her performance would " go down in the history books as being one of the worst to grace the MTV Awards " . The day after the performance , American blogger Chris Crocker posted a video in YouTube titled " Leave Britney alone ! " , in which he cried and defended Spears 's performance , explaining that he did not want her to spiral out of control like Anna Nicole Smith , who had died in February 2007 . Within the first 24 hours of its posting , the video accumulated over 2 million views . " Leave Britney alone ! " turned Crocker into an internet celebrity , and was featured on television shows such as The View and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . It was also parodied by dozens of other YouTube users , most famously by actor Seth Green . An editor for YouTube said " the melodramatic two @-@ minute clip made Crocker an instant YouTube star " and named it one of the top videos of 2007 . Wired named it the top video of 2007 . 
 = = = Other performances = = = 
 During Spears 's 2009 concert tour The Circus Starring Britney Spears , the <unk> Remix of " Gimme More " was used in a martial arts @-@ inspired interlude between the first and second act . On March 25 , 2011 , Spears performed a special show at Rain Nightclub in Las Vegas . The setlist of the show consisted of three songs from her seventh studio album , Femme Fatale , including " Hold It Against Me " , " Big Fat Bass " and " Till the World Ends " . During the performance of " Big Fat Bass " , Spears wore a latex bodysuit and elements of " 3 " , " Gimme More " and " I 'm a Slave 4 U " were also included . On March 27 , 2011 , " Big Fat Bass " was also performed at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium that aired on Good Morning America on March 29 , 2011 , and the same day , Spears performed the set at Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 Spears also performed " Gimme More " at 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour . After the performance of " If U Seek Amy " , a video interlude in which a stalker talked about femme fatales in history saw the beginning of the third section . Spears returned to the stage wearing a golden bikini and made her entrance in a boat whose individual parts were wheeled by dancers in Egyptian costumes . Matt Kivel of Variety said , " the crowd reacted wildly to all of it : screaming out the chorus to ' I 'm a Slave 4 U , ' pulsating along to the twitch of ' Gimme More ' and going absolutely ballistic for the brief , two @-@ verse rendition of ' ... Baby One More Time . ' " Craig S. Semon of Telegram & Gazette called it the most over the top number of the show , adding , " She delivered the banal , brain @-@ numbing chorus [ ... ] while her dancers ( looking like extras from ' Stargate ' ) paraded around in Egyptian garb and basked in the glow of pyrotechnic sparks . " Spears also performs the song at her residency show , Britney : Piece of Me , which began in 2013 . 
 = = Cover versions and samples = = 
 " Gimme More " has been covered by many artists and a great number of amateurs . In late 2007 , American singer @-@ songwriter Marié Digby posted an acoustic cover of " Gimme More " along with a cover of Rihanna 's " Umbrella " in her YouTube account . Both became viral hits , with " Gimme More " gaining more than 300 @,@ 000 views in two weeks . Shortly after , Digby became the eighth most subscribed @-@ to artist on YouTube . She joked about the situation saying , " I could have done a karaoke video to [ ' Gimme More ' ] , but I just had my stripper pole taken out the other day from my living room , and it just wouldn 't have been the same " . The same year , Australian pop singer Sia released an acoustic version of the song . Swedish metal band <unk> Supremacy covered the song on their third studio album Overworld , released on February 13 , 2008 . Matthieu De Ronde of Archaic Magazine commented " [ it is ] one of the most unexpected covers of all time , [ ... ] this track has been given a somewhat comical but enjoyable makeover , but who said that metal couldn ’ t be fun ? " . American singer @-@ songwriter Christopher Dallman played a cover of the song during many of his concerts in 2007 . Two years later , he showed his version to his producer Rachel Alina , who prompted him to release an EP of Spears 's covers . The EP , titled Sad Britney , was released on November 9 , 2009 , and also contained covers of " Radar " , " Toxic " and " ... Baby One More Time " . It became Dallman 's first record to chart on iTunes . He also released a music video for " Gimme More " , which was criticized by Spears 's fans who thought Dallman was making fun of her . He explained , " There have been a few folks who have misinterpreted what I was doing and thought that I was somehow making fun of her , which really isn ’ t the case . I have such a place in my heart for Britney " . 
 " Gimme More " has been sampled in many songs , including Girl Talk 's " Give Me a Beat " ( 2008 ) and Charles Hamilton 's " Devil In A Light Pink Dress " ( 2009 ) . In the episode " Michael Scott Paper Company " of the television series The Office , the character of Michael Scott is driving his convertible listening to Lady Gaga 's " Just Dance " ( 2008 ) . When he stops the car , he looks into the camera and says " It 's Britney , bitch " , mistaking Gaga for Spears . During an episode of the television series Kath & Kim , the character of Brett Craig screams the catch phrase before starting a fight in a bar . During a skit in a 2008 episode of The Ellen DeGeneres Show , in which Ellen DeGeneres and Spears sang Christmas carols through a neighborhood , DeGeneres said the catch phrase when knocking on a door . " It 's Britney , bitch " was also included in a video backdrop during the performance of " Human Nature " in Madonna 's 2008 @-@ 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . In the video , Spears was trapped in an elevator and tried to get out . At the end of the performance , the doors opened to reveal Spears saying the catch phrase . On November 6 , 2008 in the Los Angeles show at Dodger Stadium , Spears joined Madonna onstage halfway through the performance . In 2012 , " Gimme More " was covered on Glee during its second Britney Spears tribute episode . " Britney 2 @.@ 0 " features " Gimme More " which is performed by Heather Morris and heavily parodies Britney 's infamous 2007 MTV Music Video Awards <unk> will.i.am 's single " Scream & Shout " ( which features Spears herself ) samples the phrase " Britney , bitch ! " . Rapper Jay @-@ Z sampled the line " It 's Britney , bitch ! " in " BBC " , a song on his 2013 album Magna Carta Holy Grail . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and Personnel = = 
 Background Vocals , Lead Vocals – Britney Spears 
 Producer – Nate " Danja " Hills 
 Vocal producer – Jim Beanz 
 Mixer and additional programming – Marcella " Ms. Lago " Araica 
 Background vocals – Keri Hilson , Jim Beanz , Danja 
 Additional editing – Ron Taylor 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Germanus ( cousin of Justinian I ) = 
 Germanus ( Greek : <unk> ; died 550 ) was an East Roman ( Byzantine ) general , one of the leading commanders of Emperor Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) . Germanus was Emperor Justinian 's cousin , and a member of the ruling dynasty . He held commands in Thrace , North Africa , and the East against Persia , and was slated to command the final Byzantine expedition against the Ostrogoths . Having married into the Gothic Amal royal line through his second wife Matasuntha and a distinguished service record , at the time of his sudden death , he was considered the probable heir to Emperor Justinian . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origins and early career = = = 
 Germanus was born before 505 , the nephew of Emperor Justin I ( r . 518 – 527 ) and thus cousin of Emperor Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) , and not his nephew , as is often erroneously stated . According to a statement in Jordanes 's Getica , Germanus was a descendant of the noble Roman clan of the <unk> . The exact nature of his connection , however , if indeed it is anything more than a literary device to indicate noble descent , is unclear . Theodor Mommsen hypothesized that his mother could have been a daughter of Anicia Juliana . During the reign of Emperor Justin I , he was raised to high office ( he is recorded as a vir illustris in a 519 letter addressed to him by Pope <unk> ) , eventually being appointed as magister militum per <unk> . In this capacity , he scored a crushing victory over an invasion of the <unk> . 
 By 536 , he was raised to the honorary consulate and the rank of patricius , and held the post of magister militum praesentalis . In that year , he was sent to North Africa to succeed Solomon as military commander , with the task of suppressing a large @-@ scale mutiny of the Byzantine troops led by Stotzas . His tenure there , described by Procopius , was a thorough success . By appearing conciliatory and paying the arrears , he won over a large part of the mutinous army . He then defeated the remaining rebels under Stotzas at the Battle of Scalas Veteres in the spring of 537 and stabilized the situation by suppressing another conspiracy amongst his troops and restoring discipline . 
 Germanus was recalled by Emperor Justinian in 539 , and sent to Antioch in 540 at the outbreak of the Lazic War with Sassanid Persia . Heavily outnumbered by the Persians , he retreated to Cilicia and was unable to prevent the catastrophic sack of Antioch in the same year . In the next year , as Belisarius assumed command in the East , Germanus returned to Constantinople . 
 = = = Conspiracy of Artabanes = = = 
 By 548 , he was acknowledged as the most influential of Emperor Justinian 's relatives and his heir apparent , although this was never formally recognized . In that year , his position was strengthened further by the death of Empress Theodora , who disliked him intensely . His stature at court was such that a plot was hatched by the disaffected general Artabanes and his kinsman Arsaces to assassinate Emperor Justinian and replace him with Germanus . The conspirators thought Germanus amenable to their plans , since he had been dissatisfied with Emperor Justinian 's meddling in the settling of the will of his recently deceased brother Boraides . 
 The conspirators first told Justin , Germanus 's eldest son , of their intentions . He , in turn , informed his father , who then held counsel with the comes excubitorum , Marcellus . In order to find out more of their intentions , Germanus met the conspirators in person , while a trusted aide of Marcellus , named Leontius , was concealed nearby and listened in . Marcellus then informed Emperor Justinian , and the conspirators were arrested , but treated with remarkable leniency . At first , Germanus and his sons too were suspected , until the testimony of Marcellus cleared them . 
 = = = High command and death = = = 
 In the meantime , the Gothic War in Italy against the Ostrogoths had been going badly for the Byzantine Empire , with the Gothic king Totila having wrested most of the peninsula back from the Byzantine troops . In 549 , Emperor Justinian decided to send a major expeditionary force to Italy with Germanus as its head . Soon , however , he changed his mind and appointed the patricius Liberius instead , before cancelling the expedition altogether . 
 In 550 , however , Emperor Justinian did finally appoint Germanus as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of an Italian expedition . Installing his base at Serdica ( modern Sofia , Bulgaria ) , he began assembling an army . According to Procopius , his fame was such that soldiers , both Byzantines and barbarians , flocked to his banner . Even a Slav invasion headed for Thessalonica allegedly diverted itself towards Dalmatia at the news of his taking up command in Thrace . Germanus also took a step that he hoped would significantly decrease the resistance he would face from the Ostrogoths : he took as his second wife Matasuntha , the former queen of the Goths , granddaughter of Theodoric the Great and last surviving heir of the royal Amal line . Contemporary accounts certainly suggest that this move , combined with news of the massive preparations , produced an effect among the Goths in Italy , as well as the numerous Byzantine defectors in their ranks , some of whom sent messages promising to return to Byzantine allegiance upon his arrival . 
 In addition , this marriage , which was endorsed by Emperor Justinian himself , marked Germanus out as the heir to both the East Roman and the Gothic realms . It was not to be , however : only two days before the army was to set out , in the early autumn of 550 , he fell ill and died . His demise dashed any hopes for the reconciliation of Goth and Roman in Italy , and led to further years of bloodshed , until the peninsula was definitively conquered by the Byzantines . 
 Germanus is given a very favourable treatment in the work of Procopius , he openly praises him for his virtue , justice , and generosity , as well as for his energy and ability both as a soldier and an administrator . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Germanus had a brother named Boraides and perhaps also a brother named Justus . From his first marriage to a lady called <unk> , he had two sons and a daughter : 
 Justin , born probably in circa 525 / 530 , became consul in 540 and general towards the end of Emperor Justinian 's reign . 
 Justinian , general . 
 Justina , born in circa 527 , who married in 545 the general John , nephew of the general and rebel Vitalian . 
 From his later marriage to Matasuntha , he had a son , also called Germanus , born posthumously ( late 550 / early 551 ) . Nothing further is known of him with certainty , although he can possibly be identified with the patricius Germanus , a leading senator in the reign of Emperor Maurice ( r . 582 – 602 ) whose daughter married Maurice 's eldest son Theodosius . Michael Whitby identifies the younger Germanus with Germanus , a son @-@ in @-@ law of Tiberius II Constantine and Ino Anastasia . 
 = Ireland King of Arms = 
 Ireland King of Arms was the title of an officer of arms to the King of England and Lord of Ireland from 1392 until the accession of Henry VII as King of England in 1485 . A king of arms is the highest of the three levels of officers of arms , and usually enjoys heraldic jurisdiction over a geographical area . Despite the name Ireland King of Arms did not appear to exercise heraldic authority in Ireland , and indeed the connection with Ireland seems rather tenuous . The office may have been created preparatory to a subsequently aborted military expedition to Ireland . The last holder of the office , Walter Bellinger , did exercise the heraldic prerogative of a king of arms to grant armorial bearings , however two of his grants were annulled or regranted by other kings of arms as they felt he encroached on their provinces . In 1552 , 70 years after the last Ireland King of Arms , the office of Ulster King of Arms was created . The holders of this office exercised control over the heraldic affairs of Ireland until 1943 , when the office was merged with that of Norroy King of Arms forming the present office of Norroy and Ulster King of Arms . 
 = = Origins of the office = = 
 In 1392 , King Richard II of England created the first in a succession of Ireland kings of arms . It is unknown why such an office was called into being . Froissart notes the creation of Chandos le Roy d <unk> , but does not give any clues as to the reasoning . It does , however , fit into the general English policy in Ireland at the time . Richard II sought to re @-@ establish English control in those areas where the native Irish had reasserted their independence . The appointment can be seen as a necessary part of the preparations for the appointment of the Duke of Gloucester as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1392 . Richard intended Gloucester to lead a major military campaign , and such a campaign would have necessitated the involvement of heralds to marshal arms and provide advice and evidence in case of heraldic disputes . 
 Richard and Gloucester 's campaign of 1392 never happened , but Richard did leave for Ireland in 1394 with a large army , accompanied by John Othelake , who had succeeded Chandos as Ireland King of Arms in 1393 . No details are given of Othelake 's career as Ireland King of Arms , although he certainly had a connection with Ireland as an officer of arms to the Earl of March in 1381 . The historical evidence does not even make clear how long Othelake served in the position . 
 It is clear that Othelake was no longer enjoying the office by 1420 . By this time , John Kitley had been appointed to the post , though the exact date of his appointment is unknown . He was appointed by King Henry V of England on the insistence of the Earl of Ormonde . There is no evidence to suggest that Kitley had any connection to Ireland , or even that he visited it , but his connection to Earl of Ormonde is interesting . Kitley was succeeded by Thomas Collyer , who had previously served as Clarenceux King of Arms and Lancaster Herald of Arms in Ordinary . Nothing is known of his career as Ireland , and he was succeeded by Thomas <unk> . 
 = = Walter Bellinger = = 
 Walter Bellinger enjoyed the office of Ireland King of Arms from at least 1468 . This is proven by the fact that on 3 June 1469 , King Edward IV granted Bellinger a pension of £ 20 per annum for his service as Ireland . The same writ states that he had been appointed on 9 June the year before . Bellinger was a native of Dieppe , and had served as a herald for fifty @-@ five years by 1477 . He accompanied his King to France and acted as his ambassador to the French court in the discussions preceding the Treaty of <unk> . The French King gave him the value of 100 silver marks for his services in that affair . Bellinger held the office of Ireland King of Arms until the reign of Henry VII of England . After Bellinger , no one was appointed to fill the office . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Bellinger is the only Ireland King of Arms known to have made any grants of arms . However two of his four known grants were annulled and or regranted , because their recipients were within the heraldic jurisdiction of other kings of arms . There is no evidence to suggest that any Ireland Kings of Arms ever attempted to exercise control over the heraldic practice of Ireland . 
 In 1552 , Bartholomew Butler was created Ulster King of Arms . Edward VI wrote in his journal of the occasion " There was a king of arms made for Ireland , whose name was Ulster , and whose province was Ireland , and he was ... the first herald of Ireland . " Ulster King of Arms was thus a new creation , rather than a revival of Ireland King of Arms , and unlike the latter had heraldic jurisdiction over Ireland . The office of Ulster King of Arms was merged with that of Norroy King of Arms in 1943 , to form the present Norroy and Ulster King of Arms . 
 = Volvariella surrecta = 
 Volvariella surrecta , commonly known as the piggyback rosegill , is an agaric fungus in the family Pluteaceae . Although rare , the species is widely distributed , having been reported from Asia , North America , Northern Africa , Europe , and New Zealand . The fungus grows as a parasite on the fruit bodies of other gilled mushrooms , usually Clitocybe nebularis . V. surrecta mushrooms have white or greyish silky @-@ hairy caps up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , and white gills that turns pink in maturity . The stipe , also white , is up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long , and has a sack @-@ like volva at its base . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first mentioned in scientific literature as Agaricus <unk> by English botanist John Leonard Knapp in his 1829 Journal of a Naturalist . Knapp described the species and illustrated it in a woodcut . He wrote : 
 We have even an agaric , with a bulbous root and downy pileus , that will spring from the smooth summit of another ( agaricus <unk> ) , which has a uniform <unk> , though not of common occurrence . Thus a plant , that itself arises from decay , is found to constitute a soil for another ; and the termination of this chain of efficiency is hidden from us . 
 Seven years later , Miles Berkeley described the fungus as Agaricus loveianus , not aware of Knapp 's previous publication , and wrote that it was " a most elegant and curious species which ... appears not to have been hitherto noticed . " Berkeley 's name was frequently used in literature to refer to the fungus for over a century rather than Knapp . In his 1917 North American Flora , William Alphonso Murrill proposed a new name combination for the species based on Berkeley 's name , Volvariopsis <unk> . In 1942 , John Ramsbottom discovered Knapp 's image and description of the fungus , and realizing it referred to the same species as Berkeley 's Agaricus loveianus , made the new combination Volvaria surrecta . Rolf Singer transferred it to the genus Volvariella in 1951 , giving it the name by which it is known presently . 
 Molecular analysis of DNA sequences suggests that V. surrecta belongs to the Volvariella pusilla group — a grouping of related Volvariella species that produce small , white fruit bodies . In this analysis , V. surrecta formed a subclade with V. hypopithys . Almost 90 years earlier , Paul Konrad and André <unk> recognized the relatedness of these species , and proposed that V. surrecta should be considered a subspecies of V. hypopithys . 
 The specific epithet surrecta is Latin for " to arise " . Berkeley 's epithet loveianus honors British naturalist and Reverend Richard Thomas Lowe . The mushroom is commonly known as the piggyback rosegill . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of V. surrecta have caps that are initially ovoid ( egg @-@ shaped . Later they become bell @-@ shaped or convex before flattening ; reaching diameters of 2 @.@ 5 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The cap sometimes has a shallow umbo , although the presence of this character is not consistent . The cap surface is dry and covered with long , silky hairs ; the color is white to light gray , with a yellowish or brownish center . The gills are free from attachment to the stipe and are packed close together . They are initially white , later becoming pink . There are many lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from cap margin to the stipe ) interspersed between the gills . The stipe is 4 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 4 – 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 47 in ) thick , and roughly equal in width throughout the length or somewhat thicker at the base . Its color is white to light gray , and the stipe surface is appressed @-@ fibrillose , with a pruinose coating near the apex . The white volva measures 1 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) high and 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) broad , and has a lobed margin . The mushroom is not edible . 
 The color of the spore print is brownish @-@ pink . The spores are egg @-@ shaped to oval , measuring 5 @.@ 4 – 7 @.@ 6 by 3 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 9 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 20 – 31 by 5 – 10 μm . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are fusoid @-@ ventricose ( distinctly enlarged in the middle and tapered toward both ends ) , sometimes with an elongated neck . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are also fusoid @-@ ventricose with a neck that is sometimes short and bulbous ; they measure 25 – 50 by 6 – 20 μm . The hyphae do not have clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Because of its occurrence on the fruit bodies of other agarics , V. surrecta is unlikely to be confused with other mushrooms . Other parasitic mushrooms include Asterophora species , but these have thick gills compared to the thin gills of V. surrecta . Collybia species , including C. cookei , C. cirrhata and C. tuberosa are saprobic , and grow on the blackened , decayed remains of other agarics . Their fruit bodies are much smaller than V. surrecta , with cap diameters up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) . Although some other Volvariella species have an appearance similar to V. surrecta , they grow in grass or in leaf litter . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Volvariella surrecta grows parasitically on the fruit bodies of Clitocybe species , usually C. nebularis , although it has been reported growing on Tricholoma species , as well as <unk> brevipes . The mushrooms grow in clusters , and fruit in the summer and autumn . The host mushroom is sometimes malformed and assumes an irregular appearance . In an early publication , Charles Bagge Plowright commented " Berkeley 's figure ... is rather misleading . So is that given by Knapp under the name Agaricus <unk> ... , <unk> they show the Agaric ( A. nebularis ) , upon which it is parasitic , in a very robust condition . In my specimen the host ( A. nebularis ) was quite sodden and collapsed so as to be practically unrecognisable unless one had known what species to expect . " 
 Volvariella surrecta is a rare species , even though its major host is quite common ; the conditions required for the parasite to produce fruit bodies are not well known . Some authors have suggested that it may grow equally well as a parasite or a saprobe . V. surrecta has been found on its host in several different habitat types , including birch woodlands , pine plantations , scrub , thickets of small trees or shrubs beside roads , and under brambles . No definite preference for soil type has been determined , having been found in sands , clay , gravels , and peat . In 1867 , Worthington George Smith reported that he had successfully cultivated the species by partially burying fruit bodies under water @-@ soaked rotting fir leaves that were placed in a bell @-@ glass in a warm room . According to his account , a white mycelium grew over the leaves and eventually formed small white pins ( immature , undifferentiated fruit bodies ) that grew into fully formed mushrooms about two weeks after starting . 
 The geographical distribution of the fungus includes North America north of Mexico , Northern Africa , Europe , New Zealand , and Asia ( Amur region of Russia , India , and Korea ) . 
 = Hurricane Calvin ( 1993 ) = 
 Hurricane Calvin was one of three Pacific hurricanes on record to make landfall along the Mexican coast during the month of July . The fourth tropical cyclone , third named storm , and second hurricane of the 1993 Pacific hurricane season , Calvin developed from an area of convection to the south of Mexico on July 4 . The following day , the system intensified into a tropical storm , which was named Calvin . Continued strengthening ensued as Calvin curved from its initial westward track northward , and was upgraded to a hurricane on July 6 Calvin eventually turned northwest , and became a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) . By July 7 , Hurricane Calvin made landfall near Manzanillo at peak strength . Calvin rapidly weakened after landfall , and was a tropical storm when it reemerged into the Pacific Ocean on early on July 8 . Despite this , the hurricane did not reintensify , and continued to weaken as it headed rapidly northwestward . As Calvin made a second Mexican landfall near the southern tip of Baja California peninsula late on July 8 , it weakened to a tropical depression . Early on July 9 , the depression dissipated shortly after entering the Pacific Ocean for a third time . 
 Calvin was only the third July hurricane on record to make landfall on the west coast of Mexico . Throughout the nation of Mexico , Calvin dropped heavy rainfall , especially in the southwestern portion of the country . Heavy rainfall produced flooding , which , in turn , caused mudslides . In the wake of Calvin , 37 fatalities were reported . Most of the casualties were due to flooding or car accidents . In the state of Michoacán , 700 homes were destroyed . In addition , a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) storm surge was reported . Many boats and shoreline structures from Acapulco to Manzanillo were damaged . Heavy seas near Lázaro Cárdenas in western Mexico caused a ship , which contained sulfuric acid , to leak . The cleanup effort took one month to complete . In all , 30 @,@ 000 people were displaced by the storm . Overall , Calvin caused $ 32 million ( 1993 US $ ) in damage . 
 = = Background = = 
 A trough steered Calvin northward to hit Mexico as a hurricane in the month of July , making Calvin one of only three Pacific hurricanes to strike the nation since HURDAT started keeping records during the 1949 Pacific hurricane season . The other ones were Hurricane Eugene in 1987 and the third storm in 1954 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Calvin originated from an area of disturbed weather , characterized with scattered deep convection , that developed south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on the second day of July . Despite the lack of concentrated convection , the system was classified using the Dvorak technique , a tool used to measure a tropical cyclone 's intensity . However , during the morning hours of July 4 , banding features formed on the southern semicircle of the disturbance , and it is estimated that the system attained tropical depression status at 1200 UTC while centered approximately 315 mi ( 505 km ) southeast of Acapulco . Initially , the storm was expected to stay offshore and attain winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Intensifying within a favorable atmospheric environment , the depression attained tropical storm status at 0000 UTC on July 5 , receiving the name Calvin . 
 A period of rapid intensification ensued shortly thereafter , and banding @-@ type eye formed in association with Calvin later that day . By July 5 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) was predicting winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Later that day , the NHC reported winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Continuing to intensify , the system was upgraded to a hurricane at 0000 UTC on July 6 while becoming the second hurricane of the season , though operationally , it was believed to have become a hurricane three hours earlier . Upon becoming a hurricane , the NHC revised their forecast and was now expecting Calvin to become a Category 3 hurricane on the SSHWS . Around this time , Hurricane Calvin was embedded within the northeastern portion of a large , monsoon @-@ like deep @-@ layer @-@ mean , which stretched from the Intertropical Convergence Zone to the southwest Mexican coastline . Furthermore , Calvin was a fairly large cyclone as surface winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) were reported over 200 mi ( 320 km ) from the storm 's center . 
 During the late morning hours of July 6 , Calvin briefly slowed down before quickly accelerating to the northwest , bringing Calvin 's gale force winds 90 mi ( 140 km ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco . Later that day , the NHC upgraded Calvin into a Category 2 hurricane . At 1200 UTC on July 7 , Calvin reached its peak intensity of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 966 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Shortly thereafter , Calvin made landfall , approximately 40 mi ( 65 km ) west @-@ northwest of Manzanillo . The storm quickly weakened over land , and by the evening , it had weakened into a tropical storm . After weakening greatly due to land interaction with the mountainous terrain of Mexico , Calvin reentered the Pacific at 0000 UTC on July 8 . Although initially expected to turn west , this did not occur . Instead , Calvin continued northwest , accelerating while emerging into the Gulf of California . Calvin weakened to a tropical depression late on July 8 as it made a second landfall along the extreme southern Baja California peninsula . After crossing the coast , Tropical Depression Calvin dissipated the next day atop of cold sea surface temperatures . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Prior to making landfall , a tropical storm warning and hurricane watch was issued for a portion of the Mexican coast on July 6 . Six hours later , a hurricane warning was issued . By July 8 , all hurricane warnings were discontinued . Six hours later , all hurricane watches were dropped . By 1800 UTC that day , all watches and warnings were dropped . In addition to the watches and warnings , flash floods and mudslides to occur . In Acapulco , hundreds of police and emergency workers were on stand by in advance of the storm . Meanwhile , the city 's airport and ports were closed . Further south , in Oaxaca , the ports of Puerto Escondido , Puerto Ángel , <unk> de Huatulco , and Salina Cruz were closed . As a precautionary measure , the port of Zihuatanejo was also closed . In all , many sea ports were closed and airplane flights were canceled leaving many vacationers stranded . Multiple hotels were closed in the cities of Acapulco , Puerto Angel , and Huatulco . While weakening , the storm also threatened ports such as Mazatlán along the Gulf of California coast . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Due to the storm 's large size , Hurricane Calvin was responsible for heavy flooding along much of the coast of Mexico , and after moving onshore as a hurricane , two locations ( El Marques , <unk> Del ) reported as high as 18 @.@ 27 in ( 464 mm ) of rain . The flooding led to mudslides , killing 28 people on land , with 30 @,@ 000 people displaced . Most of the casualties were indirect . In all , 37 people perished due to Hurricane Calvin . Nationwide 42 @,@ 063 people were evacuated from their homes . Numerous seaside restaurants were washed off their respective foundations . Banana , mango , and corn plantations were also destroyed by the strong winds . Coconut trees were reportedly brought down as well . 
 In Puebla , a peasant died . Inland , 16 persons were killed in the states of Mexico and San Luis Potosí , where heavy rains caused mudslides across higher elevations . In the latter , 11 deaths were reported as two rivers had overflowed their banks while in the former , five people died . Moreover , six people riding in a taxi died in Veracruz during Calvin . Across Nayarit , Calvin brought heavy rains to the state . Later in its duration , Calvin struck the Baja California peninsula , though the storm had weakened considerably by that time Offshore , three ships containing 659 immigrants were intercepted by the storm , but the ship sustained no damage . 
 In all , the damage from Hurricane Calvin amounted to over 100 million new pesos , or $ 32 million ( 1993 USD ) . Despite the devastation , many vacationers did not alter their plans because of the hurricane . 
 = = = Oaxaca = = = 
 Prior to affecting Guerrero , Hurricane Calvin was responsible for heavy rains and widespread flooding across Oaxaca . An estimated 7 @,@ 000 were left homeless along the <unk> coast and on the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . In addition , travel from the isthmus was cut off due to mudslides that blocked portions of the Pan @-@ American Highway . Two rivers threatened to overflow their banks while the Benito , Juarez , and <unk> dams attained peak capacity and thus the gates were opened to prevent overflowing . A total of 42 communities were flooded . The cities of Tehuantepec , Salina Cruz , <unk> , and Tuxtepec were flooded due to extended periods of torrential rains . Across the state , the rains blocked highways and knocked out electrical , telephone , and water services . About 3 @,@ 000 people took refuge to shelters and one person was killed . 
 = = = Guerrero = = = 
 In Acapulco , waves of 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) moved through the city . In several states , between 5 in ( 130 mm ) to 10 in ( 250 mm ) inches of rain was recorded . However , in Las Pilas , the highest rainfall total was observed , at 16 @.@ 34 in ( 415 mm ) . 
 Prior to landfall , the storm 's outer rainbands began to spread over the region , resulting in flooding . Throughout Acapulco , the storm uprooted 100 trees and caused some damage to roads . Although the city escaped significant damage , many huts were damaged and 1 @,@ 600 people were left homeless . City @-@ wide six people were killed while two other fisherman were missing . A mudslide killed a man and a son one person was reported dead after trying to save his boat from sinking . In addition , 13 boats sunk due to high waves , which impeded all maritime activity along the coast . In the city of Zihuatanejo , heavy rains flooded streets ; consequently , " waist @-@ deep " water was reported in some parts of the city . As a result , tourists were evacuated to higher ground . A total of 2 @,@ 000 people were forced to abandon their homes . Two people sustained minor injuries when a tree was uprooted . Many neighborhoods throughout Acapulco were flooded . Overall , several beach communities were destroyed , almost 1 @,@ 000 dwellings were destroyed , thousands of people were left homeless , and many areas remained without electricity . 
 Statewide , the majority of storm damage occurred over a 4 mi ( 6 km ) stretch of road , which was situated about 25 mi ( 40 km ) north of Acapulco . About a dozen small wood @-@ built restaurants were swept away by high waves . At a nearby small beach resort , four cottages were damaged due to the winds and were later swept away . One two @-@ story hotel was nearly destroyed as all that remained undamaged after the storm was a swimming pool . In a resort town situated 18 mi ( 29 km ) northwest of the city , high waves pounded many small resorts . 
 = = = Colima = = = 
 Following Calvin 's closest approach to Manzanillo , the Mexican Weather Service station in the city recorded a minimum barometric pressure of 986 @.@ 5 mbar ( 29 @.@ 13 inHg ) , as well as 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) surface winds as the center of Calvin passed a little to the west . The Instituto <unk> del Pacifico in Manzanillo reported a minimum central pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) in addition to gale @-@ force winds . Statewide , sustained winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) were observed around 1300 UTC . Shortly thereafter , near 1545 UTC , sustained winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) with gusts up to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) were reported in Manzanillo . Offshore , several ships reported rough weather during Calvin 's existence , with the Pacific <unk> reporting a maximum wave height of 44 ft ( 13 m ) . 
 Two fatalities occurred offshore when a trimaran capsized ; two fishermen were also reported missing . A pair children were killed by a mudslide . Damage to boats and shoreline structures extended from Acapulco to Manzanillo . Electrical and water services were cut off to the city of <unk> . In all , 4 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from their homes throughout the state . Several ports were also closed . Throughout Colima , lime and mango crops sustained $ 4 @.@ 3 million in damage . 
 = = = Michoacán = = = 
 In the state of Michoacán , 700 homes were destroyed . Moreover , many bridges and highways were destroyed due to a 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) storm surge . A total of 4 @,@ 000 persons fled their homes in Michoacan , including 3 @,@ 000 alone in Lázaro Cárdenas . Crop damage in both this state and Colima totaled to $ 7 million . Numerous communities were completely evacuated . 
 Although initially not expected to pose a threat to the chemicals on the ship Betula , rough seas near Lázaro Cárdenas caused all 4 @,@ 000 t ( 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) of sulfuric acid to leak aboard the previously beached cargo tanker . The tow line snapped when a tug was taking it out to sea . Two of the four tanks broke off by July 7 . The Mexican Navy then decided it would be best to tow the ship to shore and neutralize the battery acid that the ship contained . It was estimated that such project could take two weeks . 
 = = = Jalisco = = = 
 Shortly after making its first landfall , the storm moved over a sparsely populated portion of Mexico near Puerto Vallarta . Throughout the region from Manzanillo to Puerto Vallarta , no deaths were reported . However , phones and power services were disrupted and many roads were blocked due to extensive flooding . However , further details about impact could not be obtained due to lack of communication , though some places sustained waist @-@ high water . However , the resort city of Puerto Vallarta itself was spared , receiving just some rain and light winds . About 60 mi ( 95 km ) south of the city , numerous coastal roads were destroyed due to mudslides . In all , 10 towns were flooded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the aftermath of the storm , troops were called in to deliver aid to the victims of the storm . A state of emergency was declared in at least ten states in Mexico following Calvin 's passage . Furthermore , Mexican officials implemented emergency measures with assistance of agencies such as the Mexican Army and the local health department in the most of the devastated areas . Civil protection authorities donated food to more than 40 @,@ 000 people for three days . They distributed around 11 @,@ 000 blankets , 5 @,@ 000 mattresses , 8 @,@ 000 sacks of sand to reinforce dikes , and an additional 20 t ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) of food , medicine , and clothes . Many Los Angeles residents looked for ways to donate aid to the needy . Then @-@ Mexican President Carlos Salinas de <unk> announced that the government would channel $ 11 @.@ 4 million to three of the hardest @-@ hit states . The government channeled $ 2 @.@ 7 million to Guerrero alone ( half of which was supplied to Acapulco ) for reconstruction efforts . Michoacan was also expected to receive $ 4 @.@ 7 million in aid while Colima was expected to acquire $ 4 million . 
 Once the hurricane had moved away from the coast , airports quickly re @-@ opened . Simultaneously , fishermen in Playa Azul protested that their livelihood was endangered due to fishing bans caused by the chemical spill ; consequently , in Lázaro Cárdenas , 28 people were arrested while warrants for 526 others ' arrest were issued for disturbing peace and blocking highways . This sparked protests from two environmental group as a well a group of Mexican artists . Also , the fisherman demanded a $ 1 million compensation . Within a week after the storm , additional rains had moved into the area , leading to further damage and eight fatalities . 
 = Geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area = 
 The geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area includes nine known exposed formations , all visible in Zion National Park in the U.S. state of Utah . Together , these formations represent about 150 million years of mostly Mesozoic @-@ aged sedimentation in that part of North America . Part of a super @-@ sequence of rock units called the Grand Staircase , the formations exposed in the Zion and Kolob area were deposited in several different environments that range from the warm shallow seas of the Kaibab and Moenkopi formations , streams and lakes of the Chinle , Moenave , and Kayenta formations to the large deserts of the Navajo and Temple Cap formations and dry near shore environments of the Carmel Formation . 
 Subsequent uplift of the Colorado Plateau slowly raised these formations much higher than where they were deposited . This steepened the stream gradient of the ancestral rivers and other streams on the plateau . The faster @-@ moving streams took advantage of uplift @-@ created joints in the rocks to remove all Cenozoic @-@ aged formations and cut gorges into the plateaus . Zion Canyon was cut by the North Fork of the Virgin River in this way . Lava flows and cinder cones covered parts of the area during the later part of this process . 
 Zion National Park includes an elevated plateau that consists of sedimentary formations that dip very gently to the east . This means that the oldest strata are exposed along the Virgin River in the Zion Canyon part of the park , and the youngest are exposed in the Kolob Canyons section . The plateau is bounded on the east by the Sevier Fault Zone , and on the west by the Hurricane Fault Zone . Weathering and erosion along north @-@ trending faults and fractures influence the formation of landscape features , such as canyons , in this region . 
 = = Grand Staircase and basement rocks = = 
 The Grand Staircase is an immense sequence of sedimentary rock layers that stretch south from Bryce Canyon National Park through Zion National Park and into the Grand Canyon . Within this sequence , the oldest exposed formation in the Zion and Kolob canyons area is the youngest exposed formation in the Grand Canyon — the Kaibab limestone . Bryce Canyon to the northeast continues where the Zion and Kolob areas end by presenting Cenozoic @-@ aged rocks . In fact , the youngest formation seen in the Zion and Kolob area is the oldest exposed formation in Bryce Canyon — the Dakota Sandstone . 
 In the Permian period , the Zion and Kolob area was a relatively flat basin near sea level on the western margin of the supercontinent Pangaea . Sediments from surrounding mountains added weight to the basin , keeping it at relatively the same elevation . These sediments later lithified ( turned to rock ) to form the Toroweap Formation , now exposed in the Grand Canyon to the south but not in the Zion and Kolob area . This formation is not exposed in the park , though it does form its basement rock . 
 = = Deposition of sediments = = 
 = = = Kaibab Limestone ( Upper Permian ) = = = 
 In later Permian time , the Toroweap Basin was invaded by the warm , shallow edge of the vast <unk> ocean in what local geologists call the Kaibab Sea . At that time , Utah and Wyoming were near the equator on the western margin of the supercontinent Pangaea . 
 Starting 260 million years ago , the yellowish @-@ gray limestone of the fossil @-@ rich Kaibab Limestone was laid down as a limy ooze in a tropical climate . During this time , sponges , such as <unk> <unk> , proliferated , only to be buried in lime mud and their internal silica needles ( spicules ) dissolved and recrystallized to form discontinuous layers of light @-@ colored chert . In the park , this formation can be found in the Hurricane Cliffs above the Kolob Canyons Visitor Center and in an escarpment along Interstate 15 as it skirts the park . This is the same formation that rims the Grand Canyon to the south . 
 Farther to the west , a complex island arc assemblage formed above a subduction zone . To the east , in western Colorado , a mountain range similar to today 's Himalayas called the Uncompahgre Mountains bordered the Utah lowland . The <unk> of the Kaibab with the White Rim Sandstone , now exposed in Capitol Reef National Park area , to the east suggests that the marine facies of the Kaibab migrated eastward in response to a relative sea @-@ level rise , or transgression ( the White Rim is not exposed in the Zion area ) . The sea moved back and forth across Utah , but by the Middle Permian , the sea had withdrawn and the Kaibab Limestone was exposed to erosion , creating karst topography and channels reaching 30 m ( 100 ft ) in depth . 
 = = = Moenkopi Formation ( Lower Triassic ) = = = 
