 Volcanoes continued to erupt through the Early Triassic on the north – south trending island arc to the west , which was located along what is now the border between California and Nevada . Shallow , marine water stretched from eastern Utah to eastern Nevada over a beveled continental shelf . As the sea withdrew around 230 million years ago , fluvial , mudflat , sabkha , and shallow marine environments developed , depositing gypsum ( from lagoon evaporites ) , mudstones , limestones , sandstones , shales , and siltstones . 
 It took many thousands of thin layers of these sediments to form the 1 @,@ 800 @-@ foot ( 550 m ) thick Moenkopi Formation . A prograding shoreline laid down muddy delta sediments which mixed with limy marine deposits . The fossilized plants and animals in the Moenkopi are evidence of a climate shift to a warm tropical setting that may have experienced monsoonal , wet @-@ dry conditions . 
 The Red Canyon Conglomerate , the basal member of the Moenkopi , fills broad east @-@ flowing <unk> carved into the Kaibab Limestone . Some of these channels are up to several tens of feet deep and may reach 200 ft ( 61 m ) deep in the St. George area . A thin , poorly developed soil , or regolith , formed over the <unk> high areas between the channels . 
 The depositional environment was a nearshore one where the seashore alternated between advance ( transgression ) and retreat ( regression ) . At Zion , the limestones and fossils of the <unk> , Virgin Limestone , and <unk> members of the Moenkopi Formation document transgressive episodes . Unlike the <unk> and Virgin Limestone members , the <unk> contains abundant gypsum and interbedded mudstone resulting from deposition in a restricted marine environment with complex <unk> fluctuations . Regressive , red bed layers separate the transgressive strata . Ripple marks , mud cracks , and thinly laminated bedding suggest that these intervening red shale and siltstone units were deposited in tidal flat and <unk> environments . 
 Outcrops of this brightly colored red , brown , and pink banded formation can be seen in the Kolob Canyons section of the park and in buttes on either side of State Route 9 between Rockville , Utah to the south and Virgin , Utah to the southwest of the park borders . Progressively higher beds are exposed until the top of the formation is reached at the mouth of <unk> Canyon ( when traveling to the park on Route 9 ) . 
 = = = Chinle Formation ( Upper Triassic ) = = = 
 Later , uplift exposed the Moenkopi Formation to erosion and Utah became part of a large interior basin drained by north and northwest @-@ flowing rivers in the Upper Triassic . Shallow river deposition along with volcanic ash eventually became the mineral @-@ rich Chinle Formation . The irregular contact zone , or unconformity , between the Chinle and the underlying Moenkopi can be seen between Rockville and Grafton in southwestern Utah . 
 Petrified wood and fossils of animals adapted to swampy environments , such as phytosaurs , lungfish , and lacustrine bivalves , have been found in this formation as well as conifer trees , cycads , ferns , and horsetails . Relatively plentiful uranium ore , such as carnotite and other uranium @-@ bearing minerals , has also been found . The purple , pink , blue , white , yellow , gray , and red colored Chinle also contains shale , gypsum , limestone , sandstone , and quartz . Iron , manganese oxides and copper sulfide are often found filling gaps between pebbles . <unk> slopes made of the Chinle can be seen above the town of Rockville . 
 The sand , gravel , and petrified wood which made up these deposits were later strongly cemented by dissolved silica ( probably from volcanic ash from the west ) in groundwater . Much of the bright coloration of the Chinle is due to soil formation during the Late Triassic . The lowermost member of the Chinle , the Shinarump , consists of a white , gray , and brown conglomerate made of coarse sandstone , and thin lenses of sandy mudstone , along with plentiful petrified wood . The Shinarump was laid down in braided streams that flowed through valleys eroded into the underlying Moenkopi Formation . This member of the Chinle forms prominent cliffs with thickness up to 200 feet ( 60 m ) , and its name comes from a Native American word meaning " wolf 's rump " ( a reference to the way this member erodes into gray , rounded hills ) . 
 A succession of volcanic @-@ ash @-@ rich mudstone and sandstone with a thickness of 350 @-@ foot ( 110 m ) make up the Petrified Forest Member of the Chinle , which was deposited by lakes , highly sinuous rivers and on the surrounding floodplains . This is the same bright , multicolored part of the Chinle that is exposed in Petrified Forest National Park and the Painted Desert . Petrified wood is , of course , also common in this member . 
 = = = Moenave and Kayenta formations ( Lower Jurassic ) = = = 
 Early Jurassic uplift created an unconformity above the Chinle Formation that represents about ten million years of missing sedimentation between it and the next formation , the Moenave . Periodic incursions of shallow seas from the north during the Jurassic flooded parts of Wyoming , Montana , and a northeast – southwest trending trough on the Utah / Idaho border . The Moenave was deposited in a variety of river , lake , and flood @-@ plain environments . 
 The oldest beds of this formation belong to the Dinosaur Canyon Member , a reddish , slope @-@ forming rock layer with thin beds of siltstone that are interbedded with mudstone and fine sandstone . The Dinosaur Canyon , with a local thickness of 140 to 375 feet ( 43 to 114 m ) , was probably laid down in slow @-@ moving streams , ponds and large lakes . Evidence for this is in cross @-@ bedding of the sediments and large numbers of fish fossils . 
 The upper member of the Moenave is the pale reddish @-@ brown with a thickness of 75 to 150 feet ( 23 to 46 m ) and cliff @-@ forming Springdale Sandstone . It was deposited in swifter , larger , and more voluminous streams than the older Dinosaur Canyon Member . Fossils of large sturgeon @-@ like freshwater fish have been found in the beds of the Springdale Sandstone . The next member in the Moenave Formation is the thin @-@ bedded Whitmore Point , which is made of mudstone and shale . The lower red cliffs visible from the Zion Human History Museum ( until 2000 the Zion Canyon Visitor Center ) are accessible examples of this formation . 
 At 200 to 600 feet ( 61 to 183 m ) thick , the Kayenta Formation 's sand and silt were laid down in early Jurassic time in slower @-@ moving , intermittent streambeds in a semiarid to tropical environment . <unk> sandstone , basal conglomerates , siltstones , mudstones , and thin cross @-@ beds are typical channel and floodplain deposits found in the Kayenta . <unk> studies show that the Kayenta rivers flowed in a general westward to southwestward direction . 
 Fossilized dinosaur footprints from sauropods have been found in this formation near the Left Fork of North Creek . Mountains in Nevada and California continued to rise in the Lower Jurassic as plate motions forced North America northward . Eventually , this created a rain shadow and brought widespread desertification . Today the Kayenta is a red and mauve rocky slope @-@ former that can be seen throughout Zion Canyon . 
 = = = Navajo Sandstone ( Lower to Mid Jurassic ) = = = 
 Approximately 190 to 136 million years ago in the Jurassic the Colorado Plateau area 's climate increasingly became arid until 150 @,@ 000 square miles ( 388 @,@ 000 km ² ) of western North America became a huge desert , not unlike the modern Sahara . For perhaps 10 million years sometime around 175 million years ago sand dunes accumulated , reaching their greatest thickness in the Zion Canyon area ; about 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 670 m ) at the Temple of Sinawava ( photo ) in Zion Canyon . 
 Most of the sand , made of 98 % translucent , rounded @-@ grain quartz , was transported from coastal sand dunes to the west , in what is now central Nevada . Today the Navajo Sandstone is a geographically widespread , pale tan to red cliff and monolith former with very obvious sand dune cross @-@ bedding patterns ( photo ) . Typically the lower part of this remarkably homogeneous formation is reddish from iron oxide that percolated from the overlaying iron @-@ rich Temple Cap formation while the upper part of the formation is a pale tan to nearly white color . The other component of the Navajo 's weak cement matrix is calcium carbonate , but the resulting sandstone is friable ( crumbles easily ) and very porous . Cross @-@ bedding is especially evident in the eastern part of the park where Jurassic wind directions changed often . The crosshatched appearance of Checkerboard Mesa is a good example ( photo ) . 
 Springs , such as Weeping Rock ( photo ) , form in canyon walls made of the porous Navajo Sandstone when water hits and is channeled by the underlying non @-@ porous Kayenta Formation . The principal aquifer in the region is contained in Navajo Sandstone . Navajo is the most prominent formation exposed in Zion Canyon with the highest exposures being West Temple and Checkerboard Mesa . The monoliths in the sides of Zion Canyon are among the tallest sandstone cliffs in the world . 
 = = = Temple Cap and Carmel formations ( Middle Jurassic ) = = = 
 Utah and western Colorado were deformed as the rate of subduction off the west coast increased in the Middle Jurassic Sevier Orogeny . At the same time , an inland sea began to encroach on the continent from the north . Broad tidal flats and streams carrying iron oxide @-@ rich mud formed on the margins of the shallow sea to the west , creating the Sinawava member of the Temple Cap Formation . Flat @-@ bedded sandstones , siltstones , and limestones filled depressions left in the underlying eroded strata . Streams eroded the poorly cemented Navajo Sandstone , and water caused the sand to slump . 
 Desert conditions returned briefly , creating the White Throne member , but encroaching seas again beveled the coastline , forming a regional unconformity . Thin beds of clay and silt mark the end of this formation . The most prominent outcrops of this formation make up the capstone of West Temple in Zion Canyon . Rain dissolves some of the iron oxide and thus streaks Zion 's cliffs red ( the red streak seen on the Altar of Sacrifice is a famous example ) . Temple Cap iron oxide is also the source of the red @-@ orange color of much the lower half of the Navajo Formation . 
 A warm , shallow inland sea started to advance into the region ( transgress ) 150 million years ago , finishing the job of flattening the sand dunes . <unk> ooze with some sand and fossils were laid down as 1 @-@ to @-@ 4 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) thick sedimentation beds from Mid to Late Jurassic time . Some calcareous silt percolated down into the buried sand dunes ( carrying red oxides with it ) and eventually cemented them into the sandstone of the Navajo Formation . The limy ooze above would later <unk> into the hard and compact limestone of the Carmel Formation , 200 to 300 feet ( 61 to 91 m ) thick . 
 Many unique environments were created by the migrating Sevier thrust system , and the four members of the Carmel Formation in southwest Utah capture these changing environments . Both open marine ( crinoids ) and restricted marine ( pelecypods , gastropods ) environments are represented in the Co @-@ op Creek member . Sandstone and gypsum in the Crystal Creek and Paria River members signal a return to desert conditions in a coastal setting . 
 Outcrops of the Carmel Formation are most notably exposed on Horse Ranch Mountain ( photo ) in the Kolob Canyons section of the park and near Mt . Carmel Junction east of the park . Other formations totaling 2 @,@ 800 feet ( 850 m ) thick may have been deposited in the region during Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous only to be uplifted and entirely removed by erosion . 
 = = = Dakota Sandstone ( Lower Cretaceous ) = = = 
 Mountains continued to rise in the Sevier orogenic belt to the west during the Cretaceous while the roughly north @-@ south trending Western Interior Basin expanded . Rifting in the Gulf of Mexico helped the southern end of the basin to subside , which allowed marine water to advance northward . At the same time , the shoreline advanced inland from the Arctic region . The seas advanced and retreated many times during the Cretaceous until one of the most extensive interior seaways ever , called the Western Interior Seaway , drowned much of western North America from the Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic Ocean . The western shoreline of the seaway was in the vicinity of Cedar City , Utah while the eastern margin was part of the low @-@ lying , stable platform ramp in Nebraska and Kansas . 
 The pebble to cobble conglomerate and tan fossil @-@ rich sandstone of the resulting 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) thick Dakota Sandstone include alluvial fan and alluvial plain sediments that grade laterally into coastal plain , marginal marine , and marine deposits . A small remnant of the Dakota is exposed on top of the 8 @,@ 766 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 672 m ) -high Horse Ranch Mountain ( photo ) . This formation is the youngest one exposed in the Zion area but the oldest exposed in Bryce Canyon to the northeast . Deposition continued but the resulting formations were later uplifted and eroded away . The exposed formations in the Bryce Canyon area likely represent these lost layers . 
 = = Tectonic activity and erosion = = 
 = = = Regional forces = = = 
 East – west @-@ directed compression from subduction off the west coast affected the area in later Mesozoic and early Tertiary time by folding and thrust faulting strata . Evidence for the Sevier Orogeny part of this period can be seen in the Taylor Creek area in the Kolob section of the park . Chunks of Moenave strata have been compressed to the point of thrusting themselves over the same formation in the Taylor Creek Thrust Fault Zone , located on the east flank of the <unk> anticline . 
 <unk> forces forming the Basin and Range <unk> province to the west about 20 to 25 million years ago in Tertiary time created the two faults that bound the Markagunt Plateau ( which underlies the park ) : the Sevier Fault on the east and the Hurricane Fault on the west . The Hurricane fault zone is a major , active , steeply west @-@ dipping normal fault that stretches at least 155 miles ( 250 km ) from south of the Grand Canyon northward to Cedar City , Utah . Along the southern boundary of the park , tectonic displacement along this fault is about 3 @,@ 600 ft ( 1 @,@ 098 m ) . Several other normal faults also developed on the plateau . 
 Subsequent uplift of the Colorado Plateau and tilting of the Markagunt Plateau started 13 million years ago . This steepened the stream gradient of the ancestral Virgin River ( Zion Canyon section of the park ) , and Taylor and La <unk> creeks ( Kolob Canyons section of the park ) , causing them to flow and <unk> faster into the underlying Markagunt Plateau . <unk> continues to be especially rapid after heavy rainstorms and winter runoff when the water contains large amounts of suspended and abrasive sand grains . Uplift and downcutting are so fast that slot canyons ( very narrow river @-@ cut features with vertical walls ) , such as the Zion Narrows , formed . 
 = = = Volcanic activity = = = 
 Explosive andesitic volcanism dominated the area to the west of Zion during Oligocene and early Miocene time and probably inundated the region with hundreds of feet of welded tuff that has since eroded away . Three of these tuff layers are preserved on top of <unk> Peak . About 21 million years ago the Pine Valley laccolith formed . This typical mushroom @-@ shaped laccolith is one of the largest intrusions of this type in the world . Debris flows carried boulders of this intrusion onto the Upper Kolob Plateau indicating that the Hurricane Cliffs could not have been present at the time . 
 Then from at least 1 @.@ 4 million to 250 @,@ 000 years ago in Pleistocene time basaltic lava flowed intermittently in the area , taking advantage of uplift @-@ created weaknesses in the Earth 's crust . Volcanic activity was concentrated along the Hurricane Fault west of the park that today parallels Interstate 15 . Evidence of the oldest flows can be seen at Lava Point and rocks from the youngest are found at the lower end of Cave Valley . Some cinder cones were constructed much later in the southwest corner of the park . 
 Some of these lava flows blocked rivers and streams , impounding small lakes and ephemeral ponds in the process . About 100 @,@ 000 years ago , basalt from the largest cinder cone in the park , Crater Hill , flowed over the area . The lava traveled into Coalpits and <unk> Washes to the south and accumulated to a depth of over 400 ft ( 122 m ) in the ancestral Virgin River valley near the present @-@ day ghost town of Grafton , Utah . Water impounded behind the two blockages , forming Coalpits Lake and Lake Grafton respectively . 
 Lake Grafton was the largest of at least 14 lakes that have periodically formed in the park ( most were from landslides ; see below ) . Thirteen lava flows are mapped in and near Zion dating from 1 @.@ 5 million to 100 @,@ 000 years ago . More recent flows of less than 10 @,@ 000 years in age occurred north of Zion and east of Cedar Breaks National Monument . 
 = = = Erosion and canyon formation = = = 
 Stream downcutting continued along with canyon @-@ forming processes such as mass wasting ; sediment @-@ rich and abrasive flood stage waters would undermine cliffs until vertical slabs of rock sheared away . This process continues to be especially efficient with the vertically jointed Navajo Sandstone . 
 All erosion types took advantage of preexisting weaknesses in the rock such as rock type , amount of <unk> , and the presence of cracks or joints in the rock . Basalt flows concentrated in valleys but subsequent erosion removed sedimentary rock that once stood at higher elevations . The resulting inverted relief consists of ridges capped by basalt which are separated by adjacent drainages . 
 In all about 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) of sediment were removed from atop the youngest exposed formation in the park ( the Late Cretaceous @-@ aged Dakota Sandstone ) . The Virgin River carved out 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) of sediment in about 1 million years . This is a very high rate of downcutting , about the same rate as occurred in Grand Canyon during its most rapid period of erosion . About 1 million years ago , Zion Canyon was only about half as deep as it is today in the vicinity of Zion Lodge . Assuming that erosion was fairly constant over the past 2 million years , then the upper half of Zion Canyon was carved between about 1 and 2 million years ago and only the upper half of the Great White Throne was exposed 1 million years ago and The Narrows were yet to form . 
 <unk> and canyon widening continue today as the process of erosion continues to try to reduce the topography to sea level . In 1998 a flash flood temporarily increased the Virgin River 's flow rate from 200 to 4 @,@ 500 ft ³ / s ( 6 to 125 m ³ / s ) . Geologists estimate that the Virgin River can cut another thousand feet ( 300 m ) before it loses the ability to transport sediment to the Colorado River to the south . However , additional uplift will probably increase this figure . 
 = = = Landslides and earthquakes = = = 
 Landslides more than once dammed the Virgin River and created lakes where sediment accumulated . Every time the river eventually breached the slide and drained the lake , leaving a flat @-@ bottomed valley . About 7 @,@ 000 years ago , the relatively thin wall between two closely spaced joints in the Navajo Sandstone collapsed . The resulting Sand Bench landslide blocked Zion Canyon just east of The Sentinel , creating Sentinel Lake . Another notable stand was created about 4 @,@ 000 years ago when Sentinel Slide impounded the North Fork Virgin River , creating a lake that backed up to Weeping Rock . The current site of Zion Lodge was under about 200 feet ( 60 m ) of water for around 700 years . Evidence of valley floors created by these lakes can be seen from Zion Canyon Scenic Drive south of Zion Lodge near Sentinel Slide . Recent landslides in 1923 , 1941 , and 1995 have temporarily dammed the Virgin River . Prior to the initial Sand Bench landslide , the Virgin River flowed 70 ft ( 21 m ) lower in elevation than it does today . 
 The area is periodically rocked by mild to moderate earthquakes , which often trigger landslides . For example , on September 2 , 1992 a Richter Magnitude 5 @.@ 8 earthquake caused 14 million cubic meters ( 18 million cubic yards ) of mostly Moenave Formation to slide downslope atop the weak claystone of the Petrified Forest member of the Chinle Formation . The quake was centered on the Washington Fault , about 30 miles ( 48 km ) southwest . Three houses and two water tanks were destroyed when the slope they were built on dropped 98 feet ( 30 m ) and extended laterally a similar distance over a period of several hours . The landslide is visible just outside the park 's entrance in Springdale , Utah . 
 = Sicklefin weasel shark = 
 The sicklefin weasel shark ( Hemigaleus microstoma ) is an uncommon species of ground shark in the family <unk> . It is native to southern India , southern China , and parts of Southeast Asia , living in shallow waters down to a depth of 170 m ( 560 ft ) . This lightly built shark is characterized by its very short mouth , broad upper teeth with serrations only on the trailing edge , and strongly sickle @-@ shaped fins with obvious white tips on the two dorsal fins . It is light grey or bronze in colour , often with small white blotches on its sides , and reaches a maximum known length of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 Spending most of its time close to the sea floor , the sicklefin weasel shark is a specialist predator of cephalopods . Its reproductive mode is viviparous , in which the unborn young form a placental connection to their mother . Females probably give birth twice a year , with each litter consisting of two to four pups . The sicklefin weasel shark is widely caught by artisanal fisheries and used for meat , fins , and fishmeal ; its low natural abundance and reproductive rate mean that it cannot sustain much fishing pressure . Given that fishing activity is intense throughout its range , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Vulnerable . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Dutch ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker described the sicklefin weasel shark in 1852 . He gave it the specific epithet microstoma , from the Greek mikros ( " small " ) and stoma ( " mouth " ) , and placed it in a new genus , Hemigaleus . His account was based on two females from Jakarta , Indonesia , measuring 63 and 70 cm ( 25 and 28 in ) long . This species was once thought to occur off Australia , but that population is now recognised as a distinct species , H. australiensis . <unk> Chu 's 1960 description of <unk> <unk> from Chinese waters is probably of the same species as H. microstoma . Albert William Herre 's 1929 description of Hemigaleus <unk> from the Philippines , though lacking in detail , is also consistent with being of this species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sicklefin weasel shark is a slender @-@ bodied species reaching 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) in length . The snout is fairly long and rounded , with the nostrils preceded by short flaps of skin . The large , oval eyes are <unk> with nictitating membranes and are followed by minute spiracles . The mouth forms a very short , wide arch and conceals the teeth when closed . Moderately long furrows are present at the corners of the mouth . There are 25 – 34 upper and 37 – 43 lower tooth rows ; the upper teeth are broad and angled with a smooth leading edge and strongly serrated trailing edge , while the lower teeth are narrow , erect , and smooth @-@ edged . The five pairs of gill slits are short . 
 The fins are strongly falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) , particularly the dorsal fins , pelvic fins , and lower caudal fin lobe . The pectoral fins are narrow and pointed . The first dorsal fin is positioned about halfway between the pectoral and pelvic fins . The second dorsal fin is about two @-@ thirds as tall as the first and is positioned slightly ahead of the anal fin . The anal fin is smaller than the second dorsal fin . The dorsal surface of the caudal peduncle bears a crescent @-@ shaped notch at the caudal fin origin . The asymmetrical caudal fin has a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a long upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The dermal denticles are small and overlapping ; each has five horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth . This species is light grey or bronze above , often with small white spots on the sides , and pale below . The dorsal fins are tipped in white , which is especially obvious on the second dorsal as the remainder of fin is mostly dark . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The sicklefin weasel shark is found off southern India and Sri Lanka , as well as from southern China and Taiwan to Java and Borneo . It may also occur in the Philippines and the Red Sea , though specimens from these regions need to be compared taxonomically with those from its confirmed range . It does not seem to be very common naturally . This species inhabits continental and insular shelves from inshore waters to at least a depth of 170 m ( 560 ft ) , and usually swims close to the sea floor . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The diet of the sicklefin weasel shark is composed almost entirely of cephalopods , though crustaceans and echinoderms may be infrequently eaten . Its small mouth and short gill slits may be adaptations for capturing cephalopods via suction , while its weak jaws and small teeth reflect a diet of mostly soft @-@ bodied prey . This species is viviparous , wherein the developing embryos are sustained to term through a placental connection formed from the depleted yolk sac . Females likely produce two litters per year , implying a gestation period of under six months . Between two and four pups are born at a time ( average 3 @.@ 3 ) ; newborns measure approximately 45 cm ( 18 in ) long . Males mature sexually at around 74 – 75 cm ( 29 – 30 in ) long , while females mature at around 75 – 78 cm ( 30 – 31 in ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The sicklefin weasel shark is not dangerous to humans . It is caught by artisanal fishers throughout its range , mostly in drifting and bottom gillnets but also in bottom trawls and on longlines . The meat is eaten , the fins are used in shark fin soup , and the offal is processed into fishmeal . However , the small size of this shark limits its economic value . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the sicklefin weasel shark as Vulnerable , noting that it is naturally uncommon and resides in heavily fished regions . In addition , compared to the related Australian weasel shark it is less productive and thus less resilient to withstand fishing pressure . 
 = Sidney Crosby = 
 Sidney Patrick Crosby , ONS ( born August 7 , 1987 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player who serves as captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Crosby was drafted first overall by the Penguins out of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . During his two @-@ year major junior career with the Rimouski Océanic , he earned back @-@ to @-@ back CHL Player of the Year awards and led his club to the 2005 Memorial Cup final . Nicknamed " The Next One " , he was one of the most highly regarded draft picks in hockey history , leading many to refer to the 2005 Draft Lottery as the " Sidney Crosby Sweepstakes " . 
 In his first NHL season , Crosby finished sixth in league scoring with 102 points ( 39 goals , 63 assists ) and was a runner @-@ up for the Calder Memorial Trophy ( won by Alexander Ovechkin ) . By his second season , he led the NHL with 120 points ( 36 goals , 84 assists ) to capture the Art Ross Trophy , becoming the youngest player and the only teenager to win a scoring title in any major North American sports league . That same season , Crosby won the Hart Memorial Trophy as the Professional Hockey Writers Association 's choice for most valuable player and the Lester B. Pearson Award as the NHL Players Association 's choice for most outstanding player , becoming the seventh player in NHL history to earn all three awards in one year . 
 Crosby started the 2007 – 08 season with the team 's captaincy and subsequently led them to the 2008 Stanley Cup Finals , where they were defeated by the Detroit Red Wings in six games . The Penguins returned to the Finals against Detroit the following year and won in seven games ; Crosby became the youngest captain in NHL history to win the Stanley Cup . In the 2009 – 10 season , Crosby scored a career @-@ high 51 goals , tying him with Steven Stamkos for the " Rocket " Richard Trophy as the league @-@ leader ; with 58 assists , he totalled 109 points , second in the NHL . During the off @-@ season , Crosby received the Mark Messier Leadership Award . In 2010 – 11 , Crosby sustained a concussion as a result of hits to the head in back @-@ to @-@ back games . The injury left him sidelined for ten and a half months . However , after playing eight games in the 2011 – 12 season , Crosby 's concussion @-@ like symptoms returned in December 2011 , and he did not return until mid @-@ March 2012 after extended treatment by neurologists at <unk> and chiropractic neurologist Ted Carrick , whom Crosby credits with helping him return to hockey . In 2013 – 14 , he again won the Hart Memorial Trophy as well as the Art Ross Trophy and his third Ted Lindsay Award . In the 2015 – 16 season , Crosby finished third in scoring , and captained the Penguins to the 2016 Stanley Cup Finals , where they defeated the San Jose Sharks in six games . Crosby was the 2016 winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player during the playoffs . 
 Internationally , Crosby has represented Canada in numerous tournaments for the country 's junior and men 's teams . After competing in the 2003 U @-@ 18 Junior World Cup , he represented Canada in back @-@ to @-@ back IIHF World U20 Championships , winning silver in 2004 and gold in 2005 . At the 2006 IIHF World Championship , he led the tournament in scoring , while also earning Top Forward and All @-@ Star Team honours . Four years later , Crosby was named to Team Canada for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . Playing the United States in the gold medal game , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in overtime . He captained the 2014 Canadian Olympic ice hockey team at the Sochi Olympics , leading the team to a gold medal victory over Sweden . In 2015 he led Team Canada to a gold in the World Championship in Prague , thus becoming a member of the Triple Gold Club and the only player in the club to have captained all three winning teams . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crosby was born in the Grace Maternity Hospital in Halifax , Nova Scotia , on August 7 , 1987 , to Troy and Trina ( née Forbes ) Crosby . Crosby 's jersey number ( 87 ) and 2007 contract signing ( $ 8 @.@ 7 million per year ) reflect his birthdate ( 8 / 7 / 87 ) . Crosby grew up in nearby Cole Harbour , and has a younger sister , Taylor . His father was a goaltender who played for the Verdun Junior Canadiens in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . Troy played in the 1985 Memorial Cup and had been drafted 240th overall by the Montreal Canadiens in 1984 , but never played at the NHL level . Growing up , Crosby admired Steve Yzerman and , like his father , was a Canadiens fan . Crosby began playing hockey by himself in his basement at the age of two years , shooting pucks against the family 's clothes dryer ; he learned to skate at three . 
 From age 12 to 15 , Crosby attended Astral Drive Junior High School . He was a straight @-@ A student and , according to the vice @-@ principal , " an amazing role model who was really kind to students in the learning centre and to special needs kids . " When he was 15 , Crosby transferred to Shattuck @-@ Saint Mary 's in Faribault , Minnesota , to play with the school 's hockey program . While playing for the Rimouski Océanic of the QMJHL , Crosby attended and graduated in 2005 from Harrison Trimble High School , in Moncton , New Brunswick . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor hockey = = = 
 Early in his minor hockey years , Crosby began attracting media attention for his play and gave his first newspaper interview at age seven . When Crosby was 13 , Nova Scotia 's Minor Hockey Council refused to allow him to play midget , a level of minor hockey designated for 15- to 17 @-@ year @-@ olds . His family sued but lost . The following year , he entered the midget level with the triple @-@ A Dartmouth Subways and went on to score a combined 217 regular season and playoff points , leading Dartmouth to a second @-@ place finish at the 2002 Air Canada Cup . He was named the MVP and Top Scorer awards at the national tournament at the tournament banquet held after the preliminary round and he finished the tournament with 24 points ( 11 goals and 13 assists ) in 7 games . Crosby was called up as a 14 @-@ year @-@ old to play two games with the Maritime Junior A Hockey League 's Truro Bearcats that season . Crosby had been drafted by the Bearcats in the 2001 <unk> Draft as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old . 
 During his midget season , Crosby appeared on the CBC 's Hockey Day in Canada telecast . He has recalled numerous instances in which opposing players intentionally attempted to injure him , as well as constant verbal abuse from parents on and off the ice . Parents taunted and threatened Crosby so harshly , he took to not wearing his jersey between tournament games while he waited to play so that he would not be recognized . Due to this treatment , he elected to play for the American hockey program at Shattuck @-@ Saint Mary 's Boarding School , Minnesota for the 2002 – 03 hockey season . In 57 games with the Sabres , he recorded 72 goals and 162 points , leading the team to a U18 AAA national championship . 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 Crosby was selected first overall in the 2003 Midget Draft by the Rimouski Océanic of the QMJHL . In his first exhibition game , he scored eight points , leading his teammates to nickname him " Darryl " ( in reference to Darryl Sittler 's ten @-@ point in the NHL in 1976 ) . In his first regular season game in the QMJHL , he scored one goal and added two assists . He was named QMJHL Player of the Week for two consecutive weeks at the start of the season and won the honour four more times as the season progressed . He was named QMJHL Player of the Month and Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) Player of the Week three times each . Crosby finished his rookie QMJHL season with 54 goals and 81 assists over 59 games to capture the Jean Béliveau Trophy as the league 's leading point @-@ scorer . He was further recognized with the RDS / JVC Trophy ( overall rookie of the year ) and Michel Brière Memorial Trophy ( most valuable player ) , becoming the first QMJHL player to win all three major awards at once . Rounding out Crosby 's accolades for the 2003 – 04 regular season were QMJHL All @-@ Rookie and First All @-@ Star Team honours , as well as Offensive Rookie , Offensive Player and Personality of the Year Awards . As a team , the Océanic led the Eastern Division with 34 wins and 76 points . After receiving a first @-@ round bye in the 2003 QMJHL playoffs , they defeated the Shawinigan Cataractes in the quarterfinals , then were eliminated by the Moncton Wildcats in the semifinals . Crosby recorded 16 points ( 7 goals and 9 assists ) over 9 post @-@ season games . 
 During the off @-@ season , the World Hockey Association , a major professional league proposed to rival the NHL , held an Entry Draft on July 17 , 2004 . Holding the first overall selection , Toronto chose Crosby . The following month , it was reported that Crosby turned down a US $ 7 @.@ 5 million deal over three years to play for Hamilton . Crosby told reporters that while " it took a lot to say no to that much money " , he " work [ ed ] hard most of his life to play in the NHL . " The deal would have paid him $ 2 @.@ 5 million annually and an additional $ 2 million payout regardless of whether the WHA was realized as a legitimate league or not . It was not clarified , however , how Hamilton could have signed Crosby , as Toronto held his WHA rights . Nevertheless , the WHA never materialized . 
 Returning to the Océanic for the 2004 – 05 season , Crosby continued dominating the league , leading the league with 66 goals , 102 assists and 168 points over 62 games to capture his second consecutive Beliveau Trophy . Joining Crosby on Rimouski 's top line were wingers Dany Roussin and Marc @-@ Antoine <unk> , who finished second and third in league @-@ scoring with 116 and 114 points , respectively . In addition to his scoring title , Crosby was once again named Most Valuable Player , Offensive Player and Personality of the Year honours , while repeating as a QMJHL First All @-@ Star . The Océanic finished with the regular season with the best record in the league , registering 45 wins and 98 points , including a league record @-@ setting 28 @-@ game undefeated streak . They went on to capture the President 's Cup as QMJHL playoff champions , defeating the Halifax Mooseheads in the finals . Crosby led the playoffs with 31 points ( 14 goals and 17 assists ) over 13 games , earning him the Guy Lafleur Trophy as post @-@ season MVP . With their QMJHL championship , the Océanic qualified for the 2005 Memorial Cup , Canada 's national major junior tournament . Meeting the London Knights in the final , the Océanic were shutout 4 – 0 . Despite the loss , Crosby was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team and captured the Ed Chynoweth Trophy as the competition 's leading scorer 11 points ( 6 goals and 5 assists ) over 5 games . Knights forward Corey Perry was awarded the Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy as the MVP . Soon after , he attended the NHL prospect combine in preparation of the 2005 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = = NHL career = = = 
 = = = = 2005 – 07 = = = = 
 Entering the 2005 NHL Entry Draft , Crosby was listed first overall in the NHL Central Scouting Bureau and International Scouting Services ' respective rankings of prospects . He had also won the Mike Bossy Trophy as the QMJHL 's best prospect . Crosby went on to be selected first overall in the draft by the Pittsburgh Penguins on July 30 , 2005 . Due to the labour stoppage that suspended the entire 2004 – 05 NHL season , positioning for the 2005 draft was conducted via a weighted lottery based on each team 's playoff appearances and draft lottery victories in the last four years . This lottery system led to the draft being popularly referred to as the Sidney Crosby Lottery or the Sidney Crosby Sweepstakes . 
 Crosby made his NHL debut on October 5 , 2005 , against the New Jersey Devils , and registered an assist on the team 's first goal of the season , scored by Mark Recchi in a 5 – 1 loss . He scored his first NHL goal in the Penguins ' home opener on October 8 against goaltender Hannu Toivonen of the Boston Bruins . Despite having registered two assists for a three @-@ point night , the Penguins were defeated 7 – 6 in overtime . Crosby began his rookie season playing alongside Hall of Famer Mario Lemieux . Unfortunately , Lemieux was forced to retire due to an irregular heartbeat after having played just 26 games of the season . Near the midway point of the season , Penguins head coach Ed Olczyk was fired and replaced by Michel Therrien on December 15 , 2005 . The following day , Therrien designated Crosby as an alternate captain for the Penguins . The move drew criticism from some hockey pundits , including Don Cherry , who claimed that Crosby did not have the experience for the position . He stated , " An 18 @-@ year @-@ old kid says he 's going to give us ideas . What , from the Quebec League , he 's going to give them ideas ? Come on . That 's ridiculous " . Although hopes were high in Pittsburgh for the club to succeed , largely in part to the beginning of Crosby 's NHL career and bolstered by the acquisitions of Sergei Gonchar , <unk> Pálffy and Mark Recchi , the Penguins still finished with the worst record in the Eastern Conference . 
 Nevertheless , Crosby 's first NHL campaign was a personal success as he established franchise records in assists ( 63 ) and points ( 102 ) for a rookie , both of which had been previously held by Mario Lemieux . He additionally became the youngest player in NHL history to score 100 points in a single season , and only the seventh rookie ever to hit the benchmark . Overall , Crosby finished sixth in the NHL scoring race and seventh in the NHL in assists . Among Canadian NHL players , he trailed only Joe Thornton and Dany Heatley . Throughout the season , Crosby had battled with Washington Capitals forward and 2004 first @-@ overall pick Alexander Ovechkin for the rookie scoring lead . He would finish second to Ovechkin 's 106 points and also lose out to the Capitals forward for the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL rookie of the year . Throughout his first season , Crosby was accused by opposing players and coaches of taking dives and complaining to officials , which was typically attributed to his youth . He became the first rookie to earn 100 penalty minutes and 100 points in the same season , which magnified his reputation for complaining to NHL officials . Hockey analyst Kelly Hrudey compared Crosby to Wayne Gretzky , who had a similar reputation as a " whiner " in his youth , and suggested that as Crosby matured , he would mellow out and his reputation would fade . 
 In his second NHL season , Crosby built on his rookie success . On October 28 , 2006 , Crosby scored his first NHL hat trick in an 8 – 2 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers . His success against the Flyers continued as just over six weeks later , on December 13 , he recorded the first six @-@ point game of his career ( one goal , five assists ) . The multi @-@ point effort vaulted Crosby into the NHL scoring lead , which he would retain for the remainder of the season . He finished the 2006 – 07 NHL season with 36 goals and 84 assists in 79 games to become the first teenager to lead the NHL in scoring since Wayne Gretzky in 1980 . Being only nineteen years old at the time , he became the youngest player in NHL history to win the Art Ross Trophy and the youngest scoring champion in any major North American professional sport . 
 Crosby 's second NHL season also saw significant improvements for the Penguins franchise as a whole , as the emergence of Calder Trophy @-@ winner Evgeni Malkin and runner @-@ up Jordan Staal complemented the club 's offence . As a result , the Penguins jumped from last place in the Eastern Conference the previous season to fifth for the club 's first playoff appearance since 2001 . Playing the Ottawa Senators in the opening round , Crosby scored a goal in his Stanley Cup playoff debut in a 6 – 3 losing effort . He finished the series with 5 points in 5 games as the Penguins were ousted by the eventual Stanley Cup runner @-@ up . Following the Penguins defeat , Crosby was named Pittsburgh 's team captain on May 31 , 2007 , making him ( at 19 years , 9 months , and 24 days ) the youngest team captain in NHL history . During the season , the Penguins had offered him the captaincy , but he had turned it down . In the press conference naming him the team captain , he explained : 
 " I just thought it wasn 't right for me . As a team , we were playing great and you don 't want to disrupt things like that . Individually , I was not ready to accept that responsibility quite yet . Going through the playoffs and having that experience has probably given me more confidence . I understand there is going to be a lot more responsibility on my shoulders with this , but it 's something I 'm ready for , I feel very comfortable with it and I 'm just excited to get things going . " 
 At the NHL 's annual awards show later in June 2007 , Crosby completed a rare off @-@ season hat trick , winning the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Lester B. Pearson Award in addition to his previously clinched Art Ross Trophy . He became the youngest player in NHL history to win the Lester B. Pearson , and only the second youngest player ever to win the Hart ( after Gretzky ) . He became the youngest player ever to be named to the NHL 's First All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = = = 2007 – 09 = = = = 
 With Crosby 's initial three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract set to expire at the end of the following season , the Penguins signed him to a five @-@ year , $ 43 @.@ 5 million contract extension on July 10 , 2007 , ensuring his stay with the Penguins through the 2012 – 13 season . Midway through the subsequent season , Crosby recorded a Gordie Howe hat trick on December 20 , 2007 , in a game against the Boston Bruins . His first assist came 55 seconds into the first period . At 8 : 26 of the same period , Crosby scored to give the Penguins a 2 – 0 lead . Then , five minutes and nine seconds into the second frame , Crosby fought defenceman Andrew Ference to complete the hat trick . This was Crosby 's first NHL fight . In NHL 's first Winter Classic ( with a record crowd of 71 @,@ 217 fans in attendance ) , Crosby scored the shootout winner in heavy snowfall to beat the Sabres . Two weeks later , however , on January 18 , 2008 , Crosby suffered a high ankle sprain crashing leg @-@ first into the boards in a game against the Tampa Bay Lightning . As a result , he missed the 2008 All @-@ Star Game , to which he was named a starter . After missing 21 games , he returned on March 4 against the Lightning and earned an assist . Two games after his return , however , he felt his ankle was not up to shape and decided that he needed more time for it to heal . Crosby consequently sat out of the Penguins ' next seven games and returned on March 27 , 2008 , to help the Penguins defeat the New York Islanders 3 – 1 . In spite of the injury @-@ shortened campaign , Crosby still managed 72 points in just 53 games . 
 His absence from the Penguins ' line @-@ up served as a stepping stone for teammate Evgeni Malkin , who , now in his second season , was developing into a superstar in his own right . Picking up the offensive slack , Malkin finished second in league scoring to Alexander Ovechkin and was also a Hart Trophy nominee as MVP honours also went to Ovechkin . In addition to Crosby 's return to the line @-@ up late in the regular season , the Penguins acquired star winger Marián Hossa from the Atlanta Thrashers at the trade deadline , placing the club in a strong position to make a deep playoff run . Pittsburgh finished the regular season as Atlantic Division champions and just two points shy of the first @-@ seeded Montreal Canadiens . In a rematch of the previous year 's opening round , the Penguins began the 2008 playoffs facing the Ottawa Senators , whom they quickly swept in four games . After then defeating the New York Rangers and archrival Philadelphia Flyers , each in five games , the Penguins reached the final round for the first time since 1992 , to face the Detroit Red Wings . After being shutout as a team for the first two games of the series , Crosby scored the first two goals of game three as the series shifted to Pittsburgh to fuel a 3 – 2 win . The Penguins lost the next game and despite staving off defeat in game five , they were overcome by the Red Wings in six games . Crosby finished the playoffs with 27 points ( <unk> , 21a in 20 games ) , tying Conn Smythe @-@ winner Henrik Zetterberg ( <unk> , 14a in 22 games ) for the playoff scoring lead . 
 Early in the following season , on October 18 , 2008 , Crosby scored one goal and three assists to surpass benchmarks of 100 goals , 200 assists , and 300 points for his career . On the scoring play in which Crosby scored , teammate Malkin assisted to record his own 200th point . As a result , Crosby had a team trainer cut the puck in half so both players could commemorate the achievement . Minor injury troubles kept Crosby from five games early in the season as he was listed day @-@ to @-@ day , but he was , for the most part , able to bounce back from the previous injury @-@ riddled season and stay healthy . He recorded 33 goals and 70 assists to finish third in league scoring , as Evgeni Malkin captured his first career Art Ross Trophy . 
 Entering the 2009 playoffs as the defending Prince of Wales Trophy winners , the Penguins defeated the Philadelphia Flyers in the opening round before meeting the Washington Capitals for a highly publicized second @-@ round matchup . The series was heavily followed as it pitted Ovechkin of the Capitals against both Crosby and Malkin , who together finished as the league 's top three scorers that season . In the second game , Crosby and Ovechkin recorded matching three @-@ goal efforts for their first career playoff hat tricks in a 4 – 3 Capitals victory . Despite being down 2 – 0 in the series , Crosby and the Penguins won the next three games and eventually defeated the Capitals in a seventh and deciding game , in which Crosby added another two goals . Following a sweep of the Carolina Hurricanes in the Eastern Conference Final , Crosby opted against recent NHL tradition and picked up the Prince of Wales Trophy , which he had left untouched the previous year . In explanation of the change of heart , Crosby said , " We didn 't touch the trophy last year , and obviously we didn 't have the result we wanted ... Although we haven 't accomplished exactly what we want ... we can still enjoy it . " 
 Meeting the Detroit Red Wings for the second straight year in the Finals , Crosby won his first Stanley Cup with the Penguins in seven games . At 21 years , 10 months , and 5 days , Crosby became the youngest NHL captain to win a Stanley Cup championship since 1895 . ( The youngest captain to lead his team to the Stanley Cup in the history of the trophy is Mike Grant of the 1895 Montreal Victorias , who was 21 years and 2 months at the time . ) In the deciding game seven , Crosby was forced to watch all but 32 seconds of the third period from the bench after suffering a knee injury less than halfway through the second period due to a hit from Johan Franzén . Following the game , Crosby was criticized by Detroit forward Kris Draper for neglecting to shake hands with some of Detroit 's players , most notably captain Nicklas Lidström . An irate Draper was quoted as saying " Nick was waiting and waiting , and Crosby didn 't come over to shake his hand . That 's ridiculous , especially as their captain . " Crosby replied afterward , saying , " I just won the Stanley Cup . I think I have the right to celebrate with my teammates . I know it 's not easy waiting around ... I understand if they don 't feel like waiting around . But you know what ? It 's the easiest thing to do in the world , to shake hands after you win . I had no intentions of trying to skip guys and not shake their hands . I think that was a pretty unreasonable comment . " 
 = = = = 2009 – 13 = = = = 
 In the 2009 – 10 NHL season , Crosby tied Tampa Bay Lightning centre Steven Stamkos for the lead in goals scored , with 51 goals , earning the Rocket Richard Trophy . He also garnered 58 assists for a total of 109 points , enough to tie with Alex Ovechkin for second in league points , trailing only the Vancouver Canucks ' Henrik Sedin 's 112 . Crosby was also named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy , finishing third behind Ovechkin and Sedin . Crosby won the Mark Messier Leadership Award , getting recognized as a ' superior leader within the sport , setting a positive example through on @-@ ice performance , motivation of team members and a dedication to the community ' . This was the second time he had received this honour , the other being in January 2007 , during the award 's first year when it was presented monthly . Crosby 's Penguins were defeated in the second round of the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs , losing to the Montreal Canadiens in seven games . Crosby had 19 points in 13 games in the playoffs , though through seven games against the Canadiens he had only 1 goal and 4 assists for a total of 5 points . Game seven was also the last game to be played at Mellon Arena , the Penguins ' home rink since the start of the franchise . On July 27 , 2010 , Crosby joined his mentor Mario Lemieux to be the first to skate on the new ice at the Consol Energy Center . The two skated for about five minutes before being joined on the ice by a group of young hockey fans all wearing Lemieux 's 66 or Crosby 's 87 jerseys . 
 In the 2010 – 11 NHL season , Crosby had a 25 @-@ game point streak , which began November 5 , 2010 , against the Anaheim Ducks , and ended December 28 , 2010 , against the New York Islanders . During this streak he had 27 goals ( including three hat @-@ tricks ) , 24 assists , and 51 points . This streak was tied for 11th longest point streak in NHL history , and he was named First Star of the Month in both November and December . On January 3 , 2011 , Crosby was selected as a 2011 All @-@ Star , along with teammates Evgeni Malkin , Marc @-@ André Fleury , and Kris Letang . However , neither Crosby nor Malkin were available to play in the All @-@ Star Game due to injuries and rookie Jeff Skinner along with Paul Stastny were named as replacements . In consecutive games , the 2011 NHL Winter Classic on January 1 , 2011 , against the Washington Capitals and January 5 against the Tampa Bay Lightning , Crosby suffered hits to his head from Dave Steckel and Victor Hedman , respectively . After experiencing several concussion symptoms , Crosby did not return for the rest of the regular season , and he missed the 2010 – 11 Stanley Cup Playoffs . The Penguins were further crippled when Evgeni Malkin suffered a torn ACL and MCL , taking him out for the rest of the season . This left the Penguins without the services of their two highest scoring players . Despite Crosby 's injury and subsequent absence for the final 41 games of the season , he finished as the Penguins ' leading scorer . His 66 points in 41 games were 16 points ahead of the second highest team scorer , defenceman Kris Letang . In doing this , Crosby set an NHL record for fewest games played by an NHL team 's points leader . 
 Crosby missed the first 20 games of the 2011 – 12 season due to the lingering effects of his concussion . He returned on November 21 , 2011 , against the New York Islanders , scoring two goals and two assists in a 5 – 0 shutout win for the Penguins . However , after playing another seven games , for a total of 12 points in 8 games , Crosby 's concussion @-@ like symptoms returned in December 2011 , possibly following an elbow hit by David <unk> in his eighth game of the season . Despite passing a successful <unk> test , Crosby decided not to return on the ice until he felt perfectly fine , stating that he also must " listen to [ his ] body " . Crosby returned to action on March 15 , scoring an assist in a 5 – 2 win against the New York Rangers . Despite only playing 22 games , Crosby tallied 29 assists to go with 8 goals for 37 points , including his 600th career point . 
 Crosby 's return in advance of the playoffs resulted in many experts predicting that the Penguins would win their second Stanley Cup in four years , and though the Penguins were accordingly picked to oust the Philadelphia Flyers in their first round series , it was acknowledged that it would be a tough series for both teams . The Flyers shocked the Penguins by winning the first three consecutive games , the third of which saw the teams combine for 158 penalty minutes . After the 8 – 4 loss in game 3 , Crosby was widely criticized for his conduct during the game , and for his testy post @-@ game interview . When asked about an incident where Flyer forward Jakub <unk> had dropped his glove and Crosby swatted it away with his stick before <unk> could pick it up , Crosby replied , saying " I don 't like any guy on their team there , so his glove was near me , went to pick it up , and I pushed it , so yeah , that 's ... [ ... ] I don 't like them . Because I don 't like them . I don 't like ... I don 't like any guy on their team . " When the interviewer suggested he could have skated away , Crosby replied " Skate away ? Yeah , well , I didn 't that time . " The Penguins went on to win the next two games , but ultimately lost the series in game 6 . Crosby would finish with 3 goals and 5 assists in the 6 games . On June 28 , 2012 , the Pittsburgh Penguins announced that Crosby had agreed to a 12 @-@ year , $ <unk> contract extension that will keep Crosby in Pittsburgh through the 2024 – 25 NHL season , unless he is traded during this period . 
 The start of the 2012 – 13 NHL season was postponed until January 2013 due to the owners locking out the players as negotiations took place to solidify a new collective bargaining agreement . During this time , Crosby was a regular attendee of meetings taking place between NHLPA representatives and NHL owners . The lock @-@ out began on September 15 , 2012 , and officially ended January 6 , 2013 , with the NHL regular season getting underway on January 19 . During the 119 @-@ day lock @-@ out , Crosby was often questioned about his future plans should the lock @-@ out persist , and said on more than one occasion that he was entertaining contract offers from various teams in European leagues ( where many NHL players went so that they could continue playing in a professional capacity while waiting for the lock @-@ out to end or for the NHL season to be officially cancelled ) . Crosby continued to practice and participated with other NHL players who had not gone overseas in several exhibition games open to the public . 
 With the season finally underway in late @-@ January , Crosby set the pace for scoring , totalling 31 points ( 9 goals , 22 assists ) through the first 21 games . He remained hot through March racking up another 25 points ( 6 goals , 19 assists ) in 15 games as the Pittsburgh Penguins went unbeaten over this stretch . However , his regular season came to an abrupt end on March 30 in a home game against the New York Islanders . Crosby 's teammate , Brooks Orpik , unleashed a slapshot which caught Crosby in the mouth , causing the centerman to lose several teeth . Crosby was down the ice for several minutes before the medical staff was able to help him to the dressing room with Crosby holding a towel over his face . Initially the prognosis was not severe , but it was discovered a short while later that Crosby had , in fact , broken his jaw , and would require several rounds of reconstructive dental surgery . He missed the final twelve games of the regular season , and finished fourth in the scoring race , losing the title to Tampa Bay 's Martin St. Louis by four points . 
 Crosby returned to the ice May 5 for the Penguins ' second game against their first @-@ round playoff opponents , the New York Islanders — ironically the very team Pittsburgh had been playing when Crosby was injured . Despite two Crosby goals , Pittsburgh lost the game 3 – 2 , tying the series at one game a piece . The Penguins would ultimately prevail 4 – 2 in the series over the Isles with Crosby scoring 9 points ( 3 goals , 6 assists ) in the five games in which he played . Crosby and the Penguins moved on to face the Ottawa Senators in the second round with ' Sid the Kid ' registering a hat @-@ trick in game @-@ 2 of the series . Pittsburgh quickly defeated Ottawa 4 games to 1 in the series with a still @-@ hot Crosby finishing the series with four goals and two assists . 
 The Eastern Conference Finals came down to what many felt were the two best teams in the conference : Pittsburgh and Boston . Boston Bruins goaltender Tuukka Rask put on an outstanding performance , shutting down Pittsburgh 's potent offence with the help of a stifling defensive effort from his teammates . The Penguins were held to just two goals in the series , with Rask stopping 134 of 136 shots on goal ( .985 % ) . Crosby , who had been strong for the Penguins in the regular season and through the first two rounds of the playoffs was held off the score sheet entirely , finishing the series with 0 goals and 0 assists on 13 shots . The Bruins swept the Penguins in four straight games , ending Crosby 's bid for a second Stanley Cup Championship . In the off @-@ season , Crosby was awarded his second Ted Lindsay Award and finished as runner @-@ up to the Hart Memorial Trophy and Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy . 
 = = = = 2013 – 16 = = = = 
 Crosby put together a healthy and productive year in 13 – 14 , playing 80 games for the first time since the 2009 – 10 season . Crosby finished the season with 36 goals and a league @-@ leading 68 assists . It marked the first time in his career that he led the league in assists . He also finished with a league @-@ high 104 points , winning the Art Ross Trophy for the second time in his career . Crosby and the Penguins finished second in the east to the Bruins , and were matched up with new division rival the Columbus Blue Jackets in the first round . Despite a very back @-@ and @-@ forth series and not a single goal by Crosby , the Penguins defeated the Jackets in 6 games to advance to a second @-@ round matchup with longtime rival the New York Rangers , against whom they lost in seven games . 
 Going into their second @-@ round series with the Rangers , Crosby looked to end a long playoff goal drought , which dated back to the 2013 Eastern Conference Finals against the Boston Bruins . After dropping Game 1 at home , Crosby finally broke his goal drought in Game 2 , as the Pens tied the series at 1 – 1 heading back to Madison Square Garden . The Penguins would capitalize on their Game 2 win , taking games 3 and 4 and destroying the Rangers home ice advantage . However , the Rangers would quickly rebound , dominating the Pens in both games 5 and 6 , forcing a Game 7 in Pittsburgh . The Penguins would complete an epic playoff collapse , as they dropped Game 7 to the Rangers , and headed home without a prize for the 5th straight season . This also marked the 5th straight season the Penguins would be eliminated by a lower @-@ seeded team . The team 's collapse prompted Penguins ownership to fire general manager Ray Shero , replacing him with Jim Rutherford , the former general manager of the Carolina Hurricanes . Rutherford 's first action as GM was to relieve Dan Bylsma of his duties , and on June 25 , he announced that Mike Johnston was hired as new head coach . On May 1 , Crosby , along with fellow captains Ryan Getzlaf and Claude Giroux , was named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy . It marked the fourth time in his career Crosby was named a top three finalist for the Hart Trophy , and his first win since 2006 – 07 . Crosby also collected his third Ted Lindsay Award , as the players choice for the best player in the league . 
 Crosby finished the 2014 – 15 season with the highest point @-@ per @-@ game average and a total of 84 points , trailing only John Tavares ( 86 points ) and Art Ross winner Jamie Benn ( 87 points ) , who moved to the top by tallying four points in the last day of the regular season . On November 26 , 2014 , Crosby notched his 800th career point , becoming the 6th @-@ fastest player in NHL history to reach 800 points . On January 4 , 2015 , Crosby scored his 300th career goal against the Philadelphia Flyers . Despite a strong start to the season , the injury @-@ plagued Penguins entered the playoffs as the Eastern Conference 's second wild card . Facing the New York Rangers , Crosby helped even the series with two goals in Game 2 . However , the Penguins were defeated in five games and was eliminated in the first round for the first time since the 2012 Stanley Cup playoffs . 
 Starting the 2015 – 16 NHL season , Penguins had gone through a major overhaul of their roster , adding a number of offensive players such as right winger Phil Kessel . Despite a line @-@ up laced with some of the world 's finest offensive talents , Crosby struggled with putting up points , as he and the team had for much of the Johnston era . By the time Johnston was fired on December 12 , 2015 , after posting a 15 – 10 – 3 record through 28 games , some media outlets began speculating that Crosby had aged out of his prime scoring years . On December 16 , The Washington Post wrote : " Sidney Crosby has widely been regarded as the NHL 's best player since he burst on the scene as a rookie in 2005 ... But Crosby just hasn 't been himself this season , scoring just six goals in 29 games and sitting with a plus / minus of minus @-@ seven . All players go through slumps , but it is clear that the Crosby we knew has been on the decline for some time . " His slow start was capped off by not being selected as a starter for the 61st NHL All @-@ Star Game . 
 However , under new head coach Mike Sullivan the 28 @-@ year old turned his season around , outscoring all NHL players from December 12 through the end of the season . On February 2 , Crosby scored three straight goals for his first natural hat trick in more than five years . Four days later , Crosby scored his 900th , <unk> and <unk> career NHL points to fuel a 3 @-@ 2 overtime comeback victory over the Florida Panthers . He became the 10th @-@ fastest player to reach the 900 @-@ point milestone . He tallied at least one point in 15 of Pittsburgh 's 16 games in March , including six multi @-@ point efforts , and was subsequently named the NHL 's First Star of the Month . On April 2 , Crosby recorded his 600th NHL assist as Penguins clinched a playoff berth for the 10th straight season . Six days later he scored in overtime against Washington Capitals to secure home @-@ ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs . Crosby finished the season with 36 goals and 85 points in 80 games , including a career high nine game @-@ winning goals , and was voted team MVP for the sixth time in his career . His two @-@ way game also received praise , with Scotty Bowman noting that Crosby would be a good candidate for the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the league 's best defensive forward . Crosby 's comeback also impressed Wayne Gretzky : " He had a tough start , but the sign of an elite athlete is a guy that battles through it . He didn 't point any fingers , he just battled through it , and I don 't think there is any question the last 40 or so games , he made a case for the MVP . He was that good . He went to another level . " On May 7 , he was named a finalist for the Hart Memorial Trophy . He finished as the first runner @-@ up with 800 points and 11 first @-@ place votes . 
 After losing to New York in the past two playoffs , Penguins eliminated Rangers in the first round , winning four games to one , after losing to the Rangers by the same series margin in the first round in the previous year . Crosby led the team in scoring with three goals and eight points . Penguins then ousted the Presidents ' Trophy @-@ winning Washington Capitals in six games , without much offensive production from either Crosby ( two assists ) or Malkin ( one goal , one assist ) . Advancing to their first Conference Final since 2013 , Crosby ended a scoring slump with the overtime winner against the Tampa Bay Lightning in Game 2 . Scored 40 seconds into overtime for a 3 @-@ 2 win , it was the fastest overtime goal in Penguins playoff history and the first in his career . In the following game , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 4 @-@ 2 victory . After dropping the next two games , Crosby scored his third game @-@ winning goal of the series in Game 6 , forcing a final game in Pittsburgh . Defeating the Tampa Bay Lightning 2 @-@ 1 in Game 7 , Crosby helped his team win the Eastern Conference Championship , advancing to the Stanley Cup Finals against the San Jose Sharks . 
 The Penguins defeated the Sharks in six games in the 2016 Stanley Cup Final , earning Crosby his second Stanley Cup . Crosby became the ninth player to win two cups and two Olympic gold medals . Finishing the playoffs with 19 points ( six goals , 13 assists ) , including the primary helper on the Cup @-@ winning goal scored by Kris Letang , Crosby was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as the playoffs MVP . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 As captain and first line centre for Team Canada , Crosby played with different line mates in almost every game as the coaching staff struggled to find players capable of keeping pace with the superstar centre at the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver , British Columbia , and again at the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi , Russia . Crosby 's fellow countryman and Olympic teammate , Rick Nash of the New York Rangers was questioned by the media about this , at one point saying , " I think he ’ s a tough guy to keep up with . He 's so fast . The way he thinks about the game seems like it ’ s far beyond everyone else 's process . It 's the same thing in the last Olympics , keep shuffling around until you found something that fit . ” 
 In July 2015 , Jonathan Quick , who was playing for the Los Angeles Kings at the time , praised Crosby for having " the best backhand shot in the league " . Previously in January 2015 , Logan Couture , who was playing for the San Jose Sharks at the time , complimented Crosby 's usage of the backside of the blade as well . 
 So why not just force him wide ? The thing with defending Crosby is that he can take it wide and use his backhand as well as most players use their forehand . If you ’ re defending a normal player , you ’ d purposely force him to his backhand side . With Sid , you can ’ t do that – – If he roofs it , the goalie basically has no chance . 
 = = International play = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Crosby debuted internationally for Team Canada at the 2003 U @-@ 18 Junior World Cup in the Czech Republic and Slovakia . He was the youngest player on the under @-@ 18 team , having turned 16 shortly before the beginning of the tournament . After seven consecutive gold medals at the tournament , Team Canada lost in the bronze medal game to the Czech Republic 8 – 2 . He scored four goals and six points over five tournament games . 
 Crosby went on to compete in two World Junior Championships with Team Canada 's under @-@ 20 team . When he was named to the team in December 2003 , he became the fifth sixteen @-@ year @-@ old to represent Canada at the tournament , following Jay Bouwmeester , Jason Spezza , Eric Lindros , and Wayne Gretzky . Competing in the 2004 World Junior Championships in Helsinki , he then became the youngest player to score a goal in the history of the tournament at 16 years , 4 months , and 21 days when he scored against Switzerland in a 7 – 2 win . This record would last until the 2012 World Juniors , when Aleksander <unk> of Finland scored a goal aged 16 years , 4 months . Crosby finished the tournament with 2 goals and 3 assists in 6 games , helping Canada to a silver medal finish . The following year , he returned for Team Canada at the 2005 World Junior Championships in Grand Forks . He improved to 6 goals and 3 assists as Canada earned gold . Crosby stated the following year that his most memorable hockey moment was winning his World Junior gold medal . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 After completing his rookie season with the Pittsburgh Penguins , Crosby competed in the 2006 World Championships as an alternate captain for Team Canada . <unk> a tournament @-@ best 8 goals and 8 assists in 9 games , he became the youngest player ever to win a World Championship scoring title . Despite his performance , Canada failed to medal , being shutout by Finland 5 – 0 in the bronze medal game . Crosby was named the tournament 's top forward and to the competition 's all @-@ star team . 
 After having been left off the Olympic team in 2006 , Crosby was named to Team Canada on December 30 , 2009 , as an alternate captain for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . He scored the game @-@ winning shootout goal for Canada in the second game of the preliminary round against Switzerland . After going pointless in the quarter- and semi @-@ final against Russia and Slovakia , respectively , Crosby scored the winning goal seven minutes and forty seconds into overtime against the United States in the gold medal game . The goal has later become known as the " Golden Goal " due to it being scored in the gold medal game . 
 Following the Penguins ' second @-@ round elimination in the 2010 Stanley Cup playoffs , Crosby declined an invitation to join Team Canada midway through the 2010 IIHF World Championship in Germany . Crosby was selected to represent Canada at the 2014 Winter Olympics , and was later named team captain . Canada won gold , with Crosby contributing 1 goal and 2 assists in 6 games . He scored his only goal in the final against Sweden , further establishing his reputation as " a player who rises up in big games " . In 2015 , Crosby captained Canada to its first World Championship title since 2007 , with the team winning all ten games and scoring 66 goals . Crosby , scoring four goals and seven assists in nine games , became the 26th member of the Triple Gold Club . He is the first member of the club to captain all three championship teams . 
 On March 2 , 2016 , Hockey Canada named Crosby to its roster for the 2016 World Cup of Hockey in Toronto . 
 = = Jerseys = = 
 Crosby 's 87 Pittsburgh Penguins jersey was the top seller on the NHL 's website from September 2005 to February 2008 . In January 2005 , an Air Canada baggage handler in Montreal stole Crosby 's red Canada jersey from the World Junior Hockey Championship . It was recovered later in a mailbox . His white jersey from the tournament was temporarily delisted from an auction while the red one was missing . It eventually sold for $ 22 @,@ 100 , which went to youth hockey charities and 2004 Indian Ocean Earthquake relief . 
 Less than a year later , one of Crosby 's game @-@ worn sweaters disappeared . The jersey he wore in his first NHL game , played against the New Jersey Devils , disappeared from his father 's luggage during a flight from Pittsburgh to Buffalo . The jersey was later found at the Pittsburgh International Airport between a piece of equipment and a stairwell . Crosby 's jersey from his third NHL game was the highest @-@ selling NHL jersey in an auction for Hurricane Katrina relief – it sold for $ 21 @,@ 010 . During an online auction held by the NHL and the NHL Players Association to benefit Hockey Fights Cancer , Crosby 's game @-@ worn jersey from the first period of the 2007 All @-@ Star Game earned the most money . Crosby 's sold for $ 47 @,@ 520 , more than eight times the next highest price — $ 5 @,@ 681 for the jersey worn by Brendan Shanahan of the New York Rangers . 
 Following Crosby 's Olympic gold medal victory with Canada in 2010 , it was announced that his stick and glove were missing . It was initially suspected that they might have been stolen ; Reebok Canada offered a reward of CAD $ 10 @,@ 000 for their return — no questions asked . On March 10 , the items were found ; Crosby 's stick had been placed in a shipment bound for the International Ice Hockey Federation Hall of Fame in St. Petersburg , Russia ( the shipment was intercepted in Toronto ) and his glove was found in a hockey bag belonging to Patrice Bergeron whose stall was beside Crosby 's in the locker room . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Crosby lived with the Lemieux family in Sewickley , Pennsylvania , from 2005 until 2010 . In the spring of 2010 , Crosby purchased his own home in the same area . In June 2006 , he bought his first house on Grand Lake in Halifax , Nova Scotia . 
 In time for Crosby 's first season , Gare Joyce wrote Sidney Crosby : Taking the Game by Storm , a biography . The November 2005 edition of GQ Magazine featured him in a series of shirt @-@ less photos . In 2007 , Crosby was nominated for Time Magazine 's 100 Most Influential People list . He has an endorsement deal with Reebok and designed a fashion line in 2007 . On May 29 , 2010 , it was announced that Crosby would sign the richest endorsement deal in NHL history with Reebok , expected to pay Crosby $ 1 @.@ 4 million a year for five to seven years . He also has endorsement deals with Bell , Tim Hortons and Gatorade . 
 Crosby continues to be active in the community in Cole Harbour , Nova Scotia . He created the Sidney Crosby Foundation in 2009 , an organization committed to providing support to charities benefiting children . In 2015 , he launched an inaugural Hockey School in Cole Harbour . 
 In 2008 , Crosby appeared in the documentary film Pond Hockey , in which he discussed his experiences playing pond hockey . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 1999 – 2000 stats are from : " Age @-@ old question : Cole Harbour hockey association bars peewee player from bantam tourney " . The Halifax Daily News . April 5 , 2000 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours and achievements = = 
 The Order of Nova Scotia – 2008 
 Lou Marsh Trophy – 2007 , 2009 
 Lionel Conacher Award – 2007 , 2009 , 2010 
 Dapper Dan Sportsman of the Year – 2006 , 2007 
 NHL 
 NHL All @-@ Rookie Team – 2006 
 Runner @-@ up Calder Memorial Trophy – 2006 
 2 × Art Ross Trophy ( Leading Scorer ) – 2007 , 2014 
 3 × Lester B. Pearson Award / Ted Lindsay Award ( Peer @-@ voted Best Player ) – 2007 , 2013 , 2014 ( Finalist : 2010 ) 
 2 × Hart Memorial Trophy ( NHL MVP ) – 2007 , 2014 ( Finalist : 2010 , 2013 , 2016 ) 
 4 × NHL First All @-@ Star Team – 2007 , 2013 , 2014 , 2016 
 2 × NHL Second All @-@ Star Team – 2010 , 2015 
 5 × NHL All @-@ Star selection – 2007 , 2008 † , 2009 † , 2011 † , 2015 † 
 2 × Mark Messier Leadership Award – Jan. 2007 , 2010 
 3 × Prince of Wales Trophy – 2008 , 2009 , 2016 
 2 × Stanley Cup champion – 2009 , 2016 
 Maurice " Rocket " Richard Trophy ( Goals Leader ) – 2010 
 Runner @-@ up Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy – 2012 
 Conn Smythe Trophy ( Playoff MVP ) – 2016 
 † Could not play due to injury . 
 Team awards 
 Michel Brière Rookie of the Year Award – 2006 
 Most Valuable Player Award ( MVP ) – 2006 , 2007 , 2010 , 2013 , 2014 , 2016 
 A.T. Caggiano Memorial Booster Club Award – 2006 , 2007 , 2010 , 2013 , 2014 
 <unk> " Baz " Bastien Memorial Good Guy Award – 2006 , 2009 , 2010 
 The Edward J. DeBartolo Community Service Award – 2010 , 2016 
 International 
 World Junior silver medal – 2004 
 World Junior gold medal – 2005 
 World Championship All @-@ Star Team – 2006 
 World Championship Best Forward – 2006 
 World Championship Leading Scorer – 2006 
 Olympic gold medal – 2010 , 2014 
 World Championship gold medal – 2015 
 Minor 
 Air Canada Cup Tournament MVP Award – 2002 
 Air Canada Cup Top Scorer Award – 2002 
 Air Canada Cup Scholarship – 2002 
 = = Records = = 
 = = = IIHF = = = 
 Youngest player to win a World Championship scoring title 
 = = = Pittsburgh Penguins = = = 
 Assists ( 63 ) and points ( 102 ) in a season by a rookie 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 First rookie to record 100 points and 100 penalty minutes in a season 
 Youngest player to record 100 points in a season ( 18 years , 253 days ) 
 Youngest player to record 200 career points ( 19 years and 207 days ) 
 Youngest player to record 2 consecutive 100 @-@ point seasons ( 19 years , 215 days ) . 
 Youngest player voted to the starting line @-@ up in an All @-@ Star Game 
 Youngest Art Ross Trophy and Lester B. Pearson Award winner 
 Youngest player to be named to the First All @-@ Star Team 
 Youngest player to lead NHL playoffs in scoring ( 20 years , 9 months , and 28 days ) 
 Youngest NHL captain to win Stanley Cup ( 21 years , 10 months , and 5 days ) 
 Fewest games played by an NHL team 's leading scorer ( his 66 points in 41 games were the most of any player on the 2010 – 11 Penguins squad ) 
 = Geography and ecology of the Everglades = 
 The geography and ecology of the Everglades involve the complex elements affecting the natural environment throughout the southern region of the U.S. state of Florida . Before drainage , the Everglades were an interwoven mesh of marshes and prairies covering 4 @,@ 000 square miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km2 ) . The Everglades is simultaneously a vast watershed that has historically extended from Lake Okeechobee 100 miles ( 160 km ) south to Florida Bay ( around one @-@ third of the southern Florida peninsula ) , and many interconnected ecosystems within a geographic boundary . It is such a unique meeting of water , land , and climate that the use of either singular or plural to refer to the Everglades is appropriate . When Marjory Stoneman Douglas wrote her definitive description of the region in 1947 , she used the metaphor " River of Grass " to explain the blending of water and plant life . 
 Although sawgrass and sloughs are the enduring geographical icons of the Everglades , other ecosystems are just as vital , and the borders marking them are subtle or nonexistent . Pinelands and tropical hardwood hammocks are located throughout the sloughs ; the trees , rooted in soil inches above the peat , marl , or water , support a variety of wildlife . The oldest and tallest trees are cypresses , whose roots are specially adapted to grow underwater for months at a time . The Big Cypress Swamp is well known for its 500 @-@ year @-@ old cypresses , though cypress domes can appear throughout the Everglades . As the fresh water from Lake Okeechobee makes its way to Florida Bay , it meets salt water from the Gulf of Mexico ; mangrove forests grow in this transitional zone , providing nursery and nesting conditions for many species of birds , fish , and invertebrates . The marine environment of Florida Bay is also considered part of the Everglades because its sea grasses and aquatic life are attracted to the constant discharge of fresh water . 
 These ecological systems are always changing due to environmental factors . Geographic features such as the Western Flatwoods , Eastern Flatwoods , and the Atlantic Coastal Ridge affect drainage patterns . Geologic elements , climate , and the frequency of storms and fire are formative processes for the Everglades . They help to sustain and transform the ecosystems in the Shark River Valley , Big Cypress Swamp , coastal areas and mangrove forests . Ecosystems have been described as both fragile and resilient . Minor fluctuations in water levels have far @-@ reaching consequences for many plant and animal species , and the system cycles and pulses with each change . 
 = = Shaping processes of ecosystems = = 
 At only 5 @,@ 000 years of age , the Everglades is a young region in geological terms . Its ecosystems are in constant flux as a result of the interplay of three factors : the type and amount of water present , the geology of the region , and the frequency and severity of fires . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Water is the dominant element in the Everglades , and it shapes the land , vegetation , and animal life of South Florida . The South Florida climate was once arid and semi @-@ arid , interspersed with wet periods . Between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years ago , sea levels rose , submerging portions of the Florida peninsula and causing the water table to rise . Fresh water saturated the limestone , eroding some of it and creating springs and sinkholes . The abundance of fresh water allowed new vegetation to take root , and through evaporation formed thunderstorms . Limestone was dissolved by the slightly acidic rainwater . The limestone wore away , and groundwater came into contact with the surface , creating a massive wetland ecosystem . Although the region appears flat , the wearing away of the limestone in some areas created slight valleys and plateaus — a difference of inches in elevation — that affected not only the flow of water , but also types of vegetation present . 
 The Everglades are unique ; no other wetland system in the world is nourished <unk> from the atmosphere . Before the first attempt at draining the Everglades in 1882 , the entire watershed extended from Orlando to Florida Bay comprising the Kissimmee – Lake Okeechobee – Everglades ( <unk> ) watershed . Kissimmee River outlets flow into Lake Okeechobee , which sits 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) above sea level . Only two seasons exist in the Everglades : wet ( May to November ) and dry ( December to April ) . Average annual rainfall in the Everglades is approximately 62 inches ( 160 cm ) , though fluctuations of precipitation are normal . Droughts , floods , and tropical storms are normal occurrences in the area . When Lake Okeechobee exceeds its water storage capacity during the wet season , it pours slowly over the southern rim and flows for 100 miles ( 160 km ) to Florida Bay . The gradient change is so slight that the river moves only 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) a minute . Sawgrass thrives in this river , dominates freshwater marshes and sloughs , and is the main characteristic of the region . 
 Severe weather , in the form of tropical storms and hurricanes , also affects the structure of the Everglades . Between 1871 and 2003 , 40 tropical cyclones struck the Everglades , usually every one to three years . These storms alter the coastline , flush decaying vegetation from estuaries , strip weakened branches from trees , and disperse seeds , pollen , and plant material . Hurricane Donna in 1960 affected 120 square miles ( 310 km2 ) of mangrove forests by depositing marl over the roots and depriving the trees of oxygen . It also eradicated orchids , bromeliads , and other epiphytes that once flourished in the mangroves ; their reappearance may take a century or more . Donna also significantly spread <unk> , saltwort , and glasswort , and epiphytes began to grow in new areas . Although the lasting effects remain to be seen , Hurricane Andrew in 1992 also destroyed mangrove forests and snapped slash pines in half . However , regrowth occurred quickly , and sand deposited by the storm surge improved nesting conditions for crocodiles and sea turtles . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 A vast marshland could only have been formed due to the underlying rock formations in southern Florida . The floor of the Everglades formed between 25 million and 2 million years ago when the Florida peninsula was a shallow sea floor . The peninsula has been covered by sea water at least seven times since the earliest bedrock formation . The rock that makes up the Everglades floor was created as layers of calcium carbonate were compressed by ocean water , making limestone . Fossilized bryozoans and tiny shells , or ooids , make the limestone porous . Water is stored in the rock , sometimes from one year to the next . The length of time that a region in the Everglades remains flooded , called a hydroperiod , determines what particular soils and vegetation are present . 
 Shorter hydroperiods of three or four months promote the growth of periphyton : algae and other microscopic organisms covered with calcium carbonate crystals . Periphyton is the basic building block of marl , a calcitic mud . In areas with hydroperiods of longer than nine months , peat builds up over hundreds or thousands of years due to many generations of decaying plant matter . Peat and marl are considered nutrient @-@ poor soils that foster the growth of specialized vegetation depending on the length of the regional hydroperiod . 
 Five types of peat appear in the Everglades system ; each type supports a specific type of vegetation , such as sawgrass , tree islands , or custard apple trees . Peat buildup is possible because water prevents oxygen from quickly decomposing plant matter . Once peat buildup reaches the surface , oxygen reacts with the microorganisms to decay the peat rapidly in a process called subsidence . Initial attempts at developing agriculture near Lake Okeechobee were successful , but the nutrients in the peat quickly deteriorated by drying , and were broken down by bacteria in the soil . The dried peat burned or was degraded into carbon dioxide and water by microorganisms . Some homes built near early farms had to restructure their foundations on stilts as the peat deteriorated ; other areas lost approximately 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) of soil depth . Between the 1880s and 2005 , an estimated 3 @.@ 4 billion metric tons of soil has been lost in the Everglades due to oxidation . Most of that loss occurs in the Everglades Agricultural Area ; the least amount of loss is found in Everglades National Park . 
 = = = Fire = = = 
 Fire is another important element in the maintenance of the Everglades . The majority are caused by lightning strikes from thunderstorms during the wet season . Their effects are largely superficial , and serve to foster further plant growth : sawgrass will burn above water , but the roots are preserved . Fire in the sawgrass marshes serves to keep out larger bushes and trees , and releases nutrients from decaying plant matter more efficiently than decomposition . Large burned areas also affect waterflow , since wind and water are undeterred by the eradicated sawgrass ; water may flow two to three times faster in recently burned areas . During the wet season only dead plant matter and the tips of plants are burned ; however , the effects of fire are much more significant in the dry season , as fire may be fed by organic peat and burn deeply , destroying root systems . The only impediment to the spread of fire in the Everglades is the presence of water . It takes around 225 years for one foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) of peat to develop , but the peat is not as dense as it should be for the 5 @,@ 000 years of the Everglades ' existence . Scientists point to fire as the reason . 
 Researchers have noted that fires appear in cycles associated with those of the hydroperiods . The first cycle is the annual wet @-@ season fires that occur with rapid frequency during the summer , but are quickly extinguished . Dry @-@ season fires are rarer due to the lack of lightning , but their damage may be more pervasive . A longer fire cycle spanning ten to fourteen years coincides with similar water cycles affected by global climate conditions . Fires in this cycle may be numerous and have little effect , or rare and have catastrophic consequences . The third cycle appears in a 550 @-@ year frequency associated with severe drought . Layers of charcoal have been detected inside peat in parts of the Everglades , indicating the region endured severe fires for years at a time , although this trend seems to have abated since the last occurrence around 940 BCE . 
 = = Ecosystem characteristics = = 
 The Everglades are dominated by sawgrass in water ; this is the titular " River of Grass " popularized by Marjory Stoneman Douglas in 1947 . This river contains a wide variety of plant and animal life . An early American environmentalist named Gifford Pinchot said of the Everglades , " It is a region so different that it hardly seems to belong to the United States . It is full of the most vivid and most interesting life on land , in the air , and in the water . It is a land of strangeness , separate and apart from the common things we all know so well . " 
 The sawgrass grows in prairies or strands , in between channels of water in a shallow river 100 miles ( 160 km ) long and 60 miles ( 97 km ) wide flowing from Lake Okeechobee to Florida Bay . Some authors refer to the sawgrass and water combination as the " true Everglades " or just " the Glades " . Prior to the first drainage attempts in 1905 , the sheetflow , or the wide shallow river starting in Lake Okeechobee , occupied nearly a third of the lower Florida peninsula . Though sawgrass remains the main feature of the Everglades , other ecosystems are scattered among the marshes and prairies , and their borders are sometimes imperceptible . 
 = = = Sawgrass marsh = = = 
 Most marshes in the Everglades are dominated by the sedge known as Cladium , or sawgrass in common terminology . The sedge is a three @-@ dimensional v @-@ shaped stalk with upward @-@ pointing teeth . Sawgrass thrives in the slowly moving water , but may die if oxygen is unable to reach its roots and is particularly vulnerable to floods immediately after a fire . Some of the sawgrass can grow up to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , and directly south of Lake Okeechobee it has grown to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Farther south , where the peat is not as rich , it typically grows 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) tall in patches , as opposed to the prairies of the upper glades . The hydroperiod for the marsh is usually nine months but can last longer . In shorter hydroperiods , marl may form instead of peat . 
 Where sawgrass grows densely , few animals or other plants thrive , although alligators often choose these locations for nesting . Where there is more room , periphyton grows , appearing as mats or brown sausage @-@ shaped chunks . Periphyton is predominantly algae , although over 100 different microorganisms help create it . Larval insects and amphibians are supported by periphyton ; these in turn provide food for birds , fish , and reptiles . Periphyton also absorbs calcium from the water , which creates marl where sawgrass takes root . 
 = = = Freshwater sloughs = = = 
 Sloughs are channels of free @-@ flowing water in between the sawgrass marshes . Sloughs are deeper than sawgrass marshes , about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) , and may stay flooded for at least 11 months out of the year if not multiple years in a row . The peat beds that support sawgrass are slightly elevated and may begin abruptly creating ridges of grass . The borders between these systems are called " ridge @-@ and @-@ slough " landscapes . Aquatic animals such as turtles , young alligators , snakes , and fish live in sloughs and they usually feed on aquatic invertebrates , such as the Florida apple snail . Plants grow here , usually submerged or floating like bladderwort ( Utricularia ) , waterlily ( <unk> ) , or <unk> ( Nuphar lutea ) . Major sloughs in the Everglades system include the Shark River Slough draining to Florida Bay , <unk> Slough bordering The Big Cypress , and Taylor Slough in the eastern Everglades . 
 = = = Wet prairie = = = 
 Two kinds of wet prairies thrive in the Everglades : marl and water @-@ marsh community . Wet prairies are slightly elevated like sawgrass marshes , but contain abundant plant diversity . Marl prairies are located where marl covers limestone that may protrude as pinnacles or erode into solution holes : depressions formed by the same processes that create sinkholes . Solution holes , however , do not meet the water table ; they are filled with rain water . The surface is covered only three to seven months of the year , but the water is usually just 4 inches ( 10 cm ) deep . Marl is created by layers of periphyton loosely attached to the limestone , and forms a grey or white crumbly mud when it dries . When flooded , the marl can support a variety of water plants , and dwarf cypresses may grow for hundreds of years though not exceed 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in height . Solution holes may remain flooded even when the prairies are dry , and they support aquatic invertebrates such as crayfish and snails , as well as larval amphibians which feed young wading birds . Where the predominant soil is peat , a water @-@ marsh community exists . Its hydroperiod is longer than the marl prairie , although its plants are less diverse . These regions tend to be on the border between sloughs and sawgrass marshes . 
 Alligators have created an ecological niche in wet prairies ; they dig at low spots with their claws and snouts and create ponds free of vegetation that remain submerged throughout the dry season . Alligator holes are integral to the survival of aquatic invertebrates , turtles , fish , small mammals , and birds during extended drought periods . Alligators feed upon animals that visit the hole . 
 = = = Tropical hardwood hammock = = = 
 Islands of trees featuring dense temperate or tropical trees are called tropical hardwood hammocks . They may rise between 1 and 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 and 0 @.@ 91 m ) above water level in freshwater sloughs , sawgrass prairies , or pineland . These islands illustrate the difficulty of characterizing the climate of the Everglades as tropical or subtropical . Hammocks in the northern portion of the Everglades consist of more temperate plant species , but closer to Florida Bay the trees are tropical and smaller shrubs are more prevalent . Tropical trees like the West Indian mahogany ( <unk> <unk> ) were probably spread by birds carrying seeds from the West Indies . 
 These hammocks form on slightly elevated areas unharmed by deep peat fires or limestone plateaus rising several inches above the surrounding peat . Hardwood hammocks exhibit a mixture of subtropical and hardwood trees that grow in very dense clumps , such as southern live oak ( Quercus virginiana ) , gumbo limbo ( Bursera simaruba ) , royal palm ( Roystonea ) , and willow <unk> ( <unk> salicifolia ) . Near the bases of hammocks sharp saw palmettos ( Serenoa repens ) flourish , making the hammocks very difficult to penetrate . Water in sloughs flow around the islands creating moats . Though some ecosystems are maintained and promoted by fire , hammocks may take decades or centuries to recover ; the moats are therefore essential for protection . Islands vary in size , but most range between 1 and 10 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 and 4 @.@ 05 ha ) ; the water slowly flowing around them limits their size and gives them a teardrop appearance from above . The height of the trees is limited by factors such as frost , lightning , and wind : the majority of trees in hammocks grow no higher than 55 feet ( 17 m ) . 
 Florida strangler figs ( Ficus aurea ) are common in hammocks , and find particular ease in rooting at the heads of cabbage palms ( Sabal palmetto ) . After taking root into the ground , they build complex frameworks around the host tree , eventually squeezing out light and nutrients , and essentially taking its place . A variety of invertebrates including beetles , ants , spiders , and tree snails support a food chain that includes frogs , owls and other birds of prey , snakes , rodents , bobcats , and raccoons . There are more than 50 varieties of tree snails in the Everglades ; the color patterns and designs unique to single islands may be a result of the isolation of certain hammocks . 
 Tropical hardwood hammocks in the Everglades have been harvested for lumber , particularly by shipbuilders seeking West Indian mahogany and black ironwood ( <unk> ferreum ) . The largest and most mature of these trees had been removed by the late 18th century . Seminoles made their villages in hammocks in the late 19th and early 20th centuries ; they lived in groups of chickees numbering half a dozen , with one central chickee for cooking and another for eating . Dugout canoes , cookware , stills , and sewing machines may still be found in remote locations . 
 = = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = = 
 Some hammocks are dominated by types of vegetation that grow in relation to the amount of water or type of soil present . The majority of hardwood hammocks create a thin poor soil covering the limestone called humus , made of decaying plant matter and moisture trapped by the structure of the trees . When peat forms the layer atop the limestone of a tree island , <unk> develop , dominated by bay trees such as <unk> magnolia ( Magnolia virginiana ) and others like swamp holly ( Ilex <unk> ) , wax myrtle ( Myrica <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . <unk> , dominated by willow trees ( Salix caroliniana ) , take hold where the hydroperiod is long , usually around solution or alligator holes , and may surround the holes , giving them a donut appearance from above . 
 = = Flatwoods and the Atlantic Coastal Ridge = = 
 The prairies and sloughs of the Everglades system are bordered by two areas of poorly drained sandy soil on both sides of Lake Okeechobee : the Eastern Flatwoods and the Western Flatwoods just north of Big Cypress Swamp . The predominant ecosystem in the Flatwoods is pine forest , but there are also cypress swamps and sloughs in the Eastern Flatwoods . Along the eastern border of the Everglades is the Atlantic Coastal Ridge , rising 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in elevation , and curving to the southwest , gradually decreasing in elevation until it meets Taylor Slough . The Coastal Ridge prevents Everglades water from flowing into the Atlantic Ocean to the east , directing it southwesterly into Florida Bay . The South Florida metropolitan area is located on a portion of the Atlantic Coastal Ridge , and much of the landscape has changed drastically within the past 100 years as a result of urban growth . 
 = = = Pine rockland = = = 
 Pine rocklands ( also called pinelands ) are found on uneven limestone substrates that contain pinnacles and solution holes . There are three primary locations of pine rocklands : the Miami Ridge , which runs from Miami into Long Pine Key near the main entrance of Everglades National Park ; the lower Florida Keys ; and the Big Cypress Swamp . The most significant feature of the pine rockland ecosystem is the South Florida slash pine ( Pinus <unk> var densa ; also called Dade County pine ) that reaches a height of 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) . Pine rockland communities require fire for maintenance ; they have adapted to promote and resist fire at the same time . These communities are located in the highest part of the Everglades with little to no hydroperiod , although some floors may have flooded solution holes or puddles for a few months at a time . The sandy floor of the pine rocklands is covered with dry pine needles that are highly flammable . South Florida slash pines are insulated by their bark to protect them from heat . Fire eliminates competing vegetation on the forest floor , and opens pine cones to germinate seeds . A period without significant fire can turn pineland into hardwood hammock as larger trees overtake the slash pines . The understory shrubs in pine rocklands include fire @-@ resistant species like saw palmetto ( Serenoa repens ) , cabbage palm ( Sabal palmetto ) , and West Indian lilac ( <unk> bicolor ) . The most diverse group of plants in the pine community are herbs , of which two dozen species exist . These plants contain tubers and other mechanisms allowing for quick sprouts after charring . 
 Wildlife in pine rockland communities is diverse . In some forests , 15 species of birds can be found . Common among them are the pine warbler ( Dendroica <unk> ) , the red @-@ bellied woodpecker ( <unk> <unk> ) , and the eastern meadowlark ( <unk> magna ) . More than 20 species of reptiles and amphibians have been noted , such as the green anole ( Anolis carolinensis ) , southern leopard frog ( Rana <unk> ) , and southern black racer ( <unk> constrictor <unk> ) . Mammals such as the critically endangered Florida panther ( Puma concolor coryi ) , Florida black bear ( Ursus americanus floridanus ) , and several types of bats also live in the pine rocklands . 
 Before urban development of the South Florida region , pine rocklands covered around 161 @,@ 660 acres ( 654 @.@ 2 km2 ) in Miami @-@ Dade County . Pine forests were extensively cleared by urban developers and the lumber industry in the 1930s and 1940s . Within Everglades National Park , 19 @,@ 840 acres ( 80 @.@ 3 km2 ) of pine rockland communities are protected , but outside the park , 1 @,@ 780 acres ( 7 @.@ 2 km2 ) of pine forests remain as of 1990 , averaging 12 @.@ 1 acres ( 0 @.@ 049 km2 ) in size . Dade County pine has a remarkable longevity and has proven to be termite @-@ resistant , though dense enough to make driving nails difficult . In 1984 they were protected by a county ordinance , after many pine areas had been depleted . A misunderstanding of fire 's role also played a part in the disappearance of pine forests , as natural fires were put out and pine rocklands transitioned into hardwood hammocks . Today prescribed fires occur in Everglades National Park in pine rocklands every three to seven years . 
 = = The Big Cypress = = 
 West of the sawgrass prairies and sloughs lies the Big Cypress Swamp , commonly called " The Big Cypress " , referring to its size rather than the height or diameter of its trees . It takes up the majority of Collier County ; at its most limited measurement , the swamp measures 1 @,@ 200 square miles ( 3 @,@ 100 km2 ) , but its hydrological boundary is nearly twice as large . The Big Cypress is slightly elevated at 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) at its highest point and slopes gradually to the coastline for approximately 35 miles ( 56 km ) . Because the defining feature of The Big Cypress is the abundance of trees it is considered a swamp , rather than a marsh where grass is the main characteristic . 
 The basin for The Big Cypress receives on average 55 inches ( 140 cm ) of water in the rainy season . Most of The Big Cypress sits atop a bedrock covered by a thin layer of limestone that contains quartz , creating a sandy soil that hosts a variety of vegetation . The majority of trees are bald cypress ( Taxodium <unk> ) and not true cypresses ( Cupressaceae ) . Cypresses are conifers that are uniquely adapted to thrive in flooded conditions , with buttressed trunks and root projections that protrude out of the water , called " knees " . 
 Cypress trees in the area can live for hundreds of years ; some giants grow to 130 feet ( 40 m ) and are 500 years old . Still , they may be only seventh- or eighth @-@ generation cypresses . Few massive trees survived the logging operations that took place in the 1930s and 1940s . As a result , much of The Big Cypress is protected by various federal or state agencies that include Big Cypress National Preserve , Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary , Fakahatchee Strand State Preserve and two Indian reservations . 
 = = = Cypress head = = = 
 Although The Big Cypress is the largest growth of cypress swamps in South Florida , such swamps — as well as portions of sawgrass marshes — can be found near the Atlantic Coastal Ridge and between Lake Okeechobee and the Eastern flatwoods . Hardwood hammocks and pineland are often interspersed with the cypress ecosystem . Much like tree islands that are colloquially referred to as " heads " , cypress trees grow in formations that resemble domes , with the tallest and thickest trunks in the center , rooted in the deepest peat . As the peat thins out , cypresses continue to grow , but are smaller and thinner , giving the small forest the appearance of a dome . They also grow in strands , slightly elevated on a plateau of limestone and surrounded on two sides by sloughs . Other hardwood trees can be found in cypress domes , such as red maple ( Acer rubrum ) , swamp bay ( Persea palustris ) , and pop ash ( Fraxinus caroliniana ) . If cypresses are removed , hardwoods take over , and the ecosystem is recategorized as a mixed swamp forest . 
 Because the cypress domes and strands retain moisture and block out much of the sunlight , plants such as orchids , bromeliads , and ferns thrive in cypress domes and strands . Orchids bloom throughout the year in cypress heads , and bromeliads appear in many varieties ; on Fakahatchee Strand alone , thirteen species have been documented . <unk> collect moisture from rain and humidity in the bases of their leaves , which also nurture frogs , lizards and various insects . Wood storks ( Mycteria americana ) nest almost exclusively in cypress forests and in the past 100 years have seen a dramatic decline , probably due to lack of reproduction tied to controlled water . Wood storks ' reproductive cycles coincide with the dry season , when small fish and amphibians are trapped in shallow pools and puddles . When water from canals or locks is released too soon or not at all , storks are unable to find enough food for themselves and their offspring . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 wood storks nested in The Big Cypress in the 1930s , but by the 1990s less than 2 @,@ 000 were counted . 
 = = Mangroves and coastal prairie = = 
 Water from Lake Okeechobee and The Big Cypress eventually flows to the ocean . At a transitional zone where fresh water meets salt water , mangrove trees thrive , adapted as they are to both kinds of water . This brackish mixture of water and mangrove systems , crisscrossed by hundreds of tidal creeks , harbors a very productive ecosystem . The depth of these zones is dependent on how much water flows from the Everglades . In the wet season , fresh water pours into Florida Bay and sawgrass appears near the coastline . In dryer years , salt water creeps inland to the coastal prairie , an ecosystem that buffers the freshwater marshes by absorbing sea water . Mangrove trees grow in fresh water ecosystems when the salt water flows far enough inland . The Everglades have the most extensive contiguous system of mangroves in the world . The mangrove forests of the Ten Thousand Islands cover almost 200 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 km2 ) . 
 = = = Mangroves = = = 
 Three species of mangrove trees exist in the region : red ( Rhizophora mangle ) , black ( Avicennia germinans ) , and white ( Laguncularia racemosa ) , although all are from different families . All have the same characteristics : they are tolerant of salt , brackish , and fresh water ; they grow in oxygen @-@ poor soil ; and they can survive drastic water @-@ level changes . Black and white mangroves excrete salt from under their leaves , and red mangroves filter the salinity of sea water . All species are integral to coastline protection during severe storms . Red mangroves , for example , have far @-@ reaching roots that trap sediments . The trees not only stabilize coastlines , but add land as more sand and decaying vegetation is trapped in the root systems . All three mangroves also absorb the energy of waves and storm surges . 
 The estuaries act as fisheries for fry and nurseries for crustaceans . Shrimp , oysters , crabs , whelks , cockles , and snails thrive in these waters , as do primordial horseshoe crabs ( Limulus polyphemus ) . The region supports a $ 59 million @-@ a @-@ year Tortugas pink shrimp ( Farfantepenaeus <unk> ) industry , and a $ 22 million @-@ a @-@ year stone crab ( Menippe mercenaria ) industry . Between 80 and 90 percent of species that are harvested commercially in Florida are born or spend time in the shallow waters near the Everglades . Oysters and mangroves work in tandem to build up the coastline . The sand around the coastline has minute white particles of quartz and fine shells . When currents are right , oysters grow in colonies or beds , and deposit their shells , reinforcing the bed . Mangrove seeds , called propagules , are full embryos and float in water until they reach a favorable location and take root , often on oyster beds . They shed skin and litter , ensuring other trees will not compete for space and nutrients . 
 Mangroves also serve as excellent rookeries for birds . Wading birds , such as roseate spoonbills ( Platalea ajaja ) , egrets , and tricolored herons ( Egretta tricolor ) use the mangroves as a nursery , due to the proximity of food sources and the protection offered from most prey . Thousands of birds can nest in the mangroves at once , making a noisy and messy colony , but their droppings fertilize the mangrove trees . Shorebirds like rails , terns and gulls ; diving birds such as pelicans and grebes ; and birds of prey such as ospreys , hawks and vultures are among the more than 100 species of birds that use Everglades mangrove trees to raise their young . 
 = = Florida Bay = = 
 Because much of the coast and inner estuaries are built by mangroves — and there is no border between the coastal marshes and the bay — the ecosystems in Florida Bay are considered part of the Everglades . More than 800 square miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km2 ) of Florida Bay is protected by Everglades National Park , representing the largest body of water in the park boundaries . There are approximately one hundred keys in Florida Bay , many of which are mangrove forests . Larger islands may be taken over by hardwood hammocks . The outer rims of the Ten Thousand Islands and Cape Sable share characteristics of the intertwining saltwater bays and fresh water marshes . 
 The fresh water entering Florida Bay from the Everglades creates ideal conditions for vast beds of turtle grass and algae formations that foster animal life in the bay . Sea turtles and manatees ( Trichechus manatus latirostris ) eat the grass , while invertebrates such as worms , clams , and other mollusks consume algae formations and microscopic plankton . Female sea turtles return annually to nest on the shore , and manatees spend the winter months in the warmer water of the bay . The Calusa Indians had various uses for shells of marine invertebrates , due to the lack of dense rock with which to make tools . They used the horse conch ( <unk> gigantea ) , left @-@ handed whelk ( Busycon <unk> ) , and the Florida crown conch ( <unk> corona ) as drinking vessels , picks , hammers , knives and awls . 
 Sea grasses stabilize sea beds and protect shorelines from erosion by absorbing energy from waves . Shrimp , spiny lobsters , and sea urchins live in and among the grasses and feed on phytoplankton ; they in turn feed larger predators such as sharks , rays , barracuda , and king mackerel ( Scomberomorus <unk> ) . Due to shallow water and abundant sunlight , Florida Bay hosts communities of coral reefs and sponges , although the majority of the state 's reefs are closer to the Florida Keys . Everglades keys that foster mangroves also support nurseries for wading birds such as the Great white heron ( Ardea herodias ) , which was almost wiped out in the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 ( only 146 were counted afterward ) . After recovering to number more than 2 @,@ 000 , they were further endangered by Hurricane Donna in 1960 , which decreased their numbers by 35 to 40 percent . 
 Sea floor patterns of Florida Bay are formed by currents and winds . However , since 1932 , sea levels have been rising at a rate of 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) per 100 years . Though mangroves serve to build and stabilize the coastline , seas may be rising more rapidly than the trees are able to build . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 Ecosystems in the Everglades have been described as both fragile and resilient . Author Michael Grunwald wrote about the observations of the Everglades ' first American visitors : " If the Grand Canyon was a breathtaking painting , the Everglades was a complex drama , and everything in it had a role . " An estimated 11 @,@ 000 species of seed @-@ bearing plants and 400 species of land or water vertebrates live in the Everglades , but slight variations in water levels affect many organisms and reshape land formations . The health and productivity of any ecosystem relies on the number of species present : the loss of one species weakens the entire ecosystem . 
 For example , Florida apple snails ( Pomacea paludosa ) are an amphibious fresh water mollusk . They have a single gill and lung , and live on stalks of sawgrass in water depths no more than 20 inches ( 51 cm ) . They are the primary food of the endangered Everglades snail kite ( Rostrhamus sociabilis ) and limpkin ( Aramus <unk> ) as well as the raccoon , otter , and young alligator . Apple snails lay their eggs on sawgrass stalks about 6 inches ( 15 cm ) above the water line , and they are intolerant of being submerged for long periods of time . When the eggs hatch , young snails must enter the water quickly or face death . When water levels are too low or rise too quickly while snail eggs are developing , apple snails do not flourish , affecting the many reptiles , mammals , and birds that feed on them . With regard to the ecology of trophic dynamics , or food chains , the 174 species of invertebrates play a vital role in the Everglades . Crayfish , insects , scorpions , and other invertebrates also support a web of animals . 
 The group of animals most integral to the overall success of Everglades wildlife is freshwater fish . Few places in the Everglades stay submerged from one year to the next , so alligator holes and deep clefts in the limestone are vital to the survival of fish , and the animal community as a whole . Freshwater fish are the main diet of most wading birds , alligators , and otters , and require large areas of open water in order to repopulate . Young amphibians also play an important role in the food chain . Tadpoles spread quickly in isolated areas where fish do not have the time or access to reproduce in numbers necessary to support larger animals . Hundreds of species of amphibians are found in the Everglades , and their availability helps support wildlife during short hydroperiods or in remote locations . 
 These smaller animals support communities of larger animals , including 70 species of land birds that breed within the Everglades , and 120 water birds , of which 43 breed in the area . Many of these birds go on to migrate through the West Indies and North America . Several dozen species of mammals also thrive in the region , from tiny bats and shrews to midsize raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) , otters ( Lontra canadensis ) , opossums ( Didelphis virginiana ) , and foxes . The largest include white tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , the Florida black bear , and the Florida panther . 
 Although slight changes in water level affect many species , the system as a whole also cycles and pulses with each change . Some transformations to the diversity of plant and animal life are natural , caused by fire or storms , and some are induced by humans , such as urban encroachment , the introduction of exotic species , and rapid global warming . Environmental conditions in the Everglades favor no particular species . Some species , such as snail kites and apple snails , do well in wet conditions , but wood storks and Cape Sable seaside sparrows ( Ammodramus maritimus mirabilis ) do well in dryer circumstances . 
 = = Human impact = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 People have lived in the Everglades region for thousands of years . Within the past 100 years however , they have changed the natural landscape dramatically . Settlement of urban areas in South Florida was facilitated by large drainage projects intended to create more land . The drainage was often implemented without a full understanding of the intricacies of ecosystems and shaping processes of the Everglades . The South Florida metropolitan area grew exponentially , causing problems in ecosystems throughout the Everglades . By the 1990s , the diminishing quality of life in many of these urban areas was linked to the degraded local environment . The State of Florida and the U.S. government devised and passed a plan in 2000 to restore as much of the Everglades to pre @-@ drainage conditions as possible . It is the costliest and most comprehensive environmental restoration project in history . 
 = = = Invasive species = = = 
 Humans have also adversely impacted the ecology of the Everglades by introducing numerous invasive species , which may prey on or compete with native species . A spectacular and particularly damaging example of this phenomenon is the recent proliferation of the Burmese python in the Everglades , as well as elsewhere in Florida . First observed in the wild in 1979 and not again until 1995 , they have increased alarmingly since 2000 . By 2011 , decreases of 87 @.@ 5 % , 94 @.@ 1 % , 98 @.@ 9 % and 99 @.@ 3 % in sightings of bobcats , white @-@ tailed deer , opossums and raccoons , respectively , were reported in park road surveys , while rabbits were no longer being seen at all . 
 = North Acropolis , Tikal = 
 The North Acropolis of the ancient Maya city of Tikal in Guatemala is an architectural complex that served as a royal necropolis and was a centre for funerary activity for over 1300 years . The acropolis is located near the centre of the city and is one of the most studied of Maya architectural complexes . Excavations were carried out from 1957 to 1969 by the University of Pennsylvania , directed by Edwin M. Shook and William Coe . 
 The first traces of human activity at the site date to approximately 800 BC , with the first structures being built about 350 BC . Around 250 AD the complex underwent a major redevelopment with the construction of a massive basal platform that supported a cluster of temples ; this was followed around AD 450 by the addition of a row of four pyramids on a terrace to the south of the main platform . 
 A number of royal tombs have been excavated that have been identified with named kings , including the tombs of Yax Nuun Ayiin I ( ruled AD <unk> c . 404 ) , Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II ( ruled 411 @-@ 456 ) , Wak Chan K 'awiil ( ruled 537 @-@ 562 ) and " Animal Skull " ( ruled c . 593 @-@ 638 ) . An early tomb in the North Acropolis has been tentatively identified as that of the dynastic founder Yax Ehb ' Xook ( ruled c . 90 ) . 
 A large number of stone monuments were placed in the North Acropolis . By the 9th century AD these included 43 stelae and 30 altars ; 18 of these monuments were sculpted with hieroglyphic texts and royal portraits . A number of these monuments show the influence of the great city of Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico . 
 = = Development = = 
 The earliest traces of working of the limestone bedrock under the basal platform of the acropolis date to about 800 BC , consisting of deep cuts into the rock associated with refuse from domestic and ceremonial activity . The first structures in what became the North Acropolis were built around 350 BC , towards the end of the Middle Preclassic period ( c . 1000 @-@ 300 BC ) . 
 = = = Late Preclassic period = = = 
 During the Late Preclassic ( c . 300 BC - AD 250 ) , a 49 @-@ metre ( 161 ft ) wide causeway was built to unite the North Acropolis with the Mundo Perdido complex to the southwest . The earliest dated architecture in the North Acropolis was built in the second century BC and consisted of a low basal platform to the north with two smaller platforms immediately to the south , which were forerunners of the triadic pyramid complex formed by the later Temples 22 , 23 and 24 . These were not the first structures to be built since the remains of earlier versions of the platforms have been identified underneath but these suffered such extensive destruction prior to the building of the 2nd century BC version that no physical sequence can be reconstructed . 
 In the 1st century AD the complex underwent a major expansion . At this time there was a gradual shift in focus from the major Preclassic Mundo Perdido complex to the North Acropolis , which was marked out as the new ceremonial centre of the city and received the first royal burials , so far not conclusively identified with named rulers . 
 = = = Classic period = = = 
 During the Classic period ( c . AD 250 @-@ 900 ) the royal dynasty of Tikal developed the complex into a royal necropolis , with each successive ruler superimposing new temples over earlier structures . Around AD 250 , the pre @-@ existing architecture was demolished and a new basal platform was built , supporting four corbel @-@ vaulted structures . Around AD 400 the complex was expanded southwards from its original basal platform with the addition of a row of tall pyramids that divided the original architecture from Tikal 's main plaza . Towards the end of the 7th century , King Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I ordered the construction of a new version Temple 33 , possibly to house the remains of Nuun Ujol Chaak , his father . This new building completely blocked the entrance to the North Acropolis , formerly ending its role as the preferred burial ground of Tikal 's kings . Around AD 734 king Jasaw Chan K 'awiil was entombed in Temple I on the east side of the plaza , ending the tradition of interring rulers within the North Acropolis . 
 = = = Postclassic period = = = 
 Funerary activity continued as late as the Postclassic ( c . 900 @-@ 1525 ) . Towards the end of Tikal 's dwindling occupancy , during the 10th or 11th centuries , squatters were mining the North Acropolis in search of jade grave goods in the elite tombs ; some of the easier @-@ to @-@ find burials were located and looted at this time . 
 = = Structures = = 
 The North Acropolis closes off the Great Plaza on the north side . The basal platform of the North Acropolis covers an area of just under 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) ; measuring approximately 100 by 80 metres ( 330 by 260 ft ) . It stands 9 metres ( 30 ft ) above its bedrock foundation and 12 metres ( 39 ft ) above the Great Plaza , and is accessed by a number of stairways on its south side . During the Preclassic period , the facades of many of the temples were decorated with brightly coloured stucco ornamentation , including giant masks flanking some of the access stairways . By the Early Classic , eight temple @-@ pyramids stood upon the platform , each with an access stairway flanked by masks , a small summit shrine and an elaborate roof comb . 
 = = = Basal platform = = = 
 Most of the structures upon the basal platform underwent two consecutive construction phases during the Early Classic , except Temple 22 which underwent three phases of construction . The structures upon the basal platform all date to the Early Classic period and were laid out in a symmetrical arrangement over the course of three centuries . This forms the greatest concentration of pure Early Classic architecture at Tikal , using construction methods distinct from that of the major Late Classic temples around the Great Plaza . The Early Classic construction involved the complete finishing of the basal platform as a distinct architectural unit before the additional structures were built upon it . 
 Temple 20 ( Structure 5D @-@ 20 ) is located upon the northwest corner of the basal platform and looks outwards to the north . It is estimated to date to approximately AD 550 . 
 Temple 21 ( Structure 5D @-@ 21 ) forms a pair with Temple 20 ; it is located upon the northeast corner of the basal platform and also looks outwards to the north ; it is thought to date to around AD 550 . 
 Temple 22 ( Structure 5D @-@ 22 ) is a south @-@ facing building located centrally on the north side of the basal platform . Temple 22 underwent three principal phases of construction . The earliest version of this structure was built around AD 250 ; a second version of the temple was built over it around AD 350 ; this version was decorated with giant stucco masks . The final version of the temple dates to the 5th century AD . Temple 22 has been extensively investigated by archaeologists with portions of the 5th @-@ century architecture being stripped away to expose the earlier versions . A tomb in the Temple 22 was looted at some point during the Postclassic period . 
 Temple 23 ( Structure 5D @-@ 23 ) has been partially restored and dates to the middle of the 3rd century AD . It is situated on the centre of the west side of the basal platform , facing east . 
 Temple 24 ( Structure 5D @-@ 24 ) dates to around AD 250 . It forms a pair with Temple 23 , being located on the east side of the basal platform , facing west . Temple 24 has not been explored by archaeologists . 
 Temple 25 ( Structure 5D @-@ 25 ) is located on the southwest corner of the basal platform ; it was first built around AD 250 and underwent a second Early Classic construction phase that completely covered the earlier version . 
 Temple 26 ( Structure 5D @-@ 26 ) is the central building in the North Acropolis , located centrally on the south side of the basal platform overlooking the terrace ; the earliest version of this structure dates to approximately AD 250 . Temple 26 has been fully excavated and restored . A tomb in the structure was looted at some time during the Postclassic period . The northern portion of the structure stood over a Late Preclassic tomb ( Burial 85 ) dated to around AD 100 , which has been tentatively identified as that of dynastic founder Yax Ehb ' Xook . 
 Temple 27 ( Structure 5D @-@ 27 ) forms a pair with Temple 25 . It is situated on the southeast corner of the basal platform . Archaeologists presume that this structure underwent the same two Early Classic construction phases as its twin . It was built around AD 250 . 
 Building 28 ( Structure 5D @-@ 28 ) is an unusual building at the top of an access stairway on the east side of the basal platform . It appears to have been a guardroom controlling access from the east terrace . The chamber originally contained curtained doorways and benches against the walls . The width of the building completely blocked access from the stairway ; this forced visitors to pass through the chamber , where their presence could be scrutinised and passage beyond blocked if necessary . This route may have become important when Temple 33 was built , blocking the main access stairway from the Great Plaza . Structure 5D @-@ 28 was built very late in the Early Classic period ( around the 6th century ) . 
 = = = Terrace = = = 
 A trio of small Early Classic temples ( Temples 29 to 31 ) stand upon a common platform at the east end of the terrace , facing west . It is likely that the platform was purposely built to support the three temples that were built more @-@ or @-@ less simultaneously . Neither the platform nor the temples have been investigated ; it is therefore possible that an early version of the central temple ( Temple 30 ) was built first , then decommissioned with the platform being built to cover the early version , followed by the construction of a new version plus the two additional flanking temples . 
 Temple 29 ( Structure 5D @-@ 29 ) is located at the east end of the terrace of the North Acropolis , facing west . Stela 40 was excavated at its base in 1996 . Temple 29 is one of a trio of similar structures , with Temples 30 and 31 . Temple 29 has not been excavated ; the corbel vaulting and roof has collapsed to fill the three chambers of the superstructure with rubble . Of the trio of temples , Temple 29 is the only one to display traces of red paint . The basal platform of the temple stands 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) high and the superstructure walls measure 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high . The building is believed to date to the Early Classic period ( c . AD 250 – 600 ) . 
 Temple 30 ( Structure 5D @-@ 30 ) is at the east end of the terrace of the North Acropolis ; it is one of a trio of similar structures . The roof and vaulting has collapsed , filling the three summit chambers with rubble . Temple 30 is estimated to date from the Early Classic ( c . AD 250 – 600 ) , based upon a stylistic comparison with other structures at Tikal . As with the other temples of the trio , the basal platform of the temple stands 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) high and the superstructure walls measure 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high . 
 Temple 31 ( Structure 5D @-@ 31 ) is one of a trio of similar structures at the east end of the terrace , together with Temples 29 and 30 . As with the other two temples of the trio , the summit superstructure had three chambers ; these have been buried under the rubble resulting from the collapse of the vaulting and roof . The temple is believed to date to the Early Classic ( c . AD 250 – 600 ) . The height of the temple is identical to those of the other temples in the trio , with a basal platform measuring 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) high and superstructure walls standing 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high . 
 Temple 32 ( Structure 5D @-@ 32 ) stands immediately to the east of Temple 33 . It was partially investigated in the mid @-@ 1960s and dates to the first half of the 7th century AD . The temple shrine contained three large chambers , which were looted soon after the abandonment of the city in the 10th century . Archaeologists discovered a tomb cut into the bedrock under the pyramid , which contained a royal burial ( Burial 195 ) . The pyramid was built over the tomb soon after the king 's burial and consisted of a single construction phase . 
 Temple 33 ( Structure 5D @-@ 33 ) was the 33 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 108 ft ) funerary pyramid of 5th @-@ century king Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II . It was centrally situated between Temples 32 and 34 , in the front row of structures facing onto the Great Plaza ; it is one of the most thoroughly explored temples in the entire Maya area . Over the course of two centuries the temple underwent three construction phases ; the final phase of development took place during the Tikal Hiatus , which lasted from AD 562 to 692 . The last construction phase of Temple 33 served as a prototype for Temple I on the Great Plaza . This final version of Temple 33 was controversially dismantled by archaeologists in 1965 in order to arrive at the earlier stages of construction . 
 Temple 34 ( Structure 5D @-@ 34 ) was the first pyramid to be built along the front terrace of the North Acropolis ; it dates to the Early Classic period . The pyramid was built by Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II over the tomb of his father , Yax Nuun Ayiin I. It was topped by a three chambered shrine with the rooms situated one behind the other . Archaeologists cut a trench across Temple 34 in 1959 and discovered the tomb cut into the bedrock underneath , with two previous versions of the temple built over it . Stela 26 originally stood at the foot of this temple but was broken , probably at the beginning of the Late Classic period , and dragged up the temple steps to be places under a masonry altar within the summit shrine . The shrine was looted in the Postclassic period and the altar was broken at this time . Ceremonial fires for the burning of inanimate sacrifices were lit directly above Yax Nuun Ayiin 's tomb well into the Late Classic period and may be indicative of continued ancestor worship centuries after the king 's death . 
 Temple 35 ( Structure 5D @-@ 35 ) was a tall Late Classic temple backing against the southwest corner of the basal platform . It is the westernmost of the row of pyramids facing south onto the Great Plaza ; it has not been explored by archaeologists and is considered to be one of two likely locations for the tomb of 7th @-@ century king Nuun Ujol Chaak . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 A great many stelae were erected in the North Acropolis ; by the 9th century AD there were a total of 43 stelae and 30 altars . Eighteen of these monuments were sculpted with hieroglyphic texts and royal portraits . 
 Stela 4 was erected by king Yax Nuun Ayiin I to celebrate the k 'atun @-@ ending of AD 396 . It is one of two stelae from Yax Nuun Ayiin I 's reign and was re @-@ erected at the base of his funerary pyramid , Temple 34 . The stela displays a mix of Maya and Teotihuacan qualities , and deities from both cultures . It has a portrait of the king with the Underworld Jaguar God under one arm and the Mexican Tlaloc under the other . His helmet is a simplified version of the Teotihuacan War Serpent . Unusually for Maya sculpture , but typically for Teotihuacan , Yax Nuun Ayiin is depicted with a frontal face , rather than in profile . 
 Stela 18 was one of two stelae erected by Yax Nuun Ayiin I to celebrate the k 'atun @-@ ending of AD 396 . It was re @-@ erected at the base of Temple 34 , his funerary shrine . 
 Stela 26 was found in the summit shrine of Temple 34 , underneath a broken masonry altar . The monument had originally been erected at the base of the temple during the Early Classic period and was later broken , probably at the beginning of the Late Classic . Its remains were then interred within the temple shrine . 
 Stela 31 is the upper portion of a monument that was broken and interred above the tomb of Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II in Temple 33 . It was dedicated in AD 445 and bears images of Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II and his father Yax Nuun Ayiin I , who is depicted as a Teotihuacano warrior on the sides of the monument . The back of the stela is sculpted with a long hieroglyphic text legitimising Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II 's dynasty . 
 Stela 40 was found at the base of Temple 29 . It has been dated to AD 468 and depicts 5th @-@ century king K 'an Chitam . He is holding up a Teotihuacan @-@ style headdress in one hand . The sides of the monument are sculpted with depictions of his father , Siyaj Chan K <unk> II , and his mother , Lady Ayiin . A lengthy hieroglyphic text on the back details his birth in 415 , his promotion to a junior rank in 434 and his accession to the throne in 458 , as well as a brief description of his father 's reign . 
 Altar 19 was buried in the fill of the final version of Temple 33 , immediately in front of the second version of the summit shrine . It was badly damaged and was broken into several pieces , and the majority of a sculpture depicting a seated person was chipped away . The three fragments were buried together in a way that paired the altar with the buried Stela 31 ; this may have maintained a relationship between the monuments that existed when they were originally on public display . The altar was crafted from limestone and is now in the site museum at Tikal . It has been dated to approximately AD 445 . 
 = = Burials = = 
 Burial 10 was the tomb of late 4th @-@ century king Yax Nuun Ayiin I. The tomb consists of a large chamber carved out of the bedrock beneath Temple 34 . The remains of the king were interred upon a wooden bier and he was accompanied by nine human sacrifices and a headless caiman . The tomb contained a large quantity of grave goods , including an impressive array of ceramic vessels , many decorated with Teotihuacan @-@ linked imagery . One ceramic drinking vessel bore the writing " the drinking vessel of the son of <unk> Owl " . Five turtle shells of assorted sizes , some still attached to a rack , were the remains of a musical instrument similar to a marimba . A small jade ornament was also found , sculpted into the form of a caiman 's head with a curled snout . The skull of the king was dyed red . The association of caimans with the king 's remains related to an element of the king 's name ; <unk> means " crocodile " and the animal may have been the king 's way ( spirit companion ) . 
 Burial 23 was a royal tomb inserted by destroying the second version of the access stairway of Temple 33 . The individual interred within the tomb has not been identified but the tomb is one of two proposed locations for the burial of the late 7th @-@ century king Nuun Ujol Chaak . The tomb was cut into the bedrock under the temple , to the south of the burial of Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II . The king appears to have been hastily interred in a tomb that was still being prepared while the burial took place , since plaster from the walls was splashed on some of the grave goods and a flint pick was accidentally left behind by a workman . The body of the king was laid upon a litter painted with cinnabar and overlain with jaguar @-@ pelts ; the corpse was laid out on the pelts and covered in layers of marine shells . 
 Burial 24 was an elite status burial inserted into the rubble core of Temple 33 during the final phase of the pyramid 's construction . The tomb contained painted ceramic dishes that appear to name Nuun Ujol Chaak 's father and grandfather , who both preceded him as rulers of the city . 
 Burial 48 was carved from the bedrock under the terrace , upon the central north @-@ south axis of the North <unk> directly under Temple 33 ; it has been identified as the tomb of king Siyaj Chan K 'awiil II . The remains of the king were flanked those of two juvenile human sacrifices ; one of these was a child and one was an adolescent . The walls of the tomb were coated in stucco , onto which were painted hieroglyphs indicating that the tomb was sealed in March 457 , a year after the king had died . The king was interred bundled in a seated position and his remains lacked the skull , hands , and femurs . Grave goods included 27 ceramic vessels of mixed of local and imported origin , stone and shell artefacts including a well @-@ used stone metate and accompanying <unk> , a large quantity of jade artefacts , including jade discs and hundreds of beads that once formed a semicircular collar , two pairs of earspools and a great many more beads in small groups that did not form a part of the collar . Two obsidian blades also accompanied the burial . 
 Burial 85 dates to the 1st century AD , in the Late Preclassic , and was enclosed by a platform , with a primitive corbel vault . It was the first royal burial that characterised the shift in ceremonial focus from the Mundo Perdido complex to the North Acropolis . The tomb was centrally located upon the north @-@ south axis of the North Acropolis , under what would later become Temple 26 , and contained a single male skeleton , which lacked a skull and its thighbones . The dynastic founder of Tikal , Yax Ehb ' Xook , has been linked to this tomb , which lies deep in the heart of the North Acropolis . The deceased had probably died in battle with his body being mutilated by his enemies before being recovered and interred by his followers . The bones were wrapped carefully in textiles to form an upright bundle . The missing head was replaced by a small greenstone mask with shell @-@ inlaid teeth and eyes and bearing a three @-@ pointed royal headband . This head wears an emblem of rulership on its forehead and is a rare Preclassic lowland Maya portrait of a king . Among the contents of the tomb were a stingray spine , a <unk> shell and twenty @-@ six ceramic vessels . 
 Burial 125 is another tomb that has been tentatively identified as that of dynastic founder Yax Ehb ' Xook . It has been dated to around 90 AD . A cache was interred 6 metres ( 20 ft ) to the east that may contain the grave goods associated with this burial , since the remains themselves had no directly associated artefacts . The cache contained high status ceramics and jade , shell and bone artefacts . The interment of this burial established a new central axis for the acropolis that was used as a point of reference for most of the royal burials up to the 8th century AD . 
 Burial 195 was a corbel @-@ vaulted chamber cut into the bedrock under Temple 32 . It was the tomb of the ruler nicknamed " Animal Skull " by archaeologists , who ruled from the end of the 6th century AD through to at least 628 . The remains of the king had been wrapped in cloth that had been dyed red . The tomb was flooded soon after it was sealed , leaving a thick layer of mud that dried to preserve the hollow forms of the king 's burial offerings long after the wooden artefacts had rotted away . Archaeologists filled these hollows with plaster of Paris and were thus able to reconstruct many of the perishable items from the tomb , including four large carved panels depicting the king , a small throne decorated with hieroglyphs , a ballgame yoke and four stucco figurines of the deity K 'awiil . 
 Burial 200 was the 6th @-@ century tomb of king Wak Chan K 'awiil . It was a masonry tomb contained within Temple 22 . 
 = Martin Bucer = 
 Martin Bucer ( early German : Martin Butzer ) ( 11 November 1491 – 28 February 1551 ) was a German Protestant reformer based in Strasbourg who influenced Lutheran , Calvinist , and Anglican doctrines and practices . Bucer was originally a member of the Dominican Order , but after meeting and being influenced by Martin Luther in 1518 he arranged for his monastic vows to be annulled . He then began to work for the Reformation , with the support of Franz von Sickingen . 
 Bucer 's efforts to reform the church in Wissembourg resulted in his excommunication from the Roman Catholic Church , and he was forced to flee to Strasbourg . There he joined a team of reformers which included Matthew Zell , Wolfgang Capito , and Caspar Hedio . He acted as a mediator between the two leading reformers , Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli , who differed on the doctrine of the eucharist . Later , Bucer sought agreement on common articles of faith such as the Tetrapolitan Confession and the Wittenberg Concord , working closely with Philipp Melanchthon on the latter . 
 Bucer believed that the Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire could be convinced to join the Reformation . Through a series of conferences organised by Charles V , he tried to unite Protestants and Catholics to create a German national church separate from Rome . He did not achieve this , as political events led to the Schmalkaldic War and the retreat of Protestantism within the Empire . In 1548 , Bucer was persuaded , under duress , to sign the Augsburg Interim , which imposed certain forms of Catholic worship . However , he continued to promote reforms until the city of Strasbourg accepted the Interim , and forced him to leave . 
 In 1549 , Bucer was exiled to England , where , under the guidance of Thomas Cranmer , he was able to influence the second revision of the Book of Common Prayer . He died in Cambridge , England , at the age of 59 . Although his ministry did not lead to the formation of a new denomination , many Protestant denominations have claimed him as one of their own . He is remembered as an early pioneer of ecumenism . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 In the 16th century , the Holy Roman Empire was a centralised state in name only . The Empire was divided into many princely and city states that provided a powerful check on the rule of the Holy Roman Emperor . The division of power between the emperor and the various states made the Reformation in Germany possible , as individual states defended reformers within their territories . In the Electorate of Saxony , Martin Luther was supported by the elector Frederick III and his successors John and John Frederick . Philip I , Landgrave of Hesse — whose lands lay midway between Saxony and the Rhine — also supported the Reformation , and he figured prominently in the lives of both Luther and Bucer . The Emperor Charles V had to balance the demands of his imperial subjects . At the same time , he was often distracted by war with France and the Ottoman Empire and in Italy . The political rivalry among all the players greatly influenced the ecclesiastical developments within the Empire . 
 In addition to the princely states , free imperial cities , nominally under the control of the Emperor but really ruled by councils that acted like sovereign governments , were scattered throughout the Empire . As the Reformation took root , clashes broke out in many cities between local reformers and conservative city magistrates . It was in a free imperial city , Strasbourg , that Martin Bucer began his work . Located on the western frontier of the Empire , Strasbourg was closely allied with the Swiss cities that had thrown off the imperial yoke . Some had adopted a reformed religion distinct from Lutheranism , in which humanist social concepts and the communal ethic played a greater role . Along with a group of free imperial cities in the south and west of the German lands , Strasbourg followed this pattern of Reformation . It was ruled by a complex local government largely under the control of a few powerful families and wealthy <unk> . In Bucer 's time , social unrest was growing as lower @-@ level artisans resented their social immobility and the widening income gap . The citizens may not have planned revolution , but they were receptive to new ideas that might transform their lives . 
 = = Early years ( 1491 – 1523 ) = = 
 Martin Bucer was born in Sélestat ( Schlettstadt ) , Alsace , a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire . His father and grandfather , both named Claus Butzer , were coopers ( <unk> ) by trade . Almost nothing is known about Bucer 's mother . Bucer likely attended Sélestat 's prestigious Latin school , where artisans sent their children . He completed his studies in the summer of 1507 and joined the Dominican Order as a novice . Bucer later claimed his grandfather had forced him into the order . After a year , he was consecrated as an acolyte in the Strasbourg church of the Williamites , and he took his vows as a full Dominican friar . In 1510 , he was consecrated as a deacon . 
 By 1515 , Bucer was studying theology in the Dominican monastery in Heidelberg . The following year , he took a course in <unk> in Mainz , where he was ordained a priest , returning to Heidelberg in January 1517 to enroll in the university . Around this time , he became influenced by humanism , and he started buying books published by Johannes Froben , some by the great humanist Erasmus . A 1518 inventory of Bucer 's books includes the major works of Thomas Aquinas , leader of medieval scholasticism in the Dominican order . 
 In April 1518 , Johannes von <unk> , the vicar @-@ general of the Augustinians , invited the Wittenberg reformer Martin Luther to argue his theology at the Heidelberg Disputation . Here Bucer met Luther for the first time . In a long letter to his mentor , Beatus Rhenanus , Bucer recounted what he learned , and he commented on several of Luther 's Ninety @-@ Five Theses . He largely agreed with them and perceived the ideas of Luther and Erasmus to be in concordance . Because meeting Luther posed certain risks , he asked Rhenanus to ensure his letter did not fall into the wrong hands . He also wrote his will , which contains the inventory of his books . In early 1519 , Bucer received the <unk> degree , and that summer he stated his theological views in a disputation before the faculty at Heidelberg , revealing his break with Aquinas and scholasticism . 
 The events that caused Bucer to leave the Dominican Order arose from his embrace of new ideas and his growing contact with other humanists and reformers . A fellow Dominican , Jacob van <unk> , the Grand Inquisitor of Cologne , tried to prosecute Johann Reuchlin , a humanist scholar . Other humanists , including the nobles Ulrich von Hutten and Imperial Knight Franz von Sickingen , took Reuchlin 's side . Hoogstraten was thwarted , but he now planned to target Bucer . On 11 November 1520 , Bucer told the reformer Wolfgang Capito in a letter that <unk> was threatening to make an example of him as a follower of Luther . To escape Dominican jurisdiction , Bucer needed to be freed of his monastic vows . Capito and others were able to expedite the annulment of his vows , and on 29 April 1521 he was formally released from the Dominican order . 
 For the next two years , Bucer was protected by Sickingen and Hutten . He also worked for a time at the court of Ludwig V , Elector Palatine , as chaplain to Ludwig 's younger brother Frederick . Sickingen was a senior figure at Ludwig 's court . This appointment enabled Bucer to live in Nuremberg , the most powerful city of the Empire , whose governing officials were strongly reformist . There he met many people who shared his viewpoint , including the humanist Willibald <unk> and the future Nuremberg reformer Andreas Osiander . In September 1521 , Bucer accepted Sickingen 's offer of the position of pastor at Landstuhl , where Sickingen had a castle , and Bucer moved to the town in May 1522 . In summer 1522 , he met and married Elisabeth <unk> , a former nun . 
 Sickingen also offered to pay for Bucer to study in Wittenberg . On his way , Bucer stopped in the town of Wissembourg , whose leading reformer , Heinrich <unk> , asked him to become his chaplain . Bucer agreed to interrupt his journey and went to work immediately , preaching daily sermons in which he attacked traditional church practices and monastic orders . On the basis of his belief that the Bible was the sole source for knowledge to attain salvation ( sola <unk> ) , he preached that the mass should not be considered as the <unk> of Christ , but rather the reception of God 's gift of salvation through Christ . He accused the monks of creating additional rules above what is contained in the Bible . He summarised his convictions in six theses , and called for a public disputation . His opponents , the local Franciscans and Dominicans , ignored him , but his sermons incited the townspeople to threaten the town 's monasteries . The bishop of Speyer reacted by excommunicating Bucer , and although the town council continued to support him , events beyond Wissembourg left Bucer in danger . His leading benefactor , Franz von Sickingen , was defeated and killed during the Knights ' Revolt , and Ulrich von Hutten became a fugitive . The Wissembourg council urged Bucer and <unk> to leave , and on 13 May 1523 they fled to nearby Strasbourg . 
 = = Reformer in Strasbourg ( 1523 – 1525 ) = = 
 Bucer , excommunicated and without means of subsistence , was in a precarious situation when he arrived in Strasbourg . He was not a citizen of the city , a status that afforded protection , and on 9 June 1523 he wrote an urgent letter to the Zürich reformer , Huldrych Zwingli , pleading for a safe post in Switzerland . Fortunately for Bucer , the Strasbourg council was under the influence of the reformer , Matthew Zell ; during Bucer 's first few months in the city he worked as Zell 's unofficial chaplain and was able to give classes on books of the Bible . The largest guild in Strasbourg , the <unk> or Gardeners , appointed him as the pastor of St Aurelia 's Church on 24 August 1523 . A month later the council accepted his application for citizenship . 
 In Strasbourg , Bucer joined a team of notable reformers : Zell , who took the role of the preacher to the masses ; Wolfgang Capito , the most influential theologian in the city ; and Caspar Hedio , the cathedral preacher . One of Bucer 's first actions in the cause of reform was to debate with Thomas <unk> , a monk who had attacked Luther in satires . While the city council vacillated on religious issues , the number of people supporting the Reformation and hostile towards the traditional clergy had grown . 
 The hostility reached a boiling point when Conrad Treger , the prior provincial of the Augustinians , denounced the reformist preachers and the burghers of Strasbourg as heretics . On 5 September 1524 , angry mobs broke into the monasteries , looting and destroying religious images . Many opponents of the Reformation were arrested , including Treger . After the council requested an official statement from the reformers , Bucer drafted twelve articles summarising the teachings of the Reformation , including justification by faith ( sola fide ) . He rejected the mass and Catholic concepts such as monastic vows , veneration of saints , and purgatory . He refused to recognise the authority of the pope and instead emphasised obedience to the government . Treger was released on 12 October and left Strasbourg . With his departure , overt opposition to the Reformation ended in the city . 
 The reformers ' first goal was the creation of a new order of service — at this time the Strasbourg reformers followed Zwingli 's liturgy . They presented proposals for a common order of service for the entire Reformation movement to the theologians of Wittenberg and Zürich . In Bucer 's booklet Grund und <unk> ( Basis and Cause ) , published in December 1524 , he attacked the idea of the mass as a sacrifice , and rejected liturgical garments , the altar , and any form of ritual . By May 1525 , reforms had been implemented in Strasbourg 's parish churches , but the city council decided to allow masses to continue in the cathedral and in the collegiate churches St. Thomas , Young St Peter , and Old St Peter . 
 = = Dialogue with Luther and Zwingli ( 1524 – 1530 ) = = 
 Beginning in 1524 , Bucer concentrated on the main issue dividing leading reformers , the eucharist . In this dispute , he attempted to mediate between Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli . The two theologians disagreed on whether the body and blood of Christ were physically present within the elements of bread and wine during the celebration of the Lord 's Supper . Luther believed in a corporeal or physical real presence of Christ ; and Zwingli believed Christ 's body and blood where made present by the Holy Spirit . By late 1524 , Bucer had abandoned the idea of corporeal real presence and , after some exegetical studies , accepted Zwingli 's interpretation . However , he did not believe the Reformation depended on either position but on faith in Christ , other matters being secondary . In this respect he differed from Zwingli . 
 In March 1526 , Bucer published Apologia , defending his views . He proposed a formula that he hoped would satisfy both sides : different understandings of scripture were acceptable , and church unity was assured so long as both sides had a " child @-@ like faith in God " . Bucer stated that his and Zwingli 's interpretation on the eucharist was the correct one , but while he considered the Wittenberg theologians to be in error , he accepted them as brethren as they agreed on the fundamentals of faith . He also published two translations of works by Luther and Johannes Bugenhagen , interpolating his own interpretation of the Lord 's Supper into the text . This outraged the Wittenberg theologians and damaged their relations with Bucer . In 1528 , when Luther published Vom <unk> Christi , <unk> [ Confession Concerning Christ 's Supper ] ( in German ) , detailing Luther 's concept of the sacramental union , Bucer responded with a treatise of his own , <unk> D. <unk> , und <unk> <unk> , vom <unk> Christi [ Conciliation between Dr. Luther and His Opponents Regarding Christ 's Supper ] ( in German ) . It took the form of a dialogue between two merchants , one from Nuremberg who supported Luther and the other from Strasbourg who supported Bucer , with the latter winning over his opponent . Bucer noted that as Luther had rejected <unk> , the idea that Christ was " made into bread " , there was no disagreement between Luther and Zwingli ; both believed in a spiritual presence of Christ in the eucharist . Luther harshly rejected Bucer 's interpretation . 
 During this time , Bucer and Zwingli remained in close touch , discussing other aspects of theology and practice such as the use of religious images and the liturgy . Bucer did not hesitate to disagree with Zwingli on occasion , although unity between Strasbourg and the Swiss churches took priority over such differences . In 1527 , Bucer and Capito attended a disputation in Bern to decide whether the city should accept reformed doctrines and practices . Bucer provided strong support for Zwingli 's leading role in the disputation , which finally brought the Reformation to Bern . 
 The last meeting between Zwingli and Luther was at the Marburg Colloquy of October 1529 , organised by Philip of Hesse and attended by various leading reformers , including Bucer . Luther and Zwingli agreed on 13 of the 14 topics discussed , but Zwingli did not accept the doctrine of the real presence , on which Luther would not compromise . After the discussion broke down between the two , Bucer tried to salvage the situation , but Luther noted , " It is obvious that we do not have one and the same spirit . " The meeting ended in failure . The following year , Bucer wrote of his disappointment at doctrinal inflexibility : 
 If you immediately condemn anyone who doesn 't quite believe the same as you do as forsaken by Christ 's Spirit , and consider anyone to be the enemy of truth who holds something false to be true , who , pray tell , can you still consider a brother ? I for one have never met two people who believed exactly the same thing . This holds true in theology as well . 
 = = Competing Protestant confessions ( 1530 – 1533 ) = = 
 The extent of the theological division among the reformers became evident when the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V asked them to present their views to him in 1530 at the Diet of Augsburg . Philipp Melanchthon , the main delegate from Wittenberg , quickly prepared the draft that eventually became the Augsburg Confession . The Wittenberg theologians rejected attempts by Strasbourg to adopt it without the article on the Lord 's Supper . In response , Bucer wrote a new confession , the Confessio <unk> ( Tetrapolitan Confession ) , so named because only four cities adopted it , Strasbourg and three other southern German cities , Konstanz , Memmingen , and Lindau . A copy of Melanchthon 's draft was used as the starting point and the only major change was the wording on the article on the eucharist . According to Eells , the article on the eucharist in the Tetrapolitan Confession stated , " In this sacrament his true body and true blood are truly given to eat and drink , as food for their souls , and to eternal life , that they may remain in him and he in them " . The ambiguous word " truly " was not defined . 
 Charles , however , decreed on 22 September that all reformers must reconcile with the Catholic faith , or he would use military force to suppress them . This prompted Melanchthon to call a meeting with Bucer and after lengthy discussions they agreed on nine theses , which they sent to Luther and to Strasbourg . The Strasbourg magistrates forwarded them to Basel and Zürich . Bucer met Luther in Coburg on 26 – 28 September . Luther still rejected Bucer 's theses , but he encouraged him to continue the search for unity . Bucer then travelled to several southern German cities , including Ulm , <unk> , Konstanz , Memmingen , and Lindau , and to the Swiss cities of Basel and Zürich . In Zurich on 12 October , he presented the articles to Zwingli , who neither opposed him nor agreed with him . 
 In February 1531 , the evangelical princes and cities of the empire set up the Protestant Schmalkaldic League to defend the reformed religion . Strasbourg 's Jakob Sturm negotiated the city 's inclusion on the basis of the Tetrapolitan Confession . By this time , Bucer 's relationship with Zwingli was deteriorating . Strasbourg 's political ties with the Elector of Saxony , and Bucer 's partial theological support of Luther , became too much for Zwingli , and on 21 February 1531 , he wrote to Bucer ending their friendship . When representatives of the southern German cities convened in Ulm on 23 – 24 March 1532 to discuss their alliance with the Schmalkaldic League , Bucer advised them to sign the Augsburg Confession , if they were being pressured to do so . For Bucer to recommend the rival confession over his own version surprised the Swiss cities . Luther continued his polemical attacks on Bucer , but Bucer was unperturbed : " In any case , we must seek unity and love in our relationships with everyone , " he wrote , " regardless of how they behave toward us . " In April and May 1533 , he again toured the southern German cities and Swiss cities . The latter remained unconvinced and did not join the Protestant alliance . 
 = = Organising the Strasbourg church ( 1529 – 1534 ) = = 
 While these events unfolded , the reformers in Strasbourg were slowly making progress . Their pressure on the council to ban all masses finally succeeded . On 20 February 1529 , Strasbourg openly joined the Reformation when the practice of the mass was officially suspended . In its place , two preaching services ( <unk> ) per Sunday were held in all the parish churches . On 5 January 1530 , when Strasbourg joined the alliance of Swiss cities , the <unk> Burgrecht [ Christian Federation ] ( in German ) , the council systematically removed images and side altars from the churches . Bucer had at first tolerated images in places of worship as long as they were not venerated . He later came to believe they should be removed because of their potential for abuse , and he advocated in a treatise for their orderly removal . First the authority of the magistrates should be obtained , and then the people instructed on abandoning devotion to images . 
 Bucer 's priority in Strasbourg was to instil moral discipline in the church . To this end , special wardens ( <unk> ) , chosen from among the laity , were assigned to each congregation to supervise both doctrine and practice . His concerns were motivated by the effects of a rapidly rising refugee population , attracted by Strasbourg 's tolerant asylum policies . <unk> of refugees , particularly after 1528 , had brought a series of revolutionary preachers into Strasbourg . These men were inspired by a variety of apocalyptic and mystical doctrines , and in some cases by hostility towards the social order and the notion of an official church . Significant numbers of refugees were Anabaptists and spiritualists , such as the followers of Melchior Hoffman , Caspar <unk> , and Clemens Ziegler . Bucer personally took responsibility for attacking these and other popular preachers to minimise their influence and secure their expulsion and that of their followers . On 30 November 1532 , the pastors and wardens of the church petitioned the council to enforce ethical standards , officially sanction the reformed faith , and refute the " sectarian " doctrines . The ruling authorities , who had allowed sectarian congregations to thrive among the refugees and lower orders , would only expel the obvious troublemakers . Bucer insisted that the council urgently take control of all Christian worship in the city for the common good . 
 In response to the petition , the council set up a commission that proposed a city synod . For this gathering , Bucer provided a draft document of sixteen articles on church doctrine . The synod convened on 3 June 1533 at the Church of the Penitent Magdalens to debate Bucer 's text , eventually accepting it in full . Sectarian leaders were brought before the synod and questioned by Bucer . Ziegler was dismissed and allowed to stay in Strasbourg ; Hoffmann was imprisoned as a danger to the state ; and <unk> left Strasbourg of his own accord . 
 Following the synod , the city council dragged its heels for several months . The synod commission , which included Bucer and Capito , decided to take the initiative and produced a draft ordinance for the regulation of the church . It proposed that the council assume almost complete control of the church , with responsibility for supervising doctrine , appointing church wardens , and maintaining moral standards . Still the council delayed , driving the pastors to the brink of resignation . Only when Hoffman 's followers seized power in Münster , in the Münster Rebellion , did the council act , fearing a similar incident in Strasbourg . On 4 March 1534 , the council announced that Bucer 's Tetrapolitan Confession and his sixteen articles on church doctrine were now official church statements of faith . All Anabaptists should either subscribe to these documents or leave the city . The decision established a new church in Strasbourg , with Capito declaring , " Bucer is the bishop of our church . " 
 = = Champion of Protestant unity ( 1534 – 1538 ) = = 
 By 1534 , Bucer was a key figure in the German Reformation . He repeatedly led initiatives to secure doctrinal agreement between Wittenberg , the south German cities , and Switzerland . In December 1534 , Bucer and Melanchthon held productive talks in Kassel , and Bucer then drafted ten theses that the Wittenberg theologians accepted . In October 1535 , Luther suggested a meeting in Eisenach to conclude a full agreement among the Protestant factions . Bucer persuaded the south Germans to attend , but the Swiss , led by Zwingli 's successor Heinrich Bullinger , were skeptical of his intentions . Instead they met in Basel on 1 February 1536 to draft their own confession of faith . Bucer and Capito attended and urged the Swiss to adopt a compromise wording on the eucharist that would not offend the Lutherans . The true presence of Christ was acknowledged while a natural or local union between Christ and the elements was denied . The result was the First Helvetic Confession , the success of which raised Bucer 's hopes for the upcoming meeting with Luther . 
 The meeting , moved to Wittenberg because Luther was ill , began on 21 May 1536 . To the surprise of the south Germans , Luther began by attacking them , demanding that they recant their false understanding of the eucharist . Capito intervened to calm matters , and Bucer claimed that Luther had misunderstood their views on the issue . The Lutherans insisted that unbelievers who partake of the eucharist truly receive the body and blood of Christ . Bucer and the south Germans believed that they receive only the elements of the bread and the wine . Johannes Bugenhagen formulated a compromise , approved by Luther , that distinguished between the unworthy ( <unk> ) and the unbelievers ( <unk> ) . The south Germans accepted that the unworthy receive Christ , and the question of what unbelievers receive was left unanswered . The two sides then worked fruitfully on other issues and on 28 May signed the Wittenberg Concord . Strasbourg quickly endorsed the document , but much coaxing from Bucer was required before he managed to convince all the south German cities . The Swiss cities were resistant , Zürich in particular . They rejected even a mild statement suggesting a union of Christ with the elements of the eucharist . Bucer advised the Swiss to hold a national synod to decide on the matter , hoping he could at least persuade Bern and Basel . The synod met in Zürich from 28 May to 4 April 1538 , but Bucer failed to win over a single city . The Swiss never accepted or rejected the Wittenberg Concord . 
 Bucer 's influence on the Swiss was eventually felt indirectly . In summer 1538 , he invited John Calvin , the future reformer of Geneva , to lead a French refugee congregation in Strasbourg . Bucer and Calvin had much in common theologically and maintained a long friendship . The extent to which Bucer influenced Calvin is an open question among modern scholars , but many of the reforms that Calvin later implemented in Geneva , including the liturgy and the church organisation , were originally developed in Strasbourg . 
 = = Advice to Philip of Hesse ( 1538 – 1539 ) = = 
 When Philip of Hesse 's law on the protection of the Jews in his territory expired in 1538 , he commissioned Bucer to create a new policy . Philip gave him a draft that was tolerant in the regulation of their affairs . Bucer rejected the favourable conditions and recommended that Jews be prohibited from all trades except those providing minimum subsistence . His <unk> also included his first use of negative stereotypes of the Jews . Philip 's ordinance of 1539 represented a compromise . He allowed the Jews to engage in trade and commerce but included strict rules on their association with Christians . The potential for an arbitrary enforcement of the new policy was frightening , and as a result many Jews chose to leave Hesse . For this Bucer must share part of the blame . 
 In November 1539 , Philip asked Bucer to produce a theological defence of bigamy , since he had decided to contract a bigamous marriage . Bucer reluctantly agreed , on condition the marriage be kept secret . Bucer consulted Luther and Melanchthon , and the three reformers presented Philip with a statement of advice ( <unk> <unk> ) ; later , Bucer produced his own arguments for and against bigamy . Although the document specified that bigamy could be sanctioned only under rare conditions , Philip took it as approval for his marriage to a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting of his sister . When rumours of the marriage spread , Luther told Philip to deny it , while Bucer advised him to hide his second wife and conceal the truth . Some scholars have noted a possible motivation for this notorious advice : the theologians believed they had advised Philip as a pastor would his parishioner , and that a lie was justified to guard the privacy of their confessional counsel . The scandal that followed the marriage caused Philip to lose political influence , and the Reformation within the Empire was severely compromised . 
 = = Doctrinal issues ( 1539 – 1542 ) = = 
 At the end of 1538 , shortly before the Catholic Duke Georg of Saxony died , a religious colloquy was convened in Leipzig to discuss potential reforms within the Duchy . The Electorate of Saxony sent Melanchthon , and Philip of Hesse sent Bucer . The Duchy itself was represented by Georg Witzel , a former Lutheran who had reconverted to Catholicism . In discussions from 2 to 7 January 1539 , Bucer and Witzel agreed to defer controversial points of doctrine , but Melanchthon withdrew , feeling that doctrinal unity was a prerequisite of a reform plan . Bucer and Witzel agreed on fifteen articles covering various issues of church life . Bucer , however , made no doctrinal concessions : he remained silent on critical matters such as the mass and the papacy . His ecumenical approach provoked harsh criticism from other reformers . 
 In the Truce of Frankfurt of 1539 , Charles and the leaders of the Schmalkaldic League agreed on a major colloquy to settle all religious issues within the Empire . Bucer placed great hopes on this meeting : he believed it would be possible to convince most German Catholics to accept the doctrine of sola fide as the basis for discussions on all other issues . Under various pseudonyms , he published tracts promoting a German national church . A conference in Haguenau began on 12 June 1540 , but during a month 's discussion the two sides failed to agree on a common starting point . They decided to reconvene in Worms . Melanchthon led the Protestants , with Bucer a major influence behind the scenes . When the colloquy again made no progress , the imperial chancellor , Nicholas <unk> de <unk> , called for secret negotiations . Bucer then began working with Johannes Gropper , a delegate of the archbishop of Cologne , Hermann von Wied . Aware of the risks of such apparent collusion , he was determined to forge unity among the German churches . The two agreed on twenty @-@ three articles in which Bucer conceded some issues toward the Catholic position . These included justification , the sacraments , and the organisation of the church . Four disputed issues were left undecided : veneration of the saints , private masses , auricular confession , and transubstantiation . The results were published in the " Worms Book " , which they confidentially presented to a prince on each side of the religious divide : Philip of Hesse and Joachim II , Elector of Brandenburg . 
 The Worms Book laid the groundwork for final negotiations at the Diet of Regensburg in 1541 . Charles created a small committee , consisting of Johannes Eck , Gropper , and Julius <unk> on the Catholic side and Melanchthon , Bucer , and Johann Pistorius on the Protestant side . The basis for discussion was the " Regensburg Book " — essentially the Worms Book with modifications by the papal legate , Gasparo Contarini , and other Catholic theologians . The two sides made a promising start , reaching agreement over the issue of justification by faith . But they could not agree on the teaching authority of the Church , the Protestants insisting it was the Bible , the Catholics the magisterium — in other words , the pope and his bishops . Into the article on the mass and the Lord 's Supper , Contarini had inserted the concept of transubstantiation , which was also unacceptable to the Protestants . As a result , the colloquy became deadlocked . To salvage some of the agreements reached , Charles and <unk> had the Regensburg Book reprinted with additional articles in which the Protestants were allowed to present their views . However , Luther in Wittenberg and the papal court in Rome had by this time seen the book , and they both publicly rejected the article on justification by faith . The failure of the conference was a major setback for Bucer . 
 After Bucer 's return from Regensburg , the city of Strasbourg was struck by the plague . First , Bucer 's friend and colleague Wolfgang Capito succumbed to the disease ; then Bucer 's wife Elisabeth died on 16 November 1541 . How many children Elisabeth had borne is unknown ; several died during child @-@ birth or at a young age . One son , Nathanael , although mentally and physically handicapped , survived to adulthood and remained with the Bucer family throughout his life . During Elisabeth 's final hours , she urged Bucer to marry Capito 's widow , Wibrandis Rosenblatt , after her death . He married Rosenblatt on 16 April 1542 , as her fourth husband — she had outlived Ludwig Keller , Johannes Oecolampadius , and Wolfgang Capito . She brought with her four children from her previous marriages . The new couple produced a daughter , whom they named Elisabeth . 
 = = Reform in the Electorate of Cologne ( 1542 – 1547 ) = = 
 On 5 February 1542 , Bucer and Gropper met with Hermann von Wied , archbishop @-@ elector of Cologne , to discuss the introduction of church reform in his archdiocese . As one of the seven electors of the Holy Roman Empire , the archbishop of Cologne was a key political figure for both the emperor and the reformers . After consulting the territorial diet , the archbishop enlisted Bucer to lead the reform , and on 14 December Bucer moved to Bonn , the capital of the electorate . His selection caused consternation in the Cologne cathedral chapter , the clerics assisting the archbishop . The hostility of the clergy soon caused a rift between Bucer and Gropper . On 19 December , the chapter lodged a formal protest against Bucer 's appointment , but von Wied supported his new protégé and Bucer was allowed to stay . He led a small congregation at Bonn cathedral , where he preached three times a week , although his main responsibility was to plan reform . 
 In January 1543 , Bucer began work on a major document for von Wied , <unk> <unk> , <unk> eine <unk> , im Worte Gottes <unk> Reformation ... <unk> sei [ Simple Consideration Concerning the Establishment of a Christian Reformation Founded upon God 's Word ] ( in German ) . Melanchthon joined him in Bonn in May , and Caspar Hedio a month later , to help draft the document . At the beginning of July , Bucer discussed the draft with the archbishop , who , after studying it , submitted the document to the territorial diet on 23 July . Although the cathedral chapter flatly rejected it , the diet ruled in favour of the reform programme . The final document was over three hundred pages and covered a number of subjects on doctrine , church law , and liturgy . Some of the principles proposed include justification by faith , the acceptance of baptism and the Lord 's Supper as the only valid sacraments , the offering of the cup to the laity , the holding of worship services in the vernacular , and the authorisation of priests to marry . 
 These first steps toward reform were halted on 17 August 1543 when Charles V and his troops entered Bonn . The emperor was engaged in a harsh campaign to assert his claim over lands contested by Wilhelm , Duke of Jülich @-@ Cleves @-@ Berg . Bucer was forced to return to Strasbourg shortly afterwards . When the anti @-@ reformist Cologne cathedral chapter and the University of Cologne appealed to both emperor and pope for protection against their archbishop , Charles took their side . Bucer wrote several treatises defending von Wied 's reformation plan , including a six @-@ hundred @-@ page book , <unk> <unk> ( Steadfast Defence ) , but he was unable to influence the course of events . Von Wied was excommunicated on 16 April 1546 , and he formally surrendered his electoral titles on 25 February 1547 . Bucer 's congregation in Bonn wrote to him in dismay at this disaster . Bucer reassured them that Christians who humble themselves before God eventually receive his protection . 
 = = Rejecting the Augsburg Interim ( 1547 – 1549 ) = = 
 With the onset of the Schmalkaldic War in 1546 , Protestants began a gradual retreat within the Empire . On 21 March 1547 , Strasbourg surrendered to the imperial army , and the following month the decisive imperial victory at the Battle of Mühlberg ended most Protestant resistance . In Strasbourg , Bucer and his colleagues , including Matthew Zell , Paul Fagius and Johannes Marbach , continued to press the council to bring more discipline and independence to the church . Charles V overruled their efforts at the Diet of Augsburg , which sat from September 1547 to May 1548 . The Diet produced an imperial decree , the provisional Augsburg Interim , which imposed Catholic rites and ceremonies throughout the Empire , with a few concessions to the Reformation . To make the document acceptable to the Protestants , Charles needed a leading figure among the reformers to endorse it , and he selected Bucer . 
 Bucer arrived in Augsburg on 30 March 1548 of his own volition . On 2 April , after he was shown the document , he announced his willingness to ratify it if certain changes were made ; but the time for negotiations had passed , and Charles insisted on his signature . When he refused , he was placed under house arrest on 13 April , and shortly afterwards in close confinement . On 20 April , he signed the Interim and was immediately freed . 
 Despite this capitulation , Bucer continued to fight . On his return to Strasbourg , he stepped up his attacks on Catholic rites and ceremonies , and on 2 July published the Ein <unk> <unk> der <unk> Lehre und Religion [ Concise Summary of Christian Doctrine and Religion ] ( in German ) , a confessional statement calling on Strasbourg to repent and to defend reformed principles outlined in twenty @-@ nine articles . Charles ordered all copies destroyed . Tension grew in Strasbourg , as Bucer 's opponents feared he was leading the city to disaster . Many Strasbourg merchants left to avoid a potential clash with imperial forces . On 30 August , the guild officials voted overwhelmingly to begin negotiations to introduce the Interim . Bucer stood firm ; even after the city of Konstanz surrendered and accepted the Interim , he called for Strasbourg to reject it unconditionally . In January 1549 , with plans underway for the implementation of the Interim in Strasbourg , Bucer and his colleagues continued to attack it , producing a memorandum on how to preserve the Protestant faith under its directives . With no significant support left , Bucer and Fagius were finally relieved of their positions and dismissed on 1 March 1549 . Bucer left Strasbourg on 5 April a refugee , as he had arrived twenty @-@ five years earlier . 
 = = Exile in England ( 1549 – 1551 ) = = 
 Bucer received several offers of sanctuary , including Melanchthon 's from Wittenberg and Calvin 's from Geneva . He accepted Archbishop Thomas Cranmer 's invitation to come to England ; from his correspondence with several notable Englishmen , he believed that the English Reformation had advanced with some success . On 25 April 1549 Bucer , Fagius , and others arrived in London , where Cranmer received them with full honours . A few days later , Bucer and Fagius were introduced to Edward VI and his court . Bucer 's wife Wibrandis and his stepdaughter Agnes Capito ( daughter of Wolfgang Capito ) joined him in September . The following year , Wibrandis arranged for the rest of her children and her elderly mother to come to England . 
 Bucer took the position of Regius Professor of Divinity at the University of Cambridge . In June he entered a controversy when Peter Martyr , another refugee who had taken the equivalent Regius Professor position at Oxford University , debated with Catholic colleagues over the issue of the Lord 's Supper . Martyr asked Bucer for his support , but Bucer did not totally agree with Martyr 's position and thought that exposure of differences would not assist the cause of reform . Unwilling to see the eucharist conflict repeat itself in England , he told Martyr he did not take sides , Catholic , Lutheran , or Zwinglian . He said , " We must aspire with the utmost zeal to edify as many people as we possibly can in faith and in the love of Christ — and to offend no one . " 
 In 1550 , another conflict arose when John Hooper , the new bishop of Gloucester , refused to don the traditional clothes for his consecration . The vestments controversy pitted Cranmer , who supported the wearing of clerical garments , against Hooper , Martyr and Jan Laski , the pastor of the Stranger church in London . As it was known that Bucer had reformed the church services in Strasbourg to emulate the simplicity of the early church , Hooper expected Bucer 's support . However , Bucer tried to stay out of the fray , arguing that there were more important issues to deal with — lack of pastors and pastoral care , the need for <unk> instruction , and the implementation of church discipline . Hooper refused to be swayed , and was imprisoned in the Tower of London until he accepted Cranmer 's demand . 
 Bucer had ambitious goals in diffusing the Reformation throughout England . He was disappointed , therefore , when those in power failed to consult him in bringing about change . On learning about the custom of presenting a memorandum to the king every new year , he worked on a major treatise which he gave as a draft to his friend John Cheke on 21 October 1550 . The De Regno Christi [ On the Kingdom of Christ ] was the culmination of Bucer 's many years of experience , a summary of his thought and theology that he described as his legacy . In it he urged Edward VI to take control of the English Reformation , and proposed that Parliament introduce fourteen laws of reform , covering both ecclesiastical and civil matters . In his view the Reformation was not only concerned with the church , but in all areas of life . Noting the difficult social conditions in England , he promoted the role of deacons to care for the poor and needy . He described marriage as a social contract rather than a sacrament , hence he permitted divorce , a modern idea that was considered too advanced for its time . He advocated the restructuring of economic and administrative systems with suggestions for improving industry , agriculture , and education . His ideal society was distinctively authoritarian , with a strong emphasis on Christian discipline . The De Regno Christi was never to be the charter of the English Reformation that Bucer intended : it was finally printed not in England but in Basel , in 1557 . 
 Bucer 's last major contribution to the English Reformation was a treatise on the original 1549 edition of the Book of Common Prayer . Cranmer had requested his opinion on how the book should be revised , and Bucer submitted his response on 5 January 1551 . He called for the simplification of the liturgy , noting non @-@ essential elements : certain holidays in the liturgical calendar , actions of piety such as <unk> , and ceremonies such as private masses . He focused on the congregation and how the people would worship and be taught . How far Bucer 's critique influenced the 1552 second edition of the Prayer Book is unknown . Scholars agree that although Bucer 's impact on the Church of England should not be overestimated , he exercised his greatest influence on the revision of the Prayer Book . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Bucer 's time in England was dogged by illnesses , including rheumatism , coughs , and intestinal ailments . Symptoms such as vomiting , shivering , and sweating suggest severe tuberculosis . In February 1551 , his health finally broke down , and on the 22nd he dictated an addition to his will . He named Walter Haddon and Matthew Parker as executors , commended his loved ones to Thomas Cranmer , and thanked his stepdaughter Agnes Capito for taking care of him . On 28 February , after encouraging those near him to do all they could to realise his vision as expressed in De Regno Christi , he died at the age of 59 . He was buried in the church of Great St Mary 's in Cambridge before a large crowd of university professors and students . 
 In a letter to Peter Martyr , John Cheke wrote a fitting eulogy : 
 We are deprived of a leader than whom the whole world would scarcely obtain a greater , whether in knowledge of true religion or in integrity and innocence of life , or in thirst for study of the most holy things , or in exhausting labour in advancing piety , or in authority and fulness of teaching , or in anything that is praiseworthy and renowned . 
 Bucer left his wife Wibrandis a significant inheritance consisting mainly of the household and his large collection of books . She eventually returned to Basel , where she died on 1 November 1564 at the age of 60 . 
 When Mary I came to the throne , she had Bucer and Fagius tried posthumously for heresy as part of her efforts to restore Catholicism in England . Their caskets were disinterred and their remains burned , along with copies of their books . On 22 July 1560 , Elizabeth I formally rehabilitated both reformers . A brass plaque on the floor of Great St Mary 's marks the original location of Bucer 's grave . 
 After Bucer 's death , his writings continued to be translated , reprinted , and disseminated throughout Europe . No " <unk> " denomination , however , emerged from his ministry , probably because he never developed a systematic theology as Melanchthon had for the Lutheran church and Calvin for the Reformed churches . Several groups , including Anglicans , Puritans , Lutherans , and Calvinists , claimed him as one of their own . The adaptability of his theology to each confessional point @-@ of @-@ view also led polemicists to criticise it as too accommodating . His theology could be best summarised as being practical and pastoral rather than theoretical . Bucer was not so concerned about staking a doctrinal claim per se , but rather he took a standpoint in order to discuss and to win over his opponents . At the same time his theological stand was grounded in the conditions of his time where he envisioned the ideal society to be one that was led by an enlightened , God @-@ centred government with all the people united under Christian fellowship . Martin Bucer is chiefly remembered for his promotion of doctrinal unity , or ecumenism , and his lifelong struggle to create an inclusive church . 
 = Chevrolet Volt = 
 The Chevrolet Volt is a plug @-@ in hybrid manufactured by General Motors , also marketed in rebadged variants as the Holden Volt in Australia and New Zealand , and with a different fascia as the Vauxhall Ampera in the United Kingdom and as the Opel Ampera in the remainder of Europe . 
 Sales of the 2011 Volt began in the U.S. in mid @-@ December 2010 followed by various European countries and other international markets in 2011 . Global combined Volt / Ampera family sales totaled over 110 @,@ 000 unit by the end of March 2016 , with the U.S. as the leading market with over 96 @,@ 600 Volts delivered through May 2016 . Canada is the world 's second largest market with almost 6 @,@ 400 Volts sold through May 2016 . About 10 @,@ 000 Opel / Vauxhall Ampera cars had been sold in Europe as of December 2015 , with the Netherlands leading the European region with almost 5 @,@ 000 Amperas and over 1 @,@ 000 Volts registered . The Volt / Ampera family of vehicles is the world 's all @-@ time best @-@ selling plug @-@ in hybrid vehicle as of March 2016 . 
 The Volt operates as a pure battery electric vehicle until its battery capacity drops to a predetermined threshold from full charge . From there its internal combustion engine powers an electric generator to extend the vehicle 's range as needed . When the engine is running it may be periodically mechanically linked ( by a clutch ) to a planetary gear set , and hence the output drive axle , to improve energy efficiency . The Volt 's regenerative braking also contributes to the on @-@ board electricity generation . Under the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) cycle , the 2013 / 15 model year Volt all @-@ electric range is 38 mi ( 61 km ) , with a combined electric mode / gasoline @-@ only rating of 62 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 8 L / 100 km ; 74 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ equivalent ) . 
 The second generation Volt improved battery system and drivetrain increased the all @-@ electric range to 53 miles ( 85 km ) , its EPA rated fuel economy in charge @-@ sustaining mode to 42 mpg @-@ US ( 5 @.@ 6 L / 100 km ; 50 mpg @-@ imp ) , and the combined city / highway fuel economy in all @-@ electric mode to 106 MPG @-@ e , up from 98 MPG @-@ e . Deliveries to retail customers in the U.S. and Canada began in October 2015 as a 2016 model year . 
 The Volt has won several awards , including the 2009 Green Car Vision Award , 2011 Green Car of the Year , 2011 North American Car of the Year , 2011 World Green Car , 2012 European Car of the Year , and 2016 Green Car of the Year . Controversies regarding the Volt include the extent to which the U.S. federal government may have participated in the Volt ’ s development , which continued through General Motors ' 2009 government @-@ led bankruptcy , and concerns about the battery pack fire risk following a crash test that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) performed on a Volt in 2011 . At the completion of its investigation NHTSA concluded that no discernible defect trend exists . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The Society of Automotive Engineers ' ( SAE ) definition of a hybrid vehicle states that the vehicle shall have " two or more energy storage systems both of which must provide propulsion power , either together or independently . " General Motors has avoided the use of the term " hybrid " when describing its Voltec designs , even after the carmaker revealed that in some cases the combustion engine provided some assist at high speeds or to improve performance . Instead General Motors describes the Volt as an electric vehicle equipped with a " range extending " gasoline powered internal combustion engine ( ICE ) as a genset and therefore dubbed the Volt an " Extended Range Electric Vehicle " or E @-@ REV . In a January 2011 interview , the Chevy Volt 's Global Chief Engineer , Pamela Fletcher , referred to the Volt as " an electric car with extended range . " 
 According to the Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) definitions , the Volt is a plug @-@ in hybrid vehicle , due to the combination of an internal combustion engine and two electric motors , along with a battery that can accept off @-@ board energy . The Volt operates as a purely electric vehicle for the first 25 to 50 miles ( 40 to 80 km ) in charge @-@ depleting mode . When the battery capacity drops below a pre @-@ established threshold from full charge , the vehicle enters charge @-@ sustaining mode , and the Volt 's control system will select the most optimally efficient drive mode to improve performance and boost high @-@ speed efficiency . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Concept vehicle = = = 
 The Chevrolet Volt concept car debuted at the January 2007 North American International Auto Show , becoming the first @-@ ever series plug @-@ in hybrid concept car shown by a major car manufacturer . The Volt concept vehicle had four doors with a rear liftgate and seating for four passengers . This was a significant change in design when compared to the General Motors EV1 of the 1990s , which only seated two to reduce weight and to make the necessary room for the lead @-@ acid battery pack . The top speed was also increased on the Volt , from the electronically limited 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) to 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . The battery pack size was reduced , from about 10 @.@ 6 cu ft ( 300 L ) in volume in the EV1 , to 3 @.@ 5 cu ft ( 100 L ) in the Volt . 
 General Motors ' then @-@ Vice @-@ Chairman Robert Lutz said the two @-@ seater sports car being developed by Tesla , the Tesla Roadster , and the rapid advancement of lithium @-@ ion battery technology inspired him to push the carmaker to develop the Volt after the 2006 Detroit Auto Show . Lutz 's initial idea was to develop an all @-@ electric car , but Jon Lauckner , General Motors Vice President for Global Vehicle Development , convinced him that to avoid an expensive battery , range anxiety concerns , and lack of public charging infrastructure , they could use a smaller battery pack with a small gasoline engine driving a generator acting as a backup to extend the range , but without a mechanical connection between the gasoline engine and the drive wheels , so it would be a pure electrically driven vehicle without many of the limitations General Motors learned from the EV1 experience . 
 Most of the Volt initial design parameters defined for the development of the concept car , then referred as the " <unk> " in homage to the iPod , were kept throughout the process up to the final production version . A key design parameter was a target of 40 miles ( 64 km ) for the all @-@ electric range , selected to keep the battery size small and lower costs , and mainly because research showed that in the U.S. 78 percent of daily commuters travel 40 miles or less . This target range would allow most travel to be accomplished electrically driven and the assumption was made that charging will take place at home overnight . This requirement translated using a lithium @-@ ion battery pack with an energy storage capacity of 16 kWh considering that the battery would be used until the state of charge ( SOC ) of the battery reached 30 % . This limit to the SOC was necessary in order to maintain operational performance under a wide range of environments , and to minimize the battery degradation to allow at least a ten @-@ year life span . The initial target range for the gasoline engine / generator was set between 250 to 300 miles ( 400 to 480 km ) and the vehicle had to be family size for four or five passengers . 
 Another key design decision was to develop the concept car based on a new family of common powertrain components for electric propulsion , which initially was called the E @-@ Flex Systems , “ E ” stands for electric drive and “ Flex ” for the different sources of electricity , but later was renamed Voltec drive system . The E @-@ Flex or Voltec powertrain is an attempt to standardize many components of possible future electrically propelled vehicles , and to allow multiple interchangeable electricity @-@ generating systems . The E @-@ Flex powertrain has the potential to adapt the vehicles to pure battery electric , to fuel cell @-@ powered or to several other sources of energy to create electricity on board , such as engine @-@ generator sets ( genset ) fueled by gasoline , diesel , biodiesel , ethanol fuel ( E100 ) , or flex @-@ fuel ( E85 ) . Regenerative braking would also contribute to the on @-@ board electricity generation . On October 2006 the E @-@ flex powertrain was selected for the new propulsion architecture and the name Volt was chosen by General Motors . 
 The Volt concept car became the first application of the E @-@ Flex ( Voltec ) drive system with a combination of an electric motor , the same used in the Chevrolet Equinox Fuel Cell , a 16 kW · h ( 58 MJ ) lithium @-@ ion battery pack with 136 kW of peak power , and a genset consisting of a small 1 @.@ 0 L , 3 @-@ cylinder turbocharged flex @-@ fuel capable engine linked to a 53 kW ( 71 hp ) generator . General Motors called this genset an electric vehicle ( EV ) range extender . The vehicle was propelled by an electric motor with a peak output of 120 kW ( 160 hp ) delivering 236 lb ft ( 320 <unk> ) of motoring torque . The concept car featured several advanced materials from GE Automotive Plastics which allowed GM to reduce the vehicle weight up to 50 percent . 
 The Volt concept featured a 12 US gal ( 45 L ; 10 @.@ 0 imp gal ) fuel capacity providing the vehicle a total driving range of around 640 mi ( 1 @,@ 030 km ) , which considered a gasoline fuel efficiency of about 50 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 60 mpg @-@ imp ) and a 40 mi ( 64 km ) all @-@ electric range . According to General Motors estimates , a daily drive of 60 mi ( 97 km ) , combined with an overnight recharge to support the first 40 all @-@ electric miles , would yield an effective gasoline fuel economy of 150 mpg @-@ US ( 1 @.@ 6 L / 100 km ; 180 mpg @-@ imp ) . General Motors also emphasized that the Volt would further reduce dependence on imported oil if E85 ethanol was used instead of gasoline to power the on @-@ board generator engine . Robert Lutz added that if the driver used E85 , " the fuel economy figure became 525 miles per ( equivalent ) petroleum gallon " , as only 15 % of gasoline is used in this blend . General Motors also noted that actual production of the Volt depended on further battery development , because the required rechargeable batteries needed to make the Volt a viable vehicle did not exist in the market and had yet to be developed . The concept car was actually powered by two 12 @-@ volt conventional car batteries , just enough power to allow the vehicle to move at low speeds in the stand . 
 = = First generation ( 2010 – 2015 ) = = 
 = = = Production model = = = 
 The production design model officially unveiled on September 16 , 2008 , as part of General Motors centennial celebration at the <unk> headquarters in Detroit . The production model differed greatly in design from the original concept car . The carmaker cited necessary aerodynamic changes needed to reduce the concept car 's high drag coefficient of Cd = 0 @.@ 43 down to a more efficient Cd = 0 @.@ 28 , though still somewhat higher than the Toyota Prius Cd = 0 @.@ 25 . Another reason was the use of General Motors ' new global compact vehicle platform Delta II to keep costs reasonable , and shared with the 2010 model year Chevrolet Cruze . Another significant difference from the concept car is the seating , as the production Volt seats four rather than five passengers . This change was due to the higher @-@ than @-@ usual central tunnel that runs from the front console to the rear seat that houses the car 's T @-@ shaped battery pack . 
 After the concept was put into the pipeline for production , General Motors began looking for a partner to develop the Volt 's lithium @-@ ion battery pack . The carmaker evaluated about twenty @-@ five different battery cell chemistries and constructions from around two dozen lithium @-@ ion battery makers around the world . Due to their more promising cell technologies , two companies were selected in June 2007 , Compact Power ( CPI ) , which uses a lithium manganese oxide ( <unk> ) cell made by its parent company , LG Chemical ; and Continental Automotive Systems , which uses lithium iron phosphate based cylindrical cells made by <unk> . By the end of October 2007 CPI ( LG Chem ) delivered their finished battery pack prototypes , and <unk> delivered theirs by January 2008 . General Motors testing process was conducted at the laboratory the carmaker had created for the GM EV1 program . The battery packs included monitoring systems designed to keep the batteries cool and operating at optimum capacity despite a wide range of ambient temperatures . In order to make sure the battery pack would last ten years and 150 @,@ 000 miles ( 240 @,@ 000 km ) expected for the battery warranty , the Volt team decided to use only half of the 16 kWh capacity to reduce the rate of capacity degradation , limiting the state of charge ( SOC ) up to 80 % of capacity and never depleting the battery below 30 % . General Motors also was expecting the battery could withstand 5 @,@ 000 full discharges without losing more than 10 % of its charge capacity . 
 In April 2008 General Motors started extensive battery testing . In two years the carmaker put the battery packs to the equivalent of 150 @,@ 000 real @-@ world miles ( 240 @,@ 000 km ) and ten years of use . The durability of the battery pack was tested for a broad range of extreme ambient conditions including a shaker table to simulate potholes and a thermal chamber , to simulate temperatures varying from 116 ° F ( 47 ° C ) , typical of the Southwest deserts , to − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) typical of the Alaska tundra . In April 2008 the lithium @-@ ion battery pack was placed in Chevrolet <unk> fitted with the Volt powertrain to be used as test mules for further real @-@ world testing . In October 2008 General Motors chose CPI ( LG Chemical ) to provide the battery systems for the first production version of the Volt . In July 2008 General Motors confirmed that a non @-@ turbocharged , 1 @.@ 4 L 4 @-@ cylinder engine would be used as the range extender , and that the intention was to build it in Flint , Michigan . In April 2009 , General Motors allowed journalists to test the Volt powertrain in the body of Chevrolet Cruze sedans used as test mules which lacked the range @-@ extending generator at the GM Technical Center in Warren , Michigan . 
 The first pre @-@ production test car based on the final Volt design was built in June 2009 , in Warren , Michigan , and by October 2009 , 80 Volts had been built and were tested under various conditions . On March 31 , 2010 , the first factory @-@ built Volt was produced at the Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant in order to test the production line and for quality control purposes , both of the tooling and the pre @-@ production vehicles produced before regular production began . 
 Tony <unk> was the Volt Vehicle Line Director from 2006 to 2012 , and he was known as employee # 1 and led the team from concept to production . 
 Official introduction 
 General Motors held a ceremony at its Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant on November 30 , 2010 , to introduce the first Chevrolet Volt off the assembly line . The first Volt built for retail sale was earmarked for display at General Motors ' Heritage Center museum in Sterling Heights , Michigan . The second unit was offered at a public auction , with an opening bid of US $ 50 @,@ 000 and it was won by Rick Hendrick who paid US $ 225 @,@ 000 . The proceeds went to fund math and sciences education in Detroit through the Detroit Public Schools Foundation . Deliveries to retail customers in the United States began in mid December 2010 . Volt deliveries began in Canada in September 2011 . The first deliveries of the Chevrolet Volt in Europe took place in November 2011 . The European version of the Volt , the Opel Ampera , was released to retail customers in Europe in February 2012 . Deliveries of the right @-@ hand drive Vauxhall Ampera in the UK began in May 2012 . The Holden Volt was released in Australia in December 2012 . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 = = = = Drivetrain = = = = 
 The 2011 Chevrolet Volt has a 16 kWh / 45 A · h ( 10 @.@ 4 kWh usable ) lithium @-@ ion battery pack that can be charged by plugging the car into a 120 @-@ 240 VAC residential electrical outlet using the provided SAE J1772 @-@ compliant charging cord . No external charging station is required . The Volt is propelled by an electric motor with a peak output of 111 kW ( 149 hp ) delivering 273 lb · ft ( 370 N · m ) of torque . Capacity of the battery pack was increased to 16 @.@ 5 kWh ( 10 @.@ 9 kWh usable ) for 2013 models , which increased the all @-@ electric range from 35 to 38 mi ( 56 to 61 km ) . Other specifications remained the same . The battery pack capacity was increased to 17 @.@ 1 kWh for 2015 models . This incremental upgrade is likely to reflect in an improvement in range over previous model years , but as of July 2014 , the 2015 Volt has not been re @-@ certified with the EPA . 
 While driving , after the Volt battery has dropped to a predetermined threshold from full charge , a small naturally aspirated 1 @.@ 4 L 4 @-@ cylinder gasoline fueled internal combustion engine ( Opel 's Family 0 ) with approximately 80 hp ( 60 kW ) , powers a 55 kW generator to extend the Volt 's range . The vehicle also has a regenerative braking system . The electrical power from the generator is sent primarily to the electric motor , with the excess going to the batteries , depending on the state of charge ( SOC ) of the battery pack and the power demanded at the wheels . 
 The Volt requires premium gasoline with a minimum 91 or octane rating because the higher octane rating fuel permits the 10 @.@ 5 : 1 compression ratio engine to utilize more ignition timing advance in order to maximize its fuel efficiency by 5 to 10 % as compared to regular gasoline . For users who drive mostly in electric mode and to avoid maintenance problems caused by storing the same gasoline in the tank for months , the 2011 Volt has a sealed and pressurized fuel tank to avoid evaporation , and as a result , the fuel filler has to be depressurized before opening the tank . Also the engine management system monitors the time between engine running and it is programmed to prompt the driver to run past the 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) all @-@ electric range before recharging in order to consume some gasoline . If the driver does not run on gasoline , the system will automatically run the maintenance mode which starts the engine to consume some of the aging fuel and circulate the fluids within the engine . A configuration with an E85 flex @-@ fuel capable engine is under development and was expected to be available in 2013 . 
 Operating and driving modes 
 The Voltec drivetrain has three power converting elements : 
 Primary traction electric motor / generator , provides good acceleration for driving at lower speeds and regeneration for braking , its maximum output of 111 kW setting the maximum output of the whole system . 
 Secondary electric motor / generator , works primarily as generator capable of producing 55 kW or when necessary acts as a motor assisting the primary electric motor . 
 Internal combustion engine of 63 kW power , engaged when the batteries reach the predetermined threshold . 
 These units are connected via a planetary gear and three electrically controlled hydraulic clutches to provide power output for propulsion in any of four programmed operating modes : 
 Single motor electric – The primary motor runs solely on battery power , maximum propulsion power is 111 kW . 
 Dual motor electric – At higher vehicle speeds the secondary motor engages over the planetary gear such that it reduces the speed of the primary motor . This facilitates higher efficiency and better mileage for the combined system , without increasing the maximum power . 
 Single motor extended – The battery reaches its minimum charge which triggers the combustion engine . The engine drives the secondary motor which now works as a generator , via the charging electronics , to keep the minimum battery charge level . The primary motor can still provide its 111 kW for short acceleration , albeit not sustained . 
 Dual motor extended – The electric motors are used again in dual configuration with increased efficiency at higher speeds . Additionally the gasoline engine contributes propulsion power via the planetary gear . While power is drained from the battery the amount is less than in mode 2 for the same propulsion power , thus extending the range . 
 The drivetrain permits the Volt to operate as a pure battery electric vehicle until its battery capacity has been depleted to a defined level , at which time it commences to operate as a series hybrid design where the gasoline engine drives the generator , which keeps the battery at minimum level charge and provides power to the electric motors . The full charge of the battery is replenished only by loading it on the electrical grid . 
 While in this series mode at higher speeds and loads , ( typically above 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) at light to moderate loads ) the gasoline engine can engage mechanically to the output from the transmission and assist both electric motors in driving the wheels , in which case the Volt operates as a power @-@ split or series @-@ parallel hybrid . After its all @-@ electric range has been depleted , at speeds between 30 to 70 miles per hour ( 48 to 113 km / h ) , the Volt is programmed to select the most efficient drive mode , which improves performance and boosts high @-@ speed efficiency by 10 to 15 percent . 
 While operating modes are switched automatically the Volt allows the driver to choose from three drive modes : normal , sport and mountain . The mountain mode , which is expected to be required only under unusual power demand conditions , increases minimum battery state of charge ( SOC ) to around 45 % , thus maintaining performance on steep and long grades . The driver will hear more engine noise due to the higher rate of power generation required to maintain this mode . The sport mode causes the engine to rev higher , and the response to the throttle pedal is quicker . The Ampera has an additional option , the " City Mode " or " battery hold " , allowing the driver to save the energy currently stored in the battery for use when traveling in urban areas or restricted zones . The 2013 model year Volt includes a " Hold " option to provide the same choice . 
 = = = = Battery = = = = 
 The 2011 Volt 's lithium @-@ ion battery ( Li @-@ ion ) battery pack weighs 435 lb ( 197 kg ) and " consists of 288 individual cells arranged into nine modules . Plastic frames hold pairs of lithium @-@ ion cells that sandwich an aluminum cooling fin . The design and construction of that aluminum plate was critical to ensuring an even temperature distribution with no hot or cool spots across the flat , rectangular cell . The battery pack has its own cooling circuit that is similar to , but independent from , the engine cooling system . " 
 For the 2011 / 2012 model years , the battery pack stores 16 kWh of energy but it is controlled or buffered via the energy management system to use only 10 @.@ 3 kWh of this capacity to maximize the life of the pack . For this reason the battery pack never fully charges or depletes , as the software only allows the battery to operate within a state of charge ( SOC ) window of 65 % , after which the engine kicks in and maintains the charge near the lower level . The minimum SOC varies depending on operating conditions . When more power is required , such as mountain mode , the lower limit of the SOC will rise to 45 % to ensure there is enough power available . The battery capacity was increased to 16 @.@ 5 kWh for the 2013 model year , the SOC window will be increased to use 10 @.@ 8 kWh of the total battery energy , and the buffer to ensure battery life will not be reduced . These changes will increase the Volt 's all @-@ electric range but charging will take slightly longer . The improved battery performance and durability were achieved through minor changes to the material composition of the battery cell chemistry . 
 Despite containing near identical energy ( + / - 0 @.@ 5 kWh ) , the Volt 's battery pack is over 70 % lighter than the EV1 's original 1 @,@ 310 lb ( 590 kg ) , 16 @.@ 5 kWh AC Delco lead @-@ acid battery pack , mainly because the Volt uses higher specific energy Li @-@ ion batteries . Li @-@ ion batteries are expected to become less expensive as economies of scale take effect . 
 Because batteries are sensitive to temperature changes , the Volt has a thermal management system to monitor and maintain the battery cell temperature for optimum performance and durability . The Volt 's battery pack provides reliable operation , when plugged in , at cell temperatures as low as − 13 ° F ( − 25 ° C ) and as high as 122 ° F ( 50 ° C ) . The Volt features a battery pack that can be both warmed or cooled . In cold weather the battery coolant is electrically heated during charging or operation in order to provide full power capability ; in hot weather the battery coolant can be chilled utilizing the vehicle 's air @-@ conditioning system preventing over @-@ temperature damage . 
 The Volt 's battery is guaranteed by General Motors for eight years or 100 @,@ 000 miles ( 160 @,@ 000 km ) , and will cover all 161 battery components . GM estimates that the Volt batteries will degrade by 10 to 30 % after 8 years or 100 @,@ 000 miles . GM has applied for a patent that may allow technicians to quickly and cheaply recover some of the performance of degraded battery packs . The Volt ’ s battery management system runs more than 500 diagnostics at 10 times per second , allowing it to keep track of the Volt ’ s battery pack in real @-@ time , 85 % of which ensure the battery pack is operating safely and 15 % monitor battery performance and life . 
 The Volt uses a plug specification published in 2009 , SAE J1772 @-@ 2009 , that is considered a standard for electric cars in North America . Depending on in @-@ car settings a full charge will take approximately 10 hours ( 12A setting ) to as much as 14 hours ( 8A setting ) from a standard North American 120 V , 15 A outlet and about 4 hours from a 240 VAC source and suitable 240V EVSE . The Volt comes with a 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) charging cord suitable for the standard household power outlet in its country of sale . If plugged in , recharging can be controlled remotely through a smartphone application . 
 = = = = Others = = = = 
 In order to save energy , the Volt will sometimes heat the seats instead of blowing heated air through HVAC system , as heating the vehicle 's cabin draws significant power , and can even exceed what is needed to move the vehicle on occasions . A power @-@ saving stereo system uses amplifiers that switch on and off rapidly to save power . It uses 50 percent less energy . The system is also lighter because the use of high grade neodymium magnets . 
 = = = Performance = = = 
 The Volt has a top speed of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . According to Edmunds.com road tests , the Volt 's 0 to 60 mph ( 0 – 97 km / h ) acceleration time is 9 @.@ 2 seconds running on electric @-@ only mode , and 9 @.@ 0 seconds with the gasoline engine assisting propulsion . Motor Trend reports the Volt 's quarter mile ( 402 m ) time is 16 @.@ 9 sec @ 84 @.@ 3 mph ( 135 @.@ 7 km / h ) , while Edmunds reports a quarter mile ( 402 m ) time of 16 @.@ 8 sec @ 81 @.@ 5 mph ( 131 @.@ 2 km / h ) in electric @-@ only operation , and 16 @.@ 6 sec @ 85 @.@ 5 mph ( 137 @.@ 6 km / h ) with the gasoline engine assisting . Motor Trend reports a 60 to 0 mph ( 97 to 0 km / h ) braking distance of 112 ft ( 34 m ) and Edmunds.com of 124 ft ( 38 m ) . 
 = = = = Range = = = = 
 = = = = = United States = = = = = 
 2011 – 2012 model years 
 According to General Motors the Volt 's all @-@ electric range with fully charged batteries varies from 25 to 50 miles ( 40 to 80 km ) depending on terrain , driving technique , and temperature . The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) official all @-@ electric range is 35 miles ( 56 km ) with an energy consumption of 36 kWh per 100 miles ( 810 kJ / km ) . This range is based on the agency 's five @-@ cycle tests using varying driving conditions and climate controls . The total range with a full tank of gasoline and a fully charged battery is 379 miles ( 609 @.@ 9 km ) according to EPA tests . 
 The Volt 's nominal usable battery capacity is 10 @.@ 3 kWh . The Volt 's fuel tank capacity is 9 @.@ 3 US gallons ( 35 L ; 7 @.@ 7 imp gal ) . Aside from charge sustaining modes of operation , the battery capacity is completely used first , and then the fuel is consumed . In the event that the car is operated until it runs out of gasoline , the gasoline @-@ powered generator shuts down , and the Volt continues to operate , tapping into a reserve portion of the battery capacity which is below the regular minimum state @-@ of @-@ charge . The reserve battery capacity provides an extra 3 to 4 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 to 6 @.@ 4 km ) . If this reserve battery capacity is also exhausted , the Volt slows to a stop . 
 2013 – 2015 model years 
 As a result of its improved battery chemistry , the 2013 model year Volt increased its EPA 's rated all @-@ electric range to 38 miles ( 61 km ) with an energy consumption of 35 kWh per 100 miles ( 788 kJ / km ) , down from 36 kWh ( 810 kJ / km ) in the 2012 model . The total range with a full tank of gasoline and a fully charged battery is 380 miles ( 611 @.@ 6 km ) . The 2014 and 2015 Volt have the same EPA ratings . 
 = = = = = Europe = = = = = 
 The Opel Ampera official all @-@ electric range under the EU @-@ approved UN ECE R101 standard for plug @-@ in hybrids is 83 km ( 52 mi ) . Opel prefers to state that the Ampera 's EV ranges is 40 to 80 kilometres ( 25 to 50 mi ) which is confirmed in tests carried out by ADAC <unk> . The Vauxhall Ampera is reported to have a total range of 310 mi ( 500 km ) . 
 = = = = Fuel economy = = = = 
 United States 
 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) officially rated the 2011 model year Volt 's combined city / highway fuel economy in all @-@ electric mode at 93 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) ( 2 @.@ 5 L gasoline equivalent / 100 km ; 112 mpg @-@ imp gasoline equivalent ) and 94 MPG @-@ e for the 2012 model year . This rating considers a conversion factor of 33 @.@ 7 kWh of electricity being the energy equivalent of a gallon of gasoline . The EPA rating in gasoline @-@ only mode is 37 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 44 mpg @-@ imp ) . The overall combined city / highway gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy rating for the 2011 Volt is 60 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 72 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) , The EPA also included in the 2011 Volt 's fuel economy label a table showing fuel economy and electricity consumed for five different scenarios : 30 , 45 , 60 and 75 miles ( 121 km ) driven between a full charge , and a never charge scenario . This information was included in order to make the consumers aware of the variability of the fuel economy outcome depending on miles driven between charges . Under the gasoline @-@ only scenario ( never charge ) , the 37 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 44 mpg @-@ imp ) figure results from 35 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 42 mpg @-@ imp ) city driving and 40 mpg @-@ US ( 5 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 48 mpg @-@ imp ) on the highway . 
 For the 2012 model year , EPA revised the Volt 's fuel economy ratings , increasing the combined city / highway rating in all @-@ electric mode from 93 MPG @-@ e to 94 MPG @-@ e , and the highway rating was increased from 90 MPG @-@ e to 93 MPG @-@ e . As a result of its improved battery pack , the 2013 model year EPA rating climbed to a combined city / highway fuel economy of 98 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( 2 @.@ 4 L gasoline equivalent / 100 km ; 118 mpg @-@ imp gasoline equivalent ) . The EPA rating in gasoline @-@ only mode is the same 37 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 44 mpg @-@ imp ) as the previous models . The combined gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy rating of the 2013 / 2014 model year Volt is 62 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 8 L / 100 km ; 74 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent , 63 MPG @-@ e in city driving and 61 MPG @-@ e in highway . 
 When introduced in December 2010 , the 2011 Volt was the most fuel efficient car sold in the American market in the compact class , with a combined gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy of 60 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 72 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) , until it was surpassed by the 2012 Ford Focus Electric in February 2012 . The all @-@ electric Focus has a combined fuel economy of 105 mpg @-@ US ( 2 @.@ 2 L / 100 km ; 126 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) . Nevertheless , the Volt remained as the most fuel efficient car with an internal combustion engine available in the United States until May 2014 , when the BMW i3 REx replaced the Volt as the most efficient EPA @-@ certified current year vehicle with a gasoline engine , with a combined gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy of 88 mpg @-@ US ( 2 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 106 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) . 
 In December 2012 General Motors reported , based on data collected through its OnStar telematics system since Volt deliveries began , that Volt owners drive around 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) , or a month and a half , between fill @-@ ups . By mid June 2014 , GM reported that among Volt owners who charge regularly , they typically drive more than 970 mi ( 1 @,@ 560 km ) between fill @-@ ups and visit the gasoline station less than once a month . In early October 2014 , based on General Motors ' real time tally of miles driven by Volt owners in North America , the company reported they have accumulated a total of 1 billion miles ( 1 @.@ 6 billion km ) traveled , of which , about 62 @.@ 5 % were driven in all @-@ electric mode . 
 A 2014 analysis conducted by the Idaho National Laboratory using a sample of 21 @,@ 600 all @-@ electric cars and plug @-@ in hybrids , found that Volt owners traveled on average 9 @,@ 112 miles in all @-@ electric mode ( e @-@ miles ) per year , while Leaf owners traveled 9 @,@ 697 e @-@ miles per year , despite the Volt 's shorter all @-@ electric range , about half of the Leaf 's . The 2015 edition of the EPA 's annual report " Light @-@ Duty Automotive Technology , Carbon Dioxide Emissions , and Fuel Economy Trends " estimates the following utility factors for 2015 model year plug @-@ in hybrids to represent the percentage of miles that will be driven using electricity by an average driver , whether in electric only or blended modes , The Volt has a utility factor of 66 % , compared with 83 % for the BMW i3 REx , 45 % for the Ford Energi models , 43 % for the McLaren P1 , 37 % for the BMW i8 , and 29 % for the Toyota Prius PHV . 
 Europe 
 The Opel Ampera official equivalent fuel consumption under the EU @-@ approved UN ECE R101 standard for plug @-@ in hybrids is 1 @.@ 2 L / 100 km ( 196 @.@ 0 mpg @-@ US ; 235 @.@ 4 mpg @-@ imp ) ( 83 @.@ 3 km / L ) . However , a leading Opel engineer prefers saying 169 Wh / km while battery @-@ powered , and then 20 km / L petrol @-@ powered . The ECE R101 standard weights charge @-@ depleting mode as 76 % and gasoline @-@ only driving as 24 % . 
 = = = Operating cost and payback period = = = 
 According to Consumer Reports in December 2011 , the Chevrolet Volt fuel cost in electric mode was 3 @.@ 8 ¢ / mile , while the Nissan Leaf had a cost of 3 @.@ 5 ¢ / mi . The Volt 's higher cost per mile was attributed to its heavier weight . Their estimates used the U.S. national average electricity rate of 11 ¢ / ( kWh ) and energy consumption rates as measured on their own , unofficial tests . When comparing the Volt in range @-@ extended mode with the four most fuel efficient gasoline @-@ powered cars as tested by the magazine , the plug @-@ in hybrid had a cost of 12 @.@ 5 ¢ / mi ( using premium gasoline ) while the Toyota Prius had a cost of 8 @.@ 6 ¢ / mi . , the Honda Civic Hybrid 9 @.@ 5 ¢ / mi . , the Toyota Corolla 11 @.@ 9 ¢ / mi . , and the Hyundai Elantra 13 @.@ 1 ¢ / mi . The analysis also found that , on trips up to 100 mi ( 160 km ) , the Volt was cheaper to drive than the other four cars because the Volt was able to drive 35 mi ( 56 km ) using less expensive electric power . Consumer Reports found that , using their proprietary testing , the Volt overall fuel efficiency was 99 mpg @-@ US ( 2 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 119 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) , and using only range @-@ extended mode the overall fuel economy was 32 mpg @-@ US ( 7 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 38 mpg @-@ imp ) and equivalent to the Toyota Corolla . The report noted that , as of 2011 , plug @-@ in electric cars are more expensive to buy , and the previous operating costs do not include maintenance , depreciation or other costs . 
 According to Edmunds.com , the price premium paid for the Volt in 2012 , after discounting the US $ 7 @,@ 500 U.S. federal tax credit , takes a long time for consumers to recover in fuel savings , often longer than the normal ownership time period . Edmunds compared the Volt ( priced at US $ 31 @,@ 712 ) with the same @-@ size gasoline @-@ powered Chevrolet Cruze ( priced at US $ 19 @,@ 656 ) and found that the payback period for the plug @-@ in hybrid is 15 years for gasoline prices at US $ 3 per gallon , 12 years at US $ 4 per gallon , and drops to 9 years with gasoline prices at US $ 5 per gallon . At February 2012 prices , the break even period is 14 years . These estimates assume an average of 15 @,@ 000 miles ( 24 @,@ 000 km ) annual driving and vehicle prices correspond to Edmunds.com 's true market value estimates . 
 In a similar comparison carried out by TrueCar in April 2012 for The New York Times , the analysis found that the payback period for the Volt takes 26 @.@ 6 years versus a Chevrolet Cruze Eco , assuming it was regularly driven farther than its battery @-@ only range allows , and with gasoline priced at US $ 3 @.@ 85 per gallon . The analysis assumes an average of 15 @,@ 000 miles ( 24 @,@ 000 km ) driven a year , a fuel economy of 34 @.@ 3 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 86 L / 100 km ; 41 @.@ 2 mpg @-@ imp ) for the Cruze Eco , priced at US $ 19 @,@ 925 , and a Volt price of US $ 31 @,@ 767 , after discounting the US $ 7 @,@ 500 federal tax . TrueCar also found that with gasoline priced at US $ 5 per gallon , the payback time could drop to about 8 years if the Volt were to be operated exclusively on battery power . The newspaper also reported that according to the March 2012 Lundberg Survey , gasoline prices would need to reach US $ 12 @.@ 50 a gallon for the Volt to break even , while the Nissan Leaf would be competitive with a similar gasoline @-@ powered compact car at US $ 8 @.@ 53 a gallon . 
 Since the Edmunds and The New York Times pieces however , numerous rebuttal articles have surfaced that have identified various flaws in the methodologies and calculations used by Edmunds and TrueCar in their estimation of the Volt 's pay @-@ back period . Namely both sources strict use of the Volt 's " gasoline engine only " EPA fuel economy rating of 37 mpg , when in fact when operated as intended any real @-@ world use will most typically include an initial 38 miles of all @-@ electric power during which zero gasoline would be consumed . Thus resulting in significantly higher total fuel economy that admittedly will be entirely dependent on how often and how far the car is driven . Many of these articles further suggest that the usage model used by TrueCar of 114 trips of 131 mi ( 211 km ) per trip was not typical of the majority of American daily driving patterns , and their use of a projected cost US $ 3 @.@ 85 per gallon as the cost of gasoline throughout the entire payback period quite unrealistic . An article from the online automotive publication The Truth About Cars indicates that when the Volt is charged and driven daily exclusively on its available electric power for its EPA rated 38 miles of all @-@ electric range ( 13 @,@ 780 mi ( 22 @,@ 180 km ) annually ) the payback period for the Volt would be much lower and similar to that of other plug @-@ in electric @-@ cars such as the Nissan Leaf or approximately 8 @.@ 7 years ( as indicated by TrueCar ) . 
 = = = Tailpipe emissions = = = 
 While operating in all @-@ electric mode the Volt produces no tailpipe emissions . However , the clean air benefit is mostly local because , depending on the source of the electricity used to recharge the batteries , air pollutant emissions are shifted to the location of the electricity generation plants . The amount of carbon dioxide emitted depends on the emission intensity of the power source used to charge the vehicle . When the Volt 's battery is depleted and the gasoline @-@ powered engine engages , the plug @-@ in emissions are similar to other internal combustion engine vehicles . The amount of total local emissions depends on how much the Volt is driven in all @-@ electric mode and how much in charge @-@ sustaining mode . 
 United States 
 The California Air Resources Board ( CARB ) classified the Volt as Ultra Low Emission Vehicle ( ULEV ) , as CARB tests do not account for the Volt electric range . With all tests conducted under conditions where the engine is running the CARB rated the Volt 's carbon monoxide ( CO ) emissions at 1 @.@ 3 g / mile ( 0 @.@ 81 g / km ) , missing the limit for SULEV classification by 0 @.@ 3 g / mile ( 0 @.@ 19 g / km ) . 
 The EPA rating for the model year 2011 Volt 's tailpipe emissions is 84 grams of CO2 per mile , ( 52 @.@ 5 CO2 g / km ) . Tailpipe emissions for the improved model year 2014 / 15 Volt fell to 81 grams of CO2 per mile , ( 50 @.@ 6 CO2 g / km ) . CO2 emissions are produced by the internal combustion engine in extended @-@ range mode , and only after the Volt 's primary battery charge has been depleted . In the other air pollutants category , the Volt rates six out of ten , with ten being best . 
 The EPA also estimated the upstream CO2 emissions associated with the production and distribution of electricity required to charge the vehicle . Since electricity production in the United States varies significantly from region to region , the EPA considered three scenarios / ranges with the low end of the range corresponding to the California powerplant emissions factor , the middle of the range represented by the national average powerplant emissions factor , and the upper end of the range corresponding to the powerplant emissions factor for the Rockies . The following table shows the Volt tailpipe emission plus total upstream CO2 emissions for the three scenarios , compared with other four popular plug @-@ in hybrids and the average gasoline @-@ powered car : 
 Europe 
 The Ampera 's official EU @-@ approved UN ECE R101 carbon dioxide emission rating is 27g / km . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 The 2011 Chevrolet Volt standard features include 4 @-@ wheel anti @-@ lock brakes with traction control ; <unk> electronic stability control system with brake assist ; tire @-@ pressure monitoring system ; and 8 total airbags : dual @-@ stage frontal , side @-@ impact and knee for driver and front passenger , and roof @-@ rail side @-@ impact for front and rear outboard seating positions , with a passenger sensing system . There is also available an optional emergency assistance system . A safety cage , built with high @-@ strength and ultra high @-@ strength steel , surrounds the passenger compartment to keep the space intact in the event of a crash . Crush zones framing the trunk and the engine crumple to absorb crash energy before it reaches occupants . Door hinges and latches in harmony with door structure and its steel reinforcements to keep doors closed during an impact . The 2011 Chevrolet Volt was named " Top Safety Pick " by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety . The Volt received the top ratings of " Good " for front , side , and rear impact crash tests , and also on rollover protection . All injury measurements except one were rated good , indicating a low risk of significant injuries in crashes according to the scale of severity employed in the IIHS ’ s testing . The Volt 's lower rating of " Acceptable " was for torso injuries . 
 The Volt received a five @-@ star overall crash safety rating from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) , the highest @-@ possible score . This rating was obtained with NHTSA 's New Car Assessment Program which is used for 2011 model year vehicles . 
 Accident and rescue handling 
 In August 2010 , General Motors began a training program for first responders when performing rescue duties involving the Chevrolet Volt . The program began at the 2010 Fire @-@ Rescue International in Chicago , using a pre @-@ production Volt for a live extrication exercise . Chicago firefighters demonstrated the sequence of tasks required to safely disable the vehicle ’ s powertrain and its 12 @-@ volt electrical system , which controls its high @-@ voltage components , and then proceed to extricate injured occupants . As of January 2011 , additional training workshops had taken place in several other cities corresponding to the Volt 's initial launch markets . An Emergency Response Guide for the 2011 Volt was made available at its Service Technical College for use by emergency responders . The guide also describes methods of disabling the high voltage system and identifies cut zone information . 
 GM recommends that a Volt battery fire be fought with water rather than dry chemicals , and rates the Volt battery as having no explosion or electrocution hazard as the result of a collision . The high @-@ voltage system is designed to shut down automatically in the event of an airbag deployment , and to detect a loss of communication from an airbag control module . During the Volt development the lithium @-@ ion battery pack was subjected to a wide range of tests , including overcharge , discharge , vibration , excessive heat and cold , short circuit , humidity , fire , crush , water immersion , salt water immersion , and nail penetration . 
 Warning sounds 
 Due to significant noise reduction typical of vehicles traveling in all @-@ electric mode at low speeds , the Volt is fitted with a manually activated electronic warning sound system called Pedestrian @-@ Friendly Alert System for use when the car is operating at low speeds to alert pedestrians to the car 's presence . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 Connectivity 
 The Volt features OnStar Mobile application for owners to access vehicle information without being in or near the car . This smartphone application features the ability to check fuel efficiency as well as the vehicle 's current electric range . It also helps monitor the charging , giving owners key information about the current charge level and the amount of time it will take until it is fully charged . The application also is able to control features such as locking / unlocking doors , and acts as a remote starter . A five @-@ year OnStar Directions and Connections service was bundled into the 2011 Volt 's base price , which was reduced to three years for the 2012 model year . 
 2011 model year 
 The 2011 Chevrolet Volt comes standard with cruise control ; remote vehicle start @-@ up system ; 17 @-@ inch 5 @-@ spoke forged painted aluminum wheels ; Bluetooth wireless technology for select phones ; audio and navigation system with a center console capacitive touch panel and DVD and MP3 playback , with voice recognition ; OnStar with five years of service ; <unk> premium speaker system , with six speakers and sub @-@ woofer ; 30 GB hard drive for audio data storage ; USB port ; three auxiliary , 12 @-@ volt , power outlets ; power door locks and windows ; power adjustable mirrors ; programmable time of day charge control ; and a 110 @-@ volt charge cord . 
 Available options include ; 17 @-@ inch 5 @-@ spoke forged polished @-@ aluminum wheels ; rearview camera system , parking assist package ; leather @-@ wrapped steering wheel ; and heated leather front seats with selectable automatic activation . 
 2012 model year 
 The 2012 Volt standard features include a remote <unk> access with passive locking allowing the car to automatically lock and unlock with the key fob in close proximity of vehicle ; OnStar turn @-@ by @-@ turn navigation for three years , and available in @-@ dash navigation system ; and Chevrolet <unk> including Bluetooth streaming audio for music and select phones . The 2012 Volt has seven option packages while the 2011 model had only three . 
 2013 model year 
 The low @-@ emission package standard available on later 2012 Volts destined for the California market is included in the 2013 Volts sold in New York state to allow their owners access to high @-@ occupancy lanes . The liftgate and roof of the 2013 model is body @-@ colored rather than black , and a new interior color " Pebble Beige " is available in both cloth upholstery and leather seats with suede inserts . A removable rear @-@ seat center armrest is included in the premium trim package . Other changes include an improved audio system with GPS @-@ based navigation ; a comfort package that includes heated driver and front passenger cloth seats and leather @-@ wrapped steering wheel ; and there are a pair of available safety packages . 
 2014 model year 
 Minor changes for the 2014 model year include a manual release for the charge port door in place of the electronically activated door found on previous models , and the addition of two new paint colors . A leather wrapped steering wheel becomes standard . 
 = = Second generation ( 2015 – ) = = 
 The second generation Chevrolet Volt was officially unveiled at the January 2015 North American International Auto Show . Retail deliveries began in the United States and Canada in October 2015 as a 2016 model year , with 1 @,@ 324 units delivered in the U.S. that month . Availability in the American market was limited to California and the other 10 states that follow California ’ s zero emission vehicle regulations . GM scheduled the second generation as a 2017 model year to be released in the 39 remaining states by early 2016 . Manufacturing of the 2017 MY Volt began in February 2016 , and the first units arrived at dealerships at the end of February 2016 . The 2017 model complies with stricter Tier 3 emissions requirements and it will be available nationwide . 
 The second generation Volt has an upgraded powertrain with a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ liter engine that uses regular gasoline ; the 18 @.@ 4 kWh battery pack has new chemistry that stores 20 % more electrical energy and uses fewer cells , 192 compared with 288 on the 2014 Volt ; it uses a new power controller that is integrated with the motor housing ; the electric motors weigh 100 lb ( 45 kg ) less and use smaller amounts of rare earth metals . GM engineers explained that the second generation Volt was developed using extensive input from Volt owners . 
 These improvements allow the 2016 Volt to deliver better EPA ratings than the first generation model . The all @-@ electric range was officially rated at 53 mi ( 85 km ) , up from 38 mi ( 61 km ) attained by the 2015 Volt . The gains in efficiency allow the second generation Volt to improve its combined fuel economy in gasoline @-@ only ( charge @-@ sustaining ) mode to 42 mpg @-@ US ( 5 @.@ 6 L / 100 km ; 50 mpg @-@ imp ) , up from 37 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 44 mpg @-@ imp ) for the previous model . The official second generation Volt 's rating for combined city / highway fuel economy in all @-@ electric mode is 106 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) , up from 98 MPG @-@ e for the 2015 first generation model . The combined gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy rating of the 2016 model year Volt is 77 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 1 L / 100 km ; 92 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent , 82 MPG @-@ e in city driving and 72 MPG @-@ e in highway . Both the all @-@ electric range and fuel economy ratings are the same for the 2017 model year Volt . 
 In April 2013 , CEO Daniel Akerson announced that GM expects the second generation Volt to be priced on the order of US $ 7 @,@ 000 to US $ 10 @,@ 000 lower than the 2013 model year with the same features . The 2016 Volt pricing will start at US $ 33 @,@ 170 before any available government incentives , plus US $ 825 for destination . The starting price is US $ 1 @,@ 175 lower than the 2015 Volt . In California , order books for the second generation Volt were opened on May 28 , 2015 . 
 In July 2014 , Opel announced that due to the slowdown in sales , the Ampera would be discontinued after the launch of second generation Volt , and between 2014 and 2018 , Opel planned to introduce in Europe a successor product in the electric vehicle segment . General Motors announced in February 2016 that the all @-@ <unk> Opel Ampera @-@ e hatchback will go into production in 2017 . This is the European version of the Chevrolet Bolt EV . 
 In April 2015 , General Motors confirmed that it will not build the second generation Volt in right @-@ hand @-@ drive configuration . Due to low sales , only 246 units had been sold in Australia by mid @-@ April 2015 , the Holden Volt will be discontinued once the remaining stock is sold out . 
 = = Production , price and sales = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Assembly of the Volt was assigned to Detroit / Hamtramck Assembly plant following the conclusion of the 2007 UAW @-@ GM contract talks . For initial production the gasoline engine is being imported from the Opel engine plant in Aspern , Austria . In November 2010 , General Motors began investing US $ 138 @.@ 3 million at its engine operations plant in Flint , Michigan to support increased production of the Ecotec 1 @.@ 4 L engine that is used in the Chevrolet Cruze , the upcoming 2012 Chevrolet Sonic , and the variant used in the Chevrolet Volt . The Flint plant was expected to start production of 400 engines a day in early 2011 , ramp up daily production to 800 engines in late 2011 , and to increase its capacity to 1 @,@ 200 a day by late 2012 . In May 2011 , General Motors decided to invest an additional US $ 84 million at the Flint plant to further increase 1 @.@ 4 L engine production capacity . 
 In 2010 , General Motors planned an initial production for calendar year 2011 of 10 @,@ 000 Volts and 45 @,@ 000 units for 2012 , up from the 30 @,@ 000 units initially announced . In May 2011 , the carmaker again raised its production targets , as Volt and Ampera production capacity was increased to 16 @,@ 000 units in 2011 , including 3 @,@ 500 units for exports and 2 @,@ 500 demonstration units destined to U.S. dealerships , and the rest for U.S. sales . However , in November 2011 GM 's sales chief announced that they would not meet its sales goal of 10 @,@ 000 vehicles in 2011 . 
 Out of the 2012 production , General Motors expected to produce 10 @,@ 000 Amperas for sale in Europe , 6 @,@ 000 destined for Opel and 4 @,@ 000 for Vauxhall in the UK . In addition , 2 @,@ 000 Volts will be made available for the region . By early 2012 GM abandoned its sales target to deliver 45 @,@ 000 Volts in the U.S and instead announced that production in 2012 will depend on demand . By March 2012 the Volt plant has a global production capacity of 60 @,@ 000 vehicles per year . 
 The Volt 's battery cells are produced by LG Chem in South Korea and then shipped to the US , where the battery packs are assembled at a purpose @-@ built facility in Brownstown Charter Township , Michigan owned and operated by General Motors . Compact Power , the North American subsidiary of LG Chem , is building a battery plant in Holland , Michigan to manufacture the advanced battery cells for the Volt and other carmakers , with capacity to produce enough cells for 50 @,@ 000 to 200 @,@ 000 battery packs per year . The US $ 303 million Holland plant was funded by 50 % U.S. Department of Energy matching stimulus funds and is planned to open by mid @-@ 2012 . 
 The 2011 Chevrolet Volt was officially launched on November 30 , 2010 at a ceremony at the Hamtramck plant , where the first production unit for retail sale came off the assembly line . The first retail vehicle was delivered to a customer in Denville , New Jersey on December 15 , 2010 . GM reported it had built 12 @,@ 400 Volts in total through December 2011 . This includes dealers ' demo vehicles in North America and Amperas in dealerships in Europe , crash test vehicles and other unavailable Volts owned by GM . 
 GM halted production for about one month at the Detroit / Hamtramck Assembly plant by mid June 2011 to complete some upgrades , including the installation of new tooling , equipment and overhead conveyor systems throughout the facility . These upgrades allowed GM to triple the rate of Volt production and prepared the plant for 2012 Volt and Ampera production . After the plant retooling , the production rate reached 150 units per day four days a week by August 2011 . The Volt plant was also down during January 2012 in preparation for building the California lower @-@ emission version . A four @-@ week shutdown due to slow sales took place between March and April 2012 . GM said it had around 3 @,@ 600 Volts in inventory and needed to reduce dealer inventories as production is expected to meet market demand . GM also extended the traditional two @-@ week summer vacation by an extra week at the Hamtramck plant . GM closed its Detroit @-@ Hamtramck plant from September 17 until October 15 , 2012 , affecting roughly 1 @,@ 500 workers on downtime while the plant was retooled to assemble the all @-@ new 2014 Chevrolet Impala alongside the 2013 Volt . This was the second time in 2012 that GM has halted Volt production . 
 Production of the 2013 model year Volt began in July 2012 and customer deliveries began during the same month . In October 2012 , GM announced that the Cadillac ELR extended @-@ range luxury coupe will be built at the Detroit @-@ Hamtramck Assembly plant , together with he Chevrolet Volt , Opel Ampera , and Holden Volt . The addition of the ELR to the plant represents an additional US $ 35 million investment , bringing the total product investment to US $ 561 million since December 2009 . The first 2014 ELRs rolled off the production line in late May 2013 . These were pre @-@ production units destined for testing purposes before production for retail customers began at the end of 2013 . Deliveries of the 2014 model year Volt began in August 2013 . Volt sales in the U.S. reached the 50 @,@ 000 unit milestone in October 2013 , with over 60 @,@ 000 vehicles of the Volt / Ampera family sold worldwide . Production of the 2015 model year Volt ended in mid @-@ May 2015 , while manufacturing of pre @-@ production units of the second generation began in March 2015 . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 Sales of the 2011 Chevrolet Volt began in selected markets due to limited initial production , as General Motors ' original target for 2011 was 10 @,@ 000 units . The first cars were delivered in Washington D.C. , the New York City metropolitan region , California , and Austin , Texas . By May 2011 the Volt had been launched also in Connecticut , Maryland , Michigan , New Jersey , and Virginia . Deliveries in Delaware , Florida , Georgia , Hawaii , North Carolina , Oregon , Pennsylvania , South Carolina , and Washington began in the third quarter of 2011 . In June 2011 , Chevrolet dealers nationwide began taking orders for the 2012 Volt , and deliveries in all 50 states began in November 2011 . 
 The suggested retail price ( MSRP ) for the 2011 Chevrolet Volt in the U.S. started at US $ 40 @,@ 280 which excluded destination freight charge , tax , title , license , dealer fees and optional equipment and before any savings due to factory incentives , tax deductions , or other available subsidies for qualifying buyers . The MSRP for the 2012 Volt starts at US $ 39 @,@ 995 including a US $ 850 destination freight charge and excludes tax , title and license fees , or other available government subsidies . The base price is US $ 1 @,@ 005 less than the 2011 model year , and General Motors explained that this price reduction is possible because of a " wider range of options and configurations that come with the expansion of Volt production for sale nationally . " The price will drop to US $ 34 @,@ 995 including destination charges for the 2014 model year . 
 Due to the capacity of the Volt 's battery pack it qualifies for the maximum US $ 7 @,@ 500 federal tax credit as specified in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 . The federal tax credit phases out over a one @-@ year period after the manufacturer has sold at least 200 @,@ 000 vehicles in the U.S. Several states also have additional incentives or rebates available for plug @-@ in electric vehicles for qualifying buyers . The 2011 Volt price including all available regular production and premium options is US $ 44 @,@ 600 , including destination charges and before tax credits or any subsidies . For the 2012 model year the price of the Volt with all available options is US $ 46 @,@ 265 before tax credits or any subsidies available . 
 Although the Volt 's retail price is higher than its main competitor , the 2011 Nissan Leaf , the lease payment for the Volt is almost the same as its competitor , except that the Leaf has a lower initial payment . General Motors explained that " the apparent disparity between the Volt 's sticker and lease prices is a reflection of the company 's calculation that the vehicle will maintain a very high residual value after three years — significantly higher than that of the LEAF . " 
 The price for the home charging units is US $ 490 plus installation costs . The Voltec is a home @-@ charging unit built by SPX for Volt owners . It is a 240 @-@ volt ( Level II ) charger , and , according to General Motors , can replenish the Volt 's batteries in about four hours . Consumer Reports has advised buyers to budget up to US $ 2 @,@ 000 , as many older homes may need a substantial electrical upgrade because the U.S. National Electrical Code requires that the charger have its own dedicated 220 @-@ volt , 30 @-@ amp circuit . Early buyers can benefit from the federal tax credit available for charging equipment . 
 The 2011 Volt was not submitted for application to the California Air Resources Board 's ( CARB ) Clean Vehicle Rebate Project rebate and therefore was not required to meet the 10 @-@ year 150 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 240 @,@ 000 km ) battery warranty requirement for enhanced advanced technology partial zero @-@ emissions vehicles ( enhAT @-@ PZEV ) . The Volt team explained that for the launch General Motors decided to go with a common national package which includes an 8 @-@ year 100 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 160 @,@ 000 km ) battery warranty . For this reason owners of the 2011 Volt did not qualify for California 's rebates and free access to use carpool lanes even when traveling solo . A third package , scheduled for 2013 , is under development with an E85 flex @-@ fuel engine . General Motors engineering team commented that " introducing two or three packages of an entirely new technology set and platform at the same time wasn 't an option . " 
 In February 2012 General Motors began deliveries of a low emission version destined for California that features a new low emissions package that allows the 2012 Chevrolet Volt to qualify as an enhanced , advanced technology – partial zero emissions vehicle ( enhAT @-@ PZEV ) and have access to California ’ s high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes ( HOV ) . The new standard California version of the Volt features a modified engine and exhaust components . The catalytic converter was modified to add a secondary air @-@ injection pump that " streams ambient air into the exhaust stream to increase its ability to remove pollutants . " Owners of a 2012 Volt with the low emissions package are eligible to apply for one of 40 @,@ 000 available HOV lane stickers issued to vehicles that qualify as a California AT @-@ PZEV . The permits are handed out on a first @-@ apply , first @-@ served basis . Additionally , the new low emissions package makes the 2012 Volt eligible for owners to receive up to US $ 1 @,@ 500 in state rebates through the state ’ s Clean Vehicle Rebate Project ( CVRP ) . This incentive is in addition to the federal government ’ s US $ 7 @,@ 500 tax credit . Only the 2012 Volts manufactured after February 6 , 2012 , are fitted with the low emission package and sold as standard models in California . Other states where the Volt has solo driving access to HOV lanes are Florida , Georgia , New York and Virginia . 
 U.S. sales 
 Since sales began in December 2010 , a total of 98 @,@ 558 Volts have been sold in the country through June 2016 . The Volt ranked as the all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in electric car in the United States until February 2015 , when it was surpassed by the all @-@ electric Nissan Leaf in March 2015 . Cumulative Volt sales passed Leaf sales in March 2016 , and became once again the best selling plug @-@ in car in the American market . 
 The top 10 selling states during the first quarter of 2012 were California , Michigan , Florida , Illinois , Texas , New York , Minnesota , Ohio , North Carolina and Maryland . California is the leading market and accounted for almost 23 % of Volt sales during this quarter , followed by Michigan with 6 @.@ 3 % of national sales . In California the leading regional markets are San Francisco , Los Angeles , and San Diego , all metropolitan areas notorious for their high congestion levels and where free access to high @-@ occupancy lanes for solo drivers has been a strong incentive to boost Volt sales in the state . 
 Resale value 
 In May 2011 Kelley Blue Book ( KBB ) projected the 2011 Chevrolet Volt resale value at just over US $ 17 @,@ 000 after 36 months , the length of a typical lease , which represents 42 % of the car 's US $ 41 @,@ 000 suggested retail price ( MSRP ) . KBB explains that even though the residual value seems low , the projection considers that the first 200 @,@ 000 Volts sold will qualify for a US $ 7 @,@ 500 federal tax credit , which effectively reduces the MSRP to US $ 33 @,@ 500 , making the US $ <unk> 51 % of its original value after the tax credit . In comparison , KBB notes , the 2011 Toyota Prius has a projected residual of 46 % after 36 months . KBB 's estimate assumed gasoline price will be around US $ 4 per gallon in 2014 . For 2012 , Kelley Blue Book expected the Volt to retain 42 % of its original value after 3 years and 27 % after 5 years . Based on these figures , in November 2011 KBB awarded the Volt with the 2012 Best Resale Value Awards in the plug @-@ in electric car category . KBB explains that the residual value for the Volt is lower than the market 35 @.@ 5 % average due to the US $ 7 @,@ 500 federal tax credit , which lowers the transaction price and pushes down the residual value . 
 Consumer Reports ' analysis show that many Chevrolets lose about half of their purchase price after three years of ownership , and if the Volt depreciates the same , US $ 17 @,@ 000 seems a reasonable estimate . However , Consumer Reports have noted that fuel @-@ efficient hybrids and diesel models often depreciate far less than most vehicles , which might increase the Volt 's resale value after three years above the US $ 17 @,@ 000 estimate . Additionally , if gasoline prices continue to rise or if the tax credits expire , the demand for used Chevrolet Volts could quickly increase , raising their market value . On the other hand , if the next @-@ generation Volt ’ s battery has twice the capacity and cost less , as General Motors has claimed , the first generation Volts will be obsolete when the new ones come out in 2015 . Considering these assumptions , Consumer Reports considers that " at this point we believe it ’ s still unclear how the Volt will fare . " 
 Pecan Street demonstration project 
 General Motors is sponsoring the Pecan Street demonstration project at the Mueller neighborhood in Austin , Texas . The project objective is to learn the charging patterns of plug @-@ in electric car owners , and to study how a residential fleet of electric vehicles might strain the electric grid if all owners try to charge them at the same , which is what the preliminary monitoring found when the plug @-@ in cars return home in the evening . As of June 2013 , the community has nearly 60 Chevrolet Volt owners alone thanks to GM 's commitment to match the federal government 's US $ 7 @,@ 500 rebate incentive , which halves the purchase price of the Volt . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 Chevrolet began taking orders in May 2011 and deliveries began in September 2011 in major cities only . During 2012 the Volt was the best selling plug @-@ in car in Canada , outselling all other PEVs combined . Despite a 24 % reduction from 2012 sales , the Volt continued as the top selling PEV in the Canadian market in 2013 , and again in 2014 with 1 @,@ 521 units . As of December 2015 , the Volt continued to rank as the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in Canada . Since September 2011 , a total of 6 @,@ 387 Volts have been delivered in Canada through May 2016 . The monthly sales record was set in May 2016 with 270 deliveries . 
 The suggested retail price ( MSRP ) for the 2012 Chevrolet Volt starts at CA $ 41 @,@ 545 ( US $ 42 @,@ 423 in June 2011 ) which excludes any charges , fees , and optional equipment and before any available subsidies or incentives for qualifying buyers . In the Canadian market , the Volt is offered in one standard trim level with two option packages , a Premium Trim Package and a Rear Camera and Park Assist Package . Some provinces are offering Government incentives including Ontario , Quebec ( both at CA $ 8 @,@ 500 US $ 8 @,@ 680 ) and British Columbia has announced their new <unk> BC program in which the Chevrolet Volt qualifies for a CA $ 5 @,@ 000 incentive / rebate as well as CA $ 500 towards charging equipment . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The European version of the Volt , the Opel Ampera ( known as the Vauxhall Ampera in the United Kingdom ) , was unveiled at the Geneva Auto Show in March 2009 and also was exhibited at the 2009 Frankfurt Auto Show . Opel developed the battery control modules for the Ampera at the Opel Alternative Propulsion Center Europe in Mainz @-@ Kastel , Germany . The production version of the Ampera was unveiled at the 2011 Geneva Motor Show . The Ampera is assembled at the Detroit / Hamtramck Assembly plant , Michigan . 
 The main differences between the Volt and the Ampera are in their styling . The Ampera has a distinctive front and rear fascia , with a large cut @-@ out in the rear bumper . The Opel Ampera features more stylized alloy wheels as standard , and the side skirts are body @-@ colored rather than black . In the inside there are only minor differences and both versions share the same exact powertrain and battery pack . A key operational difference was that the Ampera has four drive modes , one more than the 2011 / 12 model year Volt . The additional option is " City Mode " , which adapts battery management to the needs of commuter travel . City mode or " battery hold " engages the range @-@ extender immediately , allowing to save the energy currently stored in the battery , and when switched off , the range @-@ extender stops and the Ampera is then able to use the energy saved in the battery for pure electric driving , for example for traveling urban areas or restricted zones , such as the European low emission zones or to allow the Ampera to qualify for an exemption of the London congestion charge The 2013 model year Volt included the " Hold Drive " button to allow drivers to conserve battery @-@ pack energy for use at a particular time of their choice . 
 Sales 
 General Motors production target for 2012 was to manufacture 10 @,@ 000 Amperas for sale in Europe , 6 @,@ 000 destined for Opel and 4 @,@ 000 for Vauxhall in the UK , plus an additional 2 @,@ 000 Volts were to be made available for the region . The carmaker targeted the Ampera for business fleet market and local government agencies , where Opel has a strong customer base , while the Volt is aimed at retail customers . According to Opel , by June 2011 around 5 @,@ 000 customers across Europe had reserved an Ampera , with fleet or business customers representing 60 % of reservations , and a total of 7 @,@ 000 orders were received by March 2012 , with Benelux , Germany and the United Kingdom as the top markets in terms of orders . 
 The first deliveries of the Chevrolet Volt in Europe took place on November 30 , 2011 , to the U.S. Embassy in France . Distribution of the Opel Ampera to dealerships began in December 2011 , but deliveries to customers were delayed until February 2012 because Opel decided to wait until the NHTSA completed its investigation of the Volt 's battery fire risk after a crash . Since May 2012 the Vauxhall Ampera is available through the Zipcar carsharing club in London , Bristol , Cambridge and Oxford . 
 The Opel / Vauxhall Ampera was Europe 's top selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2012 with 5 @,@ 268 units and captured a 21 @.@ 5 % market share of the region 's plug @-@ in electric passenger car segment . As of October 2013 , the Ampera held a market share of almost 10 % of European registration of plug @-@ in electric cars since 2011 . The market share in the Netherlands was 40 % and 10 % in Germany . Ampera sales fell 40 % in 2013 to 3 @,@ 184 cars , and within the plug @-@ in hybrid segment , the Ampera was surpassed in 2013 by the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV ( 8 @,@ 197 ) , Volvo V60 plug @-@ in ( 7 @,@ 437 ) , and the Prius plug @-@ in ( 4 @,@ 314 ) . In 2013 the Ampera ranked eighth among Europe 's top selling plug @-@ in electric vehicles , and its market share fell to about 5 % . During the first five months of 2014 , only 332 units had been sold , down 67 % from the same period in 2013 . In July 2014 , Opel announced that due to the slowdown in sales , the Ampera will be discontinued after the launch of second generation Volt , and between 2014 and 2018 , Opel plans to introduce in Europe a successor product in the electric vehicle segment . Ampera sales totaled 939 units in 2014 , and only 215 units during the first nine months of 2015 . 
 As of December 2015 , Opel / Vauxhall Ampera sales totaled almost 10 @,@ 000 units since 2011 , with the Netherlands as the leading market with 5 @,@ 031 Amperas registered , followed by Germany with 1 @,@ 542 units , and the UK with 1 @,@ 250 units registered by the end of June 2015 . The Netherlands is also the top selling Volt market in Europe with 1 @,@ 062 units registered through December 2014 , > out of about 1 @,@ 750 Volts sold through 2014 . 
 Pricing 
 In February 2011 Opel announced that the Ampera was to be offered for a uniform price throughout the Eurozone at € 42 @,@ 900 ( US $ 56 @,@ 920 in May 2012 ) including VAT , but prices by country may vary due to the trim levels that will be offered in each market . The Chevrolet Volt also has a uniform price that starts at € 41 @,@ 950 ( US $ 55 @,@ 660 in May 2012 ) including VAT . The Opel Ampera is eligible to several subsidies and tax breaks available for plug @-@ in electric vehicles in several European countries . 
 In the UK , the Vauxhall Ampera starts at GB £ 37 @,@ 250 ( US $ 60 @,@ 400 in May 2012 ) before discounting the GB £ 5 @,@ 000 Plug @-@ in Car Grant The Chevrolet Volt will also be available in the UK at a cost of GB £ 33 @,@ 545 ( US $ 54 @,@ 400 in May 2012 ) before the government grant . All Volts in the UK will come standard with leather interior . 
 = = = China = = = 
 General Motors unveiled the Chevrolet Volt in Shanghai under its Chinese name of <unk> ( Wo Lan Da ) in September 2010 . The first Volts , out of the 10 @-@ vehicle demonstration fleet , arrived in China by late December 2011 . The demonstration program is taking place in Beijing , Tianjin and Shanghai . 
 The Volt went on sale in China by late 2011 with pricing starting at CN ¥ 498 @,@ 000 ( around US $ 78 @,@ 300 as of August 2012 ) and sales are limited to eight Chinese cities : Beijing , Shanghai , Hangzhou , Suzhou , Wuxi , Guangzhou , Shenzhen and Foshan . GM explained that 13 dealerships were selected in the eight cities , and they were chosen because these " cities have more elites who are inclined to try new technologies and lead the fashion tide . " 
 However , according to General Motors , in a move illegal under WTO rules the Chinese government refused the allow Chevrolet Volt owners access to up to US $ 19 @,@ 300 in government subsidies available for plug @-@ in vehicles unless GM had agreed to transfer intellectual property to a joint venture with a Chinese automaker for at least one of the Volt ’ s three core technologies : electric motors , complex electronic controls , and power storage devices , whether batteries or a fuel cell . General Motors negotiated with the Chinese government to let the Volt qualify for the subsidies without the technology transfer , but as of November 2011 , the subsidies were available only for electric cars made by Chinese automakers . As a result of the high import duties , General Motors reported in August 2012 that sales are minimal , those of a very low @-@ volume car . According to LMC Automotive , a total of 18 Volts have been sold in China through June 2012 . 
 In March 2012 , General Motors announced that an agreement was signed with the China Automotive Technology and Research Center ( <unk> ) to manage the Volt demonstration fleet in Beijing and to gather feedback from the fleet usage for one year . The demonstration Volts were scheduled to be delivered in April 2012 . 
 = = = Other markets = = = 
 Australia 
 Deliveries of the Holden Volt in the Australian market began in December 2012 , and the first Volt was delivered to the U.S. Ambassador in Canberra . Pricing starts at A $ 59 @,@ 990 ( around US $ 62 @,@ 598 ) . In November 2011 the first Holden Volt arrived in Australia for a series of evaluation tests . Holden has announced that the Volt underwent numerous modifications to better suit it to Australian roads , although the test vehicles are left @-@ hand drive . 
 The Holden Volt is available to purchase through 49 select Holden dealerships throughout metropolitan and rural Australia , with 18 in Victoria , 11 in New South Wales , 9 in Queensland , 7 in Western Australia and 4 in South Australia . A total of 80 Holden Volts were sold during 2012 , and 101 units in 2013 . A total of 246 Holden Volts had been sold in the country by mid April 2015 , with the stock of the first generation almost empty . General Motors announced that it will not build the second generation Volt in right @-@ hand @-@ drive configuration , so the Volt will be discontinued in the country when the remaining stock is sold out . 
 Brazil 
 General Motors do Brasil announced that it will import from five to ten Volts to Brazil during the first semester of 2011 as part of a demonstration and also to lobby the federal government to enact financial incentives for green cars . If successful , General Motors would adapt the Volt to operate on ethanol fuel , as most new Brazilian cars are flex @-@ fuel . 
 Japan 
 In December 2010 , General Motors announced plans to introduce the Volt in limited numbers into Japan in 2011 for technology and market test purposes . Exports for retail sales will depend on the results of this trial . 
 Mexico 
 The second generation Volt was released for retail customers in December 2015 . Pricing starts at 638 @,@ 000 pesos ( ~ US $ 36 @,@ 880 ) , and it is available in Mexico City , Monterrey , Guadalajara , Querétaro , and Puebla . 
 New Zealand 
 The Holden Volt will be released in New Zealand through three dealerships , with one in Auckland , Christchurch and Wellington . Deliveries are scheduled to begin by late 2012 and pricing starts at NZ $ 85 @,@ 000 ( around US $ 71 @,@ 930 ) . 
 = = = Global sales = = = 
 Combined global Volt / Ampera sales passed the 100 @,@ 000 unit milestone in October 2015 . The Volt family of vehicles ranks as the world 's all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in hybrid , and it is also the second best selling plug @-@ in electric car ever , after the Nissan Leaf , which has sold 200 @,@ 000 units worldwide by early December 2015 . The Volt / Ampera family was the world 's best selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2012 with 31 @,@ 400 units sold . The Opel / Vauxhall Ampera was Europe 's top selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2012 with 5 @,@ 268 units , representing a market share of 21 @.@ 5 % of the region 's plug @-@ in electric passenger car segment . However , during 2013 Ampera sales fell 40 % , and the declining trend continued during 2014 and 2015 . 
 As of March 2016 , global Volt / Ampera family sales totaled over 110 @,@ 000 units since its inception in December 2010 , including almost 10 @,@ 000 Opel / Vauxhall Amperas sold in Europe up to December 2015 . As of May 2016 , Chevrolet Volt sales are led by the United States with 96 @,@ 621 units delivered , followed by Canada with 6 @,@ 387 units , and the Netherlands with 1 @,@ 062 Volts registered through December 2015 , together representing 99 % of global Volt sales . Out of the 9 @.@ 989 Opel / Vauxhall Amperas sold in Europe through December 2015 , 5 @,@ 031 were registered in the Netherlands , 1 @,@ 542 in Germany , and 1 @,@ 279 in the UK by the end of September 2015 , together representing 78 % of Ampera sales . 
 The following tables present retail sales of the Volt and Ampera variants through December 2015 for the top selling national markets by year since deliveries began in December 2010 . Demonstration vehicles allocated to dealerships are not included in retail sales reports while they are used for test drives . 
 = = Related concept cars = = 
 Cadillac Converj 
 The Cadillac Converj is a plug @-@ in hybrid concept car first unveiled at the 2009 North American International Auto Show which incorporated the propulsion system from the Chevrolet Volt , including the Voltec powertrain . In August 2011 , General Motors announced its decision to produce the Converj as the Cadillac ELR . The first 2014 ELRs rolled off the production line in late May 2013 . These were pre @-@ production units destined for testing purposes and production for retail customers started at the end of 2013 . The ELR was released to retail customers in the U.S. in December 2013 . 
 Volt MPV5 
 At the 2010 Auto China show General Motors unveiled the Chevrolet Volt MPV5 Concept . The Volt MPV5 is a plug @-@ in crossover hybrid and has a top speed of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and an electric range of 32 miles ( 51 km ) . The MPV5 integrates design elements from the Volt , with a body style very similar to the Chevrolet Orlando and four inches larger than its predecessor , Chevrolet HHR . 
 Opel Monza Concept 
 The Opel Monza Concept is a four @-@ seat coupe plug @-@ in hybrid concept car with gullwing door unveiled at the 2013 Frankfurt Motor Show . The concept shares the same basic plug @-@ in hybrid setup as the Chevrolet Volt and Opel Ampera , but using a turbocharged 1 L 3 @-@ cylinder natural gas @-@ powered engine as its range extender instead of General Motors ’ current 1 @.@ 4 L gasoline engine . According to Opel , this concept is the role @-@ model for the next generation of Opel cars , and because of its modular chassis design , future cars based on it would be able to accommodate gasoline , diesel or electric power . 
 = = Controversies and criticism = = 
 = = = EPA fuel economy testing = = = 
 In 2008 , General Motors was concerned about how the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) would test the Volt to determine its official fuel economy rating . The controversy centered on whether , by including a gasoline engine , the Volt should be classified as a hybrid rather than an electric car as claimed by General Motors . If tested with the same EPA tests used by other hybrids , the Volt 's EPA fuel economy rating would be around 48 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 58 mpg @-@ imp ) due to the current EPA test for hybrids disallowing vehicles from boosting their mpg rating using stored battery power . General Motors stated that the Volt is an entirely new type of vehicle which the EPA 's current fuel economy tests were not suited to rate and that a new test should be devised for this emerging class of hybrid @-@ electrics . General Motors also advocated for a more simplified mpg calculation method to take into account the range of a plug @-@ in hybrid while running solely on electricity . Because the Volt can travel 40 miles ( 64 km ) on batteries alone , GM argued that most drivers with a daily commute of less than that distance would drive only in electric mode , so long as they recharged their vehicle at work or at home overnight . 
 The EPA official rating issued in November 2010 included separate fuel economy ratings for all @-@ electric mode and gasoline @-@ only mode , with an overall combined city / highway gasoline @-@ electricity fuel economy rating of 60 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 72 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) . To address the variability of the fuel economy outcome depending on miles driven between charges , EPA also included in the Volt 's fuel economy label a table showing fuel economy and electricity consumed for five different scenarios driven between a full charge , and a never @-@ charge scenario . According to this table the Volt 's fuel economy goes up to 168 mpg @-@ US ( 1 @.@ 40 L / 100 km ; 202 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) if driven 45 miles ( 72 km ) between full charges . Also , in recognition of the multiple operating modes that a plug @-@ in hybrid can be built with ( all @-@ electric , blended , and gasoline @-@ only ) , for the new fuel economy and environment label that will be mandatory in the U.S. beginning in model year 2013 , EPA and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) issued two separate fuel economy labels for plug @-@ in hybrids . One label is for extended @-@ range electric vehicles , like the Chevy Volt , with two modes : all @-@ electric and gasoline @-@ only ; and a second label for blended mode that includes a combination of all @-@ electric , gasoline and electric operation , and gasoline only , like a conventional hybrid vehicle . 
 = = = EPA fuel economy rating = = = 
 In August 2009 , General Motors released its estimated city fuel economy rating for the Volt of 230 mpg @-@ US ( 1 @.@ 0 L / 100 km ; 280 mpg @-@ imp ) of gasoline plus 25 kWh / 100 mi ( 560 kJ / km ) of electricity using the EPA 's proposed method for evaluating plug @-@ in hybrids . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) issued a statement clarifying that the " EPA has not tested a Chevy Volt and therefore cannot confirm the fuel economy values claimed by GM . " In July 2010 , GM explained that their estimate was based on a formula that had not been officially approved and that they had been awaiting the EPA 's decision on how the equivalent fuel economy of plug @-@ in hybrids would be estimated . 
 The official EPA rating was issued in November 2010 and became the agency 's first fuel economy label for a plug @-@ in hybrids . The EPA rated the 2011 Volt combined fuel economy at 93 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) in all @-@ electric mode , and 37 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 44 mpg @-@ imp ) in gasoline @-@ only mode , for an overall combined fuel economy rating of 60 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 72 mpg @-@ imp ) equivalent ( MPG @-@ e ) . The label also shows the combined city @-@ highway fuel economy in all @-@ electric mode expressed in traditional energy consumption units , rating the Volt at 36 kWh per 100 miles ( 160 km ) . 
 = = = Production cost and sales price = = = 
 In 2009 , the Presidential Task Force on the Auto Industry said that " GM is at least one generation behind Toyota on advanced , “ green ” powertrain development . In an attempt to leapfrog Toyota , GM has devoted significant resources to the Chevy Volt . " and that " while the Chevy Volt holds promise , it is currently projected to be much more expensive than its gasoline @-@ fueled peers and will likely need substantial reductions in manufacturing cost in order to become commercially viable . " A 2009 Carnegie Mellon University study found that a PHEV @-@ 40 will be less cost effective than a HEV or a PHEV @-@ 7 in all of the scenarios considered , due to the cost and weight of the battery . Jon Lauckner , a Vice President at General Motors , responded that the study did not consider the inconvenience of a 7 miles ( 11 km ) electric range and that the study 's cost estimate of US $ 1 @,@ 000 per kWh for the Volt 's battery pack was " many hundreds of dollars per kilowatt hour higher " than what it costs to make today . " 
 In early 2010 , it was reported that General Motors would lose money on the Volt for at least the first couple of generations , but it hoped the car would create a green image that could rival the Prius . 
 After the Volt 's sales price was announced in July 2010 , there was concern expressed of the launch price of the Volt and its affordability and resulting popularity , especially when the federal subsidies of US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion were taken into account in the development of the car . 
 General Motors CEO Edward Whitacre Jr. rejected as " ridiculous " criticism that the Volt 's price is too expensive . He said that " I think it 's a very fair price . It 's the only car that will go coast to coast on electricity without plugging it in , and nobody else can come close . " Despite the federal government being the major GM shareholder due to the 2009 government @-@ led bankruptcy of the automaker , during a press briefing at the White House a Treasury official clarified that the federal government did not have any input on the pricing of the 2011 Chevrolet Volt . 
 There have also been complaints regarding price markups due to the initial limited availability in 2010 of between US $ 5 @,@ 000 to US $ 12 @,@ 000 above the recommended price , and at least in one case a US $ 20 @,@ 000 mark up in California . Even though the carmaker cannot dictate vehicle pricing to its dealers , GM said that it had requested its dealers to keep prices in line with the company ’ s suggested retail price . 
 In May 2011 the National Legal and Policy Center announced that some Chevrolet dealers were selling Volts to other dealers and claiming the US $ 7 @,@ 500 federal tax credit for themselves . Then the dealers who bought the Volts sell them as used cars with low mileage to private buyers , who no longer qualify for the credit . General Motors acknowledged that 10 dealer @-@ to @-@ dealer Volt sales had taken place among Chevrolet dealers , but the carmaker said they do not encourage such practice . 
 In September 2012 , Reuters published an opinion / editorial article where it claimed that General Motors , nearly two years after the introduction of the car , was losing US $ 49 @,@ 000 on each Volt it built . The article concluded that the Volt is " over @-@ engineered and over @-@ priced " and that its technological complexity has put off many prospective buyers , due to fears the car may be unreliable . GM executives replied that Reuters ' estimates were significantly flawed as they also allocated the vehicle 's research and development program costs only against the number of Volts sold in the United States ( as of August 2012 ) , instead of spreading the total costs over the entire lifetime of the model , as well as including those units sold in Europe and other countries . GM explained that the investments will pay off once the innovative technologies of the Volt are applied across multiple current and future products . 
 = = = Battery pack fire risk = = = 
 In June 2011 a Volt that had been subjected by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) to a 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) side pole impact crash test followed by a post @-@ impact rollover , caught fire three weeks later in the test center parking lot , burning nearby vehicles . The battery was found to be the source of the fire . After the fire , both Chevrolet and the NHTSA independently replicated the crash test and a subsequent vehicle rotation procedure to test for any fluid leakage , but in their first attempt they could not reproduce the conditions under which the battery pack ignited . The NHTSA said it had " concluded that the crash test damaged the Volt ’ s lithium @-@ ion battery and that the damage led to a vehicle fire that took several weeks to develop . " In further testing of the Volt 's batteries carried out by NHTSA in November 2011 , two of the three tests resulted in thermal events . One battery pack was rotated 180 degrees within hours after it was impacted and began to smoke and emit sparks after rotation . In the other case , the battery pack that was crashed @-@ tested one week earlier and that had been monitored since the test caught fire . The NHTSA then took an uncommon step on November 25 , 2011 and opened a formal safety defect investigation " without any data from real @-@ world incidents " to examine the potential risks involved from intrusion damage to the battery pack in the Chevrolet Volt . After the initial Volt fire , the NHTSA examined the Nissan Leaf and other plug @-@ in electric vehicles and said its testing “ has not raised safety concerns about vehicles other than the Chevy Volt . ” 
 As a result of this investigation , GM announced that it would offer any new GM car in exchange to any Volt owner who has concerns while the federal investigation was taking place . In December 2011 , the company said that if necessary they were prepared to recall all the vehicles and repair them upon determination of the cause of the fires , and also announced they would buy back the car if the owner was too afraid of the potential for a fire . GM 's CEO also said that it may be necessary to redesign or make changes to the battery pack depending on the recommendations from federal officials . As of December 1 , 33 Volt owners in the U.S. and 3 in Canada had requested a loaner car . As of December 5 , General Motors reported that a couple dozen Volt owners had requested the carmaker to buy back their cars , and the company had already agreed to repurchase about a dozen . Before the carmaker agrees to buy back each vehicle , other options are explored as GM primarily wants to provide loaner cars , but " if the only way we can make them happy is to repurchase it , then we will , " a GM spokesman said . General Motors explained that the buy back price includes the Volt purchase price , plus taxes and fees , less a usage fee based on how many miles the car has been run . As of January 5 , 2012 , GM reported that around 250 Volt owners had requested either a loaner vehicle or a potential buyback . 
 The NHTSA also said it was working with all automakers to develop postcrash procedures to keep occupants of electric vehicles and emergency personnel who respond to crash scenes safe . Additionally , NHTSA advised to be aware that fires may occur a considerable amount of time after a crash . General Motors said the first fire would have been avoided if GM 's protocols for deactivating the battery after the crash had been followed . These protocols had been used by GM since July 2011 but were not shared with the NHTSA until November 2011 . In another statement the carmaker stated that they “ are working with other vehicle manufacturers , first responders , tow truck operators , and salvage associations with the goal of implementing industrywide protocols . ” 
 Customer deliveries of the Opel Ampera in Europe were delayed until the NHTSA completed its investigation of the Volt 's battery fire risk to make sure the vehicle is safe . However , deliveries of the first Chevrolet Volts in Europe began in France in November 2011 . Deliveries of the Vauxhall Ampera in the UK continued as scheduled for May 2012 . Opel Ampera deliveries began in February 2012 . 
 Battery enhancements 
 On January 5 , 2012 , General Motors announced that it would offer a customer @-@ satisfaction program to provide modifications to the Chevrolet Volt to reduce the chance that the battery pack could catch fire days or weeks after a severe accident . The carmaker described the modifications as voluntary enhancements and stated that neither the car nor the battery was being recalled . General Motors determined the June fire was the result of a minor intrusion from a portion of the vehicle into a side section of the battery pack . This intrusion resulted in a small coolant leak inside the battery of approximately 50 mL ( 1 @.@ 8 imp fl oz ; 1 @.@ 7 US fl oz ) . When the vehicle was put through a slow roll , where it was rotated at 90 @-@ degree increments , holding in each position for about five minutes , an additional 1 liter ( 0 @.@ 22 imp gal ; 0 @.@ 26 U.S. gal ) of coolant leaked . With the vehicle in the 180 degrees position ( upside down ) , the coolant came in contact with the printed circuit board electronics at the top of the battery pack and later crystallized . Three weeks later this condition , in combination with a charged battery , led to a short circuit that resulted in the post @-@ crash fire . 
 General Motors explained the modifications will enhance the vehicle structure that surround the battery and the battery coolant system to improve battery protection after a severe crash . The safety enhancements consist of strengthening an existing portion of the Volt ’ s vehicle safety structure to further protect the battery pack in a severe side collision ; add a sensor in the reservoir of the battery coolant system to monitor coolant levels ; and add a tamper @-@ resistant bracket to the top of the battery coolant reservoir to help prevent potential coolant overfill . The additional side safety structural pieces have a total weight of 2 to 3 lb ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 36 kg ) , and their function is to spread the load of a severe side impact away from the battery pack , reducing the possibility of intrusion into the pack . 
 During December 2011 , GM conducted four crash tests of Volts with the reinforced steel and upgraded cooling system , resulting in no intrusion to the battery and no coolant leakage . On December 22 , 2011 , the NHTSA also subjected a modified Volt to the same test that led to the original fire , with no signs of the damage that is believed to have been the cause . The NHTSA said “ the preliminary results of the crash test indicate the remedy proposed by General Motors today should address the issue of battery intrusion ” though its investigation remained open . General Motors declined to say how much the modifications would cost . 
 All 12 @,@ 400 Chevrolet Volts produced until December 2011 , including all Amperas in stock at European dealerships , were scheduled to receive the safety enhancements . Since production was halted during the holidays , the enhancements were in place when production resumed in early 2012 . Sales continued , and dealers modified the Volts they had in stock . General Motors sent a letter to Volt owners indicating that they could schedule the service appointment to protect their batteries beginning in the last week of March 2012 . General Motors also decided to replace the 120 @-@ volt charging cords in most of the nearly 10 @,@ 000 Volts sold since late 2010 . The new cords were enhanced to add durability , and some of the chargers built after February 5 have the new cords . 
 NHTSA findings 
 On January 20 , 2012 , the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration closed the Volt 's safety defect investigation related to post @-@ crash fire risk . The agency concluded that " no discernible defect trend exists " and also found that the modifications recently developed by General Motors are sufficient to reduce the potential for battery intrusion resulting from side impacts . The NHTSA also said that " based on the available data , NHTSA does not believe that Chevy Volts or other electric vehicles pose a greater risk of fire than gasoline @-@ powered vehicles . " The agency also announced it has developed interim guidance to increase awareness and identify appropriate safety measures regarding electric vehicles for the emergency response community , law enforcement officers , tow truck operators , storage facilities and consumers . 
 House of Representatives hearing 
 The chairman of the Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs , Stimulus Oversight and Government Spending , U.S. Representative Jim Jordan held hearings on January 25 , 2012 , to investigate why the NHTSA opened a formal investigation only five months after the first postcrash battery fire occurred in June . The subcommittee of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform wanted to determine if government officials , including from NHTSA , purposely held back information on the Volt fire for political reasons . Both Daniel Akerson , General Motors CEO , and David L. Strickland , NHTSA administrator , denied any wrongdoing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 The Volt has received awards from multiple organizations : 
 U.S. organizations 
 2009 Green Car Vision Award by the Green Car Journal at the Washington Auto Show for " a bold and far @-@ reaching approach that promises to bring an exceptionally fuel efficient model to consumers at reasonable cost . " 
 2011 Car and Driver Ten Best Cars . For the first time ever Car and Driver magazine included an electrically powered car among its 10 best . 
 2011 Motor Trend Car of the Year . The magazine commented that " In the 61 @-@ year history of the Car of the Year award , there have been few contenders as hyped – or as controversial – as the Chevrolet Volt . " 
 2011 Green Car of the Year by Green Car Journal . The magazine editors explained that " This award welcomes a new genre of mass @-@ production electric vehicles to the consumer market , with the Volt as the first @-@ ever electric vehicle to take top prize . " 
 2011 Automobile of the Year by Automobile Magazine . The editors commented that the Volt " ... is genuinely an all @-@ new car , in the most simplistic sense as well as in the greater notion that the Volt is unlike any vehicle we have ever driven . " 
 2011 North American Car of the Year announced at the 2011 North American International Auto Show . Forty @-@ nine American and Canadian automobile writers chose the Volt . The nominees were judged based on " innovation , design , safety , handling , driver satisfaction and value " . 
 Listed among the 2011 Greenest Vehicles of the Year by the American Council for an Energy @-@ Efficient Economy . 
 Listed among the 2011 Best Green Cars by Mother Earth News . 
 2011 Edison Award - Gold in the Transportation Category , Personal Transportation Segment . 
 2012 Best Resale Value Award in the category of electric cars by Kelley Blue Book . 
 2011 The Volt ranked first in Consumer Reports ' list of owner @-@ satisfaction based on its 2011 Annual Auto Survey , with 93 % respondents who owned the Volt saying they definitely would purchase that same vehicle again . The magazine noted that the Volt had been on sale for just a few months at the time of the survey , and also clarified that the survey took place before the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration investigation regarding the Volt 's battery fire risk . 
 2012 Total Cost of Ownership Award in the electric car category , granted by Kelley Blue Book for the lowest projected costs during initial five @-@ year ownership period in its category . 
 2012 The Volt ranked first , for a second year in a row , in Consumer Reports ' list of owner @-@ satisfaction based on its 2012 Annual Auto Survey , with 92 % respondents who owned the Volt saying they definitely would purchase that same vehicle again . 
 2016 Green Car of the Year by Green Car Journal ( awarded to the second generation Volt ) . The Chevrolet Volt is the first model to receive this award more than once . 
 International organizations 
 2009 Festival Automobile International awarded the Grand Prize for Environment to the Volt . 
 2011 World Green Car announced at the 2011 New York Auto Show . 
 2012 International Engine of the Year Award in the category of Green Engine , shared by the Opel Ampera and the Chevrolet Volt for their 1 @.@ 4 L engine @-@ based extended @-@ range electric powertrain . 
 European organizations 
 2011 Overall Winner of What Car ? Green Awards , granted by the UK magazine to the Vauxhall Ampera . 
 2011 Top Gear 's " Green Car of the Year 2011 " to the Vauxhall Ampera . 
 2012 Car of the Year in Denmark . In October 2011 , 18 Danish motor journalists chose the Opel Ampera as " Car of the Year 2012 " by a wide margin , despite being more expensive than the family cars the award usually goes to . 
 2012 European Car of the Year , shared by the Chevrolet Volt and the Opel / Vauxhall . The Ampera / Volt became the first car developed in the U.S. to win this European award . 
 2013 Green Mobility Trophy . Readers of Auto Zeitung in Germany awarded the Opel Ampera the <unk> and named the mid @-@ size sedan the best electric vehicle . 
 Rest of the world organizations 
 2012 Drive 's Green Innovation Award to the Holden Volt , as part of the Australia 's Drive Car of the Year Awards . 
 = = = Reviews and test drives = = = 
 The following tables summarize the results of long @-@ term tests reported by specialized media . 
 Notes : 
 1 . ^ The EPA run tests used a reproducible methodology to produce results that can be compared between vehicles and test sites . The remainder of the results were obtained using un @-@ controlled driving cycles and are comparable neither to each nor between different vehicles . 
 = A Passion for Churches = 
 A Passion for Churches is a 1974 BBC television documentary written and presented by the then Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman and produced and directed by Edward Mirzoeff . Commissioned as a follow @-@ up to the critically acclaimed 1973 documentary Metro @-@ land , the film offers Betjeman 's personal poetic record of the goings @-@ on taking place throughout the Anglican Diocese of Norwich and its churches in the run @-@ up to Easter Sunday using the framing device of the Holy sacraments . 
 Created with the approval of the Bishop of Norwich , Maurice Wood , the 49 @-@ minute film was shot on location in Norfolk and parts of Suffolk throughout the spring of 1974 on 16 mm colour film by cameraman John McGlashan . For the film , John Betjeman wrote an original poetic commentary consisting of blank verse , free verse , and prose and he appeared on @-@ screen in several segments to describe features of ecclesiastical buildings and to reminisce about his lifelong " passion for churches " . 
 The programme was praised by critics upon its original BBC 2 screening in December 1974 and gained high audience appreciation figures . It has since been repeated on BBC Four in 2006 . It was released on a limited @-@ edition DVD in 2007 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following the success of the 1973 film Metro @-@ land , which documented life in suburban London , Edward Mirzoeff was commissioned to create a new documentary with John Betjeman . Mirzoeff noticed that aside from suburban themes , the Church of England was the other major influence on Betjeman 's poetry . His proposal to the poet was for a study of the Church of England to be titled Failed in Divinity , a line derived from Betjeman 's poetic autobiography Summoned by Bells , in which the poet relates how was sent down from the University of Oxford after failing a compulsory examination on divinity . In Mirzoeff 's first treatment , Betjeman would have embarked on a journey around Britain studying fine cathedrals , churches and their congregations . Betjeman ruled against the title , but liked the idea , although he was keen that the film should be primarily about the Church and its people , and not himself . 
 Following this early proposal , Mirzoeff and Betjeman realised that a study of the whole Church would be too ambitious , and instead decided to set the film within one diocese . Betjeman initially suggested the Diocese of Southwark , owing to a friendship with the then @-@ Bishop of Southwark , Mervyn Stockwood . Mirzoeff was not keen , given that Southwark was primarily an urban diocese . A disastrous meeting with the bishop ( who was " high @-@ handed , arrogant and very , very rude " ) led to that idea being scrapped . 
 Film editor Ted Roberts suggested the Diocese of Norwich , as Norfolk is noted for the density of its medieval churches in a variety of urban , coastal and rural locations . In addition , Betjeman was close friends with Lady Wilhelmina " Billa " Harrod ( to whom he had once been engaged ) , who resided at The Old Rectory , Holt . She was greatly involved with saving redundant churches and was personal friends with the Bishop of Norwich , Maurice Wood , and was also able to provide the crew with accommodation . Early location @-@ scouting proved fruitful , and the production was bolstered by a meeting with Bishop Wood in March 1974 , during which the bishop , after initial reluctance , gave the production his blessing . Filming began in April 1974 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The documentary was shot on 16 mm colour film by cameraman John McGlashan , who had also worked on the BBC 's M.R. James series of adaptations A Ghost Story for Christmas , of which the early installments were entirely filmed in Norfolk ( Betjeman was a fan of <unk> ghost stories , and often read them to the crew while travelling to locations ) . McGlashan was also a part @-@ time priest for a Liberal Catholic church , and was able to bring to the production additional knowledge of the Sacraments . 
 After deciding against the original " Failed in Divinity " preface , it was decided to open the film with Betjeman remembering a Norfolk rowing holiday from his youth in which his father pointed out the tower of St Peter 's church in <unk> . This moment , he said , led to his lifelong " passion for churches " , a phrase that would eventually form the title of the film . The crew decided to film Betjeman revisiting this location on the River Bure , although on several occasions the poet nearly capsized his rowing boat . 
 The production work was exhaustive , involving the filming of numerous churches in Norfolk , both ancient and more modern . Many of the clergymen featured in the programme were discovered by accident or by word @-@ of @-@ mouth . For example , the production researcher managed to find , on request , a vicar who had an extensive model railway in his rectory , another whose ministry was based on water ( the Chaplain of the Broads ) and a vicar whose congregation at the time numbered zero . 
 Several of the services featured in the film were one @-@ off events . For example , the wedding was shot at Lyng , where the bride 's father was the rector . The bridegroom , Nigel McCulloch , went on to become the Bishop of Manchester . The production encountered difficulties with obtaining some footage ; while filming a Seaman 's Mission from Great Yarmouth , a wave flooded the boat , ruining the sound @-@ recording equipment , and a sequence featuring an open @-@ air service taking place at daybreak on Easter Sunday at the most easterly point of the UK — at Ness Point , Lowestoft — was nearly missed after the sound recordist overslept . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 The commentary alternates between blank verse , free verse , and prose . Although Betjeman had accompanied the production on most of its shoots , his poetic commentary was only written in the weeks after the film had already been edited by Roberts . According to Mirzoeff , he would run sequences from the film for hours , searching for inspiration in the rhythm of the editing , sometimes sitting in a small cupboard to help himself concentrate . Mirzoeff notes that he found writing the text for A Passion for Churches more of a strain than for his previous film since he had to take into consideration both his own beliefs and those of his friends . Sometimes members of the crew would help him by writing their own verses for him to use or modify . One particular sequence proved so difficult to write that Betjeman flew into a rage after the director pressured him to hurry the composition along . Mirzoeff suggests that several sequences , such as the scene about redundancy and death , provoked verse of much greater " complexity and depth " than any heard in his previous screen appearances . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film is roughly based on themes suggested by the Anglican sacraments . It opens with Betjeman 's recollection of how a boating holiday by <unk> in Norfolk inspired his " Passion for Churches " . After a montage of church architecture with the musical accompaniment of the barrel organ of Bressingham , the focus shifts to St Margaret 's , Cley next the Sea , where Betjeman introduces the viewer to its features . The scene then switches to a baptism in <unk> and later a children 's service in <unk> . Also seen are the restoration of the medieval screen at <unk> and examples of surviving Norwich glass . Betjeman then journeys to Norwich , which has more surviving medieval churches than London , Bristol and York combined . At Norwich Cathedral , the centre of the diocese , he attends a Mothers ' Union meeting with the Bishop , and later the institution of a new rector to the living of Holt . Betjeman tells the viewer about the Elizabethan vicarage of Great <unk> . Later seen are a vicar busily writing his newsletter at Weston Longville , a parish meeting at <unk> and a fête at South Raynham . Betjeman presents the three @-@ storey pulpit of St Mary 's <unk> and the brass @-@ rubbing at <unk> . A wedding takes place in Lyng and in the tower , change ringers explain their addiction to bell @-@ ringing . 
 Betjeman explores the ruins of St Benet 's Abbey before seeing its modern equivalent at a convent of Anglican nuns at the Community of All Hallows , <unk> . Betjeman then takes the North Norfolk Railway to Walsingham to see the Anglican pilgrims going to the church of Our Lady of Walsingham . After a look at the Queen 's church in Sandringham and the unusual Victorian church at <unk> , choir practices are seen in progress at <unk> and <unk> Abbey . <unk> the work of Sir Ninian Comper at <unk> , Suffolk , Betjeman recalls that he looked like Colonel Sanders . As Easter Day approaches , Betjeman reflects on the furthest reaches of the diocese - water @-@ borne ministries , a parish church in <unk> that no one attends , as well as the fate of those churches declared redundant ; conversion into hospitals , an artists ' studio , a shoe store and dereliction . Easter Day breaks in Lowestoft , and the viewer sees traditionally dressed ladies from the Almshouses in Castle Rising . The film concludes back in Norwich as parishioners of St Peter Mancroft , and parishioners from churches all around the county summoned by bells , walk to worship . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 Mirzoeff recalls that A Passion for Churches created a minor internal disagreement at the BBC since the film , produced by the General Features Department , discussed a subject considered to be the territory of the Religious Broadcasting Department . The head of the department insisted on a screening , but was placated by the presence of the poet and Prime Minister Harold Wilson 's wife , Mary , at a private showing held in November 1974 , and he gave the film his approval . 
 Critical reception to the film was generally very positive : the Times Literary Supplement named it " Sir John 's masterpiece to date " and the Financial Times described it as " extremely good " . Television playwright Dennis Potter was also highly complimentary , writing his New Statesman review in verse as a tribute . Only the Eastern Daily Press felt that the film was too short and lacking in detail . But it responded favourably to the repeat , claiming that its original criticisms had led to the film being much improved . In fact not one single frame had been changed . Audience response was recorded as " exceptionally enthusiastic " and Betjeman himself was pleased with the result , although of his films he still favoured Metro @-@ land . 
 A Passion for Churches was revived by BBC Four in 2006 to mark the centenary of the poet 's birth . It was subsequently released on a limited @-@ edition DVD in 2007 with notes by the producer and two additional short films by the poet . 
 = German destroyer Z14 Friedrich Ihn = 
 Z14 Friedrich Ihn was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . The ship was named after the First World War German naval officer Friedrich Ihn . At the beginning of World War II , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the German Bight to lay defensive minefields in German waters . In late 1939 and early 1940 , the ship laid multiple offensive minefields off the English coast that claimed 18 merchant ships and a destroyer . Ihn was under repair during the Norwegian Campaign of early 1940 and was transferred to France later that year . 
 After a lengthy refit in Germany , she returned to France in early 1941 where she escorted returning warships , commerce raiders , and supply ships through the Bay of Biscay for several months . She remained in Germany for the rest of the year after returning in July . The ship was transferred to France in early 1942 to escort the capital ships as they sailed through the English Channel to return to Germany ( the Channel Dash ) . Ihn was then transferred to Norway where she participated in several unsuccessful attacks on convoys to the Soviet Union . Afterwards she returned to Germany and remained there for the rest of the year . The ship spent most of 1943 in the northern Norway although she was mostly inactive because of fuel shortages . Ihn was ordered home for a long refit late in the year and she was sent to southern Norway upon its completion in mid @-@ 1944 . The ship remained there for the rest of the war , although she made several trips to evacuate refugees from East Prussia in the last days of the war . 
 Ihn was eventually allocated to the Soviets when the surviving warships were divided between the Allies after the war . Little is known about her service with the Soviet Navy and she was probably scrapped sometime in the 1960s . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Friedrich Ihn had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 239 long tons ( 2 @,@ 275 t ) at standard and 3 @,@ 165 long tons ( 3 @,@ 216 t ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Friedrich Ihn carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 10 officers and 315 sailors . 
 Friedrich Ihn carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Sufficient depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of sixteen charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of sixty mines . ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines and an active sonar system was installed by February 1941 . 
 During the war the ship 's light anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented several times . In April 1941 , improved 2 cm C / 38 guns replaced the original C / 30 guns and three additional guns were added . The two guns on the aft shelter deck were replaced at some point by a single 2 cm quadruple Flakvierling mount , probably in 1942 . Sometime in 1944 – 45 , Ihn received a partial " Barbara " anti @-@ aircraft refit where twin 2 cm mounts replaced her singles , giving her a total of 18 2 cm barrels . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Friedrich Ihn , named after the commander of the torpedo boat SMS S @-@ 35 killed during the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , was ordered on 19 January 1935 from Blohm & Voss . She was laid down at their shipyard in Hamburg on 30 May 1935 as yard number <unk> , launched on 5 November 1935 and completed on 6 April 1938 . The ship participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review as part of the 3rd Destroyer Division . On 23 – 24 March 1939 , Friedrich Ihn was one of the destroyers escorting Adolf Hitler aboard the pocket battleship Deutschland as the Germans occupied Memel . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May . 
 When World War II began , Friedrich Ihn was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sister ships in laying defensive minefields . She also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods in October . The ship was scheduled to conduct a minelaying operation off the British coast in early November , but it was cancelled when one of the other destroyers assigned to participate suffered machinery problems from contaminated fuel oil . 
 On the night of 12 / 13 December , German destroyers sortied to lay minefields off the British coast . Under the command of Commodore ( Kommodore ) Friedrich Bonte in his flagship Hermann Künne , Friedrich Ihn , Bruno Heinemann , Richard Beitzen , and Erich Steinbrinck laid 240 mines off the mouth of the River Tyne , where the navigation lights were still lit . The British were unaware of the minefield 's existence and lost eleven ships totaling 18 @,@ 979 gross register tons ( GRT ) . The destroyers were later ordered to escort the crippled light cruisers Leipzig and Nürnberg which had been torpedoed by the submarine HMS Salmon while covering the destroyers ' withdrawal . Ihn and Steinbrinck had machinery problems en route and were forced to return to port before they reached the cruisers . Ihn and her sisters Friedrich Eckoldt and Steinbrinck sortied again on the night of 18 December , but the British had turned off the navigation lights off <unk> and the German were forced to abandon the attempt because they could not locate themselves precisely enough to lay the minefield in the proper position . 
 = = = 1940 = = = 
 Another minefield of 170 magnetic mines was laid by Ihn , <unk> , and her sister Steinbrinck on the night of 6 / 7 January 1940 off the Thames Estuary . The destroyer HMS Grenville and six merchant ships totalling 21 @,@ 617 GRT were lost to this minefield as well and another ship was damaged as well . Bonte led a destroyer minelaying sortie to the Newcastle area on the night of 10 / 11 January with Ihn , Heidkamp , Eckoldt , Anton Schmitt , Beitzen , and Karl Galster . Ihn had problems with her boilers that reduced her maximum speed to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) and she had to be escorted back to Germany by Beitzen . This minefield only claimed one fishing trawler of 251 tons . 
 Ihn was under repairs during Operation Weserübung in April and did not leave the dockyard until May when she began working up as part of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla . The flotilla was transferred to the Atlantic Coast of France in early September and was attacked by Bristol Blenheim bombers of the Royal Air Force on 11 September while crossing the Baie de la Seine without result , although Ihn was near @-@ missed . Now based at Brest the flotilla laid a minefield in Falmouth Bay during the night of 28 / 29 September . Five ships totalling only 2 @,@ 026 GRT were sunk by this minefield . Led by Kapitän zur See Erich Bey , Ihn and four other destroyers sortied for the Southwest Approaches on 17 October and were intercepted by a British force of two light cruisers and five destroyers . The British opened fire at extreme range and were forced to disengage in the face of long @-@ range torpedo volleys and attacks by Luftwaffe bombers without having hit any of the German ships . Ihn returned home on 7 November for a refit in Stettin . 
 Her refit was completed in late January 1941 , but she was trapped by thick ice so that she could not reach Gotenhafen to work up until mid @-@ February . Ihn returned to France in April where she was based at La Pallice . There she was primarily occupied with escorting returning commerce raiders , warships and supply ships through the Bay of Biscay to bases in France . These included the raider Thor on 22 April , the supply ship Nordland , and the fleet oiler Ermland in late May . The heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen was escorted to Brest in early June after separating from the battleship Bismarck during Operation Rheinübung . Ihn sailed from Brest on 27 July for another refit and was ineffectually attacked by British motor torpedo boats ( MTB ) off Calais that same day . 
 = = = 1942 = = = 
 The ship remained in German waters for the rest of the year after completing her refit . She was sent to Brest in February 1942 to escort the battleships Gneisenau and Scharnhorst , as well as Prinz Eugen through the English Channel back to Germany ( Operation Cerberus ) . During the voyage , Ihn twice engaged British MTBs and shot down two Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers . Shortly afterwards , the ship joined four other destroyers in escorting Prinz Eugen and the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer to Trondheim , Norway . Heavy weather forced Ihn and two other destroyers to return to port before reaching Trondheim and Prinz Eugen was badly damaged by a British submarine after their separation . 
 On 6 March , the battleship Tirpitz , escorted by Ihn and three other destroyers , sortied to attack the returning convoy QP 8 and the Russia @-@ bound PQ 12 as part of Operation Sportpalast ( Sports Palace ) . That night the weather worsened and Ihn suffered some damage to her bridge and forward gun mount from high waves . The following morning , Admiral Otto Ciliax , commanding the operation , ordered the destroyers to search independently for Allied ships and they stumbled across the 2 @,@ 815 @-@ GRT Soviet freighter <unk> , a straggler from QP 8 later that afternoon and sank her . Tirpitz rejoined them shortly afterwards and Ciliax ordered Ihn to Harstad to refuel . The destroyer rejoined the battleship in the morning and was able to shoot down one of five Fairey Albacore torpedo bombers from the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious that unsuccessfully attacked the German ships at 10 : 20 . Two hours later both ships arrived back in port . 
 By May , Ihn was flagship of Captain Fritz Berger of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla and she was assigned to escort Tirpitz during Operation Rösselsprung ( Knight 's Move ) , the attack on the Russia @-@ bound Convoy PQ 17 . The ships sailed from Trondheim on 2 July for the first stage of the operation , although all three of the other destroyers assigned to Tirpitz 's escort ran aground in the dark and heavy fog and were forced to return to port for repairs . Tirpitz , the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper and Ihn arrived at Altafjord on 4 July , but they were recalled shortly after sortieing on the 5th and never engaged any Allied ships . She escorted Galster , one of the destroyers that had run aground , back to Germany on 12 July . 
 = = = 1943 – 45 = = = 
 Ihn was refitted after her arrival and remained in the Baltic Sea for the rest of the year . On 9 January 1943 , together with two other destroyers , she escorted Scharnhorst and Prinz Eugen as they attempted to return to Norway from Gotenhafen . The ships were spotted en route two days later by an aircraft from the Royal Air Force and the attempt was abandoned as the element of surprise was lost . Another attempt was made in March , although just with Scharnhorst , and Ihn joined her escort off Kristiansand , Norway , on 7 March . Heavy weather forced the destroyer to put in to Bergen , Norway , although the battleship reached Trondheim . Ihn was transferred to Narvik , Norway at the end of April , although the shortage of fuel severely limited her activities in the Arctic . She was ordered home to refit in November , a lengthy one that lasted until June 1944 . She was then stationed at Horten , Norway for the rest of the year , where she was employed on convoy escort and minelaying duties , mainly in the Skagerrak . The ship received a brief refit at Swinemünde in November that augmented her anti @-@ aircraft armament and returned to Horten where she remained until May 1945 . On 5 May , Ihn sailed from Denmark to Hela where she loaded refugees that she ferried to Copenhagen the following day . She immediately turned around and returned to Hela for another load that she delivered to Glücksburg , Germany , on the 8th . She surrendered at Flensburg by the next day . 
 = = = Post @-@ War = = = 
 The ship was moved to Wilhelmshaven over the summer under British control while the division of the surviving warships was decided among the victorious Allies . While this was being argued the ships were overhauled with a small maintenance crew aboard to preserve their value . The Allied Tripartite Commission allocated Ihn to the Soviet Union at the end of 1945 . By this time she had developed some problems with her boilers and the British proposed to swap her for Theodor Reidel to avoid forcing the Soviets to wait for her to be repaired . They refused and Ihn was repaired more quickly than had been estimated with additional spare boiler parts loaded aboard for the voyage . Commissioned into the Soviet Navy as <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ) , the ship served in the Baltic fleet until she was struck from the list on 22 March 1952 and sold for scrap . 
 = Vermont Route 17 = 
 Vermont Route 17 ( VT 17 ) is a 40 @.@ 409 @-@ mile ( 65 @.@ 032 km ) long state highway in western Vermont in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at the New York state line in Addison , where it connects to New York State Route 185 ( NY 185 ) by way of the Lake Champlain Bridge . Its eastern terminus is at a junction with VT 100 in Waitsfield . VT 17 was initially much shorter than it is today , extending from the Champlain Bridge to Addison upon assignment . It was extended east through the Green Mountains to Waitsfield in 1965 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The routing of VT 17 varies greatly on opposite sides of the Bristol town center . West of Bristol , the route passes through generally level terrain and connects multiple communities . East of Bristol , VT 17 is more mountainous and more rural in nature . 
 = = = West of Bristol = = = 
 VT 17 begins at the New York state line over Lake Champlain , where it connects to NY 185 at the midpoint of the Lake Champlain Bridge . The route heads northeastward from the state line , descending the eastern bridge approach and intersecting VT 125 adjacent to the Chimney Point State Historical Site at Chimney Point . It continues northward along the lakeshore of Addison County and the town of Addison for roughly 2 miles ( 3 km ) ( passing <unk> State Park ) before turning eastward toward the village of Addison . 
 In the center of Addison , situated 6 miles ( 10 km ) from Lake Champlain , VT 17 intersects VT 22A . VT 17 continues east from Addison , crossing over the Otter Creek and intersecting VT 23 near Weybridge prior to curving to the northeast toward Waltham . Midway between Waltham and New Haven , VT 17 briefly overlaps with U.S. Route 7 ( US 7 ) , before continuing eastward through New Haven to Bristol . As the route approaches the village of Bristol , it meets VT 116 at an intersection just west of the community . VT 116 turns east here , joining VT 17 through Bristol along Main Street . 
 = = = East of Bristol = = = 
 Outside Bristol , VT 17 and VT 116 are joined by the New Haven River , here marking the northern boundary of the Green Mountain National Forest . The roadway and waterway head east , following a winding route through the Green Mountains . When New Haven splits off to the southeast shortly afterward , VT 17 and VT 116 continue north along Baldwin Creek up to the point where VT 17 and VT 116 diverge . While VT 116 continues north along Beaver Brook , VT 17 remains in the vicinity of Baldwin Creek as it heads northeast through the Green Mountains . 
 Midway between Bristol and Waitsfield , VT 17 intersects Gore Road , a local road that leads to eastern Burlington 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the north . The route crosses into Chittenden County , as well as the Camel 's Hump State Park , shortly afterward . The route leaves Chittenden County and passes into Washington County 2 miles ( 3 km ) later upon traversing the Appalachian Gap , a mountain pass located to the north of Mount Ellen . East of the gap , VT 17 continues through the eastern Green Mountains for 6 miles ( 10 km ) to Waitsfield , where it terminates at VT 100 . 
 = = History = = 
 The road connecting the ferry landing at Chimney Point to the town center of Addison was designated as VT F @-@ 7 ca . 1927 . The ferry crossed Lake Champlain into Port Henry . VT F @-@ 7 was extended eastward to US 7 in New Haven by 1929 . In 1929 , the Champlain Bridge opened , connecting Chimney Point to Crown Point . By the following year , the segment of VT F @-@ 7 west of VT 30A ( now VT 22A ) in Addison was renumbered to VT 17 , which now began on the Champlain Bridge at the New York state line . In 1933 , all of VT 17 and the portion of VT F @-@ 7 's former routing between Addison and New Haven were added to the state highway system . Prior to this time , maintenance of both roads was performed by the towns through which they passed . VT 17 was subsequently extended eastward to New Haven along VT F @-@ 7 's former routing . As part of the 1935 state highway expansion , additional mileage was added to VT 17 , which was extended 4 @.@ 3 miles ( 6 @.@ 9 km ) to VT 116 in Bristol . 
 In 1936 , a 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) portion of the McCullough Turnpike in <unk> , which was chartered in 1933 but proved unprofitable , was deeded back to the state of Vermont and renamed to McCullough State Highway . The road , which extended eastward from the Chittenden – Washington county line , was paved during the period of 1936 and 1940 . The rest of the McCullough Turnpike to VT 100 in Waitsfield became part of the state highway system in 1956 . In 1965 , the state legislature authorized the extension of VT 17 from Bristol to the Addison – Chittenden county line , connecting it to the McCullough State Highway by way of Chittenden County 's section of the former McCullough Turnpike . The VT 17 designation was extended eastward through Chittenden County and along the McCullough State Highway at this time . 
 VT 17 's connection to the state of New York was temporarily severed in October 2009 when the Champlain Bridge was closed due to safety concerns . The bridge was demolished two months later , truncating VT 17 to the eastern shoreline of Lake Champlain until its replacement , the Lake Champlain Bridge , opened to traffic on November 7 , 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Neil Hamilton Fairley = 
 Brigadier Sir Neil Hamilton Fairley KBE <unk> FRACP FRCP <unk> FRS ( 15 July 1891 – 19 April 1966 ) was an Australian physician , medical scientist , and army officer ; who was instrumental in saving thousands of Allied lives from malaria and other diseases . 
 A graduate of the University of Melbourne , Fairley joined the Australian Army Medical Corps in 1915 . He investigated an epidemic of meningitis that was occurring in Army camps in Australia . While with the 14th General Hospital in Cairo , he investigated schistosomiasis ( then known as bilharzia ) and developed tests and treatments for the disease . In the inter @-@ war period he became renowned as an expert on tropical medicine . 
 Fairley returned to the Australian Army during the Second World War as Director of Medicine . He played an important role in the planning for the Battle of Greece , convincing the British Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Sir Archibald Wavell to alter his campaign plan to reduce the danger from malaria . In the South West Pacific Area , Fairley became responsible for co @-@ ordinating the activities of all allied forces in the fight against malaria and other tropical diseases . Fairley again sounded the alarm on the dangers of malaria , persuading authorities in the United States and United Kingdom to greatly step up production of anti @-@ malarial drugs . Through the activities of the LHQ Medical Research Unit , he fast @-@ tracked research into new drugs . Fairley convinced the Army of the efficacy of the new drug atebrin , and persuaded commanders to adopt a tough approach to administering the drug to the troops . 
 After the war Fairley returned to London where he became a consulting physician to the Hospital for Tropical Diseases and Wellcome Professor of Tropical Medicine at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine . A serious illness in 1948 forced him to resign his professorship , but he retained his practice and membership of numerous committees , becoming an " elder statesman " of tropical medicine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Neil Hamilton Fairley was born in Inglewood , Victoria , on 15 July 1891 , as the third of six sons of James Fairley , a bank manager , and his wife Margaret Louisa , née Jones . All of their four sons who survived to adulthood took up medicine as a career . One qualified as a Doctor of Medicine at the University of Melbourne and an FRCS in England and became a surgeon ; he was later killed in action in the First World War . A second also qualified as a Doctor of Medicine at the University of Melbourne , and later as an FRACP and FRCP ; he became senior physician at Royal Melbourne Hospital . A third son became a general practitioner . 
 Neil was educated at Scotch College , Melbourne , where he was dux of his class . He attended the University of Melbourne , graduating with his Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery ( MBBS ) with first class honours in 1915 , and his Doctor of Medicine ( MD ) in 1917 . While there , he won the Australian inter @-@ varsity high jumping championship and represented Victoria in tennis . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Fairley joined the Australian Army Medical Corps with the rank of captain on 1 August 1915 and was posted to Royal Melbourne Hospital as a resident medical officer . He investigated an epidemic of meningitis that was occurring in local Army camps , and his first published paper was an analysis of this disease , documenting fifty cases . In 1916 , he co @-@ authored a monograph published by the Federal government detailing 644 cases , of which 338 ( 52 % ) were fatal , this being before the invention of antibiotic drugs . 
 Fairley enlisted in the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 24 August 1916 . On 5 September 1916 , he embarked for Egypt on RMS Kashgar , joining the 14th General Hospital in Cairo . There he encountered Major Charles Martin , formerly Professor of Physiology at the University of Melbourne and Director of the Lister Institute from 1903 to 1930 . At this time , Martin was working as a Consulting Physician to the AIF in Egypt and commanded the Anzac Field Laboratory . 
