 While in Egypt , Fairley investigated schistosomiasis ( then known as bilharzia ) . The disease was known to be caused by contact with fresh water inhabited by certain species of snails , and orders had been issued that prohibited bathing in fresh water , but the troops were slow to appreciate the danger involved . In its toxic phase , the disease was easily confused with typhus , so Fairley developed a complement fixation test for the disease along the lines of the Wassermann test . He studied its pathology , confirming that the worms in the circulatory system could be cured by intravenous tartaric acid . Fairley also studied , and later published papers on typhus , malaria , and bacillary dysentery . 
 Fairley married Staff Nurse Violet May Phillips at the Garrison Church , Abbassia , Cairo on 12 February 1919 . They later divorced on 21 November 1924 . He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 15 March 1919 and commanded the 14th General Hospital for a time before embarking for the United Kingdom in June 1919 . For his services in the First World War , Fairley was mentioned in despatches and made an Officer of the Military Division of the Order of the British Empire . His citation read : 
 Brilliant work in Pathology – the result of eighteen months of patient and skilful work in the laboratory of the 14th Australian General Hospital . His work on <unk> will be of untold value to the civilian population of Egypt . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Fairley was one of a number of AIF officers granted leave " to visit various hospitals in the United Kingdom so that they become conversant with the latest developments in the medical sciences " . For a time , he worked for Martin at the Lister Institute in London where he qualified for membership of the Royal College of Physicians of London . He also received a Diploma of Public Health from the University of Cambridge . He returned to Australia on the transport Orontes in February 1920 , to become a research assistant to Sydney Patterson , director of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research , where Fairley worked on developing a test for echinococcosis along the lines of the test that he had already developed for bilharzia . 
 Fairley remained for less than a year before resigning to take up a five @-@ year appointment in Bombay as Chair of Clinical Tropical Medicine at a newly created School of Tropical Medicine , a post for which he had been nominated by the Royal Society . On arrival in India , he found that the scheme had been abandoned and that as his appointment could be terminated at six @-@ months ' notice , he would no longer be required after October 1922 . Fairley demanded and received an audience with the Governor of Bombay , Sir George Lloyd , the result of which was that the Secretary of State agreed to create a special five @-@ year post of Medical Officer of the Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory and Honorary Consulting Physician to the Sir <unk> <unk> Hospital and St George Hospital . 
 In India , Fairley continued his research into schistosomiasis . The disease was unknown in India but snails were abundant and there was danger that troops returning from Egypt might introduce it . In the absence of human schistosoma , Fairley investigated bovine schistosoma , which infected water buffalo and other domesticated animals in the Bombay area . Experiments with monkeys proved that daily intravenous doses of tartaric acid were an effective treatment . Fairley also carried out pioneering work on Guinea worm disease ( <unk> ) . However , his main interest was Tropical sprue . But he was unable to determine its cause or discover a cure ; in spite of contracting the disease himself and making some advances in its treatment . He was invalided out of India , travelling to the United Kingdom to recuperate in 1925 . While in India he had met Mary Evelyn Greaves , and they were married at the Presbyterian Church , Marylebone , on 28 October 1925 . 
 Fairley returned to Australia in 1927 and rejoined the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute . He worked there for two years , collaborating with the new director , Charles Kellaway in studies of snake venoms and with Harold Dew on the development of diagnostic tests for echinococcosis . Fairley dedicated most of 1928 to the snake venom programme , co @-@ ordinating an enormous body of epidemiological data – including a questionnaire to Australian clinicians – on the frequency and outcome of bites by Australian elapid snakes . This work involved numerous <unk> to establish typical and maximal venom yields , innovative studies of snake dentition using wax moulds , and detailed dissections to describe each species ' biting apparatus . Fairley furthermore undertook in vivo studies of envenomation in a range of large animal species , to determine the efficacy of prevailing first @-@ aid measures . He concluded that at best , ligature and local <unk> might slow time to death after a significant envenomation . This reinforced the need for effective <unk> ( antivenoms ) for the more dangerous local species of snakes , notably the tiger snake ( <unk> <unk> ) , death adder ( Acanthophis antarcticus ) and copperhead ( <unk> superbus ) , although only the former was suitable for manufacture by the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories ( now CSL Limited ) . 
 In 1928 , Fairley received an appointment in London as Assistant Physician to the Hospital for Tropical Diseases and Lecturer at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine . Although he and Kellaway convinced the governors to delay Fairley 's commencement until their major venom work was completed , he departed for London by the end of that year . He also opened a consulting practice in Harley Street . In London he encountered patients with filariasis and devised a test to diagnose the disease at an early stage ; but when he went to write up his results he discovered that details of a similar test had already been published . In 1934 , a sewer worker was referred to his ward with acute jaundice which Fairley diagnosed as caused by filariasis . The disease was revealed to be an occupational hazard of sewer workers , and steps were taken to protect the workers . Perhaps his most important work in this period was research into blackwater fever . Since malaria cases were uncommon in the United Kingdom , he made annual visits to the Malaria Research Laboratory of the League of Nations at the Refugee Hospital in Salonika . In the process , he described <unk> , a previously unknown blood pigment . For his scientific accomplishments in London , Fairley was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1942 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Second World War , the Australian Army 's director general of medical services , Major General Rupert Downes tapped Fairley as consulting physician . Fairley was seconded to the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) with the rank of colonel on 15 July 1940 and given the serial number <unk> . He joined the AIF Headquarters in Cairo in September , taking advantage of the initial quiet period to familiarise himself with the AIF 's medical units and their commanders . As the British Army in the Middle East had no consulting physician in tropical diseases , Fairley accepted an offer to act in this capacity as well . 
 In January 1941 the British Army began planning for operations in Greece . Fairley and his British colleague , Colonel J. S. K. Boyd , the consulting pathologist , drafted a medical appreciation . Drawing on the experience of the Salonika front in the First World War , where very heavy casualties suffered from malaria , plus Fairley 's more recent experience in that part of the world , they painted a gloomy picture , emphasising the grave risks , and going so far as to suggest that the Germans might attempt to entice the allies into a summer campaign in which they could be destroyed by malaria . The British Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Sir Archibald Wavell decried their report as " typical of a very non @-@ medical and non @-@ military spirit " , but a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting with Boyd and Fairley convinced Wavell that they were serious and not merely uncooperative , and Wavell promised his assistance in mitigating the danger . The campaign plan was altered to position allied forces further south , away from the plains of Macedonia and the Vardar and Struma River basins , where malaria was hyper @-@ endemic and heavy casualties had been suffered from malaria by British troops during the First World War . 
 Fairley tackled an outbreak of <unk> dysentery among the troops in Egypt . In most cases the patients recovered of their own accord but some cases of <unk> became seriously ill and died . Fairley had some Shiga anti @-@ toxin with him , but it proved ineffective in serious cases , even when administered in large doses . However , he also had an experimental supply of sulphaguanidine that had been given to him by Dr E. K. Marshall of Johns Hopkins Hospital . The drug was administered to a patient with severe <unk> who was not expected to live , and the patient soon recovered . Of the 21 @,@ 015 Australian soldiers who contracted <unk> dysentery during the Second World War , only 21 died . 
 Malaria again became a concern in the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign . The Australian Army raised malaria control units for the first time and as soon as the operational situation permitted swamps and areas of open water were drained and mosquito breeding areas were sprayed . There were 2 @,@ 435 cases of malaria in the AIF in 1941 , a rate of 31 @.@ 8 per thousand per year . Quinine was used as a prophylaxis . On Fairley 's advice , patients with relapses were treated with intravenous quinine for three days followed by a course of atebrin and plasmoquine . For his services in the Middle East , Fairley was mentioned in despatches a second time , and made a Commander of the Military Division Order of the British Empire for his " immense and specialised knowledge of tropical diseases in the Middle East " . 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 With the entry of Japan into the war , Fairley flew to Java in January 1942 . Fairley was well aware that Java produced 90 % of the world 's supply of quinine and that the implications would be serious if Java was lost . He arranged for the purchase of all available stocks of quinine , some 120 long tons ( 120 t ) . Fairley was informed that the quinine had been loaded on board two ships . One was never seen again . The other , the SS Klang , reached Fremantle in March . Although 20 long tons ( 20 t ) of quinine was loaded on board , it was apparently unloaded when the ship stopped at Tjilatjap , possibly due to fifth columnists . Thus , none of the shipment reached Australia . Fairley himself departed Java with the I Corps staff on the transport Orcades on 21 February 1942 shortly before Java fell . 
 In General Sir Thomas Blamey 's reorganisation of the Australian Army in April 1942 , Fairley was appointed director of medicine at Allied Land Forces Headquarters ( LHQ ) in Melbourne . Fairley was soon facing a series of medical emergencies caused by the Kokoda Track campaign . An epidemic of bacillary dysentery was headed off by Fairley 's decision to rush all available supplies of <unk> to New Guinea . On Fairley 's advice every man who complained of diarrhoea was given the drug and the epidemic was brought under control in ten days . 
 But Fairley 's main concern was malaria . Despite the experience with malaria in the Middle East , most of the troops had a poor understanding of anti @-@ malaria precautions and few medical officers had encountered the disease . In combination with critical shortages of drugs and anti @-@ malarial supplies such as netting , insecticides and repellents , the result was a medical disaster . In the 13 @-@ week period from 31 October 1942 to 1 January 1943 , the Army reported 4 @,@ 137 battle casualties , but 14 @,@ 011 casualties from tropical diseases , of which 12 @,@ 240 were from malaria . The government grimly contemplated disbanding divisions to replace malaria casualties . " Our worst enemy in New Guinea , " General Blamey declared , " is not the Nip — it ’ s the bite . " 
 This caused Blamey to despatch a medical mission headed by Fairley to the United States and the United Kingdom in September 1942 to present the Army 's case for a more adequate and equitable share of anti @-@ malarial supplies . The mission was successful . Fairley was able to secure supplies and expedite the delivery of those that were already on order but held up for lack of shipping or priority . In bringing the problem to the attention of the highest allied military and civil authorities overseas , he lifted the global profile and priority of malaria control measures . 
 It was calculated that Allied requirements for atebrin would be 200 long tons ( 200 t ) per annum , of which 50 long tons ( 51 t ) would be manufactured in the United Kingdom and 150 long tons ( 150 t ) in the United States . American production in 1942 was estimated at 60 tons but efforts were soon under way to increase production . The possibility of producing atebrin in Australia was considered , but the drug was complicated to synthesise and required little shipping space , although steps were taken to produce mosquito repellent . As in the Middle East , the Army relied on a combination of quinine , atebrin and plasmoquine ( QAP ) to cure malaria . The United States and United Kingdom agreed to each produce two tons of plasmoquine each per annum . The requested drugs and supplies began arriving in December 1942 . 
 As " one of the reasons for the lamentable record in malaria control in 1942 and early 1943 was the absence of medical authority at the level of the theatre commander 's headquarters " , Fairley suggested that there be a body responsible for co @-@ ordinating the activities of all allied forces in the South West Pacific Area . General Blamey took the matter up with the General Douglas MacArthur , the Supreme Commander . MacArthur , who had himself suffered an attack of malaria back in 1904 ( and a serious relapse the next year ) , created the Combined Advisory Committee on Tropical Medicine , Hygiene and Sanitation with Colonel Fairley as its chairman in March 1943 . After its first meeting , Fairley met with MacArthur , who emphasised that he did not wish the committee to concern itself with matters of academic interest but to make concrete recommendations on essential medical matters . The committee proceeded to make a series of recommendations regarding training , discipline , equipment , procedures and priorities , which then went out as GHQ orders to all commands . 
 Fairley 's proposed use of atebrin as a prophylactic agent was accepted and Fairley switched the Australian Army over to using atebrin as a prophylaxis instead of quinine in March 1943 . The most acute problem at this time was a shortage of atebrin . The Australian Army had only seven weeks ' stock was on hand in March 1943 and US forces in both the South West Pacific and South Pacific Area were drawing on Australian Army stocks as they had not yet received adequate stocks of their own . The drug is also a dye , and had the known side effect of making the skin and eyeballs of the user go yellow in colour after repeated use but this was an acceptable drawback in wartime . Prolonged use could cause lichen planus and psychosis in rare cases , but atebrin still turned out to be much safer than quinine . Blackwater fever — which had a mortality rate of 25 % — disappeared entirely . 
 Fairley was acutely aware that much remained unknown about malaria . In particular , he was interested in the possibility that sulphaguanidine ( or a related <unk> ) might be a causal prophylactic against malaria , as they could be manufactured in Australia , unlike atebrin and plasmoquine . Fairley decided to establish a unit in Cairns to investigate malaria . The LHQ Medical Research Unit commenced work in June 1943 . 
 Fairley travelled to New Guinea at the end of June 1943 and arranged for Plasmodium falciparum cases to be evacuated to Cairns for treatment . As the flight time from Port Moresby to Cairns was only a few hours , this was considered safe , but since the disease can be fatal if not treated promptly , Fairley was concerned lest the cases be delayed for some reason . Movement Control suggested that a special priority be allocated to such cases , and Major General Frank Berryman suggested calling it priority Neil after Fairley himself . Because movement priorities had to have five letters , an extra L was added on the end . Priority Neill soon came to be applied to the entire Cairns project . 
 The LHQ Medical Research Unit used human test subjects , all volunteers drawn from the Australian Army , including a small but notable group of ' <unk> Boys ' ( Jewish refugees ) from the 8th Employment Company . The volunteers were infected with strains of malaria from infected mosquitoes of from the blood of other test subjects , which was then treated with various drugs . The volunteers were rewarded with three weeks ' leave and a certificate of appreciation signed by General Blamey . The LHQ Medical Research Unit researched quinine , sulphonamides , atebrin , plasmoquine , and paludrine . 
 In June 1944 , a conference was held at Atherton , Queensland on " Prevention of Disease in Warfare " . Chaired by Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee , the commander of the First Army , it was attended by key corps and division commanders . Fairley , who had been promoted to brigadier in February 1944 , described the results of the work at Cairns on anti @-@ malarial drugs ; other officers described practical measures that could be taken to reduce the toll of disease on the men . The Director General of Medical Services , Major General S. R. ( Ginger ) Burston , told the senior commanders " the ball is in your court " . 
 Using draconian drills that required officers to place atebrin tablets in their men 's mouths , the army attempted to reduce the incidence of malaria to zero . For the most part they were successful but in the Aitape @-@ Wewak campaign the 6th Division suffered an epidemic of malaria despite its best efforts . Fairley was urgently recalled from a tour of South East Asia Command and given orders by General Blamey to personally proceed to Wewak and investigate the situation . A special section was formed from the LHQ Medical Research Unit to assist the 6th Division and certain relapsing personnel were evacuated to Cairns . The epidemic was ultimately brought under control by doubling the dosage of atebrin . Fairley was forced to confront the fact — confirmed by research at Cairns — that an atebrin resistant strain of malaria had arisen . The ability of malaria to develop resistant strains would have profound implications in the post @-@ war world . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war Australian medical research was substantially reorganised , but Fairley joined the ranks of senior Australian medical scientists who spent the remainder of their professional lives in Britain . In London he became consulting physician to the Hospital for Tropical Diseases and Wellcome Professor of Tropical Medicine at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine . His early post war research was a continuation of his wartime work on malaria . He became seriously ill in 1948 and his health steadily declined thereafter , forcing him to resign his professorship . He retained his practice and membership of numerous committees , becoming an " elder statesman " of tropical medicine . In recognition of his service to tropical medicine , he was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 8 June 1950 . 
 Fairley 's declining health prompted him to leave London and move to The Grove , Sonning , Berkshire , where he died on 19 April 1966 , and was buried in the graveyard of St Andrew 's Church , Sonning . He was survived by his wife and their two sons , who were both medical doctors , and also by the son of his first marriage , who had become an Australian Army officer . His son Gordon Hamilton @-@ Fairley , a renowned oncologist , was killed by a Provisional Irish Republican Army bomb on 22 October 1975 . 
 Sir William Dargie painted a portrait of Fairley in 1943 , which is in the possession the Fairley family . A later 1960 portrait by Dargie , together with a 1945 one by Nora <unk> , is in the Australian War Memorial . Neither is on display , although the latter can be viewed online . A 1954 Dargie portrait of Queen Elizabeth II painted while Dargie was staying at Fairley 's home at 81 Duke Street , Grosvenor Square , in London , and subsequently given to Fairley , was sold at auction to the National Museum of Australia in 2009 for $ 120 @,@ 000 . Fairley 's papers are in the Basser Library at the Australian Academy of Science . He is commemorated by the Neil Hamilton Fairley Overseas Clinical Fellowship , which provides full @-@ time training in Australia and overseas in areas of clinical research including the social and behavioural sciences . 
 = = Medical awards and prizes = = 
 1920 Dublin Research Prize 
 1921 David Syme Research Prize and Medal 
 1931 Chalmers Memorial Medal for Research in Tropical Medicine 
 1945 Bancroft Memorial Medal 
 1946 Richard Pierson Strong Medal , American Foundation of Tropical Medicine 
 1948 Moxon Medal , Royal College of Physicians 
 1949 Mary Kingsley Medal , Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine 
 1950 Manson Medal , Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 
 1951 James Cook Medal , Royal Society of NSW 
 1957 Buchanan Medal , Royal Society of London 
 Source : Boyd 1966 , p . 141 
 = The Castle of Cagliostro = 
 The Castle of Cagliostro ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> : <unk> no Shiro , Lupin the Third : Castle of Cagliostro ) is a 1979 Japanese animated adventure comedy film co @-@ written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki in his feature @-@ length directorial debut . It is the second film featuring Monkey Punch 's master thief Arsène Lupin III , from his manga series Lupin III . The film was Miyazaki 's first time directing a theatrical feature after having previously worked as an animator for Toei Animation and TMS Entertainment and directing several shows including Lupin III and two episodes of Lupin III Part II . 
 The Castle of Cagliostro follows gentleman thief Arsène Lupin III , who successfully robs a casino – only to find the money to be counterfeit . He heads to the tiny country of Cagliostro , the rumoured source of the bills , and attempts to save the runaway Clarisse from the Count Cagliostro 's men . Lupin enlists his associates , Jigen and Goemon , and sends his calling card to the Count to get Inspector Zenigata , his longtime nemesis , to the castle . After becoming trapped in the dungeon under the castle , Lupin and Zenigata form a pact to escape and foil the Count 's counterfeit operation and save Clarisse from her forced marriage to the Count . 
 The original theatrical release in Japan occurred on 15 December 1979 . The American theatrical debut was on 3 April 1991 , with the home release following in October 1992 . This first dub was produced by Streamline Pictures and released on home video the following year . A new dubbed version was produced by Manga Entertainment in 2000 and has had several releases . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Master thief Arsène Lupin III and his colleague , Daisuke Jigen , flee the Monte Carlo Casino with huge quantities of stolen money . They escape in Lupin 's Fiat 500 , but Lupin recognizes the bills as distinctively high quality counterfeits . Deciding to seek out the source , they head to the Grand Duchy of Cagliostro , the alleged wellspring of the counterfeits . 
 Shortly after arriving , they rescue a young woman being pursued by a gang of thugs , with her and Lupin falling off a cliff while escaping . Lupin is knocked unconscious , and the woman captured , but she leaves him a signet ring . Lupin recognizes the woman as Clarisse , the princess of Cagliostro , who will soon be married to Count Cagliostro , the country 's regent . The Count 's arranged marriage will cement his power and recover the fabled ancient treasure of Cagliostro , for which he needs both his and Clarisse 's ancestral rings . 
 A squad of assassins attack Lupin and Jigen at their inn but fail to kill them or recover the ring . Lupin leaves his calling card on the back of <unk> , the Count 's butler and chief assassin , announcing he is going to steal Clarisse . Lupin summons Goemon Ishikawa XIII to aid their quest to rescue the princess and tips off his longtime pursuer , Inspector Koichi Zenigata , to his whereabouts to provide a distraction . Zenigata 's presence and a party give Lupin enough time to sneak into the castle . There he finds his on @-@ off lover , Fujiko Mine , posing as Clarisse 's lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , who tells him where the princess is being held . Lupin makes his way to Clarisse and returns her ring , vowing to help her to escape . Before he can act , the Count drops Lupin down a trapdoor into the castle 's catacombs , as Lupin had planned . Lupin mocks the Count through the ring he gave to Clarisse – a fake containing a transmitter – and the Count sends three assassins to retrieve the real ring . 
 Lupin encounters Zenigata , who was accidentally dropped down earlier , and they form a pact to help each other escape . After overpowering the assassins , they escape into a room full of printing presses — the source of the counterfeits . Zenigata wants to collect evidence , but Lupin points out they must escape the castle first . They start a fire as a distraction and steal the Count 's autogyro . However , as they attempt to rescue Clarisse , Lupin is shot . Clarisse offers the ring to the Count in exchange for Lupin 's life . After securing the ring , the Count 's attempt at betrayal is foiled when Fujiko 's actions allow her , Lupin , and Zenigata to flee . As Lupin recovers from his injuries , Zenigata attempts to convince his superiors at Interpol to prosecute the Count for counterfeiting , but fearing political repercussions , they halt the investigation and remove him from the case . Meanwhile , Lupin intends to stop the wedding and rescue the princess . He also reveals his reasons for rescuing Clarisse to Jigen , Goemon and her former groundskeeper — as a young girl , she had saved his life during his unsuccessful first attempt to find the source of the counterfeit bills ten years earlier . Fujiko tips off Lupin on a way to sneak into the castle , and forms a plan with Zenigata to publicly reveal the counterfeiting operation under the cover of pursuing Lupin . 
 The wedding appears to go as planned with a drugged Clarisse until Lupin 's " ghost " disrupts the ceremony . The Count calls his guards , but Lupin makes off with Clarisse and both her and the Count 's rings . Meanwhile , Zenigata and his squadron arrive in the chaos and the inspector leads Fujiko , posing as a television reporter , to the Count 's counterfeiting facility to expose the operation to the world . The Count pursues Lupin and Clarisse to the face of the castle 's clock tower . Lupin is forced to surrender the rings to save Clarisse , and they are both knocked into the lake surrounding the tower . After using the rings to reveal the secret of Cagliostro , the Count is killed by the mechanism as it moves to unveil the treasure . Lupin and Clarisse watch as the lake around the castle drains to reveal exquisite ancient Roman ruins — the true treasure of Cagliostro . Lupin and his friends bid farewell to Clarisse , now the rightful ruler of Cagliostro . With Zenigata pursuing them again and Fujiko fleeing with the plates from counterfeit printing presses , Lupin and the gang drive off into the city of Cagliostro , with the police behind them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Lupin III began as a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Monkey Punch . The title character , Arsène Lupin III , was inspired by ( and is claimed in the series to be the grandson of ) Maurice Leblanc 's fictional character Arsène Lupin , a gallant and famous outlaw able to outsmart even Sherlock Holmes . Lupin III is a gentleman thief and announces his intentions to steal valuable objects by sending a calling card to the owners of the desired items . The manga 's popularity led to two anime series , titled Lupin III and Lupin III Part II . The first film , The Mystery of Mamo , was released on 16 December 1978 . Cagliostro followed the year later following the financial success of that film . The film marked the directorial film debut of Miyazaki , who had previously co @-@ directed episodes of the first Lupin anime series with Isao Takahata . He was also a writer and director of two episodes in the second series under the pseudonym " Telecom " , both produced a year after Cagliostro . In works other than Castle of Cagliostro and the series episodes directed by Miyazaki and Takahata , Lupin III is portrayed as a scheming and lecherous thief , sometimes supported by his former enemies Jigen and Goemon . Miyazaki 's film conflicts with the typical behavior and personality of the characters , a change that has been described as Lupin " growing up " . 
 Castle of Cagliostro marked Miyazaki 's debut as a theatrical movie director , but he also was a writer , a designer , and a <unk> on the movie . The production for the film began in May 1979 with the writing of the story and storyboarding for the film . Miyazaki began by drawing a bird 's eye view of the setting before creating the story to completion . After the first draft scenario was returned to Miyazaki without change , he began the storyboards . The story was divided into four parts , but after reaching the third part changes had to be made at the storyboard phase in order to not exceed the decided running time . Animation work began in July while the storyboards were only a quarter complete ; Miyazaki had to complete them during the animation production . Production wrapped up at the end of November and the film 's premier on 15 December 1979 was a short seven and a half months from the project 's undertaking , with only five months of production time . 
 The film draws upon many sources of inspiration that were important in the production of the film . McCarthy writes that a research trip was not specifically undertaken for the film , but says Miyazaki 's Heidi sketchbooks were useful for the scenery . Miyazaki would cite Italian Mountain Cities and the Tiber Estuary from Kagoshima Publishing as influencing the production of the film . The film included elements that were seen in other Arsène Lupin works , including La Justice d <unk> Lupin by Boileau @-@ Narcejac , involving the discovery of a tremendous stash of forged franc notes with which World War I – era Germany had planned to destabilize the French economy . Maurice Leblanc 's The Green @-@ eyed Lady also featured a secret treasure hidden at the bottom of a lake . The castle is visually influenced by that of the original 1952 unfinished release of The Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep . Greenberg writes , " Cagliostro also borrowed many narrative and visual elements from <unk> 's film : the basic plotline of disrupting the wedding of an evil tyrant and a beautiful innocent girl , the tyrant 's luxuriously @-@ decorated palace that is also full of traps , and a gang of henchmen serving the tyrant – both oversized goons and ninja @-@ like assassins ... " The staff added personal touches to the film , the most iconic being Lupin 's car , the Fiat 500 , was the car of head animator Yasuo Ōtsuka . Clarisse 's car in the chase scene is a Citroen 2CV , which is Miyazaki 's first car . 
 McCarthy describes the summery color palette of the film as matching the scenery and the characters , but notes the use of dark and light colors are used to emphasize the subplot of the dark and light sides of the <unk> . The film 's score was composed by series regular Yuji Ohno , and varies between jazz , romance and orchestral music . Notably , it includes a variation of Lupin III 's iconic TV theme . The music was performed by You & The Explosion Band , who had previously worked on the second television series . The main vocal song " Fire Treasure " was performed by Bobby ( aka <unk> <unk> ) and saw release as an LP single . The first release of the soundtrack was Lupin the 3rd The Castle of Cagliostro Original Soundtrack BGM Collection , an album containing extended versions of select cues from the film . It was originally sold on vinyl and cassette tape in 1983 , but later saw release on CD in 1985 with several additional prints runs . In 2003 , the entire score was finally released on a newly commissioned album entitled Lupin the 3rd : The Castle of Cagliostro – Music File and also contained 13 unused cues . 
 Castle of Cagliostro 's portrayal of the characters was changed to better identify with Miyazaki 's concept of a " hero " and to remove a sense of apathy in the story . This resulted in Lupin being a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky and upbeat thief who drives and lives out of a Fiat 500 ; a sharp contrast to the scheming and lecherous Lupin who drives expensive cars like the Mercedes @-@ Benz SSK because it was " Hitler 's favorite " . The changes would also impact secondary characters like Jigen and Goemon , changing their serious and cold personalities into friendly and humorous ; even the erotic elements involving the femme @-@ fatale Fujiko were dropped . 
 Fred Patten , who worked at Streamline Pictures was involved in the English adaptation of the film and was involved in the choice of title for the English release , " The Japanese title is Lupin III : Cagliostro no Shiro , which is literally Lupin III : Cagliostro of Castle [ sic ] . So which would be better in English ; Cagliostro Castle , Cagliostro ’ s Castle , or The Castle of Cagliostro ? It was my argument that The Castle of Cagliostro sounded the most sinister . Cagliostro Castle is just a castle ’ s name , like Windsor Castle , but the Castle of Cagliostro emphasizes that it is the evil Count ’ s lair ! " 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 In his first director role , Miyazaki deploys numerous examples of his style to great effect . Dani Cavallaro highlights the signature details of Miyazaki 's style and form being displayed in this work and how it impacts the portrayal of the story . Cagliostro , the country and setting , is depicted in meticulous detail and unconstrained by limitations of architecture , geography and culture , which can be described as " <unk> no Paris " ( Paris of our dreams ) , which is a fantastical view of Europe through Eastern eyes . The use of unexpected and unique camera angles and attention to individual movement of the characters are distinctive signatures of Miyazaki 's style , including the opening heist scene which provides characterization and spirit to understanding the character of Lupin . The changes made to the portrayal of the cast , depicting a heroic and selfless Lupin , a friendly Jigen , funny Goemon , and un @-@ sexualized Fujiko , were initially not well received by fans . Otaku USA 's Surat described compared this shift to " a James Bond movie where [ James Bond ] stayed at Motel 6 and his " Bond mobile " was a Toyota Camry ! " 
 = = Releases = = 
 The film 's Japanese theatrical release was on 15 December 1979 . A year later , Tokyo Movie Shinsha began screen testing the film in North America and it was notably shown at the World Science Fiction Convention in Boston for a marketing survey . It was later screened at other festivals during the 1980s , including <unk> 82 in Los Angeles . Despite resounding acclaim from the screenings , many of them were unsuccessful . According to Fred Patten , the primary reason was that , " most people did not bother to come to it since it was " only " an animated @-@ cartoon feature , not a " serious " live @-@ action movie . " 
 The American theatrical debut was on 3 April 1991 in New York City by Carl <unk> 's Streamline Pictures , with the home release following in October 1992 . Streamline 's dub contains several deviations from the original Japanese script , but is more accurate with lip synching of the dialogue in comparison to Manga Entertainment 's later dub ( see below ) . Due to copyright issues with Maurice LeBlanc 's estate , Lupin is referred to as " the Wolf . " Inspector Koichi Zenigata is erroneously named " <unk> Zenigata , " likely due to a translation error ( <unk> being the Japanese title for a police inspector ) . The UK release followed on 10 June 1996 by Manga Video . Optimum Releasing re @-@ released Cagliostro in the UK after Manga Entertainment lost its license in the UK . The new DVD features an anamorphic widescreen print with the original Japanese audio track as well as the Streamline dub , both in stereo . 
 In 2000 , Manga released the film on home video in the United States with a newly commissioned dub that adhered closer to the original script with the correct names restored . The DVD preserves the film in its original aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 85 : 1 widescreen and is non @-@ anamorphic . It additionally features remastered audio and picture , but contains no extras . The same company later released a new special edition DVD of Cagliostro in 2006 . The disc is double @-@ sided with the film on side A and the extras on side B. It includes a new digital transfer ; Manga 's English dub in 2 @.@ 0 and 5 @.@ 1 surround plus Japanese , Spanish , and French language tracks in mono ; the complete film in storyboard format , accompanied by Japanese audio with English subtitles ; an original Japanese trailer ; a sketch and still gallery ; a 26 @-@ minute interview with animation director Yasuo Ōtsuka , and animated menus . The film is presented in 16 : 9 anamorphic widescreen ; however , the opening credits have been heavily re @-@ edited to remove the Japanese credits , instead using selected still @-@ frames of scenes that appear without Japanese writing . The English @-@ translated names are superimposed over these stills . This change was negatively received by fans of the film . Both DVD releases are out @-@ of @-@ print , with Manga no longer owning the U.S. film rights . 
 In December 2008 , the film was released on Blu @-@ ray in Japan . Its video format is MPEG @-@ 4 AVC and its digitally @-@ remastered audio is improved over that of the DVD , but contains no English audio or subtitle options despite being in Region A format . Years later , a new HD digital remaster was produced and Cagliostro was given a limited theatrical re @-@ release in Japan on 9 May 2014 . The remaster was released both individually and as part of The Collected Works of Hayao Miyazaki , a box set containing all of Miyazaki 's movies . Both these newer releases were released by Studio Ghibli in conjunction with Disney . StudioCanal released a Blu @-@ ray and DVD bundle of the film on 12 November 2012 in the UK . The StudioCanal release is of superior quality with its new high definition transfer , but the credits for the film are absent . North American anime distributor Discotek Media announced on 26 March 2014 that they had licensed the film and planned to release it on DVD in 2014 , with a Blu @-@ ray release to follow at a then @-@ unspecified future date . The DVD version was eventually delayed to 6 January 2015 and included the Streamline and <unk> / Manga dubs , a " Family Friendly " alternate version of the <unk> / Manga dub with reduced profanity , the original Japanese audio with newly translated English subtitles , an alternate subtitle option based on the subtitles used by TMS in their 1980 screenings of the film , a text @-@ based overview of the film 's production history , translation notes , two trailers and a fan @-@ made audio commentary by Reed Nelson . The Blu @-@ ray was released on 25 June 2015 and featured the same extras in addition to another alternate subtitle option using a literal translation of the film 's screenplay , new interviews with David Hayter and Bob Bergen , an introduction to the film by Hayter , translated past interviews from the French Blu @-@ ray ( featuring Yasuo Ōtsuka , Kazuhide Tomonaga and Monkey Punch ) , an optional storyboard viewing mode , a slideshow gallery of production and promotional art , and a collection of alternate openings to the film . Plans to include an emulated port of Cliff Hanger as an extra feature for the Blu @-@ ray were dropped when the original contracts for the game could not be found . The Castle of Cagliostro was included in Disney 's The Collected Works of Hayao Miyazaki Blu @-@ ray set released on 17 November 2015 , but does not contain any of Discotek 's extras . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While the film was not initially a box @-@ office success , it gained popularity through numerous re @-@ releases and was even voted as " the best anime in history " by the readers of Animage . Following a July 1992 release by Streamline Pictures , Janet Maslin said she thought the film " should fare nearly as well [ as Akira ] with animation fans of any age , provided they are unwavering in their devotion to the form and do not think 100 minutes is an awfully long time . " According to Maslin , the film is an " interestingly wild hybrid of visual styles and cultural references " whose " animation is weak when it comes to fluid body movements , but outstanding in its attention to detail . " According to Marc Savlov of The Austin Chronicle , " C of C refrains from the Technicolor ultra @-@ violence that helped make films like Golgo 13 , Akira , and Vampire Hunter D such audience favorites , and instead focuses on broad , almost slapstick humor and chaos to keep viewers riveted . Sometimes it works , and unfortunately , sometimes it doesn 't . " Some fans maintain that it is not a " true " Lupin title , due to Miyazaki 's altering of the titular character into a bumbling hero , rather than his original ruthless criminal self . Monkey Punch , creator of Lupin III , called Castle of Cagliostro an " excellent " movie , but agreed Miyazaki 's vision of Lupin differs from his own . He said , " I wouldn ’ t have had him rescue the girl , I would have had him rape her ! " 
 In Dani Cavallaro 's The Anime Art of Hayao Miyazaki , the film was said to have received the " Award for Best Animated Feature " . The actual award was from the 1979 Mainichi Film Concours , where the film received the <unk> <unk> Award . No concrete evidence for this claim has even been put forward and the misinformation in the releases serves to cement its decades @-@ long persistence . 
 The film was the best selling anime DVD in May 2001 , and the third best selling in June . Both of Manga Entertainment 's releases of The Castle of Cagliostro received DVD Talk Collector Series recommendation status , the highest status given by the review website <unk> Chris Beveridge of <unk> gave the film a grade of " A + " , although he disliked Manga Entertainment 's use of PG @-@ 13 level language in the English dub . The Castle of Cagliostro placed in 5th place on Japan 's Agency for Cultural Affairs 's list of best anime . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The film has itself been an influence in a range of other productions . There is an unconfirmed rumor that film director Steven Spielberg saw a screening of The Castle of Cagliostro in the early 80 's . From that rumor , it would assume that Spielberg was so impressed with the film that it later influenced the action sequences in his Indiana Jones films and The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn . There is no evidence of Spielberg quoting the film , but Manga Entertainment 's DVD releases quote him saying " one of the greatest adventure movies of all time . " Another unverified statement has Spielberg calling the film 's car chase is " one of the greatest chase sequences ever filmed " . Sources believed that Spielberg had seen the film at the 1980 Cannes Film Festival , but Castle of Cagliostro was not shown that year according to official Cannes sources . 
 The character of Clarisse has also been cited as a potential ancestral example of moe character design , a trend Miyazaki would later criticize as leading to the promotion of unhealthy lolicon fetishism . In 1983 , TMS with Stern Electronics wanted to capitalize on the success of animated Laserdisc video games at the time . They released the arcade game , Cliff Hanger , which used footage from this film , along with the previous Lupin film The Mystery of Mamo . Even though the films themselves weren 't available in North America at the time , the Cliff Hanger game was featured in an episode of the game show <unk> . 
 Cagliostro deeply influenced Pixar co @-@ founder John Lasseter , along with Miyazaki 's later films ; in October 2014 , Lasseter delivered a keynote address to the Tokyo International Film Festival describing how Miyazaki 's influence upon his own life and work began when he first saw a clip from Cagliostro . Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 1986 film The Great Mouse Detective , co @-@ directed by John Musker and Ron Clements , paid homage to Cagliostro with the film 's climactic Big Ben sequence . Another reference to the clock @-@ tower fight is in " The Clock King " episode of Batman : The Animated Series . Gary Trousdale , co @-@ director of Disney 's Atlantis : The Lost Empire , admitted that a scene at the end of Atlantis , where the waters recede from the sunken city , was directly inspired from the ending in Cagliostro . One of the sequence directors of The Simpsons Movie also mentioned Cagliostro as an influence ; a brief shot where Bart Simpson rolls down the roof of the family house was inspired by Lupin running down the castle roof during his rescue attempt . Capcom 's Breath of Fire 3 video game also has a similar roof @-@ top scene involving a grappling hook . 
 = Inner German border = 
 The inner German border ( German : <unk> Grenze or deutsch @-@ deutsche Grenze ; initially also Zonengrenze ) was the border between the German Democratic Republic ( GDR , East Germany ) and the Federal Republic of Germany ( FRG , West Germany ) from 1949 to 1990 . Not including the similar but physically separate Berlin Wall , the border was 1 @,@ 393 kilometres ( 866 mi ) long and ran from the Baltic Sea to Czechoslovakia . 
 It was formally established on 1 July 1945 as the boundary between the Western and Soviet occupation zones of former Nazi Germany . On the eastern side , it was made one of the world 's most heavily fortified frontiers , defined by a continuous line of high metal fences and walls , barbed wire , alarms , anti @-@ vehicle ditches , watchtowers , automatic booby traps and minefields . It was patrolled by 50 @,@ 000 armed GDR guards who faced tens of thousands of West German , British and US guards and soldiers . In the hinterlands behind the border were more than a million North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and Warsaw Pact troops . 
 The border was a physical manifestation of Winston Churchill 's metaphorical Iron Curtain that separated the Soviet and Western blocs during the Cold War . It marked the boundary between two ideological systems – capitalism and communism . Built by East Germany in phases from 1952 to the late 1980s , the fortifications were constructed to stop the large @-@ scale emigration of East German citizens to the West , about 1 @,@ 000 of whom are said to have died trying to cross it during its 45 @-@ year existence . It caused widespread economic and social disruption on both sides ; East Germans living in the region suffered especially draconian restrictions . 
 The better @-@ known Berlin Wall was a physically separate , less elaborate , and much shorter border barrier surrounding West Berlin , more than 155 kilometres ( 96 mi ) to the east of the inner German border ( Berlin having been similarly divided by the four powers after World War II , despite the entire city being in the Soviet zone , thus creating an enclave of capitalism surrounded by East German territory ) . On 9 November 1989 , the East German government announced the opening of the Berlin Wall and the inner German border . Over the following days , millions of East Germans poured into the West to visit . Hundreds of thousands moved permanently to the West in the following months as more crossings were opened , and ties between long @-@ divided communities were re @-@ established as border controls became little more than a cursory formality . The inner German border was not completely abandoned until 1 July 1990 , exactly 45 years to the day since its establishment , and only three months before German reunification formally ended Germany 's division . 
 Little remains of the inner German border 's fortifications . Its route has been declared part of a " European Green Belt " linking national parks and nature reserves along the course of the old Iron Curtain from the Arctic Circle to the Black Sea . Museums and memorials along the old border commemorate the division and reunification of Germany and , in some places , preserve elements of the fortifications . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The inner German border originated from the Second World War Allies ' plans to divide a defeated Germany into occupation zones . The boundaries between these zones were drawn along the territorial boundaries of 19th @-@ century German states and provinces that had largely disappeared with the unification of Germany in 1871 . Three zones were agreed on , each covering roughly a third of Germany 's territories : a British zone in the north @-@ west , an American zone in the south and a Soviet zone in the East . France was later given a zone in the far west of Germany , carved out of the British and American zones . 
 The division of Germany was put into effect on 1 July 1945 . Because of their unexpectedly rapid advances through central Germany in the final weeks of the war , British and American troops occupied large areas of territory that had been assigned to the Soviet zone of occupation . The redeployment of Western troops prompted many Germans to flee to the West to escape the Soviet takeover of the remainder of the Soviet zone . 
 The wartime Allies initially worked together under the auspices of the Allied Control Council ( ACC ) for Germany . Cooperation between the Western Allies and the Soviets ultimately broke down because of disagreements over Germany 's political and economic future . In May 1949 , the three western occupation zones were merged to form the Federal Republic of Germany ( FRG ) with a freely elected government . The Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic ( GDR ) , under communist rule . 
 From the outset , West Germany and the Allies rejected East Germany 's legitimacy . The creation of East Germany was deemed a communist / Soviet fait accompli , without a freely or fairly elected government . West Germany regarded German citizenship and rights as applying equally to East and West German citizens . An East German who escaped or was released to the West was automatically granted West German rights , including residence and the right to work ; West German laws were deemed to be applicable in the East . East Germans thus had a powerful incentive to move to the West , where they would enjoy greater freedom and economic prospects . The East German government sought to define the country as a legitimate state in its own right and portrayed West Germany as enemy territory ( <unk> Ausland ) – a capitalist , semi @-@ fascist state that exploited its citizens , sought to regain the lost territories of the Third Reich , and stood opposed to the peaceful socialism of the GDR . 
 = = = 1945 – 52 : the " Green Border " = = = 
 In the early days of the occupation , the Allies controlled traffic between the zones to manage the flow of refugees and prevent the escape of former Nazi officials and intelligence officers . These controls were gradually lifted in the Western zones , but were tightened between Western and Soviet zones in 1946 to stem a flow of economic and political refugees from the Soviet zone . Between October 1945 and June 1946 , 1 @.@ 6 million Germans left the Soviet zone for the west . 
 The east – west <unk> border became steadily more tense as the relationship between the Western Allies and the Soviets deteriorated . From September 1947 , an increasingly strict regime was imposed on the eastern Soviet zone boundary . The number of Soviet soldiers on the boundary was increased and supplemented with border guards from the newly established East German Volkspolizei ( " People 's Police " ) . Many unofficial crossing points were blocked with ditches and barricades . The West Germans also stepped up security with the establishment in 1952 of the Federal Border Protection force of 20 @,@ 000 men – the <unk> , or BGS ; however , Allied troops ( the British in the north , the Americans in the south ) retained responsibility for the military security of the border . 
 The boundary line was nonetheless still fairly easy to cross . Local inhabitants were able to maintain fields on the other side , or even to live on one side and work on the other . Refugees were able to sneak across or bribe the guards , and the smuggling of goods in both directions was rife . The flow of emigrants remained large despite the increase in East German security measures : 675 @,@ 000 people fled to West Germany between 1949 and 1952 . 
 = = = 1952 – 67 : the " special regime " = = = 
 The relative openness of the border ended abruptly on 26 May 1952 , when the GDR implemented a " special regime on the demarcation line " , justified as a measure to keep out " spies , <unk> , terrorists and smugglers " . The East German move was taken to limit the continuing exodus of its citizens , which threatened the viability of the GDR 's economy . 
 A ploughed strip 10 m ( 32 @.@ 8 ft ) wide was created along the entire length of the inner German border . An adjoining " protective strip " ( Schutzstreifen ) 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) wide was placed under tight control . A " restricted zone " ( Sperrzone ) a further 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) wide was created in which only those holding a special permit could live or work . Trees and brush were cut down along the border to clear lines of sight for the guards and to eliminate cover for would @-@ be crossers . Houses adjoining the border were torn down , bridges were closed and barbed @-@ wire fencing was put up in many places . Farmers were permitted to work their fields along the border only in daylight hours and under the watch of armed guards , who were authorised to use weapons if their orders were not obeyed . 
 Border communities on both sides suffered acute disruption . Farms , coal mines and even houses were split in two by the sudden closure of the border . More than 8 @,@ 300 East German civilians living along the border were forcibly resettled in a programme codenamed " Operation Vermin " ( Aktion Ungeziefer ) . Another 3 @,@ 000 residents , realising that they were about to be expelled from their homes , fled to the West . The seal around the country was expanded in July 1962 , when the GDR declared its entire Baltic coast a border zone subject to closures and restrictions . 
 The border between East and West Berlin was also significantly tightened , although not fully closed ; East Germans were still able to cross into West Berlin , which then became the main route by which East Germans migrated to the West . Between 1949 and the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 , an estimated 3 @.@ 5 million East Germans – a sixth of the entire population – emigrated to the West , most via Berlin . The railways between East Berlin and other important parts of East Germany went through West Berlin , so an easy way of going to West Berlin was leaving such a train . This railway configuration could not easily be changed , but a new 125 km ( 78 mi ) long railway was built around West Berlin . Following the completion of Berlin outer ring in 1961 , sealing off the East German border with West Berlin became more feasible , and ultimately became a reality in August of that year . 
 = = = 1967 – 89 : the " modern frontier " = = = 
 The GDR decided to upgrade the fortifications in the late 1960s to establish a " modern frontier " that would be far more difficult to cross . Barbed @-@ wire fences were replaced with harder @-@ to @-@ climb expanded metal barriers ; directional anti @-@ personnel mines and anti @-@ vehicle ditches blocked the movement of people and vehicles ; tripwires and electric signals helped guards to detect escapees ; all @-@ weather patrol roads enabled rapid access to any point along the border ; and wooden guard towers were replaced with prefabricated concrete towers and observation bunkers . 
 Construction of the new border system started in September 1967 . Nearly 1 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 808 mi ) of new fencing was built , usually further back from the geographical line than the old barbed @-@ wire fences . The upgrade programme continued well into the 1980s . The new system immediately reduced the number of successful escapes from around 1 @,@ 000 people a year in the mid @-@ 1960s to only about 120 per year a decade later . 
 The introduction of West German Chancellor Willy Brandt 's Ostpolitik ( " Eastern Policy " ) at the end of the 1960s reduced tensions between the two German states . It led to a series of treaties and agreements in the early 1970s , most significantly a treaty in which East and West Germany recognised each other 's sovereignty and supported each other 's applications for UN membership , although East Germans leaving for the West retained the right to claim a West German passport . Reunification remained a theoretical objective for West Germany , but in practice that objective was put aside by the West and abandoned entirely by the East . New crossing points were established and East German crossing regulations were slightly relaxed , although the fortifications were as rigorously maintained as ever . 
 In 1988 , the GDR leadership considered proposals to replace the expensive and intrusive fortifications with a high @-@ technology system codenamed Grenze 2000 . Drawing on technology used by the Soviet Army during the Soviet – Afghan War , it would have replaced the fences with sensors and detectors . However , the plan was never implemented . 
 = = Economic and social impact = = 
 The closure of the border had a substantial economic and social impact on both halves of Germany . Cross @-@ border transport links were largely severed ; 10 main railway lines , 24 secondary lines , 23 autobahns or national roads , 140 regional roads and thousands of smaller roads , paths and waterways were blocked or otherwise interrupted . The tightest level of closure came in 1966 , by which time only six railway lines , three autobahns , one regional road and two waterways were left open . When relations between the two states eased in the 1970s , the GDR agreed to open more crossing points in exchange for economic assistance . Telephone and mail communications operated throughout the Cold War , although packages and letters were routinely opened and telephone calls were monitored by the East German secret police . 
 The economic impact of the border was harsh . Many towns and villages were severed from their markets and economic hinterlands , which caused areas close to the border to go into an economic and demographic decline . The two German states responded to the problem in different ways . West Germany gave substantial subsidies to communities under the " Aid to border regions " programme , an initiative begun in 1971 to save them from total decline . Infrastructure and businesses along the border benefited from substantial state investment . 
 East Germany 's communities had a much harder time , because the country was poorer and their government imposed severe restrictions on them . The border region was progressively depopulated through the clearance of numerous villages and the forced relocation of their inhabitants . Border towns suffered draconian building restrictions : inhabitants were forbidden from building new houses and even repairing existing buildings , causing infrastructure to fall into severe decay . The state did little but to provide a 15 % income supplement to those living in the Sperrzone and Schutzstreifen ; but this did not halt the shrinkage of the border population , as younger people moved elsewhere to find employment and better living conditions . 
 The GDR bore a huge economic cost for its creation of the border zone and the building and maintenance of its fortifications . The zone consumed around 6 @,@ 900 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 700 sq mi ) – more than six per cent of the East 's territory , within which economic activity was severely curtailed or ceased entirely . The actual cost of the border system was a closely guarded secret , and even today it is uncertain exactly how much it cost to build and maintain . The BT @-@ 9 watchtowers each cost around 65 @,@ 000 East German marks to build and the expanded metal fences cost around 151 @,@ 800 marks per kilometre . The implementation of the " modern frontier " in the 1970s led to a major increase in personnel costs . The total annual expenditure on GDR border troops rose from 600 million marks per annum in 1970 to nearly 1 billion by 1983 . In early 1989 , East German economists calculated that each arrest cost the equivalent of 2 @.@ 1 million marks , three times the average " value " to the state of each working person . 
 = = Views of the border = = 
 The two German governments promoted very different views of the border . The GDR saw it as the international frontier of a sovereign state – a defensive rampart against Western aggression . In Grenzer ( " Border Guard " ) , a 1981 East German Army propaganda film , NATO and West German troops and tanks were depicted as ruthless militarists advancing towards East Germany . Border troops interviewed in the film described what they saw as the <unk> of their cause and the threat of Western agents , spies and provocateurs . Their colleagues killed on the border were hailed as heroes and schoolchildren in East Berlin were depicted saluting their memorial . 
 However , West German propaganda leaflets referred to the border as merely " the demarcation line of the Soviet occupation zone " , and emphasised the cruelty and injustice of the division of Germany . Signs along the Western side of the frontier declared " Hier ist Deutschland nicht zu Ende – Auch <unk> ist Vaterland ! " ( " Germany does not end here : the Fatherland is over there too ! " ) 
 Whereas the GDR kept its civilians well away from the border , the West Germans actively encouraged tourism , and locations where the border was especially intrusive became tourist attractions . One example was the divided village of <unk> in Bavaria . The Associated Press reported in 1976 that " Western tourists by the busload come out to have their pictures taken against the backdrop of the latest Communist walled city [ and ] the concrete blockhouse and the bunker @-@ slits protruding from the green hillock where a collective 's cows were grazing . " 
 At <unk> , in Bavaria , a 38 @-@ metre ( 125 ft ) observation tower ( the <unk> ) was constructed in 1966 to give visitors a view across the hills into East Germany . The inhabitants of the East German village of Kella found themselves becoming a tourist attraction for Westerners in the 1970s and 1980s . A viewing point , the " Window on Kella " , was established on a nearby hilltop from which tourists could peer across the border with binoculars and telescopes . To the amusement of many , a nudist beach was opened on the Western side in 1975 immediately adjoining the border 's terminus near the Baltic Sea port of Travemünde . Visitors often sought to have a nude photograph taken below a looming East German watchtower ; the West Germans noted " a lot more movement on that watchtower since the nudist beach opened . " 
 = = Fortifications of the inner German border = = 
 The East German side of the inner German border was dominated by a complex system of fortifications and security zones , over 1 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 810 mi ) long and several kilometres deep . The fortifications were established in 1952 and reached a peak of complexity and lethality at the start of the 1980s . The border guards referred to the side of the border zone facing the GDR as the <unk> ( literally " <unk> " ) side and that facing the FRG as the <unk> ( " <unk> " ) side . 
 = = = Restricted zone = = = 
 A person attempting to make an illegal crossing of the inner German border around 1980 , travelling from east to west , would first come to the " restricted zone " ( Sperrzone ) . This was a 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) wide area running parallel to the border to which access was heavily restricted . Its inhabitants could only enter and leave using special permits , were not permitted to enter other villages within the zone , and were subjected to night time curfews . It was not fenced off , but access roads were blocked by checkpoints . 
 On the far side of the Sperrzone was the signal fence ( <unk> ) , a continuous expanded metal fence 1 @,@ 185 kilometres ( 736 mi ) long and 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high . The fence was lined with low @-@ voltage electrified strands of barbed wire . When the wire was touched or cut , an alarm was activated to alert nearby guards . 
 = = = Protective strip = = = 
 On the other side of the signal fence lay the heavily guarded " protective strip " ( Schutzstreifen ) , 500 to 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 to 3 @,@ 300 ft ) wide , which adjoined the border itself . It was monitored by guards stationed in concrete , steel and wooden watchtowers constructed at regular intervals along the entire length of the border . Nearly 700 such watchtowers had been built by 1989 ; each of the larger ones was equipped with a powerful 1 @,@ 000 @-@ watt rotating searchlight ( <unk> ) and firing ports to enable the guards to open fire without having to go outside . Their entrances were always positioned facing towards the East German side , so that observers in the West could not see guards going in or out . Around 1 @,@ 000 two @-@ man observation bunkers also stood along the length of the border . 
 Guard dogs were used to provide an additional deterrent to escapees . Dog runs ( <unk> ) , consisting of a suspended wire up to 100 metres ( 330 ft ) long to which a large dog was chained , were installed on high @-@ risk sectors of the border . The dogs were occasionally turned loose in temporary pens adjoining gates or damaged sections of the fence . 
 The guards used an all @-@ weather patrol road ( Kolonnenweg , literally " column way " ) to patrol the border and travel rapidly to the scene of an attempted crossing . It consisted of two parallel lines of perforated concrete blocks that ran beside the border for around 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) . 
 Next to the Kolonnenweg was one of the control strips ( <unk> ) , a line of bare earth running parallel to the fences along almost the entire length of the border . There were two control strips , both located on the inward @-@ facing sides of the fences . The secondary " K2 " strip , 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , ran alongside the signal fence , while the primary " K6 " strip , 6 metres ( 20 ft ) wide , ran along the inside of the fence or wall . In places where the border was vulnerable to escape attempts , the control strip was illuminated at night by high @-@ intensity floodlights ( <unk> ) , which were also used at points where rivers and streams crossed the border . 
 Anyone attempting to cross the control strips would leave footprints , which were quickly detected by patrols . This enabled the guards to identify otherwise undetected escape attempts , recording how many individuals had crossed , where escape attempts were being made and at which times of day escapees were active . From this information , the guards were able to determine where and when patrols needed to be increased , where improved surveillance from watchtowers and bunkers was required , and which areas needed additional fortifications . 
 Anti @-@ vehicle barriers were installed on the other side of the primary control strip . In some locations , Czech hedgehog barricades , known in German as <unk> or <unk> ( " steel hedgehogs " ) , were used to prevent vehicles being used to cross the border . Elsewhere , V @-@ shaped anti @-@ vehicle ditches known as <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) were installed along 829 kilometres ( 515 mi ) of the border and were absent only where natural obstacles such as streams , rivers , gullies or thick forests made such barriers unnecessary . 
 = = = Outer fence , walls and minefields = = = 
 The outer fences were constructed in a number of phases , starting with the initial fortification of the border from May 1952 . The first @-@ generation fence was a crudely constructed single barbed @-@ wire fence ( <unk> ) which stood between 1 @.@ 2 and 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 and 8 @.@ 2 ft ) high and was built very close to the actual border line . This was replaced in the late 1950s with parallel rows of more strongly constructed barbed @-@ wire fences , sometimes with concertina wire placed between the fences as an additional obstacle . 
 A " third @-@ generation " fence , much more solidly constructed , was installed in an ongoing programme of improvements from the late 1960s to the 1980s . The fence line was moved back to create an outer strip between the fence and the actual border . The barbed @-@ wire fences were replaced with a barrier that was usually 3 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 0 metres ( 10 – 13 ft ) high . It was constructed with expanded metal mesh ( <unk> ) panels . The openings in the mesh were generally too small to provide finger @-@ holds and were very sharp . The panels could not easily be pulled down , as they overlapped , and they could not be cut through with a <unk> or wire @-@ cutter . Nor could they be tunnelled under easily , as the bottom segment of the fences was partially buried in the ground . In a number of places , more lightly constructed fences ( <unk> ) consisting of mesh and barbed wire lined the border . The fences were not continuous but could be crossed at a number of places . Gates were installed to enable guards to patrol up to the line and to give engineers access for maintenance on the outward @-@ facing side of the barrier . 
 In some places , villages adjoining the border were fenced with wooden board fences ( <unk> ) or concrete barrier walls ( <unk> ) standing around 3 – 4 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) high . Windows in buildings adjoining the border were bricked or boarded up , and buildings deemed too close to the border were pulled down . The barrier walls stood along only a small percentage of the border – 29 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 18 @.@ 1 mi ) of the total length by 1989 . 
 Anti @-@ personnel mines were installed along approximately half of the border 's length starting in 1966 ; by the 1980s , some 1 @.@ 3 million mines of various Soviet @-@ made types had been laid . In addition , from 1970 the outer fence was booby @-@ trapped with around 60 @,@ 000 SM @-@ 70 ( <unk> @-@ 70 ) directional anti @-@ personnel mines . They were activated by tripwires connected to the firing mechanism . This detonated a horn @-@ shaped charge filled with shrapnel that was sprayed in one direction along the line of the fence . The device was potentially lethal to a range of around 120 metres ( 390 ft ) . The mines were eventually removed by the end of 1984 in the face of international condemnation of the East German government . 
 = = = Border line = = = 
 Until the late 1960s , the fortifications were constructed almost up to the actual border line . When the third @-@ generation fortifications were constructed , the fences were moved back from between 20 metres ( 66 ft ) to as much as 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . This gave the guards a clear field of fire to target escapees without shots landing in the West and provided a buffer zone where engineers could work on maintaining the outward face of the fence in East German territory . Access to the outer strip was very tightly controlled , to ensure that the guards themselves would not be tempted to escape . Although often described by Western sources as a " no @-@ man 's land " , it was de jure wholly East German territory , and escapees could be arrested or shot . Westerners were prohibited from entering the area and thus could not go to the aid of escapees . 
 The actual line between West and East Germany was located on the far side of the outer strip . It was marked by granite stones ( <unk> ) with the letters " DDR " carved on the west @-@ facing edge . Around 2 @,@ 600 distinctive East German concrete " barber pole " ( <unk> or <unk> ) markers were installed just behind the border line at intervals of about 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . A metal coat of arms of East Germany ( <unk> ) was fixed to the side of the marker facing West Germany . 
 On the West German side , there were no fortifications of any kind , nor even any patrol roads in most areas . Warning signs ( <unk> ) with messages such as Achtung ! Zonengrenze ! ( " Danger ! Zonal border ! " ) or Halt ! Hier Zonengrenze ( " Stop ! Zonal border here " ) notified visitors . Foreign military personnel were restricted from approaching the border to avoid clashes or other unwanted incidents . Signs in English and German provided notifications of the distance to the border to prevent accidental crossings . No such restriction applied to Western civilians , who were free to go up to the border line , and there were no physical obstacles to stop their crossing it . 
 = = East Germany 's sea border = = 
 The inner German border system also extended along the Baltic coast , dubbed the " blue border " or sea border of the GDR . The coastline was partly fortified along the east side mouth of the river <unk> opposite the West German port of Travemünde . <unk> , walls and fences stood along the marshy shoreline to deter escape attempts and the water was patrolled by high @-@ speed East German boats . The continuous line of the inner German border ended at the peninsula of <unk> , still belonging to Travemünde , but already on the east side of the <unk> . From there to <unk> , along some 15 km of the eastern shore of the Bay of Mecklenburg , the GDR shoreline was part of the restricted @-@ access " protective strip " or <unk> . Security controls were imposed on the rest of the coast from <unk> to <unk> on the Polish border , including the whole of the islands of Poel , Rügen , <unk> , <unk> and the peninsulas of <unk> and <unk> . 
 The GDR implemented a variety of security measures along its Baltic coastline to hinder escape attempts . Camping and access to boats was severely limited and 27 watchtowers were built along the Baltic coastline . If a suspected escape attempt was spotted , high @-@ speed patrol boats would be dispatched to intercept the fugitives . Armed patrols equipped with powerful mobile searchlights monitored the beaches . 
 Escapees aimed for the western ( West German ) shore of the Bay of Mecklenburg , a Danish lightship off the port of Gedser , the southern Danish islands of Lolland and <unk> , or simply the international shipping lanes in the hope of being picked up by a passing freighter . The Baltic Sea was , however , an extremely dangerous escape route . In all , 189 people are estimated to have died attempting to flee via the Baltic . 
 Some East Germans tried to escape by jumping overboard from East German ships docked in Baltic harbours . So many East Germans attempted to flee this way in Danish ports that <unk> installed extra life @-@ saving equipment on quaysides where East German vessels docked . The GDR 's government responded by stationing armed <unk> ( <unk> ) on passenger ships to deal forcefully with escape attempts . On one occasion in August 1961 , the <unk> caused an international incident in the Danish port of Gedser , when they beat up a would @-@ be escapee on the quayside and opened fire , hitting a Danish boat in the harbour . The next day , thousands of Danes turned out to protest against " <unk> ( Volkspolizei ) methods . " The " boat @-@ jumpers " were eventually stopped by further restricting the already limited travel rights of the GDR 's population . 
 = = River borders = = 
 The border also ran along part of the length of three major rivers of central Germany : the Elbe between Lauenburg and <unk> ( around 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) ) , the Werra and the Saale . The river borders were especially problematic ; although the Western Allies and West Germany held that the demarcation line ran along the eastern bank , the East Germans and Soviets insisted that it was located in the middle of the river ( the <unk> principle ) . In practice , the waterways were shared 50 / 50 but the navigation channels often strayed across the line . This led to tense confrontations as East or West German vessels sought to assert their right to free passage on the waterways . 
 The rivers were as heavily guarded as other parts of the border . On the Elbe , East Germany maintained a fleet of about 30 fast patrol boats and West Germany had some 16 customs vessels . The river border was closely watched for escapees , many of whom drowned attempting to cross . Numerous bridges blown up in the closing days of the Second World War remained in ruins , while other surviving bridges were blocked or demolished on the East German side . There were no ferry crossings and river barges were rigorously inspected by the GDR border guards . To prevent escape attempts , the East German river banks were barricaded with a continuous line of metal fences and concrete walls . At one location , <unk> on the Elbe , the border fortifications completely surrounded the village and sealed off the inhabitants from the rest of East Germany as well as the West . 
 = = Border guards of the inner German border = = 
 The guards of the inner German border comprised tens of thousands of military , paramilitary and civilian personnel from both East and West Germany , as well as from the United Kingdom , the United States and initially the Soviet Union . 
 = = = East Germany = = = 
 Following the end of the Second World War , the East German side of the border was guarded initially by the Border Troops ( <unk> <unk> ) of the Soviet NKVD ( later the KGB ) . They were supplemented from 1946 by a locally recruited paramilitary force , the German Border Police ( Deutsche Grenzpolizei or DGP ) , before the Soviets handed over full control of the border to the East Germans in 1955 / 56 . In 1961 , the DGP was converted into a military force within the National People 's Army ( Nationale Volksarmee , NVA ) . The newly renamed Border Troops of the GDR ( Grenztruppen der DDR , commonly nicknamed the Grenzer ) came under the NVA 's Border Command or <unk> . They were responsible for securing and defending the borders with West Germany , Czechoslovakia , Poland , the Baltic Sea and West Berlin . At their peak , the Grenztruppen had up to 50 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 Around half of the Grenztruppen were conscripts , a lower proportion than in other branches of the East German armed forces . Many potential recruits were screened out as potentially unreliable ; for instance , actively religious individuals or those with close relatives in West Germany . They were all subjected to close scrutiny to assure their political reliability and were given intensive ideological indoctrination . 
 A special unit of the Stasi secret police worked covertly within the Grenztruppen , posing as regular border guards , between 1968 and 1985 , to weed out potential defectors . One in ten officers and one in thirty enlisted men were said to have been recruited by the Stasi as informers . The Stasi regularly interviewed and maintained files on every guard . Stasi operatives were directly responsible for some aspects of security ; passport control stations at crossings were manned by Stasi officers wearing Grenztruppen uniforms . 
 The Grenztruppen were closely watched to ensure that they could not take advantage of their inside knowledge to escape across the border . Patrols , watchtowers and observation posts were always manned by two or three guards at a time . They were not allowed to go out of each other 's sight in any circumstances . If a guard attempted to escape , his colleagues were under instructions to shoot him without hesitation or prior warning ; 2 @,@ 500 did escape to the West , 5 @,@ 500 more were caught and imprisoned for up to five years , and a number were shot and killed or injured in the attempt . 
 The work of the guards involved carrying out repair work on the defences , monitoring the zone from watchtowers and bunkers and patrolling the line several times a day . Border Reconnaissance ( <unk> or <unk> ) soldiers , an elite reconnaissance force , carried out patrols and intelligence @-@ gathering on the western side of the fence . Western visitors to the border were routinely photographed by the <unk> , who also oversaw work detachments maintaining the fence . The workers would be covered by machine guns to discourage them from attempting to escape . 
 = = = West Germany = = = 
 A number of West German state organisations were responsible for policing the western side of the border . These included the <unk> ( BGS , Federal Border Protection ) , the Bayerische Grenzpolizei ( Bavarian Border Police ) and the <unk> ( Federal Customs Administration ) . West German Army units were not allowed to approach the border without being accompanied by BGS personnel . 
 The BGS , established in 1951 , was responsible for policing a zone 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) deep along the border . Its 20 @,@ 000 personnel were equipped with armoured cars , anti @-@ tank guns , helicopters , trucks and jeeps . The BGS had limited police powers within its zone of operations to tackle threats to the peace of the border . 
 The <unk> ( BZV ) was responsible for policing much of the inner German border and manning the West German crossings . Its personnel lived with their families in communities along the border and carried out regular policing tasks in a zone about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) deep along the border . They had the power to arrest and search suspects in their area of operations with the exception of the section of border in Bavaria . The BZV 's remit overlapped significantly with that of the BGS , which led to a degree of feuding between the two agencies . 
 The Bayerische Grenzpolizei ( BGP ) was a border police force raised by the Bavarian government to carry out policing duties along the inner German border 's 390 kilometres ( 240 mi ) in Bavaria . By the late 1960s , the BGP had 600 men patrolling its sector of the border , alongside the BZV , BGS and US Army . Its duties were very similar to those of the BZV , leading to turf wars between the two agencies . 
 = = = Western Allies = = = 
 The British Army conducted only relatively infrequent patrols along its sector of the inner German border , principally for training purposes and symbolic value . By the 1970s , it was carrying out only one patrol a month , only rarely using helicopters or ground surveillance radar and erecting no permanent observation posts . The British border zone was divided into two sectors covering a total distance of about 650 kilometres ( 400 mi ) along the border . Unlike the Americans , the British did not assign specific units to border duty , but rotated the task between the divisions of the British Army of the Rhine . 
 The border was also patrolled in the British sector by the British Frontier Service , the smallest of the Western border surveillance organisations . Its personnel served as a liaison between British military and political interests and the German agencies on the border . The BFS was disbanded in 1991 following Germany 's reunification . 
 The United States Army maintained a substantial and continuous military presence at the inner German border throughout the entire period from 1945 to after the end of the Cold War . Regular American soldiers manned the border from the end of the war until they were replaced in 1946 by the United States Constabulary , which was disbanded in 1952 after policing duties were transferred to the German authorities . It was replaced by three dedicated armoured cavalry regiments assigned to provide a permanent defence . The 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment based at Bamberg , 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment based at Nuremberg and the 14th Armored Cavalry Regiment based at Fulda – later replaced by the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment – monitored the border using observation posts , ground and air patrols , countering intrusions and gathering intelligence on Warsaw Pact activities . 
 = = = Cross @-@ border contacts = = = 
 There was little informal contact between the two sides ; East German guards were under orders not to speak to Westerners . After the initiation of détente between East and West Germany in the 1970s , the two sides established procedures for maintaining formal contacts through 14 direct telephone connections or <unk> ( <unk> , " border information points " ) . They were used to resolve local problems affecting the border , such as floods , forest fires or stray animals . 
 For many years , the two sides waged a propaganda battle across the border using propaganda signs and canisters of leaflets fired or dropped into each other 's territory . West German leaflets sought to undermine the willingness of East German guards to shoot at refugees attempting to cross the border , while East German leaflets promoted the GDR 's view of West Germany as a militaristic regime intent on restoring Germany 's 1937 borders . 
 During the 1950s , West Germany sent millions of propaganda leaflets into East Germany each year . In 1968 alone , over 4 @,@ 000 projectiles containing some 450 @,@ 000 leaflets were fired from East Germany into the West . Another 600 waterproof East German leaflet containers were recovered from cross @-@ border rivers . The " leaflet war " was eventually ended by mutual agreement in the early 1970s as part of the normalisation of relations between the two German states . 
 = = Crossing the inner German border = = 
 The inner German border was never entirely sealed in the fashion of the border between the two Koreas and could be crossed in either direction throughout the Cold War . The post @-@ war agreements on the governance of Berlin specified that the Western Allies were to have access to the city via defined air , road , rail and river corridors . This was mostly respected by the Soviets and East Germans , albeit with periodic interruptions and harassment of travellers . Even during the Berlin Blockade of 1948 , supplies could be brought in by air – the famous Berlin Airlift . Before and after the blockade , Western civilian and military trains , road traffic and barges routinely passed through East Germany en route to Berlin . 
 The border could be crossed legally only through a limited number of air , road , rail and river routes . Foreigners were able to cross East German territory to or from West Berlin , Denmark , Sweden , Poland and Czechoslovakia . However , they had only limited and very tightly controlled access to the rest of East Germany and faced numerous restrictions on travel , accommodation and expenditure . Lengthy inspections caused long delays to traffic at the crossing points . Westerners found crossing the inner German border to be a somewhat disturbing experience ; Jan Morris wrote : 
 Travelling from west to east through [ the inner German border ] was like entering a drab and disturbing dream , peopled by all the ogres of totalitarianism , a half @-@ lit world of shabby resentments , where anything could be done to you , I used to feel , without anybody ever hearing of it , and your every step was dogged by watchful eyes and mechanisms . 
 = = = Crossing points = = = 
 Before 1952 , the inner German border could be crossed at almost any point along its length . The fortification of the border resulted in the severing of 32 railway lines , three autobahns , 31 main roads , eight primary roads , about 60 secondary roads and thousands of lanes and cart tracks . The number of crossing points was reduced to three air corridors , three road corridors , two railway lines and two river connections giving transit access to Berlin , plus a handful of additional crossing points for freight traffic . 
 The situation improved somewhat after the initiation of détente in the 1970s . Additional crossings for so @-@ called kleine <unk> – " small border traffic " , essentially meaning West German day trippers – were opened at various locations along the border . By 1982 , there were 19 border crossings : six roads , three autobahns , eight railway lines plus the Elbe river and the <unk> . 
 The largest was at Helmstedt @-@ Marienborn on the Hanover – Berlin autobahn ( A 2 ) , through which 34 @.@ 6 million travellers passed between 1985 – 89 . Codenamed Checkpoint Alpha , this was the first of three Allied checkpoints on the road to Berlin . The others were Checkpoint Bravo , where the autobahn crossed from East Germany into West Berlin , and most famous of all , Checkpoint Charlie , the only place where non @-@ Germans could cross from West to East Berlin . 
 It was not possible to simply drive through the gap in the fence that existed at crossing points , as the East Germans installed high @-@ impact vehicle barriers and mobile rolling barriers that could ( and did ) kill drivers that attempted to ram them . Vehicles were subjected to rigorous checks to uncover fugitives . Inspection pits and mirrors allowed the undersides of vehicles to be scrutinised . Probes were used to investigate the chassis and even the fuel tank , where a fugitive might be concealed , and vehicles could be partially dismantled in on @-@ site garages . At Marienborn there was even a mortuary garage where coffins could be checked to confirm that the occupants really were dead . Passengers were checked and often interrogated about their travel plans and reasons for travelling . The system used simple technology and was slow , relying largely on vast card indexes recording travellers ' details , but it was effective nonetheless ; during the 28 years of operation of the Marienborn complex , no successful escapes were recorded . 
 = = = Border crossing regulations = = = 
 West Germans were able to cross the border relatively freely to visit relatives , but had to go through numerous bureaucratic formalities . East Germans were subjected to far stricter restrictions . It was not until November 1964 that they were allowed to visit the West at all , and even then only pensioners were allowed . This gave rise to a joke that only in East Germany did people look forward to old age . Younger East Germans were not allowed to travel to the West until 1972 , though few did so until the mid @-@ 1980s . They had to apply for an exit visa and passport , pay a substantial fee , obtain permission from their employer and undergo an interrogation from the police . 
 The odds were against successful applications , and only approximately 40 @,@ 000 a year were approved . Refusal was often arbitrary , dependent on the goodwill of local officials . Members of the Party elite and cultural ambassadors were frequently given permission to travel , as were essential transport workers . However , they were not permitted to take their families with them . 
 Until the late 1980s , ordinary East Germans were only permitted to travel to the West on " urgent family business " , such as the marriage , serious illness or death of a close relative . In February 1986 , the regime relaxed the definition of " urgent family business " , which prompted a massive increase in the number of East German citizens able to travel to the West . The relaxation of the restrictions was reported to have been motivated by a desire on the part of the East German leadership to reduce their citizens ' desire to travel and shrink the number applying to emigrate . In practice , however , it had exactly the opposite effect . 
 = = = Emigrating from East Germany = = = 
 There was no formal legal basis under which a citizen could emigrate from East Germany . In 1975 , however , East Germany signed up to the Helsinki Accords , a pan @-@ European treaty to improve relations between the countries of Europe . An increasing number of East German citizens sought to use the Accords ' provision on freedom of movement to secure exit visas . By the late 1980s , over 100 @,@ 000 applications for visas were being submitted annually with around 15 @,@ 000 – 25 @,@ 000 being granted . 
 The GDR 's government nonetheless remained opposed to emigration and sought to dissuade would @-@ be émigrés . The process of applying for an exit permit was deliberately made slow , demeaning , frustrating and often fruitless . Applicants were marginalised , demoted or sacked from their jobs , excluded from universities and subjected to ostracism . They faced the threat of having their children taken into state custody on the grounds that they were unfit to bring up children . The law was used to punish those who continued to apply for emigration ; over 10 @,@ 000 applicants were arrested by the Stasi between the 1970s and 1989 . 
 A report for the Central Committee 's security section noted : " The emigration problem is confronting us with a fundamental problem of the GDR 's development . Experience shows that the current repertoire of solutions ( improved travel possibilities , expatriation of applicants , etc . ) have not brought the desired results , but rather the opposite . " The agitation for emigration , the report concluded , " threatens to undermine beliefs in the correctness of the Party 's policies . " 
 = = = <unk> and " humanitarian releases " = = = 
 East German citizens could also emigrate through the semi @-@ secret route of being ransomed by the West German government in a process termed Freikauf ( literally the buying of freedom ) . Between 1964 and 1989 , 33 @,@ 755 political prisoners were ransomed . A further 2 @,@ 087 prisoners were released to the West under an amnesty in 1972 . Another 215 @,@ 000 people , including 2 @,@ 000 children cut off from their parents , were allowed to leave East Germany to rejoin their families . In exchange , West Germany paid over 3 @.@ 4 billion DM – nearly $ 2 @.@ 3 billion at 1990 prices – in goods and hard currency . 
 Those ransomed were valued on a sliding scale , ranging from around 1 @,@ 875 DM for a manual worker to around 11 @,@ 250 DM for a doctor . The justification , according to East Germany , was that this was compensation for the money invested by the state in the prisoner 's training . For a while , payments were made in kind using goods that were in short supply in East Germany , such as oranges , bananas , coffee and medical drugs . The average prisoner was worth around 4 @,@ 000 DM worth of goods . 
 The scheme was highly controversial in the West . Freikauf was denounced by many as human trafficking , but was defended by others as an " act of pure humanitarianism " ; the West German government budgeted money for Freikauf under the euphemistic heading of " support of special aid measures of an all @-@ German character . " 
 = = Escape attempts and victims of the inner German border = = 
 = = = Refugee flows and escape attempts = = = 
 Between 1950 and 1988 , around 4 million East Germans migrated to the West ; 3 @.@ 454 million left between 1950 and the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961 . After the border was fortified and the Berlin Wall constructed , the number of illegal crossings fell dramatically and continued to fall as the defences were improved over the subsequent decades . However , escapees were never more than a small minority of the total number of emigrants from East Germany . During the 1980s , only about 1 % of those who left East Germany did so by escaping across the border . Far more people left the country after being granted official permits , by fleeing through third countries or by being ransomed by the West German government . 
 The vast majority of refugees were motivated by economic concerns and sought to improve their living conditions and opportunities by migrating to the West . Events such as the crushing of the 1953 uprising , the imposition of collectivisation and East Germany 's final economic crisis in the late 1980s prompted surges in the number of escape attempts . 
 Attempts to flee across the border were carefully studied and recorded by the GDR authorities to identify possible weak points . These were addressed by strengthening the fortifications in vulnerable areas . At the end of the 1970s , a study was carried out by the East German army to review attempted " border breaches " ( <unk> ) . It found that 4 @,@ 956 people had attempted to escape across the border between 1 December 1974 and 30 November 1979 . Of those , 3 @,@ 984 people ( 80 @.@ 4 % ) were arrested by the Volkspolizei in the Sperrzone , the outer restricted zone . 205 people ( 4 @.@ 1 % ) were caught at the signal fence . 
 Within the inner security zone , the Schutzstreifen , a further 743 people ( 15 % ) were arrested by the guards . 48 people ( 1 % ) were stopped – i.e. killed or injured – by landmines and 43 people ( 0 @.@ 9 % ) by SM @-@ 70 directional mines on the fence . A further 67 people ( 1 @.@ 35 % ) were intercepted at the fence ( shot and / or arrested ) . A total of 229 people – just 4 @.@ 6 % of attempted escapees , representing less than one in twenty – made it across the fence . Of these , the largest number ( 129 , or 55 % of successful escapees ) succeeded in making it across the fence in <unk> sectors . 89 people ( 39 % of escapees ) managed to cross both the minefields and the fence , but just 12 people ( 6 % of the total ) succeeded in getting past the SM @-@ 70s booby @-@ trap mines on the fences . 
 Escape attempts were severely punished by the GDR . From 1953 , the regime described the act of escaping as <unk> ( literally " flight from the Republic " ) , by analogy with the existing military term <unk> ( " desertion " ) . A successful escapee was not a <unk> ( " refugee " ) but a <unk> ( " Republic deserter " ) . Those who attempted to escape were called Sperrbrecher ( literally " blockade runners " but more loosely translated as " border violators " ) . Those who helped escapees were not <unk> ( " escape helpers " ) , the Western term , but <unk> ( " human traffickers " ) . Such ideologically coloured language enabled the regime to portray border crossers as little better than traitors and criminals . 
 <unk> became a crime in 1957 , punishable by heavy fines and up to three years ' imprisonment . Any act associated with an escape attempt – including helping an escapee – was subject to this legislation . Those caught in the act were often tried for espionage as well and given proportionately harsher sentences . More than 75 @,@ 000 people – an average of more than seven people a day – were imprisoned for attempting to escape across the border , serving an average of one to two years ' imprisonment . Border guards who attempted to escape were treated much more harshly and were on average imprisoned for five years . 
 = = = Escape methods = = = 
 Escapees used a variety of methods . The great majority crossed on foot , though some took more unusual routes . One of the most spectacular was the escape in September 1979 of eight people from two families in a home @-@ made hot @-@ air balloon . Their flight involved an ascent to more than 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) before landing near the West German town of Naila . The incident inspired the film Night Crossing . 
 Other escapees relied more on physical strength and endurance . An escapee in 1987 used meat hooks to scale the fences , while in 1971 a doctor swam 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) across the Baltic Sea from Rostock almost to the Danish island of Lolland , before he was picked up by a West German yacht . Another escapee used an air mattress to escape across the Baltic in 1987 . 
 Mass escapes were rare . One of the few that succeeded took place on 2 October 1961 , when 53 people from the border village of <unk> – a quarter of the village 's population – escaped en masse , followed by another 13 inhabitants in February 1963 . An unusual mass escape occurred in September 1964 when 14 East Germans , including 11 children , were smuggled across the border in a refrigerated truck . They were able to escape detection by being concealed under the carcasses of slaughtered pigs being transported to the West . 
 The traffic was not one @-@ way ; thousands of people migrated each year from West Germany to the east , motivated by reasons such as marital problems , family estrangement and homesickness . A number of Allied military personnel , including British , French , German and American troops , also defected . By the end of the Cold War , as many as 300 United States citizens were thought to have defected across the Iron Curtain for a variety of reasons – whether to escape criminal charges , for political reasons or because ( as the St. Petersburg Times put it ) " girl @-@ hungry GI 's [ were tempted ] with seductive sirens , who usually desert the love @-@ lorn soldier once he is across the border . " The fate of such defectors varied considerably . Some were sent straight to labour camps on charges of espionage . Others committed suicide , while a few were able to find wives and work on the eastern side of the border . 
 = = = Order to fire = = = 
 From 1945 onwards , unauthorised crossers of the inner German border risked being shot by Soviet or East German guards . The use of deadly force was termed the Schießbefehl ( " order to fire " or " command to shoot " ) . It was formally in force as early as 1948 , when regulations concerning the use of firearms on the border were promulgated . A regulation issued to East German police on 27 May 1952 stipulated that " failure to obey the orders of the Border Patrol will be met by the use of arms . " From the 1960s through to the end of the 1980s , the border guards were given daily verbal orders ( <unk> ) to " track down , arrest or annihilate violators . " The GDR formally codified its regulations on the use of deadly force in March 1982 , when the State Border Law mandated that firearms were to be used as the " maximum measure in the use of force " against individuals who " publicly attempt to break through the state border " . 
 The GDR 's leadership explicitly endorsed the use of deadly force . General Heinz Hoffmann , the GDR defence minister , declared in August 1966 that " anyone who does not respect our border will feel the bullet . " In 1974 , Erich Honecker , as Chairman of the GDR 's National Defence Council , ordered : " Firearms are to be ruthlessly used in the event of attempts to break through the border , and the comrades who have successfully used their firearms are to be commended . " 
 The Schießbefehl was , not surprisingly , very controversial in the West and was singled out for criticism by the West Germans . The GDR authorities occasionally suspended the Schießbefehl on occasions when it would have been politically inconvenient to have to explain dead refugees , such as during a visit to the GDR by the French foreign minister in 1985 . It was also a problem for many of the East German guards and was the motivating factor behind a number of escapes , when guards facing a crisis of conscience defected because of their unwillingness to shoot fellow citizens . 
 = = = Deaths on the border = = = 
 It is still not certain how many people died on the inner German border or who they all were , as the GDR treated such information as a closely guarded secret . But estimates have risen steadily since unification , as evidence has been gathered from East German records . As of 2009 , unofficial estimates are up to 1 @,@ 100 people , though officially released figures give a count from 270 up to 421 deaths . 
 There were many ways to die on the inner German border . Numerous escapees were shot by the border guards , while others were killed by mines and booby @-@ traps . A substantial number drowned while trying to cross the Baltic and the Elbe river . Not all of those killed on the border were attempting to escape . On 13 October 1961 , <unk> Rundschau journalist Kurt Lichtenstein was shot on the border near the village of <unk> after he attempted to speak with East German farm workers . His death aroused condemnation across the political spectrum in West Germany . The incident prompted students from Braunschweig to erect a sign on the border protesting the killing . 
 An Italian truck driver and member of the Italian Communist Party , Benito <unk> , was shot at a crossing point in August 1976 ; the GDR government was severely embarrassed and , unusually , offered an apology . In one notorious shooting on 1 May 1976 , a former East German political prisoner , Michael <unk> , who had fled to the West some years before , was ambushed and killed by a Stasi commando squad on the border near <unk> . The Stasi reported that he had been " liquidated by security forces of the GDR " . 
 Twenty @-@ five East German border guards died after being shot from the Western side of the border or were killed by resisting escapees or ( often accidentally ) by their own colleagues . The East German government described them as " victims of armed assaults and imperialist provocations against the state border of the GDR " and alleged that " bandits " in the West took potshots at guards doing their duty – a version of events that was uncorroborated by Western accounts of border incidents . 
 The two sides commemorated their dead in very different ways . Various mostly unofficial memorials were set up on the western side by people seeking to commemorate victims of the border . West Germans such as Michael <unk> and Kurt Lichtenstein were commemorated with signs and memorials , some of which were supported by the government . The death of East German Heinz @-@ Josef Große in 1982 was commemorated annually by demonstrations on the Western side of the border . After the policy of détente was initiated in the 1970s , this became politically inconvenient and state support for border memorials largely ceased . 
 The taboo in East Germany surrounding escapees meant that the great majority of deaths went unpublicised and <unk> . However , the deaths of border guards were used for GDR propaganda , which portrayed them as " martyrs " . Four stone memorials were erected in East Berlin to mark their deaths . The regime named schools , barracks and other public facilities after the dead guards and used their memorials as places of pilgrimage to signify that ( as a slogan put it ) " their deaths are our commitment " to maintaining the border . After 1989 the memorials were vandalised , neglected and ultimately removed . 
 = = Fall of the inner German border = = 
 The fall of the inner German border came rapidly and unexpectedly in November 1989 , along with the fall of the Berlin Wall . Its integrity had been fatally compromised in May 1989 when a reformist Communist government in Hungary , supported by the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev , began to dismantle its border fortifications . Hungary was already a popular tourist destination for East Germans . Its government was still notionally Communist but planned free elections and economic reform as part of a strategy of " rejoining Europe " and reforming its struggling economy . 
 Opening the Hungarian border with Austria was essential to this effort ; West Germany had secretly offered a much @-@ needed hard currency loan of DM 500 million ( $ 250 million ) in return for allowing citizens of the GDR to freely emigrate . Pictures of the barbed @-@ wire fences being taken down were transmitted into East Germany by West German television stations . 
 They prompted a mass exodus by hundreds of thousands of East Germans , which began in earnest in September 1989 . In addition to those crossing the Hungarian border , tens of thousands of East Germans scaled the walls of the West German embassies in Prague , Warsaw and Budapest , where they were regarded as " German citizens " by the federal government , claiming " asylum " . 
 Czechoslovakia 's hardline communist government agreed to close its border with East Germany to choke off the exodus . The closure produced uproar across East Germany and the GDR government 's bid to humiliate refugees by expelling them from the country in sealed trains backfired disastrously . Torn @-@ up identity papers and East German passports littered the tracks as the refugees threw them out of the windows . When the trains passed through Dresden , 1 @,@ 500 East Germans stormed the main railway station in an attempt to board . Dozens were injured and the station concourse was virtually destroyed . 
 The small pro @-@ democracy Monday demonstrations soon swelled into crowds of hundreds of thousands of people in cities across East Germany . The East German leadership considered using force but ultimately backed down , lacking support from the Soviet Union for a violent Tiananmen Square @-@ style military intervention . Reformist members of the East German Politbüro sought to rescue the situation by forcing the resignation of the hardline Party chairman Erich Honecker , replacing him in October 1989 with the marginally less hardline Egon Krenz . 
 The new government sought to appease the protesters by reopening the border with Czechoslovakia . This , however , merely resulted in the resumption of the mass exodus through Hungary via Czechoslovakia . On 8 November 1989 , with huge demonstrations continuing across the country , the entire Politbüro resigned and a new , more moderate Politbüro was appointed under Krenz 's continued leadership . 
 = = = Opening of the border and the fall of the GDR = = = 
 The East German government sought to defuse the situation by relaxing the country 's border controls with effect from 10 November 1989 ; the announcement was made on the evening of 9 November 1989 by Politbüro member Günter Schabowski at a somewhat chaotic press conference in East Berlin , who proclaimed the new control regime as liberating the people from a situation of psychological pressure by legalising and simplifying migration . Misunderstanding the note passed to him about the decision to open the border , he announced the border would be opened " immediately , without delay " , rather than from the following day as the government had intended . Crucially , it was neither meant to be an uncontrolled opening nor to apply to East Germans wishing to visit the West as tourists . At an interview in English after the press conference , Schabowski told the NBC reporter Tom Brokaw that " it is no question of tourism . It is a permission of leaving the GDR [ permanently ] . " 
 As the press conference had been broadcast live , within hours , thousands of people gathered at the Berlin Wall demanding that the guards open the gates . The border guards were unable to contact their superiors for instructions and , fearing a stampede , opened the gates . The iconic scenes that followed – people pouring into West Berlin , standing on the Wall and attacking it with pickaxes – were broadcast worldwide . 
 While the eyes of the world were on the <unk> ( the fall of the Wall ) in Berlin , a simultaneous process of <unk> ( border opening ) was taking place along the entire length of the inner German border . Existing crossings were opened immediately . Within the first four days , 4 @.@ 3 million East Germans – a quarter of the country 's entire population – poured into West Germany . At the Helmstedt crossing point on the Berlin – Hanover autobahn , cars were backed up for 65 km ( 40 mi ) ; some drivers waited 11 hours to cross to the West . The border was opened in stages over the next few months . Many new crossing points were created , reconnecting communities that had been separated for nearly 40 years . BBC correspondent Ben Bradshaw described the jubilant scenes at the railway station of Hof in Bavaria in the early hours of 12 November : 
 It was not just the arrivals at Hof who wore their emotions on their sleeves . The local people turned out in their hundreds to welcome them ; stout men and women in their Sunday best , twice or three times the average age of those getting off the trains , wept as they clapped . ' These are our people , free at last , ' they said ... Those arriving at Hof report people lining the route of the trains in East Germany waving and clapping and holding placards saying : ' We 're coming <unk> 
 Even the East German border guards were not immune to the euphoria . One of them , Peter Zahn , described how he and his colleagues reacted to the opening of the border : 
 After the Wall fell , we were in a state of delirium . We submitted a request for our reserve activities to be ended , which was approved a few days later . We visited Helmstedt and Braunschweig in West Germany , which would have been impossible before . In the NVA even listening to Western radio stations was punishable and there we were on an outing in the West . 
 To the surprise of many West Germans , many of the East German visitors spent their DM 100 " welcome money " buying great quantities of bananas , a highly prized rarity in the East . For months after the opening of the border , bananas were sold out at supermarkets along the western side of the border as East Germans bought up whole crates , believing supplies would soon be exhausted . The rush for fruit made the banana the unofficial symbol of the changes in East Germany , which some dubbed the " banana revolution " . 
 Some West German leftists protested at what they saw as rampant consumerism by tossing bananas at East Germans coming to visit the West . The easterners ' obsession with bananas was famously spoofed by the West German satirical magazine Titanic on the front cover of its November 1989 edition , which depicted " Easterner Gaby ( 17 ) , happy to be in West Germany : My first banana " . Gaby was shown holding a large peeled cucumber . 
 The opening of the border had a profound political and psychological effect on the East German public . For many people , the very existence of the GDR , which the SED had justified as the first " Socialist state on German soil " , came to be seen as pointless . The state was bankrupt , the economy was collapsing , the political class was discredited , the governing institutions were in chaos and the people were demoralised by the evaporation of the collective assumptions that had underpinned their society for 40 years . Membership of the Party collapsed and Krenz himself resigned on 6 December 1989 after only 50 days in office , handing over to the moderate Hans <unk> . The removal of restrictions on travel prompted hundreds of thousands of East Germans to migrate to the West – more than 116 @,@ 000 did so between 9 November and 31 December 1989 , compared with 40 @,@ 000 for the whole of the previous year . 
 The new East German leadership initiated " round table " talks with opposition groups , similar to the processes that had led to multi @-@ party elections in Hungary and Poland . When the first free elections were held in East Germany in March 1990 , the former SED , which had renamed itself as the Party of Democratic Socialism , was swept from power and replaced by a pro @-@ reunification Alliance for Germany coalition led by the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) , Chancellor Kohl 's party . Both countries progressed rapidly towards reunification , while international diplomacy paved the way abroad . In July 1990 , monetary union was achieved . A Treaty on the establishment of a unified Germany was agreed on in August 1990 and political reunification took place on 3 October 1990 . 
 = = = Abandonment of the border = = = 
 The border fortifications were progressively torn down and eventually abandoned in the months following its opening . Dozens of new crossings were opened by February 1990 , and the guards no longer carried weapons nor made much effort to check travellers ' passports . The guards ' numbers were rapidly reduced ; half were dismissed within five months of the opening . On 1 July 1990 the border was abandoned and the Grenztruppen were officially abolished ; all but 2 @,@ 000 of them were dismissed or transferred to other jobs . 
 The Bundeswehr gave the remaining border guards and other ex @-@ NVA soldiers the task of clearing the fortifications , which was completed only in 1994 . The scale of the task was immense , involving both the clearing of the fortifications and the rebuilding of hundreds of roads and railway lines . A serious complication was the presence of mines along the border . Although the 1 @.@ 4 million mines laid by the GDR were supposed to have been removed during the 1980s , it turned out that 34 @,@ 000 were unaccounted for . A further 1 @,@ 100 mines were found and removed following reunification at a cost of more than DM 250 million , in a programme that was not concluded until the end of 1995 . 
 The border <unk> ' task was aided unofficially by German civilians from both sides of the former border , who scavenged the installations for fencing , wire and blocks of concrete to use in home improvements . Much of the fence was sold to a West German scrap @-@ metal company . Environmental groups undertook a programme of re @-@ greening the border , planting new trees and sowing grass seeds to fill in the clear @-@ cut area along the line . 
 = = Border area today = = 
 Very little remains of the installations along the former inner German border . At least 30 public , private and municipal museums along the old line present displays of equipment and other artifacts relating to the border . Among the preserved sites are several dozen watchtowers , short stretches of the fence and associated installations ( some of which have been reconstructed ) , sections of the wall still in situ at <unk> and <unk> , and a number of buildings related to the border , such as the GDR crossing point at Marienborn . 
 Substantial sections of the Kolonnenweg remain in place to serve as farm and forestry access roads , though the accompanying anti @-@ vehicles ditches , fences and other obstacles have been almost entirely removed . Artworks , commemorative stones , memorials and signs have been erected at many points along the former border to mark its opening , to remember its victims and to record the division and reunification of Germany . 
 The closure of the border region for nearly 40 years created a haven for wildlife in some places . Although parts of the East German side of the border were farmed , intensive farming of the kind practised elsewhere in Germany was absent and large areas were untouched by agriculture . Conservationists became aware as early as the 1970s that the border had become a refuge for rare species of animals and plants . Their findings led the Bavarian government to begin a programme of buying land along the border to ensure its protection from development . 
 In December 1989 , only a month after the opening of the border , conservationists from East and West Germany met to work out a plan to establish a " German Green Belt " ( Grünes Band Deutschland ) stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Czech border . The Bundestag voted unanimously in December 2004 to extend federal protection to the Green Belt and incorporate it into a " European Green Belt " being developed along the entire 6 @,@ 800 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @,@ 200 mi ) length of the former Iron Curtain . The German Green Belt now links 160 natural parks , 150 flora @-@ and @-@ fauna areas , three UNESCO biosphere reservations and the Harz Mountains National Park . It is home to a wide variety of species that are rare elsewhere in Germany , including the wild cat , black stork , otter and rare mosses and orchids . Most of Germany 's red kites – more than half of the 25 @,@ 000 that live in Europe – live along the former border . The Bund <unk> , one of Germany 's largest conservation groups , is campaigning to extend the area within the Green Belt designated as nature conservation zones . 
 = Patrick Bissell = 
 Walter Patrick Bissell ( December 1 , 1957 – December 29 , 1987 ) was an American <unk> . He was a leading principal dancer with the American Ballet Theatre . On his death at age 30 from a drug overdose , he was described by the artistic director of the American Ballet Theatre Mikhail Baryshnikov as " without a doubt one of the brightest lights in American Ballet Theater 's history , or , for that matter , in the entire ballet world " . Bissell was noted for his height and athleticism . His most famous rôle was as Solor in La Bayadère . His death prompted investigations into the alleged widespread drug use within the American Ballet Theatre . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bissell was born on December 1 , 1957 in Corpus Christi , Texas . He was one of the five children of Donald and Patricia Bissell ; his siblings included his twin brother William , two sisters Susan and Barbara , and brother Donald . The family lived in Palos Park , Illinois for several years . His father was a computer @-@ systems designer with Hiram Walker Inc . Bissell was an athlete who enjoyed performing feats of daring : at the age of 8 he jumped off a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) -high diving board , even though he did not know how to swim . He dabbled in many sports — baseball , basketball , football , track , etc . He was introduced to ballet at age ten by his sister Susan who paid him to be her ballet partner ; thus he was first paid to dance . He found a home and sanctuary in the passion of ballet and decided to make it his life pursuit . He began training in ballet and jazz dance and was soon accepted into a company in Toledo , Ohio . Like many boys who take up ballet , he tried to keep his lessons a secret , but word got out and he was ridiculed and bullied every single day for the rest of his school days . " I was a skinny kid . They could have crushed me in an instant , " he stated . 
 While Bissell showed early promise as a dancer , he also showed signs of being a troubled young man and began taking drugs at the age of 14 . He was expelled from his first school for dealing drugs on the premises . He was noticed by the American ballet dancer Edward Villella , who encouraged his parents to send him to a performing arts boarding school . In 1972 he joined the National Academy of Dance in Champaign , Illinois from which he was dismissed for behavior problems . Bissell then spent a year at the North Carolina School of the Arts which he left when he was informed that he should pay more attention to his academic studies . He hitch @-@ hiked all the way to New York to pursue a lifelong career in dance — as that 's where the company 's top schools are . He then won a scholarship to study at the School of American Ballet , where he was encouraged by Lincoln Kirstein , its founder , and Stanley Williams , one of his teachers . He was invented to join Balanchine 's New York City Ballet and the American Ballet Theatre . He decided to join ABT and became a member of the corps . Though he quickly rose through the ranks . Wherever Bissell went , he attracted attention , both from his fiery dancing and his habit of wearing a cowboy hat and boots around New York City — his way of distinguishing he was a true @-@ blue native Texan . He also made his way around the city on a motorcycle . 
 He danced the lead rôles in three of the four ballets performed by the school in its annual workshop and graduated in 1977 . He became a good friend of Mikhail Baryshnikov , who praised his dancing . 
 = = Career = = 
 Bissell joined the corps de ballet of the American Ballet Theatre in 1977 and , after three months there , he danced the lead male rôle in La Bayadère . He moved to the Boston Ballet but returned the following year . In 1978 he was promoted to soloist and to principal dancer in 1979 at the American Ballet Theatre due to the shortage of men in the company — even making the cover of Dance magazine . The ballerinas nicknamed him " Tarzan , " as he was a huge , hulking juggernaut of a man who could carry some of the biggest and tallest girls in the company . For much of his career , however , Bissell was plagued with injuries , and there were reports of drug and alcohol problems . Bissell and Gelsey Kirkland were dismissed from the American Ballet Theatre in 1980 and 1981 on the grounds of chronic lateness and missed rehearsals — in particular for failing to attend a dress rehearsal on the eve of the company 's opening at the Kennedy Center in Washington , D.C. on December 9 , 1980 . Bissell and Kirkland then appeared as guest artists with the <unk> Ballet in its production of Act II of Giselle in 1982 at the Hofstra Playhouse in Hempstead , Long Island , New York . Subsequently Bissell rejoined the American Ballet Theatre . 
 He appeared in many lead rôles , including Don Jose in Roland Petit 's Carmen , Franz in Coppélia , Basil and Espada in Don Quixote , Albrecht in Giselle , Romeo in Romeo and Juliet , Prince Siegfried in Swan Lake , James in La Sylphide , Prince Desire in Sir Kenneth MacMillan 's Sleeping Beauty and lead rôles in George Balanchine 's Stravinsky Violin Concerto , Symphonie Concertante and Theme and Variations . He created the rôle of the Prince in Mikhail Baryshnikov 's production of Cinderella , the leading male rôle in Antony Tudor 's The Tiller in the Fields ( 1978 ) , Glen Tetley 's <unk> ( 1979 ) , the title rôle of Peter Darrell 's Chéri ( 1980 ) and the lead rôle in Lynne Taylor @-@ Corbett 's Estuary ( 1983 ) . In 1984 , Bissell starred as a guest artist with the Universal Ballet Company in its first production , Adrienne <unk> 's Cinderella . He was partnered by its leading ballerina and general director , Julia Moon . He also performed as a guest artist with the National Ballet of Canada , Scottish Ballet and Pacific Northwest Ballet . This is a stark contrast to Patrick 's brother William , who trained to be a minister , but then went on to work in manufacturing . 
 = = Drug use and death = = 
 Bissell was arrested in 1981 in Bloomington , Indiana , and charged with public intoxication , disorderly conduct and pushing a policeman . He was given a 30 @-@ day jail sentence , however a plea bargain was made whereby the judge ordered him to arrange to give a performance at Indiana University with the proceeds to be given to charity . Bissell was also given a $ 100 fine . After being fired by the ABT ( along with Gelsey Kirkland ) , they were re @-@ hired and celebrated by doing a stash of cocaine they had smuggled in the lining of a ballet slipper . 
 Bissell married Jolinda Menendez , a former American Ballet Theatre ballerina ( she danced two rôles in the Baryshnikov Nutcracker ) and principal ballerina with the Pennsylvania Ballet , on June 26 , 1982 at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church . However the marriage ended after a year due to Bissell 's many <unk> and erratic behavior . In 1984 , company officials from the American Ballet Theatre consulted with experts on drug addiction and found a therapist for him . The following year , a condition of his continued employment by the company was that he undergo regular urine tests . The tests were held weekly with results 95 percent negative , however lapses were penalized with fines . In 1987 , he spent five weeks at the Betty Ford Clinic in California for intensive therapy , completing the treatment in August . Prior to entering the clinic he had injured his foot and was thus prevented from going on the American Ballet Theatre 's fall tour . His family blamed his drug use on the " highly competitive dance world in New York City " . 
 Bissell was found dead in his apartment in Hoboken , New Jersey on December 29 , 1987 . At the time of his death , he was engaged to fellow dancer at the American Ballet Theatre , soloist Amy Rose , and had planned to rejoin the company in January of the following year . The results of an autopsy showed that he died from an overdose of cocaine , codeine , methadone and other drugs . It never was determined whether Bissell 's death was a deliberate suicide . His death prompted charges of extensive drug use in the dance world by Bissell 's parents and fellow @-@ dancer Gelsey Kirkland . Kirkland 's autobiography Dancing on My Grave mentions Bissell 's frequent use of cocaine and , when discussing her own addiction , she alleged that he had introduced her to the drug . Attention was also drawn to the drug therapy program offered by the American Ballet Theatre . According to the company 's executive director , Charles Dillingham , Bissell had been participating in the therapy program instituted by the company and had " appeared to have been making progress " prior to his death . Gelsey Kirkland alleged that Bissell 's death was " an unavoidable tragedy caused at least in part by the failure of the ballet world and American Ballet Theater in particular to acknowledge and deal openly with the drug problem " , which contrasted with Dillingham 's statement that " his death came as an utterly horrible surprise " . The 1988 production of La Bayadère by the American Ballet Theatre was dedicated to Bissell who had been notable in the rôle of Solor . 
 = Air Battle of South Korea = 
 The Air Battle of South Korea was an air campaign early in the Korean War occurring roughly from June 25 to July 20 , 1950 over South Korea between the air forces of North Korea and the United Nations , including the countries of South Korea , the United States and the United Kingdom . The month @-@ long fight for air supremacy over the country saw several small engagements over airfields in Seoul and Taejon and ultimately ended in victory for the UN air force , which was able to destroy the small North Korean People 's Air Force . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 Main Article : Initial Phase of Korean War 
 On the morning of June 25 , 1950 , ten divisions of the North Korean People 's Army launched a full @-@ scale invasion of the nation 's neighbor to the south , the Republic of Korea . The force of 89 @,@ 000 men moved in six columns , catching the Republic of Korea Army by surprise , resulting in a rout . The smaller South Korean army suffered from widespread lack of organization and equipment , and was unprepared for war . The numerically superior North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance from the 38 @,@ 000 South Korean soldiers on the front before it began moving steadily south . 
 To prevent South Korea 's collapse the United Nations Security Council voted to send military forces . The United States ' Seventh Fleet dispatched Task Force 77 , led by the fleet carrier USS Valley Forge ; the British Far East Fleet dispatched several ships , including HMS Triumph , to provide air and naval support . By June 27 , the naval and air forces moving to Korea had authorization to attack North Korean targets with the goal of helping repel the North Korean invasion of the country . With the US forces accepting the North Korean attack as an act of war , it became imperative to evacuate civilians and American diplomats from Korea , as the forces of the north and south were battling across the peninsula . On June 27 the South Koreans were losing the First Battle of Seoul . Most of South Korea 's forces retreated in the face of the invasion . The North Koreans would capture the city the next day forcing the South Korean government and its shattered army to retreat further south . 
 In the meantime , US naval and air forces were evacuating US diplomats , military dependents , and civilians by ship and air transport , hoping to get American civilians out of the country " by any means . " Civilians were being gathered at Suwon Airfield and Kimpo Airfield near Seoul , before moving to Inchon and out of the country . These airlifts and convoys were being escorted by aircraft from the United States , which was operating its aircraft from bases in Japan . 
 = = = Air Forces involved = = = 
 The United States Air Force had 1 @,@ 172 aircraft in the Pacific region at the time of the outbreak of the Korean War , including hundreds of F @-@ 80 Shooting Stars as well as numerous F @-@ 82 Twin Mustangs , B @-@ 26 Invaders , B @-@ 29 Superfortresses , among others . Hundreds of aircraft were available to be immediately mustered against the North Korean invasion , many of them the newest jet engine @-@ powered fighter aircraft . The aircraft could fulfill a variety of missions and were well equipped , well armed and out of reach of North Korean attack , with many bases safely in Japan . Additionally , the Royal Air Force of the United Kingdom , and the Royal Australian Air Force of Australia provided assistance as 800 Naval Air Squadron , 802 Naval Air Squadron , and No. 77 Squadron RAAF were dispatched to provide additional support for ground operations . The combined airpower had about 33 @,@ 975 personnel . 
 The North Korean People 's Air Force ( KPAF ) consisted of only 132 aircraft and 2 @,@ 000 personnel , of whom only 80 were pilots and most poorly trained . The two Koreas had very small air forces of their own , with the North Koreans ' 132 aircraft organized into the KPAF 1st Air Division . At the early phase in the war , these aircraft were used boldly to the North Koreans ' advantage . Aware of their air superiority over the Republic of Korea Air Force and not expecting UN intervention , they anticipated light resistance in the air . In all , the KPAF had 2 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At the June 25 outbreak of the war , the US aircraft in Japan immediately began moving to the closest bases to the Korean Peninsula , Itazuke Air Base and Ashiya Air Base . MacArthur ordered another 250 aircraft brought to Korea for the conflict . 
 = = = Attack at Suwon = = = 
 North Korean aircraft first met US aircraft in combat during the Battle of Suwon Airfield , in which seven of the 13 North Korean aircraft were destroyed . The North Korean Lavochkin La @-@ 7 and Ilyushin Il @-@ 10 aircraft were easily outmatched by the superior American F @-@ 82 Twin Mustang and F @-@ <unk> Shooting Star aircraft , which also had better @-@ trained pilots . The planes of the 8th Fighter Wing , which were attempting to defend Suwon to allow evacuation of UN civilians encountered repeated harassing attacks from North Korean aircraft operating out of Heijo Airfield in Pyongyang . Heijo was the KPAF 's main base , but in the first few days in the war the US aircraft only had authorization to defend themselves if attacked , they could not conduct offensive operations into North Korea . 
 = = = Raid of Heijo Airfield = = = 
 During the day on June 29 , the KPAF returned to attack Suwon , and six sorties of North Korean aircraft strafed the airfield during the morning , but each time were driven off by American F @-@ 80s , and in the course of these attacks Lieutenant William T. Norris and Lieutenant Roy W. Marsh each shot down a North Korean aircraft . The North Koreans were able to destroy a single C @-@ 54 Skymaster parked at the airfield . The sorties culminated in a battle above Suwon in the midst of a conference of US military leaders in the town . Leaders including US Lieutenant General George E. Stratemeyer and General of the Army Douglas MacArthur personally witnessed the final sortie of the day , in which four North Korean aircraft attacked four F @-@ 51 Mustang aircraft over the town . The four F @-@ 51s succeeded in shooting down all four of the North Korean aircraft , with Lieutenant Orrin R. Fox scoring two kills and Lieutenants Richard J. Burns , and Harry T. Sandlin scoring one each . Ground forces also downed a North Korean aircraft during a subsequent attack . MacArthur subsequently authorized Stratemeyer to launch strikes into North Korea to destroy North Korean airfields and establish air superiority for the US forces . 
 As soon as MacArthur cleared US aircraft to enter North Korea , the 8th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron sent aircraft to scout all of North Korea 's airfields . By the afternoon , the aircraft had not completed their scouting missions but a bombing mission was nonetheless ordered against Heijo Airfield . At 16 : 15 , 18 B @-@ 26 Invaders of the 3rd Bombardment Group took off from airbases in Japan for strikes against the airfield . These would be the first offensive action against North Korea . The aircraft arrived at the airfield just after dark . There they found a substantial number of aircraft from North Korea 's 1st Air Division parked on the tarmac , caught completely by surprise . The US aircraft subsequently placed their fragmentation bombs along the hangar line , ramps , and revetment areas . In the confusion , the North Koreans were only able to get one aircraft off the ground to oppose the flight , a Yak @-@ 3 . The aircraft was quickly shot down by Staff Sergeant <unk> S. Mickley , a gunner aboard one of the bombers . By the end of the raid , the US aircraft destroyed an estimated 25 North Korean aircraft on the ground and one in the air while suffering no aircraft lost . 
 = = = Subsequent strikes = = = 
 With the successful strike on Heijo Airfield , the UN attempted more attacks against North Korean airfields . The 19th Bombardment Group launched a July 2 strike at Yonpo Airfield based on faulty intelligence there were 65 North Korean aircraft there . Only 16 North Korean aircraft were in the field , none of which were damaged by the airstrike . In the meantime , Task Force 77 launched attacks on airfields in Pyongyang and <unk> @-@ ni , downing two North Korean aircraft and damaging ten others in the July 3 – 4 attack . On July 6 a flight of North Korean aircraft with <unk> markings attacked Osan and damaged a telephone station , though for the rest of the week North Korean air forces stayed out of the sky . 
 When they returned to the fight a week later , the North Koreans employed guerrilla tactics with their aircraft , some continuing to use <unk> markings and timing their strikes when UN patrols were out of the skies refueling . On July 10 , seven Yak @-@ 7s were hidden at the captured Kimpo airfield and used in strikes against UN positions at <unk> . The next day they surprised and damaged several F @-@ 80s in the area . On July 12 , the Yak @-@ 7s shot down a B @-@ 29 bombing bridges in Seoul . Two more attacked a flight of F @-@ 80s flying over a battle at Chochiwon , damaging them . By the end of the day another UN L @-@ 4 had been shot down . On July 15 , two more <unk> ambushed a flight of B @-@ 26 aircraft near Taejon , forcing one to land . Airstrikes against UN ground positions at Taejon persisted until July 19 . The North Korean aircraft strafed ground positions and also dropped propaganda leaflets signed by US prisoners of war . 
 In counterattacks against the KPAF , the UN responded on July 15 with an attack on Kimpo , destroying two or three of the seven Yak @-@ 7s there and damaging the runway at the airfield . On July 18 , Task Force 77 attacked Pyongyang and Pyongyang East Airfields , destroying 14 North Korean aircraft and damaging 13 more . The next day , Task Force 77 attacked Yonpo and destroyed 15 more North Korean aircraft there , and three more at <unk> . That day near Pyonggang F @-@ 80s of the 8th Fighter @-@ Bomber Group destroyed another 14 North Korean fighters and one bomber , and damaging seven others . On July 20 , another strike by 14 B @-@ 29s destroyed the runways at Pyongyang and Onjong @-@ ni . In the process of these strikes , the UN aircraft also shot down six North Korean aircraft opposing the attacks . By the end of the day on July 20 , only 65 of the KPAF 1st Air Division 's original aircraft were intact , and only 34 of them were operable . 
 North Korean airpower ceased to resist UN forces after July 20 , except for isolated engagements . On August 5 and 6 the final airstrikes against the remainder of North Korean aircraft at the Pyongyang airfields destroyed another 18 combat aircraft and seven more were damaged . By this point the North Korean Air Force was considered to have been destroyed , losing 110 aircraft and only possessing 35 , with only 18 operable . Through August and September , the North Koreans could only muster at most 16 sorties a day , most by isolated , single aircraft . 
 = = Air @-@ to @-@ ground operations = = 
 By June 30 , air assets were being rallied against ground targets as well as aircraft . That day the 19th Bombardment Group was being used to bomb targets along the Han River . Meanwhile , the 3rd Bombardment Group bombed targets around Seoul , seeking to slow the North Korean advance southward from the newly captured city . These assets also attacked North Korean convoys and troop movements along the roads to great effect . During these attacks North Korean aircraft rarely opposed the US aircraft , but in a few occasions Yak @-@ 9 flights appeared , and in one instance engaged a flight of F @-@ 80s from the 36th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron , allowing Lieutenants Charles A. Wurster and John B. Thomas to score a victory each . In spite of 25 bombing missions in Seoul , however , the North Korean troops were continuing their advance , forcing the US forces to abandon Suwon Airfield . 
 Beginning with the July 5 Battle of Osan , US troops began a continuous and unsuccessful ground campaign against the North Koreans , and many of the US air assets were used in close air support and airstrike roles to aid the faltering ground troops . From this point on bombers mounted strategic bombing missions against military targets of all types supporting the North Korean ground troops , including ports , armor concentrations and supply stockpiles . A massive interdiction campaign ensued which would have implications for the upcoming conflicts . As more US Air Force , US Navy and US Marine Corps aviation assets arrived in the country , they increased their interdiction campaigns for several days striking bridges and strategic areas though going mostly unthreatened by the North Korean Air Force , though at least one F @-@ 80 was lost when it hit power lines during a bombing run . 
 The North Korean ground troops , unprepared for the aggressive use of US air power and untrained in countering it , continued to operate tightly packed convoys on open roads , allowing the US air forces to attack and ravage them repeatedly . From July 7 to 9 , an estimated 197 trucks and 44 T @-@ 34 tanks were destroyed between Seoul and Pyongtaek . Though they subsequently won ground engagements at the Battle of Pyongtaek and Battle of Chonan , the North Korean ground troops were taking heavy losses from US air forces . On a few occasions , the UN airpower made mistakes , such as a July 3 bombing by No. 77 Squadron RAAF that hit a South Korean convoy near Suwon . At the same time , UN aircraft began flying at higher altitudes because combined small arms fire from North Korean ground targets was taking a heavier toll on UN aircraft . By mid July , these aircraft were flying up to 200 sorties a day to support UN ground troops , who by this point were losing the Battle of Chochiwon and the Battle of Taejon . By the start of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , the air battle for South Korea had been won by the UN , and it used its air superiority decisively to its advantage during that battle . The UN would remain unopposed in the skies until the Chinese forces entered the war in November of that year . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In spite of the unsuccessful UN ground action from June 25 to August 4 , the air battle for South Korea was considered a crucial success for the UN forces . Able to attain air superiority over its outmatched enemy , the UN air force was able to concentrate its efforts on attacking the North Koreans on the ground , and in the process inflicted significant casualties . This , in conjunction with bombing missions against North Korean armor , supplies and ports , greatly hampered North Korean efforts against the Pusan Perimeter , contributing to the eventual UN victory on the ground . Stratemeyer later said the victory was " short and sweet " but attributed the victory more to the North Koreans ' lack of a modern air force than to skill ; he felt his pilots were just as inexperienced as the UN ground troops and could have faced similar defeats had they not outnumbered the North Koreans . The victory in the air battles also meant a large number of other advantages for the war during August and September ; UN troops were able to move by day without fear of air attack , and UN naval ships could operate close to shore . North Korean troops themselves were confined to night attacks to avoid UN aircraft and much of its limited navy was also destroyed . By the end of the battle the Eighth Army had more air support than General Omar Bradley 's Twelfth United States Army Group in Europe during World War II . 
 = That 's Not My Penguin = 
 " That 's Not My Penguin " is the sixth episode of the American television police procedural fantasy drama Awake . The episode premiered on April 5 , 2012 on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) , and was simultaneously broadcast on Global in Canada . It was written by series creator and executive producer Kyle Killen and staff writer Noelle Valdivia , and was directed by Scott Winant . " That 's Not My Penguin " was well received by television critics , who praised its storylines . Commentators noted that the script was well @-@ written and that the episode worked " either way " . Upon airing , the episode garnered 2 @.@ 56 million viewers in the United States and a 0 @.@ 9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It was the lowest @-@ rated show of the timeslot . 
 The show centers on Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) , a police detective living in two separate realities after a car accident . In this episode , Michael enters a psychiatric hospital during a hostage situation by Gabriel Wyath ( Billy Lush ) . Gabriel wants the police and Michael to find his sister Christie , who was murdered . However , Gabriel has created a separate reality where she was kidnapped by Dr. Wild rather than murdered . In the " green reality " , Michael looks for a " ring " , which is Dr. Wild 's ; Rex stole it for his girlfriend Emma ( Daniela Bobadilla ) . Michael meets Emma and gets the ring back . He also experiences hallucinations after being injected by Gabriel , seeing a penguin and Dr. Jonathan Lee ( BD Wong ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Gabriel Wyath ( Billy Lush ) in a psychiatric ward after blowing up a government building . There are doctors who are taking notes and comparing Wyath 's behavior to that of Michael Britten . The doctor 's note that the two are sharing signs of disorganization , having odd behavior , and suffering from a sleeping disorder . Later , in the " green reality " ( where Rex is alive , and Hannah is dead from the crash ) Michael forgets to sign a permission form for a field trip . He goes to work , and asks Efrem Vega ( Wilmer Valderrama ) if the prints came back . Since he is in the " green reality " , Efrem is confused , because he is not his partner in this world . Michael suddenly realizes that he is in the " green reality " . Later , Bird is bragging about his astronaut bed , when Dr. Wild comes to Michael 's desk , and asks for his ring . In the " red reality " ( where Hannah is alive , and Rex is dead from the crash ) , Michael goes to work , and is called in for a hospital hostage situation . Gabriel Wyath ( Billy Lush ) is the one causing the situation . He demands to see his sister Christie . However , she was murdered in a dispute with an ex @-@ boyfriend . Gabriel created a separate world where she was not murdered , but rather kidnapped by Dr. Wild . 
 Later , Dr. Lee explains what they are dealing with . Gabriel allows Michael to come in the hospital , but nobody else . Michael enters the building and realizes that he has a " dead man switch " , meaning that if Wyath is shot , then the whole building will blow up . Gabriel goes up near the window to handle a man who is screaming , and the police are prepared to shoot him . However , to prevent Gabriel from using his switch , Michael jumps at him , causing him to divert his path . Gabriel knocks him out , and shortly after injects him with ketamine . Michael suddenly wakes up in his " green reality " . Michael is looking for a ring , which is Dr. Wild 's . He sees a hallucination of a penguin , caused by the drugs . The penguin tells him that Rex has the ring . He calls him down , and asks <unk> it is revealed that Rex stole it for his girlfriend Emma ( Daniela Bobadilla ) . Michael meets Emma and gets the ring back . Dr. Evans ( Cherry Jones ) claims that he is " having a nightmare about madness " . He wakes up in the " red reality " and sees Dr. Lee helping him . The police are coming in to shoot him . Michael quickly phones and tells them to stop , due to the " dead man switch " . Gabriel and Michael talk about Gabriel 's two reality life . This makes Michael think about his life . Shortly later , Michael and Dr. Evans are talking about his mind . He thinks about his life and tells her that he is okay . During a subsequent discussion , he finds out that Dr. Lee was not really inside his mind ; he was actually helping himself . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Kyle Killen and staff writer Noelle Valdivia , and was directed by Scott Winant ; it was Killen 's fourth writing credit , with the last episode he wrote being " Kate Is Enough " . The episode was Valdivia 's first writing credit on the series and Winant 's first directing credit . The episode is rated TV @-@ 14 on television in the United States . 
 The episode featured guest performances from Billy Lush , who was cast as Gabriel Wyath , Matt <unk> , who was cast as the SWAT Commander Hamilton , John Christopher Storey , who was cast as the Tech , and Daniela Bobadilla , who is cast as Emma , Rex 's girlfriend . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " That 's Not My Penguin " was originally broadcast on April 5 , 2012 in the United States on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) between 10 : 00 pm and 11 : 00 pm , preceded by Up All Night . Upon airing , the episode garnered 2 @.@ 56 million viewers in the United States despite airing simultaneously with The Mentalist on CBS , and the series premiere of the drama series Scandal on ABC . It acquired a 0 @.@ 9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that it was seen by 0 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode 's ratings dropped from the previous episode , " Oregon " . It was simultaneously broadcast on Global in Canada , and was subsequently aired on Sky Atlantic in the United Kingdom on June 8 , 2012 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " That 's Not My Penguin " was well received by television commentators . Matt Fowler of IGN gave an extremely positive review . He claimed that the story worked " either way " and that it was " awesome " , mainly because of the hallucinations . Fowler stated that he had his " mind blown " and that the best part of the episode was " when the show , for a little while , actually made me think that there was something to Gabriel 's Dr. Wild story " . Claiming that he was " hooked " to the show , <unk> concluded his review by giving the episode a " 9 out of 10 " classifying it as " amazing " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club enjoyed the episode . In his " A- " review , he noted that the episode " doesn 't show any signs of imminent immolation " . He thought that the morale of the episode was " wanting something to be real doesn 't make it easier to pretend , and the harder Michael has to work to keep this up , the better the odds that he ’ s going to lose his grip " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix " loved " the episode . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic gave the episode a " 5 out of 5 " as a perfect score and thought that the entry " really used Awake 's concept to its advantage " . 
 = The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man = 
 The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man is a motion @-@ based 3D dark ride located at the Islands of Adventure , Orlando and Universal Studios Japan , Osaka theme parks . Built for Islands of Adventure 's opening in 1999 , the attraction is a hybrid ride combining special roving motion vehicles with 3D projection , elaborate physical sets , and both practical and tactile effects . 
 The ride takes park guests @-@ turned @-@ last @-@ minute @-@ reporters into the world of Marvel Comics ' Spider @-@ Man , and after boarding a Daily Bugle vehicle known as the " Scoop " , the rider learns that the evil Sinister Syndicate has captured the Statue of Liberty with an anti @-@ gravity gun . This evil group is made up of many famous Spider @-@ Man villains , including Doctor Octopus , Scream , Electro , Hydro @-@ Man , and the Hobgoblin . 
 The attraction took three years to produce , with many new technologies and techniques being developed . The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man has been well received , winning several awards including the Golden Ticket Award for Best Dark Ride for twelve consecutive years . 
 = = History = = 
 On March 27 , 1999 , Islands of Adventure opened for technical rehearsals , with The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man being one of its debut attractions . On May 28 , 1999 , the attraction officially opened to the public . Due to the success of the attraction , Universal Studios Japan opened a clone of the ride on January 23 , 2004 . 
 On May 19 , 2011 , Islands of Adventure announced a major refurbishment of the attraction , with plans to re @-@ master the entire ride film in high definition as well as to update the ride 's mechanics and to replace the film projectors with <unk> digital projectors . The refurbished version of the attraction debuted on March 8 , 2012 . The ride was refurbished in time for the release of 2012 film , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . In 2013 , the attraction at Universal Studios Japan underwent a similar refurbishment with <unk> projections being deployed . The refurbished attraction opened on July 5 , 2013 . 
 = = Experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 Guests enter the Daily Bugle from Marvel Super Hero Island at Islands of Adventure or New York at Universal Studios Japan . Guests are shown a video in which the company 's good reputation is touted and a new <unk> vehicle , the " Scoop " , is introduced . After walking though the empty office , guests are shown a " live " video feed of news coverage . Five supervillains led by Doctor Octopus have lain siege to the city by an experimental anti @-@ gravity cannon created by Doctor Octopus himself . The syndicate steals the Statue of Liberty and threatens to destroy it if the city does not surrender to them . As guests walk through the empty offices of the Bugle , it becomes apparent that all the reporters have fled , leaving The Bugle 's Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief J. Jonah Jameson with no choice but to send the tourists to cover the story using the Bugle 's new Scoop vehicle . 
 = = = Ride experience = = = 
 After donning night vision goggles ( 3D glasses ) the " cub reporters " get in the Scoop and leave the loading docks to a Manhattan back alley where they encounter Spider @-@ Man . He warns that he is in for the most dangerous night of his life and for the guests to be careful . In this scene , a series of synchronised effects are used to simulate Spider @-@ Man jumping on the Scoop . Nearly missing a trash truck driven by a Stan Lee cameo , the guests enter a warehouse where the Sinister Syndicate are holding the Statue of Liberty hostage . Once spotted , Electro , Scream , and Doctor Octopus attack and hurl the Scoop into the sewer , where Spider @-@ Man is waiting . After he fends off Hydro @-@ Man and Doctor Octopus there , the guests escape narrowly to the river where Hobgoblin attacks with exploding pumpkins and sends guests into the streets . 
 In the ride 's climax , Doctor Octopus lifts the Scoop up to a height of 400 feet ( 120 m ) using the anti @-@ gravity cannon . A number of synchronised effects help achieve this without the vehicle leaving the ground . These include a movable building set , lighting cues , simulator movements , projections and wind effects . Spider @-@ Man attempts to pull the Scoop down , but is attacked by all the supervillains . Spider @-@ Man thwarts them , but not before Doctor Octopus disengages the anti @-@ gravity device , sending the Scoop on a simulated freefall until it is rescued by Spider @-@ Man 's webbing right above the ground and another Stan Lee cameo . Spider @-@ Man manages to capture all of the supervillains by tying them with webs . As the vehicle pulls into the unload station , Spider @-@ Man thanks the guests for their help and sends them back to the Daily Bugle , where he has rigged the anti @-@ gravity cannon to lift Jameson up to the ceiling in his office . Guests unload while a modern rendition of the classic Spider @-@ Man theme song plays and a voiceover by Stan Lee instructs the riders on exiting properly . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development of The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man at Islands of Adventure began in 1996 . Allen Ambrosini from At The Park Magazine stated theme park guests in the late 1990s were becoming more sophisticated , desiring rides that combined theming and thrills into a single immersive experience . As a result , the ride 's creators set out to develop a ride which would take the motion simulation elements of Back to the Future : The Ride , and combine them with a 3D film similar to that used on T2 3 @-@ D : Battle Across Time . The result was a prototype ride system combining a track @-@ mounted motion base vehicle with 3D projections and other special effects , with the aim of immersing guests inside a comic book . To develop the attraction , Universal Creative brought together a number of companies including the Oceaneering Entertainment Systems division of Oceaneering International , Birket Engineering , Moog , Soundelux , <unk> Walczak , and Rinehart Manufacturing . 
 = = = Ride system = = = 
 The ride system used on The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man was originally prototyped for the attraction at Islands of Adventure , before being installed at Universal Studios Japan . It has since been utilised for Transformers : The Ride at Universal Studios Singapore , Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Florida . The ride vehicles , developed by Oceaneering International , are mounted to a track @-@ roaming platform that provides the forward motion to move the vehicle through each show scene . The yaw motor and a stewart platform with six degrees of freedom attaching it to the platform allows the vehicle to move 360 degrees at different angles along the track . The track switches were manufactured by Dynamic Structures . Each of the vehicles are themed as the Daily Bugle 's new " Scoop " vehicle for reporters , with each accommodating twelve riders . Each row of four riders is restrained by a single lapbar . This system was invented by Universal Creative employees Philip Hettema , William Mason , and Gary Goddard . A similar system has been patented by Oceaneering International and used on rides such as The Curse of <unk> at Busch Gardens Williamsburg , Tokyo Panic Cruise at Tokyo Dome , and Speed of Magic at Ferrari World Abu Dhabi . 
 = = = Ride film and projections = = = 
 The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man was primarily developed by Universal Creative , the research and development division of Universal Parks & Resorts . Scott Trowbridge , who now works for Walt Disney Imagineering , was the ride 's producer . Thierry Coup , who has since worked on Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey and Transformers : The Ride , was the Director and production designer . Trowbridge and Coup helped develop the initial storyboards for the attraction . They travelled to Massachusetts several times to meet with the animation directors , Jeff Kleiser and Diana Walczak , and their team at Kleiser @-@ Walczak Construction Co . ( now <unk> Studios ) who provided all the stereoscopic animation and custom software for squinching . Coup produced the film alongside Patrick Mooney and Mark Rhodes . Trowbridge is given writing credits alongside Ross Osterman and Scott Peterson . Peter Lehman provided the soundtrack with Soundelux . 
 The attraction features thirteen 30 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) projection screens , twelve of which use 3D projection . The ride uses a polarized 3D system where the two projectors have polarizers designed to interact with each lens of the 3D glasses . By blocking light from one projector with each lens , the 3D effect is achieved . With traditional 3D projections there is an ideal seating location , where an off @-@ center viewing location reduces the overall effect of the 3D . To allow the ride to effectively combine 3D projections with moving viewers , Kleiser @-@ Walczak and their head of software , Frank <unk> , developed a process they called squinching . First , the amount of distortion is predicted from a particular viewing angle . This same amount of distortion is then added in the opposite direction in order to counteract the effects . Initially miniature models were used to determine the ride 's path and the vehicle 's point of view , with full @-@ scale prototypes being used later . Trowbridge and Coup are credited with inventing the concept of squinching , with Universal Studios holding a patent for the method . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 In addition to the ride 's motion base and 3D projections , special effects including fog machines , fire , wind , heat , mist , strobe lights , and water spray are also employed throughout the attraction . All of these effects , along with the ride system , 3D projections and soundtrack , are controlled by a central industrial control system which knows , to one thirtieth of a second , when they are to execute . Just shy of the ride 's debut , the director of show and ride engineering at Islands of Adventure , Steve Blum , described The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man as the " most technically complex of all of the attractions " at the park . Vice president of design and creative development Mark Woodbury stated that they " would not have been able to tell this particular story if it weren 't for the technical tools " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cited by many as one of the best amusement rides in the world , The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man has been well received . Howard <unk> of The Philadelphia Inquirer stated the ride was " bound to become one of the all @-@ time attractions of theme parks anywhere " . He described the climax of the ride the " most amazing effect " . Bill Dean of The Ledger described the ride as the " most impressive " attraction at Islands of Adventure . Guests interviewed by Dean praised the ride with comments including " I loved it " , " I think this is better [ than Back to the Future : The Ride ] because of the 3 @-@ D effects " , and " it was so exciting and everything was happening all at once , so it was really , really good " . Fred Mawer of the Daily Mail described the rides at Islands of Adventure " as technologically sophisticated as any in the world " with The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man being " the most extraordinary few minutes " . 
 Arthur Levine of About.com gave the ride 5 stars describing the ride as " an incredibly sophisticated attraction " that " blurs the line between virtual and reality so well that you 'll emerge slack @-@ jawed and awe @-@ struck " . He stated the enhancements made to the film projections in 2012 and 2013 " make the attraction even more immersive and awe @-@ inspiring " . Brady MacDonald of the Los Angeles Times rated the ride his second favourite in the world , after Disneyland 's Indiana Jones Adventure . Following the opening of fellow Universal rides Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey and Transformers : The Ride in 2010 and 2012 , MacDonald bumped The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man to his fourth favourite . In an interview for Amusement Business , Mark Hansen Jr. of Theme Park Critic praised the ride in stating that their dream ride would combine The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man with a 4th Dimension roller coaster such as X at Six Flags Magic Mountain . Theme Park Insider rated the ride a 9 out of 10 , based on 250 reviews . 
 In April 2004 , just three months after the ride opened at Universal Studios Japan , Amusement Business reported the park was " benefiting greatly from the addition of the ride " . Figures released at the end of 2004 showed Universal Studios Japan 's attendance rose from 8 @.@ 8 million people in 2003 to 9 @.@ 9 million people in 2004 , ranking it the sixth most visited park worldwide . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Amazing Adventures of Spider @-@ Man has been the recipient of many awards from the amusement park industry . It won Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Award for Best Dark Ride for twelve consecutive years from 1999 through to 2010 . It has since placed second in that category , after fellow Islands of Adventure attraction , Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey , took the top spot in 2011 . In 2000 , the ride won a Thea Award from the Themed Entertainment Association for outstanding themed entertainment and experience design . It has also won numerous public @-@ voted Theme Park Insider Awards and Screamscape Ultimate Awards . 
 = Goliath ( La Ronde ) = 
 Goliath is a steel coaster roller coaster at the La Ronde located in Montreal , Quebec , Canada . Designed by Bolliger & Mabillard , it reaches a maximum height of 174 @.@ 8 feet ( 53 @.@ 3 m ) , a speed of 68 @.@ 4 miles per hour ( 110 @.@ 1 km / h ) , and a track length of 4 @,@ 038 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @,@ 231 @.@ 0 m ) . Construction commenced in September 2005 , and the roller coaster opened to the public on May 13 , 2006 . Goliath was the tallest and fastest roller coaster in Canada until it was surpassed by Behemoth ( another Bolliger & Mabillard roller coaster ) , at Canada 's Wonderland 's in 2008 . Six Flags announced that Goliath would be hooked up with Virtual Reality for a New Revolution experience for the 2016 season , which was previously made as a world premiere in 2013 by a Montreal VR company . 
 = = History = = 
 Speculation that La Ronde would be building a new roller coaster began in the second half of 2004 . Rumors that the roller coaster would be manufactured by Bolliger & Mabillard emerged in September 2005 . Construction for the roller coaster by Martin & Vleminckx began in September 2005 with land clearing and foundation pouring . The $ 18 @.@ 7 million Goliath was announced on October 26 , 2005 . By mid @-@ November , the storage bay was constructed with track pieces for the brake run and station being installed soon after . Construction on the lift hill continued throughout December and was topped off ( the highest piece the lift hill ) on December 21 . The first drop was completed by mid @-@ January 2006 followed by the first camelback hill which was completed by the end of February . After the second and third camelback hills were installed , the turnaround was completed in mid @-@ March . The three camelback hills and banked turns leading back to the station were installed by the end of March marking the completion of installing track . The cars for the trains were also delivered in late March . After the cars were put on the track in April , testing began . Once testing was complete , Goliath opened to the public on May 13 , 2006 . 
 When Goliath opened , it was the tallest and fastest roller coaster in Canada . Two years later , when Behemoth opened at Canada 's Wonderland , Goliath lost both records . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After being dispatched from the station , the train immediately begins to climb the 174 @.@ 8 feet ( 53 @.@ 3 m ) lift hill . Once at the top , the train drops back down 170 @.@ 6 feet ( 52 @.@ 0 m ) at a 70 @-@ degree angle . The train then makes a banked right turn leading into the first of three consecutive camelback hills ; each at a height of 121 @.@ 4 feet ( 37 @.@ 0 m ) , 95 @.@ 2 feet ( 29 @.@ 0 m ) , and 78 @.@ 8 feet ( 24 @.@ 0 m ) ( every hill is smaller than the previous one ) . Following the third hill , the train enters a 75 @.@ 5 feet ( 23 @.@ 0 m ) left hand turnaround that makes the train face the opposite direction that it came . After dropping back down to the ground , the train goes over another three <unk> hills ; each at a height of 68 @.@ 9 feet ( 21 @.@ 0 m ) , 59 @.@ 1 feet ( 18 @.@ 0 m ) , and 52 @.@ 5 feet ( 16 @.@ 0 m ) . Then , the train makes an upward 45 @.@ 9 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) right banked turn , immediately followed by a downward left banked turn . After another 42 @.@ 7 feet ( 13 @.@ 0 m ) left banked turn , the train rises back up and goes over a small bump before entering the final brake run . The train then makes a 180 @-@ degree right turn leading back to the station . One cycle of the ride lasts about three minutes . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Goliath is approximately 4 @,@ 038 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @,@ 231 @.@ 0 m ) long , and the height of the lift is 174 @.@ 8 feet ( 53 @.@ 3 m ) high . It is made up of 150 foundations , 300 pilings , 106 supports , and 850 anchor bolts . The roller coasters has no inversions though it does feature <unk> camelback hills . The track is painted red with yellow rails while the supports are painted blue . It was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . 
 Though Goliath is a B & M Hyper Coaster ( the model name for this type of B & M roller coaster ) , the roller coaster is technically not classified as a Hypercoaster . A Hypercoaster is any roller coaster that reaches a height over 200 feet ( 61 m ) ; Goliath reaches only 175 feet ( 53 m ) . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Goliath operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has nine cars which can seat four riders in a single row , for a total of 36 riders per train ; each seat has its own individual lap @-@ bar restraint . The structure of the trains are colored yellow , red and blue . The seats are blue and the restraints are yellow . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In Goliath 's opening year , it was voted the 37th best steel roller coaster in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards . The roller coaster peaked at position 23 in 2011 . It did not place in the top five new roller coasters for 2006 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's Best Steel Roller Coaster Poll , Goliath was voted as the 25th best steel roller coaster in the world in its first year ; it peaked at position 14 in 2009 . 
 = Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis = 
 Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis ( CVST ) is the presence of acute thrombosis ( a blood clot ) in the dural venous sinuses , which drain blood from the brain . Symptoms may include headache , abnormal vision , any of the symptoms of stroke such as weakness of the face and limbs on one side of the body , and seizures . The diagnosis is usually by computed tomography ( CT / CAT scan ) or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) employing radiocontrast to demonstrate obstruction of the venous sinuses by thrombus . 
 Treatment is with anticoagulants ( medication that suppresses blood clotting ) , and rarely thrombolysis ( enzymatic destruction of the blood clot ) . Given that there is usually an underlying cause for the disease , tests may be performed to look for these . The disease may be complicated by raised intracranial pressure , which may warrant surgical intervention such as the placement of a shunt . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Nine in ten people with sinus thrombosis have a headache ; this tends to worsen over the period of several days , but may also develop suddenly ( thunderclap headache ) . The headache may be the only symptom of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis . Many patients have symptoms of stroke : inability to move one or more limbs , weakness on one side of the face or difficulty speaking . This does not necessarily affect one side of the body as in the more common " arterial " stroke . 
 40 % of all patients have seizures , although it is more common still in women who develop sinus thrombosis <unk> ( in the period before and after giving birth ) . These are mostly seizures affecting only one part of the body and unilateral ( occurring on one side ) , but occasionally the seizures are generalised and rarely they lead to status epilepticus ( persistent or recurrent seizure activity for a long period of time ) . 
 In the elderly , many of the aforementioned symptoms may not occur . Common symptoms in the elderly with this condition are otherwise unexplained changes in mental status and a depressed level of consciousness . 
 The pressure around the brain may rise , causing papilledema ( swelling of the optic disc ) which may be experienced as visual obscurations . In severely raised intracranial pressure , the level of consciousness is decreased , the blood pressure rises , the heart rate falls and the patient assumes an abnormal posture . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis is more common in particular situations . 85 % of patients have at least one of these risk factors : 
 Thrombophilia , a tendency to develop blood clots due to abnormalities in coagulation , e.g. factor V Leiden , deficiency of protein C , protein S or antithrombin , or related problems 
 <unk> syndrome , a kidney problem causing protein loss in the urine 
 Chronic inflammatory diseases , such as inflammatory bowel disease , lupus and Behçet 's disease 
 Pregnancy and <unk> ( the period after giving birth ) 
 Particular blood disorders , especially polycythemia vera and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 
 Use of estrogen @-@ containing forms of hormonal contraception 
 Meningitis and infections of the ear , nose and throat area such as <unk> and sinusitis 
 Direct injury to the venous sinuses 
 Medical procedures in the head and neck area 
 Sickle cell anemia 
 Dehydration , primarily in infants and children 
 <unk> 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis may be suspected on the basis of the symptoms , for example the combination of headache , signs of raised intracranial pressure and focal neurological abnormalities , or when alternative causes of headache and neurological abnormalities , such as a subarachnoid hemorrhage , have been excluded . 
 = = = Imaging = = = 
 There are various neuroimaging investigations that may detect cerebral sinus thrombosis . Cerebral edema and venous infarction may be apparent on any modality , but for the detection of the thrombus itself , the most commonly used tests are computed tomography ( CT ) and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , both using various types of radiocontrast to perform a <unk> and visualise the veins around the brain . 
 Computed tomography , with radiocontrast in the venous phase ( CT venography or CTV ) , has a detection rate that in some regards exceeds that of MRI . The test involves injection into a vein ( usually in the arm ) of a <unk> substance , and time is allowed for the bloodstream to carry it to the cerebral veins - at which point the scan is performed . It has a sensitivity of 75 @-@ 100 % ( it detects 75 @-@ 100 % of all clots present ) , and a specificity of 81 @-@ 100 % ( it would be incorrectly positive in 0 @-@ 19 % ) . In the first two weeks , the " empty delta sign " may be observed ( in later stages , this sign may disappear ) . 
 Magnetic resonance venography employs the same principles , but uses MRI as a scanning modality . MRI has the advantage of being better at detecting damage to the brain itself as a result of the increased pressure on the obstructed veins , but it is not readily available in many hospitals and the interpretation may be difficult . 
 Cerebral angiography may demonstrate smaller clots than CT or MRI , and obstructed veins may give the " corkscrew appearance " . This , however , requires puncture of the femoral artery with a sheath and advancing a thin tube through the blood vessels to the brain where radiocontrast is injected before X @-@ ray images are obtained . It is therefore only performed if all other tests give unclear results or when other treatments may be administered during the same procedure . 
 = = = D @-@ dimer = = = 
 A 2004 study suggested that the D @-@ dimer blood test , already in use for the diagnosis of other forms of thrombosis , was abnormal ( above 500 μg / l ) in 34 out of 35 patients with cerebral sinus thrombosis , giving it a sensitivity of 97 @.@ 1 % , a negative predictive value of 99 @.@ 6 % , a specificity of 91 @.@ 2 % , and a positive predictive value of 55 @.@ 7 % . Furthermore , the level of the D @-@ dimer correlated with the extent of the thrombosis . A subsequent study , however , showed that 10 % of patients with confirmed thrombosis had a normal D @-@ dimer , and in those who had presented with only a headache 26 % had a normal D @-@ dimer . The study concludes that D @-@ dimer is not useful in the situations where it would make the most difference , namely in lower probability cases . 
 = = = Further tests = = = 
 In most patients , the direct cause for the cerebral sinus thrombosis is not readily apparent . Identifying a source of infection is crucial ; it is common practice to screen for various forms of thrombophilia ( a propensity to form blood clots ) . 
 = = Pathogenesis = = 
 The veins of the brain , both the superficial veins and the deep venous system , empty into the dural venous sinuses , which carry blood back to the jugular vein and thence to the heart . In cerebral venous sinus thrombosis , blood clots usually form both in the veins of the brain and the venous sinuses . The thrombosis of the veins themselves causes venous infarction — damage to brain tissue due to a congested and therefore insufficient blood supply . This results in cerebral edema ( both <unk> and cytotoxic edema ) , and leads to small petechial <unk> that may merge into large haematomas . Thrombosis of the sinuses is the main mechanism behind the increase in intracranial pressure due to decreased resorption of cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) . The condition does not lead to hydrocephalus , however , because there is no difference in pressure between various parts of the brain . 
 Any blood clot forms due to an imbalance between coagulation ( the formation of the insoluble blood protein fibrin ) and fibrinolysis . The three major mechanisms for such an imbalance are enumerated in Virchow 's triad : alterations in normal blood flow , injury to the blood vessel wall , and alterations in the constitution of blood ( hypercoagulability ) . Most cases of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis are due to hypercoagulability . 
 It is possible for the clot to break off and migrate ( <unk> ) to the lungs , causing a pulmonary embolism . An analysis of earlier case reports concludes that this occurs in about 10 % of cases , but has a very poor prognosis . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Various studies have investigated the use of anticoagulation to suppress blood clot formation in cerebral venous sinus thrombosis . Before these trials had been conducted , there had been a concern that small areas of hemorrhage in the brain would bleed further as a result of treatment ; the studies showed that this concern was unfounded . Clinical practice guidelines now recommend heparin or low molecular weight heparin in the initial treatment , followed by warfarin , provided there are no other bleeding risks that would make these treatments unsuitable . Some experts discourage the use of anticoagulation if there is extensive hemorrhage ; in that case , they recommend repeating the imaging after 7 – 10 days . If the hemorrhage has decreased in size , anticoagulants are started , while no anticoagulants are given if there is no reduction . 
 The duration of warfarin treatment depends on the circumstances and underlying causes of the condition . If the thrombosis developed under temporary circumstances ( e.g. pregnancy ) , three months are regarded as sufficient . If the condition was unprovoked but there are no clear causes or a " mild " form of thrombophilia , 6 to 12 months is advised . If there is a severe underlying thrombosis disorder , warfarin treatment may need to continue indefinitely . 
 Thrombolysis ( removal of the blood clot with " clot buster " medication ) has been described , either systemically by injection into a vein or directly into the clot during angiography . The 2006 European Federation of Neurological Societies guideline recommends that thrombolysis is only used in patients who deteriorate despite adequate treatment , and other causes of deterioration have been eliminated . It is unclear which drug and which mode of administration is the most effective . Bleeding into the brain and in other sites of the body is a major concern in the use of thrombolysis . American guidelines make no recommendation with regards to thrombolysis , stating that more research is needed . 
 Raised intracranial pressure , if severe or threatening vision , may require therapeutic lumbar puncture ( removal of excessive cerebrospinal fluid ) , medication ( acetazolamide ) , or neurosurgical treatment ( optic nerve sheath fenestration or shunting ) . In certain situations , anticonvulsants may be used to try to prevent seizures . These situations include focal neurological problems ( e.g. inability to move a limb ) and focal changes of the brain tissue on CT or MRI scan . Evidence to support or refute the use of antiepileptic drugs as a preventive measure , however , is lacking . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 In 2004 the first adequately large scale study on the natural history and long @-@ term prognosis of this condition was reported ; this showed that at 16 months follow @-@ up 57 @.@ 1 % of patients had full recovery , 29 @.@ 5 % / 2 @.@ 9 % / 2 @.@ 2 % had respectively minor / moderate / severe symptoms or impairments , and 8 @.@ 3 % had died . Severe impairment or death were more likely in those aged over 37 years , male , affected by coma , mental status disorder , intracerebral hemorrhage , thrombosis of the deep cerebral venous system , central nervous system infection and cancer . A subsequent systematic review of nineteen studies in 2006 showed that mortality is about 5 @.@ 6 % during hospitalisation and 9 @.@ 4 % in total , while of the survivors 88 % make a total or near @-@ total recovery . After several months , two thirds of the cases has resolution ( " <unk> " ) of the clot . The rate of recurrence was low ( 2 @.@ 8 % ) . 
 In children with CVST the risk of death is high . Poor outcome is more likely if a child with CVST develops seizures or has evidence of venous infarction on imaging . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis is rare , with an estimated 3 @-@ 4 cases per million annual incidence in adults . While it may occur in all age groups , it is most common in the third decade . 75 % are female . Given that older studies show no difference in incidence between men and women , it has been suggested that the use of oral contraceptives in women is behind the disparity between the sexes . A 1995 report from Saudi Arabia found a doubled incidence at 7 cases per 100 @,@ 000 ; this was attributed to the fact that Behçet 's disease , which increases risk of CVST , is more common in the Middle East . 
 A 1973 report found that CVST could be found on autopsy ( examination of the body after death ) in nine percent of all people . Many of these were elderly and had neurological symptoms in the period leading up to their death , and many suffered from concomitant heart failure . 
 In children , a Canadian study reported in 2001 that CVST occurs in 6 @.@ 7 per million annually . 43 % occur in the newborn ( less than one month old ) , and a further 10 % in the first year of life . Of the newborn , 84 % were already ill , mostly from complications after childbirth and dehydration . 
 = = History = = 
 The first description of thrombosis of the cerebral veins and sinuses is attributed to the French physician Ribes , who in 1825 observed thrombosis of the <unk> sinus and cerebral veins in a man who had suffered from seizures and delirium . Until the second half of the 20th century it remained a diagnosis generally made after death . In the 1940s , reports by Dr Charles Symonds and others allowed for the clinical diagnosis of cerebral venous thrombosis , using characteristic signs and symptoms and results of lumbar puncture . 
 Improvements on the diagnosis of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis in life were made with the introduction of venography in 1951 , which also aided in the distinction from idiopathic intracranial hypertension , which has similar presenting signs and symptoms in many cases . 
 The British gynecologist Stansfield is credited with the introduction , in 1942 , of the just recently introduced anticoagulant heparin in the treatment of CVST in 1942 . Clinical trials in the 1990s finally resolved the concern about using anticoagulants in most cases of CVST . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton was hospitalized on December 30 , 2012 , for anticoagulation treatment of venous thrombosis of the right transverse sinus , which is located at the base of the brain . Clinton 's thrombotic episode was discovered on an MRI scan done for follow @-@ up of a cerebral concussion she had suffered 2 @.@ 5 weeks before after she fell while suffering from gastroenteritis . 
 = Ununtrium = 
 Ununtrium ( symbol Uut ) is a temporary name for the chemical element with atomic number 113 . It is a synthetic element ( an element that can be created in a laboratory but is not found in nature ) and is extremely radioactive ; its most stable known isotope , ununtrium @-@ 286 , has a half @-@ life of 20 seconds . It is also known as eka @-@ thallium or simply element 113 . Ununtrium was first reported to have been created in 2003 by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna , Russia , and in 2004 by a team of Japanese scientists at RIKEN . In December 2015 , the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics ( IUPAP ) recognized the element and assigned the priority of the discovery to RIKEN . In June 2016 , the IUPAC published a declaration proposing the name nihonium / <unk> / , symbol Nh . The name is set to be formally accepted in ( or after ) November 2016 . The name comes from one of the pronunciations of the Japanese word for Japan ( 日本 , nihon ) . 
 In the periodic table , it is a p @-@ block transactinide element . It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in the boron group , although it has not been confirmed to behave as the heavier homologue to thallium in the boron group . Ununtrium is calculated to have some similar properties to its lighter homologues , boron , aluminium , gallium , indium , and thallium , although it should also show several major differences from them . Unlike all the other p @-@ block elements , it is predicted to show some transition metal character . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Dubna – Livermore collaboration = = = 
 The first report of ununtrium was in August 2003 , when it was identified as an alpha decay product of element 115 , ununpentium . These results were published on February 1 , 2004 , by a team composed of Russian scientists at Dubna ( Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ) , and American scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory : 
 243 
 95Am + 48 
 20Ca → 288 
 115Uup + 3 1 
 0n → 284 
 113Uut + α 
 243 
 95Am + 48 
 20Ca → 287 
 115Uup + 4 1 
 0n → 283 
 113Uut + α 
 The Dubna – Livermore collaboration has strengthened their claim for the discovery of ununtrium by conducting chemical experiments on 268Db , the final decay product of 288Uup . This was valuable as none of the nuclides in this decay chain were previously known , so that their claim was not supported by any previously obtained experimental data ( as none existed ) , and chemical experimentation would strengthen the case for their claim . In June 2004 and again in December 2005 , this dubnium isotope was successfully identified by extracting the final decay products , measuring spontaneous fission ( SF ) activities and using chemical identification techniques to confirm that they behave like a group 5 element ( as dubnium is known to be in group 5 of the periodic table ) . Both the half @-@ life and decay mode were confirmed for the proposed 268Db which lends support to the assignment of the parent and daughter nuclei to ununpentium and ununtrium respectively . Further experiments at Dubna in 2005 have fully confirmed the decay data for ununpentium and ununtrium , but in 2011 , the IUPAC / IUPAP Joint Working Party ( JWP ) did not recognize the two elements as having been discovered because current theory could not distinguish between group 4 and group 5 elements by their chemical properties with sufficient confidence , and the identification of the daughter dubnium isotope was the most important factor in confirming the discovery of ununpentium and ununtrium . Furthermore , the decay properties of all the nuclei in the decay chain of ununpentium had not been previously characterized before the Dubna experiments , a situation which the JWP generally considers " troublesome , but not necessarily exclusive " . 
 = = = RIKEN = = = 
 On July 23 , 2004 , a team of Japanese scientists at RIKEN bombarded a target of bismuth @-@ 209 with accelerated nuclei of zinc @-@ 70 and detected a single atom of the isotope ununtrium @-@ 278 . They published their results on September 28 , 2004 : 
 209 
 83Bi + 70 
 30Zn → 278 
 113Uut + 1 
 0n 
 Previously , in 2000 , a team led by P. A. Wilk identified the decay product <unk> as decaying with identical properties to what the Japanese team had observed , thus lending support for their claim . However , they also observed the daughter of <unk> , <unk> , undergo alpha decay instead of spontaneous fission ( the Japanese team observed the latter decay mode ) . 
 The RIKEN team produced a further atom on April 2 , 2005 , although the decay data were slightly different from the first chain , perhaps due to either the formation of a metastable state or an alpha particle escaping from the detector before depositing its full energy . Due to these inconsistencies in the decay data , the small number of ununtrium atoms produced , and the lack of unambiguous anchors to known isotopes , the JWP did not accept this as a conclusive discovery of ununtrium in 2011 . 
 Most recently , production and identification of another <unk> nucleus occurred at RIKEN on August 12 , 2012 . In this case , a series of six alpha decays was observed , leading down to an isotope of mendelevium : 
 278 
 113Uut → 274 
 <unk> + α → 270 
 <unk> + α → 266 
 <unk> + α → 262 
 <unk> + α → 258 
 103Lr + α → 254 
 <unk> + α 
 This decay chain differed from the previous observations at RIKEN mainly in the decay mode of dubnium , which was previously observed to undergo spontaneous fission , but in this case instead alpha decayed ; the alpha decay of <unk> to 258Lr is well @-@ known . The scientists on this team calculated the probability of accidental coincidence to be 10 − 28 , or totally negligible . The resulting <unk> atom than underwent beta plus decay to 254Fm , which itself finally alpha decayed to the long @-@ lived 250Cf , which has a half @-@ life of around thirteen years . 
 = = Naming = = 
 In March 2016 , Kosuke Morita , the leader of the RIKEN team , proposed the name " nihonium " to IUPAC , after its place of discovery and referencing Japanese chemist Masataka Ogawa 's 1908 discovery of rhenium , which he named " <unk> " . IUPAC is expected to formally decide on the name by the end of 2016 after a period of public comments . 
 Until the proposed name is confirmed , ununtrium remains the lightest element that has not yet received an official name . Using Mendeleev 's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements , ununtrium should be known as eka @-@ thallium . In 1979 IUPAC published recommendations according to which the element was to be called ununtrium ( with the corresponding symbol of Uut ) , a systematic element name as a placeholder , until the discovery of the element is confirmed and a name is decided on . Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels , from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks , the recommendations were mostly ignored among scientists in the field , who call it " element 113 " , with the symbol of ( 113 ) or even simply 113 . 
 Claims to the discovery of ununtrium have been put forward by both the Dubna and RIKEN teams . In 2011 , the IUPAC evaluated the 2004 RIKEN experiments and 2004 and 2007 Dubna experiments , and concluded that they did not meet the criteria for discovery . 
 On August 12 , 2012 , researchers at the RIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator @-@ Based Science in Japan , claimed to have synthesised element 113 by colliding zinc nuclei ( with 30 protons each ) into a thin layer of bismuth ( which contains 83 protons ) . In December 2015 , IUPAC recognized the element and assigned the priority of the discovery to RIKEN . For the first time in history a team of Asian physicists will name a new element . 
 The following names were speculated before the June 2016 announcement of the proposed name " nihonium " : 
 On 8 June 2016 , IUPAC disclosed the name of ununtrium as nihonium . Prior to the formal approval by the IUPAC Council , a five @-@ month public review is now set , expiring 8 November 2016 . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 Ununtrium has no stable or naturally @-@ occurring isotopes . Several radioactive isotopes have been synthesized in the laboratory , either by fusing two atoms or by observing the decay of heavier elements . Six different isotopes of ununtrium have been reported with atomic masses 278 and 282 – 286 ; they all decay through alpha decay . 
 = = = Stability and half @-@ lives = = = 
 All ununtrium isotopes are extremely unstable and radioactive ; however , the heavier ununtrium isotopes are more stable than the lighter . The most stable known ununtrium isotope , 286Uut , is also the heaviest known ununtrium isotope ; it has a half @-@ life of 20 seconds . The isotope <unk> has been reported to also have a half @-@ life of over a second . The isotopes 284Uut and <unk> have half @-@ lives of 0 @.@ 48 and 0 @.@ 10 seconds respectively . The remaining two isotopes have half @-@ lives between 0 @.@ 1 and 100 milliseconds : <unk> has a half @-@ life of 70 milliseconds , and <unk> , the lightest known ununtrium isotope , is also the shortest @-@ lived known ununtrium isotope , with a half @-@ life of just 0 @.@ 24 milliseconds . It is predicted that even heavier undiscovered ununtrium isotopes could be much more stable : for example , <unk> is predicted to have a half @-@ life of around 20 minutes , close to two orders of magnitude more than that of 286Uut . 
 Theoretical estimates of alpha decay half @-@ lives of isotopes of ununtrium are in good agreement with the experimental data . The undiscovered isotope <unk> has been predicted to be the most stable towards beta decay ; however , no known ununtrium isotope has been observed to undergo beta decay . 
 The stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after plutonium , the heaviest primordial element , so that all isotopes with an atomic number above 101 decay radioactively with a half @-@ life under a day , with the exception of dubnium @-@ 268 . Nevertheless , because of reasons not very well understood yet , there is a slight increased nuclear stability around atomic numbers 110 – 114 , which leads to the appearance of what is known in nuclear physics as the " island of stability " . This concept , proposed by University of California professor Glenn Seaborg , explains why superheavy elements last longer than predicted . 
 = = Predicted properties = = 
 Ununtrium is the first member of the 7p series of elements and the heaviest boron group element on the periodic table , below boron , aluminium , gallium , indium , and thallium . It is predicted to show many differences from its lighter homologues : a largely contributing effect is the spin – orbit ( SO ) interaction . It is especially strong for the superheavy elements , because their electrons move much faster than in lighter atoms , at velocities comparable to the speed of light . In relation to ununtrium atoms , it lowers the 7s and the 7p electron energy levels ( stabilizing the corresponding electrons ) , but two of the 7p electron energy levels are stabilized more than the other four . The stabilization of the 7s electrons is called the inert pair effect , and the effect " tearing " the 7p subshell into the more stabilized and the less stabilized parts is called the subshell splitting . Computation chemists see the split as a change of the second ( azimuthal ) quantum number l from 1 to 1 / 2 and 3 / 2 for the more stabilized and less stabilized parts of the 7p subshell , respectively . For many theoretical purposes , the valence electron configuration may be represented to reflect the 7p subshell split as <unk> / 21 . These effects stabilize lower oxidation states : the first ionization energy of ununtrium is expected to be 7 @.@ 306 eV , the highest among the boron group elements . Hence , the most stable oxidation state of ununtrium is predicted to be the + 1 state , and ununtrium is expected to be less reactive than thallium . Differences for other electron levels also exist . For example , the 6d electron levels ( also split in halves , with four being <unk> / 2 and six being 6d5 / 2 ) are both raised , so that they are close in energy to the 7s ones . Thus , the 6d electron levels , being destabilized , should still be able to participate in chemical reactions in ununtrium ( as well as in the next 7p element , flerovium ) , thus making it behave in some ways like transition metals and allow higher oxidation states . Ununtrium should hence also be able to show stable + 2 , + 3 and + 5 oxidation states . However , the + 3 state should still be less stable than the + 1 state , following periodic trends . Ununtrium should be the most electronegative among all the boron group elements : for example , in the compound UutUus , the negative charge is expected to be on the ununtrium atom rather than the ununseptium atom , the opposite of what would be expected from simple periodicity . The electron affinity of ununtrium is calculated to be around 0 @.@ 68 eV ; in comparison , that of thallium is 0 @.@ 4 eV . The high electron affinity and electronegativity of ununtrium are due to it being only one electron short of the closed @-@ shell valence electron configuration of flerovium ( <unk> / 22 ) : this would make the − 1 oxidation state of ununtrium more stable than that of its lighter congener thallium . 
 The simplest possible ununtrium compound is the monohydride , <unk> . The bonding is provided by the 7p1 / 2 electron of ununtrium and the 1s electron of hydrogen . However , the SO interaction causes the binding energy of ununtrium monohydride to be reduced by about 1 eV and the ununtrium – hydrogen bond length to decrease as the bonding 7p1 / 2 orbital is relativistically contracted . The analogous monofluoride ( <unk> ) should also exist . Ununtrium should also be able to form the <unk> ( <unk> ) , trifluoride ( <unk> ) , and trichloride ( <unk> ) , with ununtrium in the + 3 oxidation state . Because the 6d electrons are involved in bonding instead of the 7s ones , these molecules are predicted to be T @-@ shaped and not trigonal planar . Although the <unk> anion <unk> − 
 6 should be stable , the corresponding neutral fluoride <unk> should be unstable , spontaneously decomposing into the trifluoride and elemental fluorine . Ununtrium ( I ) is predicted to be more similar to silver ( I ) than thallium ( I ) : the Uut + ion is expected to more willingly bind anions , so that <unk> should be quite soluble in an excess of hydrochloric acid or in ammonia while TlCl is not . Additionally , in contrast to the strongly basic <unk> , ununtrium ( I ) should instead form <unk> , which would be weakly water @-@ soluble and readily ammonia @-@ soluble . 
 Ununtrium is expected to be much denser than thallium , having a predicted density of about 16 to 18 g / cm3 , due to the relativistic stabilization and contraction of its 7s and 7p1 / 2 orbitals . This is because calculations estimate it to have an atomic radius of about 170 pm , the same as that of thallium , even though periodic trends would predict it to have an atomic radius larger than that of thallium due to it being one period further down in the periodic table . The melting and boiling points of ununtrium are not definitely known , but have been calculated to be 430 ° C and 1100 ° C respectively , exceeding the values for gallium , indium , and thallium , following periodic trends . 
 = = Experimental chemistry = = 
 Unambiguous determination of the chemical characteristics of ununtrium has yet to have been established . The isotopes 284Uut , <unk> , and 286Uut have half @-@ lives long enough for chemical investigation . It is theoretically predicted that ununtrium should have an enthalpy of sublimation around 150 kJ / mol and an enthalpy of adsorption on a gold surface around − 159 kJ / mol . From 2010 to 2012 , some preliminary chemical experiments were performed to determine the volatility of ununtrium . The reaction used was 243Am ( 48Ca , 3n ) 288Uup ; the isotope 288Uup has a short half @-@ life and would quickly decay to the longer @-@ lived 284Uut , which would be chemically investigated . Teflon capillaries at 70 ° C connecting the recoil chamber , where the ununtrium atoms were synthesized , and the gold @-@ covered detectors : the ununtrium atoms would be carried along the capillaries by a carrier gas . While about ten to twenty atoms of 284Uut were produced , none of these atoms were registered by the gold @-@ covered detectors , suggesting either that ununtrium was similar in volatility to the noble gases or , more plausibly , that pure ununtrium was not very volatile and thus could not efficiently pass through the Teflon capillaries at 70 ° C. Formation of the hydroxide <unk> would ease the transport , as <unk> is expected to be more volatile than elemental ununtrium , and this reaction could be facilitated by adding more water vapor into the carrier gas . However , it seems likely that this formation is not kinetically favored , so that one would need to use the longer @-@ lived isotope 286Uut in future experiments . 
 = William Johnson ( artist ) = 
 William Henry Johnson ( March 18 , 1901 – April 13 , 1970 ) was an African @-@ American painter born in Florence , South Carolina . He became a student at the National Academy of Design in New York City , working with Charles Webster Hawthorne . He later lived and worked in France , where he was exposed to modernism . After Johnson married Danish textile artist Holcha Krake , the couple lived for some time in Scandinavia . There he was influenced by the strong folk art tradition . The couple moved to the United States in 1938 . Johnson eventually found work as a teacher at the Harlem Community Art Center , through the Federal Art Project . 
 Johnson 's style evolved from realism to expressionism to a powerful folk style , for which he is best known . A substantial collection of his paintings , watercolors , and prints is held by the Smithsonian American Art Museum , which has organized and circulated major exhibitions of his works . 
 = = Education = = 
 William Henry Johnson was born March 18 , 1901 , in Florence , South Carolina , to Henry Johnson and Alice Smoot . He attended the first public school in Florence , the all @-@ black Wilson School on Athens Street . It is likely that Johnson was introduced to sketching by one of his teachers , Louise Fordham Holmes , who sometimes included art in her curriculum . Johnson practiced drawing by copying the comic strips in the newspapers , and considered a career as a newspaper cartoonist . 
 He moved from Florence , South Carolina , to New York City at the age of 17 . Working a variety of jobs , he saved enough money to pay for classes at the prestigious National Academy of Design . He took a preparatory class with Charles Louis Hinton , then studied with Charles Courtney Curran and George Willoughby Maynard , all of whom emphasized classical portraiture and figure drawing . Beginning in 1923 , Johnson worked with the painter Charles Webster Hawthorne , who emphasized the importance of color in painting . John studied with Hawthorne at the Cape Cod School of Art in Provincetown , Massachusetts during the summers , paying for his tuition , food and lodging by working as a general handyman at the school . Johnson received a number of awards at the National Academy of Design , and applied for a coveted Pulitzer Travel Scholarship in his final year . When another student was given the award , Hawthorne raised nearly $ 1000 to enable Johnson to go abroad to study . 
 = = Career = = 
 Johnson arrived in Paris , France in the fall of 1917 . He spent a year in Paris , and had his first solo exhibition at the Students and Artists Club in November 1927 . Next he moved to <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Mer in the south of France , influenced by the work of expressionist painter Chaim <unk> . In France , Johnson learned about modernism . 
 During this time , Johnson met the Danish textile artist Holcha Krake ( April 6 , 1885 – January 13 , 1944 ) . Holcha was traveling with her sister Erna , who was also a painter , and Erna 's husband , the expressionist sculptor Christoph Voll . Johnson was invited to join them on a tour of Corsica . Johnson and Holcha were deeply attracted in spite of differences in race , culture , and age . 
 Johnson returned to the United States in 1929 . Fellow artist George Luks encouraged Johnson to enter his work at the Harmon Foundation to be considered for the William E. Harmon Foundation Award for Distinguished Achievement Among Negroes in the Fine Arts Field . As a result , Johnson received the Harmon gold medal in the fine arts . He was applauded as a " real modernist " , " spontaneous , vigorous , firm , direct " . Other winners of the fine art award include Palmer Hayden , May Howard Jackson and Laura Wheeler Waring . 
 While in the United States , Johnson also visited his family in Florence , where he painted a considerable number of new works . He was apparently almost arrested while painting the <unk> Hotel , a once @-@ fashionable town landmark which had become a dilapidated house of ill @-@ repute . Whether Johnson 's actions or his choice of subject were at issue is unknown . During this visit , Johnson was able to publicly exhibit his paintings twice . The first occasion was at a meeting of the Florence County Teachers Institute on February 22 , 1930 . The second was at a local YMCA where Johnson 's mother worked . Her boss , Bill Covington , arranged for Johnson to exhibit 135 of his paintings for a single afternoon , on April 15 , 1930 . Although the Florence Morning News described Johnson condescendingly as a " humble ... Negro youth " , it also admitted that he had " real genius " . 
 Johnson returned to Europe in 1930 by working his way to France on a freighter . He went to Funen , a Danish island , to rejoin Holcha Krake . The couple signed a prenuptial agreement on May 28 , 1930 , and were married a few days later in the town of Kerteminde . Johnson and his wife spent most of the 1930s in Scandinavia , where his interest in folk art influenced his painting . However , as Nazi sentiments increased in Germany and Europe in the late 1930s , many artists were affected . Johnson 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Christoph Voll was fired from his teaching position , and his art was labelled " degenerate " . Johnson and Krake chose to move to the United States in 1938 . 
 With the help of Mary Beattie Brady , Johnson eventually found work as a teacher at the Harlem Community Art Center . There he and other teachers instructed about 600 students per week , as part of a local Federal Art Project supported by the Works Progress Administration . Through the center Johnson met important Harlem inhabitants such as Henry <unk> and Gwendolyn Knight . He immersed himself in African @-@ American culture and traditions , producing paintings that were characterized by their folk art simplicity . Johnson was determined to " paint his own people " . He celebrated African American culture and imagery in the urban settings of pieces such as Street life - Harlem , Cafe , and Street Musicians , and in the rural settings of Farm Couple at Work , Sowing , and Going to Market . <unk> realities of Negro life were depicted in Chain Gang and Moon over Harlem , which was a response to the 1943 racial riots in New York . Another series of works showed war @-@ time soldiers and nurses . Johnson held a solo exhibition at Alma Reed Galleries in 1941 . However , although he enjoyed a degree of success as an artist during the 1940s and 1950s , he was never able to achieve financial stability . 
 On a personal level , the 1940s were difficult . Bad news came from Europe . Christoph Voll died in Karlsruhe , Germany , on June 16 , 1939 , after interrogation by Nazi officials . Holcha 's family endured the German occupation of Denmark at their home in Odense . In December 1942 , Johnson and Krake moved to a larger studio apartment in Greenwich Village . A week later , Johnson 's artwork , supplies , and personal possessions were destroyed when the building caught fire . On January 13 , 1944 , John suffered further loss when his wife Holcha died from breast cancer . To deal with his grief , he revisited his family in Florence , and painted works with religious themes , such as Mount Calvary . Mount Calvary and Booker T. Washington Legend ( from Johnson 's Fighters for Freedom series of 1945 ) were included in the show The Negro Artist Comes of Age : A National Survey of Contemporary American Artists at the Albany Institute of History and Art in 1945 . 
 In 1946 Johnson left for Denmark to be with his wife 's family . However , his behavior became increasingly erratic . At Ullevål Hospital in Oslo in spring 1947 , he was diagnosed as suffering from syphilis which had impaired both mental and motor function . As a U.S. citizen who was no longer considered mentally competent , he was sent back to New York by the U.S. Embassy in Oslo . An attorney was appointed by the court as his legal guardian , and his belongings were put into storage . He entered the Central Islip State Hospital on Long Island on December 1 , 1947 , where he was treated for syphilis @-@ induced paresis . He spent the last twenty @-@ three years of his life there . He no longer painted after 1955 and died on April 13 , 1970 of hemorrhaging of the pancreas . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1956 , Johnson 's life 's work was almost destroyed when his legal guardian declared him unable to pay further storage fees . Instead , Helen <unk> , Mary Beattie Brady , and others arranged with the court to have Johnson 's belongings delivered to the Harmon Foundation with unconditional rights over all works . The foundation would use the works to advance interracial understanding and support African American achievements in the fine arts . On April 19 , 1967 , the Harmon Foundation gave more than 1 @,@ 000 paintings , watercolors , and prints by Johnson to the Smithsonian American Art Museum . 
 In 1991 , the Smithsonian American Art Museum organized and circulated a major exhibition of his artwork , Homecoming : The Art and Life of William H. Johnson , and in 2006 , they organized and circulated William H. Johnson 's World on Paper . An expanded version of this exhibition traveled to the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth , Texas , the Philadelphia Museum of Art , and the Montgomery Museum of Fine Arts in Montgomery , Alabama in 2007 . 
 The William H. Johnson Foundation for the Arts was established in 2001 in honor of the 100th birthday of William Johnson . Beginning with <unk> Ali in 2002 , the Foundation has awarded the William H. Johnson Prize annual to an early career African American artist . 
 In 2012 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp in Johnson 's honor , recognizing him as one of the nation 's foremost African @-@ American artists and a major figure in 20th @-@ century American art . The stamp , the 11th in the " American Treasures " series , showcases his painting Flowers ( 1939 – 1940 ) , which depicts brightly colored blooms on a small red table . 
 = SS Kentuckian = 
 SS Kentuckian was a cargo ship built in 1910 for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company . During World War I she was known as USAT Kentuckian in service for the United States Army and USS Kentuckian ( ID @-@ 1544 ) in service for the United States Navy . After her Navy career , she reverted to her original name of SS Kentuckian . 
 She was built by the Maryland Steel Company as first of three ships ordered by the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company , and was employed in inter @-@ coastal service via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Panama Canal after it opened . In World War I , USAT Kentuckian carried cargo and animals to France under charter to the U.S. Army . When transferred to the U.S. Navy in December 1918 , a month after the Armistice , USS Kentuckian was converted to a troop transport and returned almost 8 @,@ 900 American troops from France . Returned to American @-@ Hawaiian in 1919 , Kentuckian resumed inter @-@ coastal cargo service . 
 Shortly before World War II , Kentuckian was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and sailed between Trinidad and African ports , between New York and Caribbean ports , and in transatlantic convoys through mid 1944 . In mid @-@ July 1944 , the ship was scuttled as part of the breakwater for one of the Mulberry artificial harbors built to support the Normandy Invasion . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 In the second quarter of 1909 , American @-@ Hawaiian , looking to expand its fleet , placed an order with the Maryland Steel Company of Sparrows Point , Maryland , for three new cargo ships — Kentuckian , Georgian , and Honolulan . The contract for the ships required that American @-@ Hawaiian pay $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in cash and a further $ 650 @,@ 000 in twelve monthly notes at 5 % interest . Provisions of the deal allowed that the monthly notes could be converted into longer @-@ term mortgages at 6 % interest , and secured by the ships themselves . The final cost of Kentuckian , including financing costs , was $ 58 @.@ 33 per deadweight ton , which came out to just under $ 579 @,@ 000 . 
 Kentuckian ( Maryland Steel yard no . 104 ) was the first ship built under the contract . She was launched on 19 March 1910 , by Miss Nancy Johnson , the daughter of U.S. Representative Ben Johnson ( D @-@ KY ) , who christened the ship with sparkling spring water from the Kentucky farms of Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis . The completed ship , delivered to American @-@ Hawaiian on 1 June , was 6 @,@ 479 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 414 feet 2 inches ( 126 @.@ 24 m ) in length ( between perpendiculars ) and 53 feet 6 inches ( 16 @.@ 31 m ) abeam . She had a deadweight tonnage of 9 @,@ 925 LT DWT , and her cargo holds had a storage capacity of 428 @,@ 145 cubic feet ( 12 @,@ 123 @.@ 7 m3 ) . Kentuckian had a single quadruple @-@ expansion steam engine powered by oil @-@ fired boilers that drove a single screw propeller at a speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ) . 
 = = Early career = = 
 When Kentuckian began sailing for American @-@ Hawaiian , the company shipped cargo from East Coast ports via the Tehuantepec Route to West Coast ports and Hawaii , and vice versa . Shipments on the Tehuantepec Route would arrive at Mexican ports — Salina Cruz , Oaxaca , for eastbound cargo , and Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , for westbound cargo — and would traverse the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the Tehuantepec National Railway . Eastbound shipments were primarily sugar and pineapple from Hawaii , while westbound cargoes were more general in nature . Kentuckian sailed in this service but it is not clear from sources whether on the east or west side of North America . 
 After the United States occupation of Veracruz on 21 April 1914 ( which found six American @-@ Hawaiian ships in Mexican ports ) , the Huerta @-@ led Mexican government closed the Tehuantepec National Railway to American shipping . This loss of access coupled with the fact that the Panama Canal was not yet open , caused American @-@ Hawaii to return in late April to its historic route of sailing around South America via the Straits of Magellan . With the opening of the Panama Canal on 15 August , American @-@ Hawaiian ships switched to taking that route . 
 In October 1915 , landslides closed the Panama Canal and all American @-@ Hawaiian ships , including Kentuckian , returned to the Straits of Magellan route again . Kentuckian 's exact movements from this time through early 1918 are unclear . She may have been in the half of the American @-@ Hawaiian fleet that was chartered for transatlantic service . She may also have been in the group of American @-@ Hawaiian ships chartered for service to South America , delivering coal , gasoline , and steel in exchange for coffee , nitrates , cocoa , rubber , and manganese ore . 
 = = World War I = = 
 At some point after the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917 , the United States Army chartered Kentuckian for transporting animals to Europe in support of the American Expeditionary Force . Although there is no information about the specific conversion of Kentuckian , for other ships this typically meant that any passenger accommodations had to be ripped out and replaced with ramps and stalls for the horses and mules carried . 
 Details about Kentuckian 's first animal transport journey are not known , but her second trip began 14 March 1918 when she sailed from Newport News , Virginia , with 848 animals for Saint @-@ Nazaire , where she unloaded all but the four animals that had died or were destroyed during the voyage . On 24 April , during a convoy crossing in Army service , Naval Armed Guardsmen on Kentuckian sighted a torpedo heading towards the second ship behind her in the column . Opening fire on the torpedo , the gun crew claimed the hit that caused the torpedo to explode short of its intended target . Further details of Kentuckian 's Army service are not available . 
 With the signing of the Armistice on 11 November , the fighting came to an end and the task of bringing home American soldiers began almost immediately . To that end , Kentuckian was acquired by the United States Navy on 16 December , and commissioned on 28 January 1919 with Lieutenant Commander Carrol E. Higgins , NAR , in command . Before she could begin returning troops , though , Kentuckian had to undergo conversion from a cargo and animal ship . Though sources do not indicate the specific modifications Kentuckian underwent , typical conversions for other ships included the installation of berths for troops , and adding greatly expanded cooking and toilet facilities to handle the large numbers of men aboard . Similar modifications on a fellow American @-@ Hawaiian cargo ship , the two @-@ years @-@ younger Minnesotan , took three months , but it is not known how long Kentuckian 's refit took . 
 Kentuckian departed New York for her first trooping voyage on 2 March , picking up nearly 2 @,@ 000 soldiers at Saint @-@ Nazaire — among them some 1 @,@ 500 men of the 363rd Infantry Regiment of the U.S. 91st Infantry Division , and a number from the U.S. 33rd Infantry Division — before returning to New York on 1 April . Her arrival on another trooping run in June returned 1 @,@ 860 men , including over 1 @,@ 500 members of the 345th Field Artillery Regiment of the U.S. 90th Infantry Division . An officer of that unit brought back a black police dog named Pat , who , purportedly , had been the personal dog of Germany 's Crown Prince Wilhelm . Another trip in July returned another 1 @,@ 852 men from Saint @-@ Nazaire . In all , Kentuckian made a total of five trooping runs from France , bringing back 8 @,@ 895 men by the time she completed her last trip on 31 August at Norfolk , Virginia . She was decommissioned on 15 September and returned to American @-@ Hawaiian the same day . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Kentuckian resumed cargo service with American @-@ Hawaiian after her return from World War I service . Though the company had abandoned its original Hawaiian sugar routes by this time , Kentuckian continued inter @-@ coastal service through the Panama Canal with a few incidents that interrupted what was a mostly uneventful twenty years . In September 1928 , a day after sailing from San Francisco , Kentuckian was rammed by the General Petroleum tanker Los Alamos near Point Sur , California , in a thick fog . Kentuckian had a leak in her number two cargo hold and damage to her port bilge keel and returned to San Francisco for repairs . In early April 1933 , a fire broke out in Kentuckian 's number two cargo hold , which resulted in the delay of the ship at Panama from 8 to 14 April . Kentuckian made her way to Los Angeles over the next ten days , where surveyors examined the ship and her general cargo . 
 For the most part , Kentuckian primarily carried general cargoes whose contents were not noteworthy . One exception occurred in July 1929 , when The New York Times reported that Kentuckian was carrying , Pirate , an R @-@ class racing yacht to races at <unk> and Marblehead . The newspaper reported that Pirate was the first West Coast designed and built yacht to race in the East . 
 Unlike SS Minnesotan , a fellow American @-@ Hawaiian ship that was plagued with labor difficulties , Kentuckian seems to have escaped much of the maritime labor turmoil of the mid @-@ 1930s . One incident was reported by the Los Angeles Times in August 1936 . The news item reported that a portion of Kentuckian 's crew went on strike in protest against unsafe working conditions . The ship 's master had ordered the deckhands to rig one of the cargo booms after the ship docked in Los Angeles , but they refused because the deck was slippery and therefore , in their opinion , unsafe . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Shortly before the United States entered World War II , Kentuckian was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration ( WSA ) , but continued to be operated by American @-@ Hawaiian . On 19 November 1941 , Kentuckian sailed from New York for Durban , where she arrived on 21 December . Kentuckian spent the next two months sailing between ports in South Africa and Mozambique , calling at Port Elizabeth , Cape Town , and East London in the former , and <unk> Marques , and Beira in the latter , before heading to Trinidad from Cape Town on 28 February 1942 . Arriving at Trinidad three weeks later , she made her way up to Boston by early April , before putting in at New York for about six weeks . Sailing from New York in late May , Kentuckian joined a southbound Hampton Roads , Virginia – Key West , Florida convoy . She left the convoy before Key West and headed back across the Atlantic to Cape Town , where she arrived on 7 July . Kentuckian spent the next month sailing between Cape Town , East London , and Durban . Kentuckian concluded her second trip to Africa when she sailed for South America on 1 August . 
 After a three @-@ week crossing of the South Atlantic , Kentuckian arrived at Paramaribo on 22 August , where she took on a load of bauxite and made her way to New York , where she docked on 20 September . The cargo ship slowly made her way south , calling at Charleston , Key West , and Guantánamo Bay along her way to Trinidad , where she arrived on 5 November . Sailing 11 November , Kentuckian began her third and final trip to Africa . She arrived at Freetown on 25 November and called at Bathurst and Takoradi over the next two months before returning to Trinidad on 31 January 1943 . Sailing from Trinidad on 4 February , she called at Guantánamo Bay and Baltimore on her way to New York , where , arriving in late March , she prepared to begin transatlantic convoy sailings to the United Kingdom . 
 On 1 April , Kentuckian , loaded with grain and general cargo , departed as a part of Convoy HX @-@ 232 , the 232nd New York – Halifax – Liverpool convoy . Developing some unreported problem , she returned to New York on 3 April . The problem must have been minor , because she sailed as part of Convoy HX @-@ 233 three days later . This convoy was attacked by no fewer than eight German submarines , which resulted in the loss of only one ship , the British cargo ship Fort Rampart , and the sinking of 175 by convoy escorts . There is no evidence that Kentuckian played any direct part in the sinking of the German submarine , but , nevertheless , members of her Naval Armed Guard were awarded a battle star for actions in the convoy from 16 – 18 April . Kentuckian arrived at Liverpool on 21 April . Over the next ten months , Kentuckian made nine more convoy crossings between the UK — where she called at Liverpool , Swansea , Milford Haven , Methil , Loch Ewe , Immingham , and Belfast Lough — and New York . She ended her tenth North Atlantic crossing when she arrived at New York on 16 February 1944 . 
 Sailing from New York on 26 February , Kentuckian made two circuits between that port and the Caribbean , calling at <unk> , Cuba , and Manatí , Puerto Rico , and making stops at Key West and Philadelphia along the way , before putting in at New York on 15 April . Kentuckian departed the United States for the final time on 19 May and headed for Milford Haven . After arriving there on 3 June , the cargo ship arrived at Barry via Plymouth , Belfast Lough , and Falmouth , on 27 June . Departing Barry on 8 July as a part of Convoy <unk> @-@ 35 , Kentuckian arrived at Arromanches on 10 July and was scuttled there as part of a breakwater protecting the mulberry harbor constructed there in support of the Normandy invasion . 
 In March 1945 , the WSA offered a payment of $ 565 @,@ 910 to American @-@ Hawaiian for Kentuckian as part of a $ 7 @.@ 2 million settlement for eleven requisitioned American @-@ Hawaiian ships that had either been sunk , scuttled ( like Kentuckian ) , or were to be retained by the government . 
 = Chaco Culture National Historical Park = 
 Chaco Culture National Historical Park is a United States National Historical Park hosting the densest and most exceptional concentration of pueblos in the American Southwest . The park is located in northwestern New Mexico , between Albuquerque and Farmington , in a remote canyon cut by the Chaco Wash . Containing the most sweeping collection of ancient ruins north of Mexico , the park preserves one of the most important pre @-@ Columbian cultural and historical areas in the United States . 
 Between AD 900 and 1150 , Chaco Canyon was a major center of culture for the Ancient Pueblo Peoples . Chacoans quarried sandstone blocks and hauled timber from great distances , assembling fifteen major complexes that remained the largest buildings in North America until the 19th century . Evidence of archaeoastronomy at Chaco has been proposed , with the " Sun Dagger " petroglyph at Fajada Butte a popular example . Many Chacoan buildings may have been aligned to capture the solar and lunar cycles , requiring generations of astronomical observations and centuries of skillfully coordinated construction . Climate change is thought to have led to the emigration of Chacoans and the eventual abandonment of the canyon , beginning with a fifty @-@ year drought commencing in 1130 . 
 Comprising a UNESCO World Heritage Site located in the arid and sparsely populated Four Corners region , the Chacoan cultural sites are fragile – concerns of erosion caused by tourists have led to the closure of Fajada Butte to the public . The sites are considered sacred ancestral homelands by the Hopi and Pueblo people , who maintain oral accounts of their historical migration from Chaco and their spiritual relationship to the land . Though park preservation efforts can conflict with native religious beliefs , tribal representatives work closely with the National Park Service to share their knowledge and respect the heritage of the Chacoan culture . 
 The park is on the Trails of the Ancients Byway , one of the designated New Mexico Scenic Byways . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Chaco Canyon lies within the San Juan Basin , atop the vast Colorado Plateau , surrounded by the Chuska Mountains to the west , the San Juan Mountains to the north , and the San Pedro Mountains to the east . Ancient Chacoans drew upon dense forests of oak , piñon , ponderosa pine , and juniper to obtain timber and other resources . The canyon itself , located within lowlands circumscribed by dune fields , ridges , and mountains , is aligned along a roughly northwest @-@ to @-@ southeast axis and is rimmed by flat massifs known as mesas . Large gaps between the southwestern cliff faces — side canyons known as <unk> — were critical in funneling rain @-@ bearing storms into the canyon and boosting local precipitation levels . The principal Chacoan complexes , such as Pueblo Bonito , Nuevo Alto , and Kin <unk> , have elevations of 6 @,@ 200 to 6 @,@ 440 feet ( 1 @,@ 890 to 1 @,@ 960 m ) . 
 The alluvial canyon floor slopes downward to the northwest at a gentle grade of 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) per mile ( 6 meters per kilometer ) ; it is bisected by the Chaco Wash , an arroyo that rarely bears water . The canyon 's main aquifers were too deep to be of use to ancient Chacoans : only several smaller and shallower sources supported the small springs that sustained them . Today , aside from occasional storm runoff coursing through arroyos , substantial surface water — springs , pools , wells — is virtually nonexistent . 
 = = Geology = = 
 After the Pangaean supercontinent sundered during the Cretaceous period , the region became part of a shifting transition zone between a shallow inland sea — the Western Interior Seaway — and a band of plains and low hills to the west . A sandy and swampy coastline oscillated east and west , alternately submerging and uncovering the area atop the present Colorado Plateau that Chaco Canyon now occupies . 
 The Chaco Wash flowed across the upper strata of what is now the 400 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) Chacra Mesa , cutting into it and gouging out a broad canyon over the course of millions of years . The mesa comprises sandstone and shale formations dating from the Late Cretaceous , which are of the Mesa Verde formation . The canyon bottomlands were further eroded , exposing Menefee Shale bedrock ; this was subsequently buried under roughly 125 feet ( 38 m ) of sediment . The canyon and mesa lie within the " Chaco Core " — which is distinct from the wider Chaco Plateau , a flat region of grassland with infrequent stands of timber . As the Continental Divide is only 15 @.@ 5 miles ( 25 km ) east of the canyon , geological characteristics and different patterns of drainage differentiate these two regions both from each other and from the nearby Chaco Slope , the <unk> Slope , and the Chuska Valley . 
 = = Climate = = 
 An arid region of high xeric scrubland and desert steppe , the canyon and wider basin average 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of rainfall annually ; the park averages 9 @.@ 1 inches ( 230 mm ) . Chaco Canyon lies on the leeward side of extensive mountain ranges to the south and west , resulting in a rainshadow effect that fosters the prevailing lack of moisture in the region . The region sees four distinct seasons . Rainfall is most likely between July and September , while May and June are the driest months . Orographic precipitation , which results from moisture wrung out of storm systems ascending the mountain ranges around Chaco Canyon , is responsible for most of the summer and winter precipitation , and rainfall increases with higher elevation . Occasional aberrant northward excursions of the intertropical convergence zone may boost precipitation in some years . 
 Chaco endures remarkable climatic extremes : temperatures range between − 38 to 102 ° F ( − 39 to 39 ° C ) , and may swing 60 ° F ( 33 ° C ) in a single day . The region averages fewer than 150 frost @-@ free days per year , and the local climate swings wildly from years of plentiful rainfall to prolonged drought . The heavy influence of the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation contributes to the canyon 's fickle climate . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Chacoan flora typifies that of North American high deserts : sagebrush and several species of cactus are interspersed with dry scrub forests of piñon and juniper , the latter primarily on the mesa tops . The canyon is far drier than other parts of New Mexico located at similar latitudes and elevations , and it lacks the temperate coniferous forests plentiful to the east . The prevailing sparseness of plants and wildlife was echoed in ancient times , when overpopulation , expanding cultivation , overhunting , habitat destruction , and drought may have led the Chacoans to strip the canyon of wild plants and game . It has been suggested that even during wet periods the canyon was able to sustain only 2 @,@ 000 people . 
 Among Chacoan mammals are the plentiful coyote ( Canis latrans ) ; mule deer , elk , and pronghorn also live within the canyon , though they are rarely encountered by visitors . Important smaller carnivores include bobcats , badgers , foxes , and two species of skunk . The park hosts abundant populations of rodents , including several prairie dog towns . Small colonies of bats are present during the summer . The local shortage of water means that relatively few bird species are present ; these include <unk> , large hawks ( such as Cooper 's hawks and American kestrels ) , owls , vultures , and ravens , though they are less abundant in the canyon than in the wetter mountain ranges to the east . Sizeable populations of smaller birds , including warblers , sparrows , and house finches , are also common . Three species of hummingbirds are present : one is the tiny but highly pugnacious rufous hummingbird , which compete intensely with the more mild @-@ tempered black @-@ chinned hummingbirds for breeding habitat in shrubs or trees located near water . Western ( prairie ) rattlesnakes are occasionally seen in the backcountry , though various lizards and skinks are far more abundant . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Archaic – Early Basketmakers = = = 
 The first people in the San Juan Basin were hunter @-@ gatherers : the Archaic – Early Basketmaker people . These small bands descended from nomadic Clovis big @-@ game hunters who arrived in the Southwest around 10 @,@ 000 BC . More than 70 campsites from this period , carbon @-@ dated to the period 7000 – 1500 BC and mostly consisting of stone chips and other <unk> , were found in <unk> Cave and elsewhere within Chaco Canyon , with at least one of the sites located on the canyon floor near an exposed arroyo . The Archaic – Early Basketmaker people were nomadic or semi @-@ nomadic hunter @-@ gatherers who over time began making baskets to store gathered plants . By the end of the period , some people cultivated food . Excavation of their campsites and rock shelters has revealed that they made tools , gathered wild plants , and killed and processed game . Slab @-@ lined storage cists indicate a change from a wholly nomadic lifestyle . 
 = = = Ancestral Puebloans = = = 
 By 900 BC , Archaic people lived at <unk> Cave and like sites . They left little evidence of their presence in Chaco Canyon . By AD 490 , their descendants , of the Late Basketmaker II Era , farmed lands around <unk> <unk> Village and other pit @-@ house settlements at Chaco . 
 A small population of Basketmakers remained in the Chaco Canyon area . The broad arc of their cultural elaboration culminated around 800 , during the Pueblo I Era , when they were building crescent @-@ shaped stone complexes , each comprising four to five residential suites abutting subterranean kivas , large enclosed areas reserved for rites . Such structures characterize the Early Pueblo People . By 850 , the Ancient Pueblo population — the " Anasazi " , from a Ute term adopted by the Navajo denoting the " ancient ones " or " enemy ancestors " — had rapidly expanded : groups resided in larger , more densely populated pueblos . Strong evidence attests to a canyon @-@ wide turquoise processing and trading industry dating from the 10th century . Around then , the first section of Pueblo Bonito was built : a curved row of 50 rooms near its present north wall . 
 The cohesive Chacoan system began unravelling around 1140 , perhaps triggered by an extreme fifty @-@ year drought that began in 1130 ; chronic climatic instability , including a series of severe droughts , again struck the region between 1250 and 1450 . Poor water management led to arroyo cutting ; deforestation was extensive and economically devastating : timber for construction had to be hauled instead from outlying mountain ranges such as the Chuska mountains , which are more than 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the west . Outlying communities began to depopulate and , by the end of the century , the buildings in the central canyon had been neatly sealed and abandoned . 
 Some scholars suggest that violence and warfare , perhaps involving cannibalism , impelled the evacuations . Hints of such include dismembered bodies — dating from Chacoan times — found at two sites within the central canyon . Yet Chacoan complexes showed little evidence of being defended or defensively sited high on cliff faces or atop mesas . Only several minor sites at Chaco have evidence of the large @-@ scale burning that would suggest enemy raids . Archaeological and cultural evidence leads scientists to believe people from this region migrated south , east , and west into the valleys and drainages of the Little Colorado River , the Rio Puerco , and the Rio Grande . Anthropologist Joseph <unk> deals at length with the structure and decline of Chaco civilization in his 1988 study The Collapse of Complex Societies . 
 = = = Athabaskan succession = = = 
 <unk> @-@ speaking peoples , such as the Ute and Shoshone , were present on the Colorado Plateau beginning in the 12th century . Nomadic Southern Athabaskan @-@ speaking peoples , such as the Apache and Navajo , succeeded the Pueblo people in this region by the 15th century . In the process , they acquired Chacoan customs and agricultural skills . Ute tribal groups also frequented the region , primarily during hunting and raiding expeditions . The modern Navajo Nation lies west of Chaco Canyon , and many Navajo live in surrounding areas . 
 = = = Excavation and protection = = = 
 The first documented trip through Chaco Canyon was an 1823 expedition led by New Mexican governor José Antonio Vizcarra when the area was under Mexican rule . He noted several large ruins in the canyon . The American trader Josiah Gregg wrote about the ruins of Chaco Canyon , referring in 1832 to Pueblo Bonito as " built of fine @-@ grit sandstone " . In 1849 , a U.S. Army detachment passed through and surveyed the ruins , following United States acquisition of the Southwest with its victory in the Mexican War in 1848 . The canyon was so remote , however , that it was scarcely visited over the next 50 years . After brief reconnaissance work by Smithsonian scholars in the 1870s , formal archaeological work began in 1896 when a party from the American Museum of Natural History based in New York City — the Hyde Exploring Expedition — began excavating Pueblo Bonito . Spending five summers in the region , they sent over 60 @,@ 000 artifacts back to New York and operated a series of trading posts in the area . 
 In 1901 Richard Wetherill , who had worked for the Hyde expedition , claimed a homestead of 161 acres ( 65 ha ) that included Pueblo Bonito , Pueblo del Arroyo , and Chetro Ketl . While investigating Wetherill 's land claim , federal land agent Samuel J. Holsinger detailed the physical setting of the canyon and the sites , noted prehistoric road segments and stairways above Chetro Ketl , and documented prehistoric dams and irrigation systems . His report went unpublished and unheeded . It urged the creation of a national park to safeguard Chacoan sites . 
 The next year , Edgar Lee Hewett , president of New Mexico Normal University ( later renamed New Mexico Highlands University ) , mapped many Chacoan sites . Hewett and others helped enact the Federal Antiquities Act of 1906 , the first U.S. law to protect relics ; it was , in effect , a direct consequence of Wetherill 's controversial activities at Chaco . The Act also authorized the President to establish national monuments : on March 11 , 1907 , Theodore Roosevelt proclaimed Chaco Canyon National Monument . Wetherill relinquished his land claims . 
 In 1920 , the National Geographic Society began an archaeological examination of Chaco Canyon and appointed Neil Judd , then 32 , to head the project . After a reconnaissance trip that year , Judd proposed to excavate Pueblo Bonito , the largest ruin at Chaco . Beginning in 1921 , Judd spent seven field seasons at Chaco . Living and working conditions were spartan at best . In his memoirs , Judd noted dryly that " Chaco Canyon has its limitations as a summer resort " . By 1925 , Judd 's excavators had removed 100 @,@ 000 short tons of overburden , using a team of " 35 or more Indians , ten white men , and eight or nine horses " . Judd 's team found only 69 hearths in the ruin , a puzzling discovery as winters are cold at Chaco . Judd sent A. E. Douglass more than 90 specimens for tree @-@ ring dating , then in its infancy . At that time , Douglass had only a " floating " <unk> it was not until 1929 that a Judd @-@ led team found the " missing link " . Most of the beams used at Chaco were cut between 1033 and 1092 , the height of construction there . 
 In 1949 , the University of New Mexico deeded over adjoining lands to form an expanded Chaco Canyon National Monument . In return , the university maintained scientific research rights to the area . By 1959 , the National Park Service had constructed a park visitor center , staff housing , and campgrounds . As a historic property of the National Park Service , the National Monument was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15 , 1966 . In 1971 , researchers Robert Lister and James Judge established the " Chaco Center , " a division for cultural research that functioned as a joint project between the University of New Mexico and the National Park Service . A number of multi @-@ disciplinary research projects , archaeological surveys , and limited excavations began during this time . The Chaco Center extensively surveyed the Chacoan roads , well @-@ constructed and strongly reinforced thoroughfares radiating from the central canyon . 
 The richness of the cultural remains at park sites led to the expansion of the small National Monument into the Chaco Culture National Historical Park on December 19 , 1980 , when an additional 13 @,@ 000 acres ( 5 @,@ 300 ha ) were added to the protected area . In 1987 , the park was designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO . To safeguard Chacoan sites on adjacent Bureau of Land Management and Navajo Nation lands , the Park Service developed the multi @-@ agency Chaco Culture Archaeological Protection Site program . These initiatives have identified more than 2 @,@ 400 archeological sites within the current park 's boundaries ; only a small percentage of these have been excavated . 
 = = Management = = 
 Chaco Culture National Historical Park is managed by the National Park Service , a federal agency within the Department of the Interior ; neighboring federal lands hosting Chacoan roads are controlled by the Bureau of Land Management . In the 2002 – 03 fiscal year , the park 's total annual operating budget was $ 1 @,@ 434 @,@ 000 . The park has a visitor center , which features the " Chaco Collection Museum " , an information desk , a theater , a book store , and a gift shop . Prior to the 1980s , archeological excavations within current park boundaries were intensive : compound walls were dismantled or demolished , and thousands of artifacts were extracted . Starting in 1981 , a new approach , informed by traditional Hopi and Pueblo beliefs , stopped such intrusions . Remote sensing , anthropological study of Indian oral traditions , and dendrochronology — which left Chacoan relics undisturbed — were pursued . In this vein , the " Chaco American Indian Consultation Committee " was established in 1991 to give Navajo , Hopi , Pueblo , and other Indian representatives a voice in park oversight . 
 Current park policy mandates partial restoration of excavated sites . " <unk> " , or re @-@ burying excavated sites with sand , is one such means . Other measures attempt to safeguard the area 's ancient ambiance and mystique , such as the " Chaco Night Sky Program " , which seeks to eliminate the effect of light pollution on the park 's acclaimed night skies ; under the program , some 14 @,@ 000 visitors make use of the Chaco Observatory ( inaugurated in 1998 ) , park telescopes , and astronomy @-@ related programs . The park was named a Gold @-@ tier Dark Sky Park by the International Dark @-@ Sky Association in 2013 . Chacoan relics outside the current park 's boundaries have been threatened by development : an example was the proposed competitive leasing of federal lands in the San Juan Basin for surface coal mining beginning in 1983 . As ample coal deposits abut the park , this strip mining threatened the web of ancient Chacoan roads . The year @-@ long " Chaco Roads Project " thus documented the roads , which were later protected from mining . 
 = = Sites = = 
 The Chacoans built their complexes along a 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) stretch of canyon floor , with the walls of some structures aligned <unk> and others aligned with the 18 @.@ 6 @-@ year cycle of minimum and maximum moonrise and moonset . 
 = = = Central canyon = = = 
 The central portion of the canyon contains the largest Chacoan complexes . The most studied is Pueblo Bonito . Covering almost 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) and comprising at least 650 rooms , it is the largest great house ; in parts of the complex , the structure was four stories high . The builders ' use of core @-@ and @-@ veneer architecture and multi @-@ story construction necessitated massive masonry walls up to 3 feet ( 91 cm ) thick . Pueblo Bonito is divided into two sections by a wall precisely aligned to run north @-@ south , bisecting the central plaza . A great kiva was placed on either side of the wall , creating a symmetrical pattern common to many Chacoan great houses . The scale of the complex , upon completion , rivaled that of the Colosseum . Nearby is Pueblo del Arroyo , which was founded between AD 1050 and 1075 and completed in the early 12th century ; it sits at a drainage outlet known as South Gap . 
 Casa Rinconada , isolated from the other central sites , sits to the south side of Chaco Wash , adjacent to a Chacoan road leading to a set of steep stairs that reached the top of Chacra Mesa . Its sole kiva stands alone , with no residential or support structures whatsoever ; it did once have a 39 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) passageway leading from the underground kiva to several above @-@ ground levels . Chetro Ketl , located near Pueblo Bonito , bears the typical ' D ' -shape of many other central complexes . Begun between 1020 and 1050 , its 450 – 550 rooms shared one great kiva . Experts estimate that it took 29 @,@ 135 man @-@ hours to erect Chetro Ketl alone ; Hewett estimated that it took the wood of 5 @,@ 000 trees and 50 million stone blocks . 
 Kin <unk> ( " Yellow House " ) was a medium @-@ sized complex located 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) west of Pueblo Bonito . It shows strong evidence of construction and occupation by Pueblo peoples from the northern San Juan Basin . Its rectangular shape and design is related to the Pueblo II cultural group , rather than the Pueblo III style or its Chacoan variant . It contains 55 rooms , four ground @-@ floor kivas , and a two @-@ story cylindrical tower that may have functioned as a kiva or religious center . Evidence of an obsidian @-@ processing industry was discovered near the village , which was erected between 1125 and 1130 . 
 Pueblo Alto is a great house of 89 rooms located on a mesa top near the middle of Chaco Canyon , 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) from Pueblo Bonito ; it was begun between AD 1020 and 1050 during a wider building boom throughout the canyon . Its location made the community visible to most of the inhabitants of the San Juan Basin ; indeed , it was only 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) north of Tsin Kletzin , on the opposite side of the canyon . The community was the center of a <unk> and turquoise @-@ processing industry that influenced the development of all villages in the canyon ; chert tool production was common . Research at the site conducted by archaeologist Tom Windes suggests only a handful of families , perhaps as few as five to twenty , lived in the complex ; this may imply that Pueblo Alto served a primarily non @-@ residential role . Another great house , Nuevo Alto , was built on the north mesa near Pueblo Alto ; it was founded in the late 12th century , a time when the Chacoan population was declining . 
 = = = Outliers = = = 
 Another cluster of great houses lies in Chaco 's northern reaches ; among the largest is Casa Chiquita ( " Small House " ) , a village built in the 1080s , when , in a period of ample rainfall , Chacoan culture was expanding . Its layout featured a smaller , squarer profile ; it also lacked the open plazas and separate kivas of its predecessors . Larger , squarer blocks of stone were used in the masonry ; kivas were designed in the northern Mesa Verdean tradition . Two miles down the canyon is Peñasco Blanco ( " White Bluff " ) , an arc @-@ shaped compound built atop the canyon 's southern rim in five distinct stages between 900 and 1125 . A nearby cliff painting ( the " Supernova <unk> " ) may record the sighting of the SN 1054 supernova on July 5 , 1054 . 
 <unk> <unk> , located 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Una Vida , measured 872 feet ( 266 m ) in circumference . Initial probes revealed 72 ground @-@ level rooms , with structures reaching four stories in height ; one large circular kiva has been identified . Kin <unk> , built in either the 9th or 10th century , is sited slightly north of Una Vida , positioned at the foot of the north mesa . Limited excavation of it has taken place . Tsin Kletzin ( " Charcoal Place " ) , a compound located on the Chacra Mesa and positioned above Casa Rinconada , is 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) due south of Pueblo Alto , on the opposite side of the canyon . Nearby is <unk> Dam , a massive earthen structure that scientists believe provided Tsin Kletzin with all of its domestic water . The dam worked by retaining stormwater runoff in a reservoir . Massive amounts of silt accumulated during flash floods would have forced the residents to regularly rebuild the dam and dredge the catchment area . 
 Deeper in the canyon , Una Vida ( " One Life " ) is one of the three oldest great houses ; construction began around 900 . Comprising at least two stories and 124 rooms , it shares an arc or " D " -shaped design with its contemporaries , Peñasco Blanco and Pueblo Bonito , but has a unique " dog leg " addition made necessary by topography . It is located in one of the canyon 's major side drainages , near Gallo Wash , and was massively expanded after 930 . <unk> ( " black greasewood " ) , comprising just over one hundred rooms , is the smallest of the great houses . Built between 1110 and 1115 , it was the last Chacoan great house to be constructed . Somewhat isolated within the narrow wash , it is positioned 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from neighboring Una Vida . Directly north are communities even more remote : Salmon Ruins and Aztec Ruins , sited on the San Juan and Animas Rivers near Farmington , were built during a thirty @-@ year wet period commencing in 1100 . Some 60 miles ( 97 km ) directly south of Chaco Canyon , on the Great South Road , lies another cluster of outlying communities . The largest , Kin <unk> , stands atop a 7 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) mesa surrounded by marshy bottomlands . 
 <unk> Pueblo is located on McKinley County Road 19 , near <unk> Mesa , a red sandstone mesa . It was connected to its nearby outlier , Andrews Ranch , by a Chacoan road . Chaco Canyon , Aztec Ruins , Salmon Ruins , and <unk> Pueblo are on the Trail of the Ancients Scenic Byway . 
 = = Ruins = = 
 = = = Great houses = = = 
 Immense complexes known as " great houses " embodied worship at Chaco . The Chacoans used masonry techniques unique for their time , and their building constructions lasted decades and even centuries . As architectural forms evolved and centuries passed , the houses kept several core traits . Most apparent is their sheer bulk ; complexes averaged more than 200 rooms each , and some enclosed up to 700 rooms . Individual rooms were substantial in size , with higher ceilings than Anasazi works of preceding periods . They were well @-@ planned : vast sections or wings erected were finished in a single stage , rather than in increments . Houses generally faced the south , and plaza areas were almost always girt with edifices of sealed @-@ off rooms or high walls . Houses often stood four or five stories tall , with single @-@ story rooms facing the plaza ; room blocks were terraced to allow the tallest sections to compose the pueblo 's rear edifice . Rooms were often organized into suites , with front rooms larger than rear , interior , and storage rooms or areas . 
 Ceremonial structures known as kivas were built in proportion to the number of rooms in a pueblo . One small kiva was built for roughly every 29 rooms . Nine complexes each hosted an oversized great kiva , each up to 63 feet ( 19 m ) in diameter . " T " -shaped doorways and stone lintels marked all Chacoan kivas . Though simple and compound walls were often used , great houses were primarily constructed of core @-@ and @-@ veneer walls : two parallel load @-@ bearing walls comprising dressed , flat sandstone blocks bound in clay mortar were erected . Gaps between walls were packed with rubble , forming the wall 's core . Walls were then covered in a veneer of small sandstone pieces , which were pressed into a layer of binding mud . These surfacing stones were often placed in distinctive patterns . The Chacoan structures altogether required the wood of 200 @,@ 000 coniferous trees , mostly hauled — on foot — from mountain ranges up to 70 miles ( 110 km ) away . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 The meticulously designed buildings composing the larger Chacoan complexes did not emerge until around AD 1030 . The Chacoans melded pre @-@ planned architectural designs , astronomical alignments , geometry , landscaping , and engineering into ancient urban centers of unique public architecture . Researchers have concluded that the complex may have had a relatively small residential population , with larger groups assembling only temporarily for annual ceremonies . Smaller sites , apparently more residential in character , are scattered near the great houses in and around Chaco . The canyon itself runs along one of the lunar alignment lines , suggesting the location was originally chosen for its astronomical significance . If nothing else , this allowed alignment with several other key structures in the canyon . 
 Turquoise was very important to the people of Chaco . Around 200 @,@ 000 pieces of turquoise have been excavated from the ruins at Chaco Canyon , and workshops for local manufacture of turquoise beads have been found . The turquoise was used locally for grave goods , burials and ceremonial offerings . Over 15 @,@ 000 turquoise beads and pendants accompanied two burials at Pueblo Bonito . 
 Around this time , the extended Ancestral Puebloan ( Anasazi ) community experienced a population and construction boom . Throughout the 10th century , Chacoan building techniques spread from the canyon to neighboring regions . By AD 1115 at least 70 outlying pueblos of Chacoan provenance had been built within the 25 @,@ 000 square miles ( 65 @,@ 000 km2 ) composing the San Juan Basin . Experts speculate the function of these compounds , some large enough to be considered great houses in their own right . Some suggest they may have been more than agricultural communities , perhaps functioning as trading posts or ceremonial sites . 
 Thirty such outliers spread across 65 @,@ 000 square miles ( 170 @,@ 000 km2 ) are connected to the central canyon and to one another by an enigmatic web of six Chacoan road systems . Extending up to 60 miles ( 97 km ) in generally straight routes , they appear to have been extensively surveyed and engineered . Their depressed and scraped caliche beds reach 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide ; earthen berms or rocks , at times composing low walls , delimit their edges . When necessary , the roads deploy steep stone stairways and rock ramps to surmount cliffs and other obstacles . Though their purpose may never be certain , archaeologist Harold Gladwin noted that nearby Navajo believe that the Anasazi built the roads to transport timber ; archaeologist Neil Judd offered a similar hypothesis . 
 = = Archaeoastronomy = = 
 = = = Sun Dagger = = = 
 Two whorl @-@ shaped etchings near the top of Fajada Butte compose the " Sun Dagger " petroglyph , itself tucked behind the eponymous rock panels of the " Three @-@ Slab Site " . They are symbolically focal . 
 It consists of two spirals : one principal and one ancillary . The latter left @-@ hand spiral captured both spring and fall equinoxes ; its artifice was revealed by a descending spear of light , itself filtered through the slabs , that shined upon it and split it in two . The former and larger whorl to its right was lit by the titular " sun dagger " , which bisected it through another interplay of slab and sun . It struck it , brilliantly , as the summer sun attains its solstice midday peak . The Chacoans were said to be marking , as artist , " Sun Dagger " discoverer , and leading proponent Anna Sofaer puts it , " the middle of time " . Each turn of the 9 @.@ 25 @-@ turn large spiral was found to mark one year in the 18 @.@ 6 @-@ year " lunar excursion cycle " of the rising mid @-@ winter full moon . This record is kept by a slab @-@ cast lunar shadow whose edge strikes in succession each ring . As the full " minimum moon " closest to the winter solstice rises , the shadow 's edge precisely strikes the center of the larger spiral ; it steps outward year by year , ring by ring , until it strikes the outermost edge of it during the full " maximum moon " , again in mid @-@ winter . 
 Fajada Butte bears five other petroglyphs — including a carving of a " rattlesnake " , other spirals , and a rectangle — that are conspicuously lit by contrasts between sunbeams and shadows during equinoxes or solstices . Public access to the butte was curtailed when , in 1989 , erosion from modern foot traffic was found to be responsible for one of the three screening slabs at the " Sun Dagger " site shifting out of its ancient position ; the assemblage of stones has thus lost some of its former spatial and temporal precision as a solar and lunar calendar . In 1990 the screens were stabilized and placed under observation , but the wayward slab was not moved back into its original orientation . 
 = = = Alignments = = = 
 Some parties have advanced the theory that at least 12 of the 14 principal Chacoan complexes were sited and aligned in coordination , and that each was oriented along axes that mirrored the passing of the Sun and Moon at visually pivotal times . The first great house known to evince fastidious proportioning and alignment was Casa Rinconada : the twinned " T " -shaped portals of its 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) radius great kiva were north @-@ south collinear , and axes joining opposing windows passed within 10 centimetres ( 4 in ) of its center . The great houses of Pueblo Bonito and Chetro Ketl were found by the " Solstice Project " and the U.S. National Geodetic Survey to be sited along a precisely east @-@ west line , an axis that captures the passage of the equinox sun . The lines perpendicularly bisecting their principal walls are aligned north @-@ south , implying a possible intent to mirror the equinox midday . Pueblo Alto and Tsin <unk> are also north @-@ south aligned . These two axes form an inverted cross when viewed from above ; its northbound reach is extended another 35 miles ( 56 km ) past Pueblo Alto by the ramrod @-@ straight Great North Road , a pilgrimage route that modern @-@ day Pueblo Indians believe to be an allusion to myths surrounding their arrival from the distant north . 
 Two shared @-@ latitude but diametrically opposed complexes , Pueblo Pintado and Kin <unk> , are located some 15 miles ( 24 km ) from the core buildings of the central canyon . Each lie on a path from the central canyon that is collinear with the passage and setting of the full mid @-@ winter " minimum moon " , which recurs every 18 @.@ 6 years . Two other complexes that are less distant from Pueblo Bonito , Una Vida and Peñasco Blanco , share an axis collinear with the passage of the full " maximum moon " . The terms " minimum " and " maximum " refer to the azimuthal extreme points in the lunar excursion cycle , or the swings in direction relative to true north that the setting full moon exhibits . It takes roughly 9 @.@ 25 years for the rising or setting full moon nearest to winter solstice to proceed from its maximum azimuthal north , or " maximum extremum " , to its southernmost azimuth , known as " minimum extremum " . 
 Reasons for the alignments have been offered : 
 As these people would view the heavens ... there was an order of things up there . What you had here ... contrasted to that . Some years it was too dry , too hot ... too windy , too cold . If there was a way to transfer the orderly nature of the cosmos down onto what seems to be chaos that exists here , then you begin to then integrate at this place both heaven and earth . And this would be ... the center place . 
 = = Photo gallery = = 
 = Masonic Hall , Taunton = 
 The Masonic Hall in Taunton , Somerset , is designated by Historic England as a Grade II * listed building . It was originally built in the early 19th century as St George 's Chapel , the first Roman Catholic chapel open for public worship in Taunton since the Reformation . The building , which forms the end of a terrace , features a series of prominent Ionic pilasters along the front and southern end . 
 Opened in 1822 , St George 's Chapel served Taunton 's growing Catholic community for over 35 years , before they moved to a larger church which was completed in 1860 . After being rented out for a time , when it was known as St George 's Hall , the building was then sold in 1878 to a company acting on behalf of a group of Freemasons , who purchased it to provide a home for the Unanimity & Sincerity Lodge . It now hosts nine different Lodges of the Freemasons . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Catholic chapel = = = 
 Prior to the Reformation , Taunton had three Catholic churches ; the Church of St Peter and St Paul , which was part of Taunton Priory , and was destroyed during the Dissolution ; and the Churches of St Mary Magdalene and St James , which both became Anglican . The Roman Catholic Church all but died in Taunton ; one book records that prior to the 19th century , " there were no Papists in Taunton " . In 1787 , a Mission Rector was sent to Taunton . Four years later , Catholic chapels were legalised , and the rector registered a chapel in a house on Canon Street . Upon his death in 1818 , a new rector was appointed ; Rev. Samuel Fisher . The new rector immediately began raising money for a permanent church , which was opened on 3 July 1822 . The building was located on The Crescent , and was dedicated to Saint George . The church seated 200 ; greater than the estimated 120 Catholic resident in Taunton . This new church , known as St George 's Chapel , was the first public Roman Catholic church in Taunton since the Reformation . 
 Within 35 years , the congregation had swelled , and St George 's Chapel was no longer large enough to serve the Catholics of Taunton . The nearby Franciscan Convent purchased a plot of land adjacent to their own in 1858 , and St George 's Church was opened in April 1860 , to replace the chapel of the same dedication . 
 = = = Masonic Hall = = = 
 The chapel building was subsequently let out for various uses , and known as " St George 's Hall " . In 1878 , the hall was purchased by members of the Unanimity & Sincerity Lodge of the Freemasons , and named the Masonic Hall ; it was consecrated by Henry Herbert , 4th Earl of Carnarvon , the Provincial Grand Master of Somerset Freemasons in January the following year . The Unanimity & Sincerity Lodge had originally met in Ilminster after their constitution in 1788 , and moved to Taunton in 1797 , meeting at the London Inn . The owners of the building , though members of the Freemasons had purchased the property as a limited company , and also rented the building to other users : Richard Huish 's School taught their girl 's classes from there , and the cellars were used by a wine merchant . 
 After purchasing the building , the Masonic Hall Company , in addition to the necessary decorating , also commissioned a builder , William <unk> to carry out a number of structural changes ; the lobby was split into three rooms , to provide a " robing chamber " on one side , and a small waiting room on the other . Beyond the large main hall , what had been the vestry had a temporary partition removed , and a toilet added . The staircase down to the kitchen was moved , and in the kitchen itself a cooking range was installed . In the mid @-@ 1880s , an extension was made to the hall by the same builder ; a two @-@ storey building , of which the ground floor served as a warehouse . The extension replaced a previous building that had been deemed " unfit for repair " . The extension was completed at a cost of £ 337 and 10 shillings , slightly more than the initial estimate . By 1892 , the hall was no longer being used by the school , now known as Bishop Fox 's , for their girl 's lessons . Further renovations were carried out around that time at a cost of just over £ 180 . 
 The hall continued to be let out for various social functions , and is currently home to nine lodges of the Freemasons ; Unanimity & Sincerity Lodge , Lodge of St George , Taunton Deane Lodge , Queens College Lodge , Old <unk> Lodge , Taunton School Lodge , Richard Huish Lodge , Vivary Lodge and the Emergency Services Lodge . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Masonic Hall sits at the southern end of a terrace . It has a stucco front , with two pairs of Ionic pilasters ; the larger ones frame the building , and appear to support an overhanging cornice with a decorative dentil finish . The smaller pilasters are either side of a large doorway , and are topped by a pediment . The double wooden doors have six panels , and are fronted by six steps which are almost the same width as the building . On the southern side of the building , more Ionic pilasters rise the height of the building , spread between four large windows . 
 The hall is designated by Historic England as a Grade II * listed building , and is considered to form a group with Numbers 1 – 11 and 15 – 20 The Crescent , which are both similarly Grade II * listed , and with the Grade II listed properties ; 21 and 22 The Crescent , Somerset County Club , Dragon Book Shop and Number 14 Bath Place . 
 = Clark Kent ( Smallville ) = 
 Clark Kent is a fictional character on the television series Smallville . The character of Clark Kent , first created for comic books by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster in 1938 as the alternate identity of Superman , was adapted to television in 2001 by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar . This is the fourth time the character has been adapted to a live @-@ action television series . Clark Kent has been played continually by Tom Welling , with various other actors portraying Clark as a child . The character has also appeared in various literature based on the Smallville series , all of which are completely independent of the television episodes . As of 2011 , Smallville 's Clark Kent has appeared in eighteen young adult novels . 
 In the series , Clark Kent attempts to live the life of a normal human being , and struggles with keeping the secret of his alien heritage from his friends . He has an on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship with Lana Lang through the first seven seasons , the trials of which are based on his lack of honesty about his secret . In contrast to previous incarnations of the character , this Clark Kent starts out best friends with Lex Luthor , whom he meets after saving the latter 's life . The pair 's friendship eventually deteriorates into hatred for one another . In Smallville , Clark 's powers appear over time , as he is not aware of all of them at the start of the show ; for instance , his heat vision and super breath do not develop until season two and six , respectively . 
 When developing Smallville 's version of Clark Kent , the producers decided to strip him down to the " bare essence " of Superman ; he is also fallible , which allows the audience to see his humanity , but that he is also " ... good to the core " . In the series , he has been seen by critics , and intentionally portrayed by the filmmakers , as a symbolic representation of Jesus Christ . Tom Welling has been nominated for multiple Teen Choice and Saturn Awards for his portrayal of Clark Kent since the show 's first season . 
 = = Role in Smallville = = 
 Clark Kent first appears in the pilot episode of Smallville as a teen with superhuman abilities that he uses to help others . Clark is adopted by Jonathan and Martha Kent ( John Schneider and Annette O 'Toole ) as an infant , when he crash lands on Earth on the day of the Smallville meteor shower in 1989 . Twelve years later , trying to find his place in life after being told he is an alien by his adoptive father , Clark saves the life of Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) , the son of billionaire Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) , and the pair become quick friends . During season one , Clark struggles with the burden of keeping his powers a secret from those close to him . In particular , he is afraid to open up to Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) for fear that she would not accept him if she learned of his supernatural abilities . 
 In the season two episode " Rosetta " , Clark learns of his Kryptonian heritage , including his native language , his birth name ( Kal @-@ El ) , and his birth father 's Jor @-@ El ( Terence Stamp ) plan for him to rule the world . Fearful that he will not be able to control his own destiny , Clark runs away to Metropolis in the season two finale , leaving behind Lana , with whom he had started to develop a romantic relationship . In the season three premiere , three months later , Clark is brought home by Jonathan , who has agreed to allow Jor @-@ El to take Clark at an undetermined time in the future . In the season three finale , a girl calling herself Kara arrives at the Kent farm and claims to be from Krypton . After Kara predicts that Clark 's friends are destined to leave or betray him , Clark decides to leave Smallville for good . When Jonathan attempts to intervene , Jor @-@ El threatens to kill him . To save his adoptive father 's life , Clark agrees to go through with his decision to leave . 
 In the season four premiere , Clark returns to Smallville . He has been " reprogrammed " by Jor @-@ El to seek out the three stones of knowledge so he may fulfill his destiny . He meets Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) , who is investigating the supposed death of her cousin , and Clark 's best friend , Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) . Clark , with help from his mother , regains control over his mind and consciously refuses to look for the stones . In the season four finale , a " great evil " is awakened in space after Clark defies Jor @-@ El 's instructions and fails to obtain the three stones of knowledge . With a new meteor shower hitting Smallville , Clark finds the remaining stones and is transported to the Arctic , where the three stones create the Fortress of Solitude . 
 In the season five premiere , Clark interrupts his training to return to Smallville , but when he fails to return to the Fortress before the Sun sets , he is stripped of his powers . In the episode " Hidden " , Clark begins an honest relationship with Lana , but is killed trying to save the town from a resident who hopes to kill all of the " ... meteor freaks " . Jor @-@ El resurrects Clark , but warns him that someone he loves will eventually have to take his place . Clark worries about who will be sacrificed in return for him being saved . In the episode " Reckoning " , Lana is killed . Unwilling to accept this , Clark turns back time to save her . As a result , it is Clark 's adoptive father that becomes the sacrifice when he suffers a fatal heart attack . In the season five finale , Clark battles Brainiac ( James Marsters ) , a Kryptonian artificial intelligence in the form of a man . Clark fights to stop Brainiac from releasing the Kryptonian criminal Zod from the Phantom Zone . Clark fails , and becomes himself imprisoned in the Phantom Zone , while Zod escapes and sets out to conquer Earth . 
 In the season six premiere , Clark escapes the Phantom Zone — inadvertently releasing several of the prisoners in the process — and returns to Smallville , where he fights and defeats Zod . The other Phantom Zone escapees become Clark 's primary focus in season six . He must also deal with Lana 's romantic relationship with Lex , which culminates in their engagement in the season six episode " Promise " . The season six finale reveals that the last of the Phantom Zone criminals is really a genetic experiment created by Kryptonian scientists . The escapee attacks Clark , cloning his DNA , and becomes Clark 's doppelgänger . In the season seven premiere , Clark , together with John Jones ( Phil Morris ) , defeats his doppelgänger . As the season continues , Clark discovers that a secret society known as Veritas was aware of his landing in Smallville during the first meteor shower and , moreover , possess a device that supposedly allows them to control him . In the season seven finale , Clark is confronted by Lex at the Fortress of Solitude . Lex has discovered Clark 's secret and possesses the Veritas device , which he uses , resulting in the Fortress collapsing on him and Clark . 
 In the season eight premiere , it is revealed that the Veritas device does not allow others to control Clark , but rather strips him of his powers . Wandering the globe with Russian gangsters , Clark is eventually found and rescued by Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) and John Jones , with the latter restoring Clarks powers . During season eight , Clark uses his new job at the Daily Planet to access advance information , which he uses to stop crime around the city . In subsequent episodes , Clark adopts the name " Red @-@ Blue Blur " as his superhero moniker . Toward the end of the season , Clark wrestles with the idea of having to kill Davis Bloome ( Sam Witwer ) , a new friend , after discovering that Davis is actually Doomsday , a genetically engineered creature created by General Zod to kill Clark and destroy Earth . In the season eight finale , Clark finds a way to separate Davis ' personality from that of Doomsday , and buries Doomsday a mile underground . When Davis subsequently kills Jimmy Olsen ( Aaron Ashmore ) , Clark decides that his human @-@ learned emotions have caused him the most trouble , as it was his compassion for Davis that led to Jimmy 's death . He vows that " Clark Kent is dead " . 
 The start of season nine reveals that Clark has begun training with Jor @-@ El , which is shown by his wearing his family crest on his chest when in his superhero persona . After realizing there are other Kryptonians on Earth , lacking special powers and led by Zod ( Callum Blue ) , Clark decides to help them adjust to living as humans . When Zod is shot and killed , Clark uses his own blood to bring him back to life , resulting in Zod regaining his Kryptonian powers . Zod enables the other Kryptonians to regain their powers as well , and unites them to destroy the world in order to turn it into a new Krypton . This season , Lois and Clark begin a romantic relationship , while Lois also assists " The Blur " in his heroic endeavors . Clark kisses Lois while he is " the Blur " in the season nine finale and unknowingly reveals to her the truth . Afterward , he convinces the Kryptonians to leave Earth for a new , uninhabited planet . Clark then sacrifices his own life to send Zod through a portal , far away from Earth . 
 Season ten begins with Clark stuck in the afterlife , where Jor @-@ El informs him that a great darkness is coming to Earth . Clark is unknowingly resurrected by Lois , who is now aware that he is " the Blur " . Jor @-@ El also informs Clark that he is not ready to be Earth 's true savior , as there are inner demons that Clark must overcome first . In the episode " Homecoming " , Clark is visited by Brainiac 5 , who shows Clark how his past has shaped his present , and will one day shape his future ; including a vision of Clark 's future self when he has fully embraced his destiny . In the episode " Isis " , Clark reveals his secret to Lois only to find out that she already knew he was " the Blur " , which is followed in a later episode by Clark proposing to Lois . Clark realizes that in order to be the hero the world needs , he will have to step out of the shadows and into the light . As a result , Clark makes the decision to turn " Clark Kent " into a real disguise — opting to wear eyeglasses and alter his mannerisms to be more shy and reserved — so that the Blur does not have to hide his face to the world . By the series finale , the darkness , which is revealed to be Darkseid , arrives on Earth to enslave all of humanity . Clark realizes that his entire life has been one big trial by Jor @-@ El ; accepting his true destiny , the Blur saves Earth from Darkseid 's coming Apokolips . The series ends by moving seven years into the future , where Clark and Lois are finally getting married , and Clark has embraced his new identity as " Superman " . 
 Throughout the series , Clark gains and adjusts to new abilities , including X @-@ ray vision in season one , heat vision in season two , and super hearing in season three . Clark unofficially flew in the season four premiere , when he was reprogrammed as " Kal @-@ El " by his biological father , but upon regaining his memory he forgot how to use the ability . In season six , Clark gained his super breath . By the series finale , Clark learns to fly . Clark also discovers new vulnerabilities as the series progresses , including " green meteor rocks " or ( kryptonite ) , which he learns can weaken and potentially kill him . Various other forms of kryptonite appeared as the show continued , each with a different effect . Red kryptonite removed Clark 's inhibitions . Black kryptonite separated Clark 's Kryptonian personality from his human self , creating two distinct physical forms , and blue kryptonite stripped him of all supernatural abilities as long as it was in contact with him . Subsequent seasons also revealed that Clark could be vulnerable to alien weapons and magic . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 In October 2000 , producers Al Gough and Miles Millar began their search for the three lead roles , and had casting directors in ten different cities looking at actors . After months of scouting , Tom Welling was cast as Clark Kent . Jensen Ackles , the runner up for the role of Clark Kent , would go on to play Jason Teague as a season four regular . Besides Welling , four other actors have portrayed Clark as young boy / teenager : <unk> <unk> portrayed a three @-@ year @-@ old Clark in the pilot , and season two episode " Lineage " ; Brandon Fonseca played young Clark in the season five episode " Vengeance " ; and in the season eight episode " Abyss " , Jackson <unk> would fill the role . In addition , in an alternate reality in the seventh season episode " Apocalypse " , a teenaged Clark Kent was portrayed by Brett Dier . 
 The pilot director , David Nutter , was looking through pictures of actors and stumbled on Tom Welling 's image . When he asked about Welling , the casting director said Welling 's manager did not want him to do the role because it could hurt his feature film career . After a conversation with Welling 's manager , Nutter got Welling to read the script for the pilot , which convinced him to do the part . Welling 's initial fears were quelled after reading the script , when he realized that the show was not about Clark " ... being a super hero ... , " but more about the character attempting to live a normal life as a teenager . 
 When Tom Welling auditioned for the role he was not sure how to prepare . While waiting for his turn , he realized that the character is one thing above all else : " ... a high school kid .... " To Welling , simply acting like he was a normal teenager , instead of like a super hero , was the perfect way to embody the character . Welling realized that by doing that , the special effects and other production elements would fill in the holes and perfect the character on screen . For one of his auditions , he read the graveyard scene with Kristin Kreuk ( the first actor to be cast for the show ) , and the network thought they had " ... great chemistry " . 
 Welling was generally unfamiliar with the Superman mythology , so much so that when an episode of Lois & Clark : The New Adventures of Superman aired on television , which featured Clark learning about his Kryptonian heritage , Welling immediately turned the show off . According to Welling , he wanted to learn about Clark 's heritage simultaneously to Clark learning about it on Smallville . Welling believed that it was important for him to learn with the character , to help him be the Clark Kent envisioned by Al Gough and Miles Millar . The actor believed his lack of knowledge of the Superman mythology helped his performance , because Gough and Millar set up the series so that the previous mythology was not as important . Welling also enjoyed that he was in the same predicament as Clark with neither knowing the future of the character , beyond the fact that he will be Superman . When Welling landed the role of Clark Kent he was sent various Superman @-@ related gifts , including books and toys , which Welling planned to leave unopened until the show was over . Welling was adamant from the beginning that he did not sign on to play Superman , and had no intention of wearing the costume . While filming , Welling was allowed input into how his character responded in certain situations , including moving the scene between rooms , or requesting the director film particular mannerisms to emphasize a specific emotion . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Storyline progression = = = 
 Early in the series , Clark was still learning how to handle his life , by learning to control his powers and find the best solution for everyone . His main priority was to fit in with his friends at school and be an average guy . Initially , Clark 's biggest problem was the fact that he could not share his secret with anyone he cared about . According to Welling , " He is burdened with a lot of responsibility . He hasn 't been able to choose whether or not he has these abilities . All this responsibility has just been thrust on him , and he has to deal with it . There have got to be times when he goes home and thinks to himself , ‘ Why me ? ' He wishes it could all go away and he could just be normal . That 's part of the character dilemma which makes him interesting to play . " Welling noted that the show was not about Clark always saving the day , but more about how using his powers " ... alienate [ s ] him from others " . Welling reasoned that by the end of season three , Clark had decided that leaving Smallville and going with Jor @-@ El was something that would save everyone a lot of pain in the long run . Welling described why Clark finally gave in to Jor @-@ El at the end of season three : 
 " If you can 't fight them , you might as well join them [ ... ] he was choosing the lesser of two evils to go with Jor @-@ El . I think a combination of those two things would probably sum it up . A lot of times in your life , you get to a point where you go , ' I just can 't fight this anymore . There 's nothing I can do about it , so I better get up out of bed and go to work ! ' And in a sense , that 's what Clark had to do . Somehow he had to try to face what it was that was causing him so much pain — and everyone else so much pain — and maybe he reasoned that by causing everyone else a little bit of pain , he could save them a lot of pain in the long run . " 
 A significant moment in the character 's story came when Clark decided to play football in season four , providing conflict between him and his father . Writer Darren Swimmer refers to this moment as a " ... callback to [ Hothead ] ... " in season one . To him , when Clark defies Jonathan and joins the team anyway , it signified the moment where Jonathan finally decided that he can trust Clark to not hurt anyone . Writer Todd Slavkin viewed it as Clark finally emerging from his father 's shadow . Two more significant moments came during the following season . First , Clark lost his powers when he failed to return to Jor @-@ El to finish his training ; leaving him human and vulnerable . According to Welling , " ... [ Clark ] learned a little bit more about what it 's like to be human , physically . Emotionally , he 's pretty close to trying to understand that . It added more weight to his abilities once he got them back , and it made him realize his responsibilities for what he has . " The second moment came in the show 's 100th episode , with the death of Clark 's adoptive father . The decision to kill Jonathan was made so that Clark could finally step into his destiny , allowing Clark the boy to become Clark the man , as explained by Gough . In order to do that he needed his mentor to die , so that no one would buffer him from the world any longer . Welling saw the series ' 100th episode as the chance for his character to evolve and grow . John Schneider saw the same catalyst for Clark 's evolution . According to Schneider , Jonathan 's death inspired Clark to make the move toward his eventual destiny . Jonathan provided such an example of sacrifice that it leaves a void in Clark . To fill that void Clark would have to become Superman . It was Schneider 's contention that had Jonathan not been the man he was , when the time came that the world needed Superman , Clark would have been unable to take on that persona , because he would not realize that the world needed him . 
 Writer Holly Harold noted that the introduction of Green Arrow ( Justin Hartley ) allowed Clark to mature more in the sixth season . Clark was able to see how others achieved the same goals , but used alternative routes that perhaps crossed moral lines . This taught Clark to start thinking about things from his opponents ' perspectives . Ultimately , in season six Clark learned it would be his human side that allowed him to become the hero he needed to be , summed up by writer Turi Meyer as " ... soon @-@ to @-@ be Man of Steel " . Each season , Clark gained insight into how not to misuse his abilities from the kryptonite @-@ mutated villains that used them for crime . In later seasons , Clark saw how even those that used their abilities for good might still have questionable actions , specifically Arthur Curry ( Alan Ritchson ) and Andrea Rojas ( Denise Quiñones ) , though Clark did help them take the high road . Those episodes reiterated the effect Clark 's parents had on how he used his abilities . Clark also learned that he cannot do everything alone , even though he chose not to join Oliver 's team of superheroes at the end of the episode " Justice " . For Meyer , season six showed that Clark was still struggling to accept his destiny , but did take steps toward the day that he would put on the cape and become Superman . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 The idea Gough and Millar came up with for their show 's version of Clark Kent was to strip him down to his " ... bare essence ... " , discovering the reasons why Clark became Superman . In Smallville , Clark is fallible , as Gough explains : 
 The thing that we 've tried to portray ... is that Clark doesn 't always make the right decisions , and by not making the right decisions , he brings further consequences on himself . Whether it 's running away from Jor @-@ El at the end of season two , or choosing humanity over some sort of Kryptonian mission , those decisions get him in more trouble , and cause more people to suffer , or in Jonathan Kent 's case , to die . 
 Welling agreed with Gough 's opinion of Clark 's fallibility , stating that the mistakes Clark made showed his humanity . 
 Even though Clark could make the wrong choices , season five 's " Aqua " helped illustrate the concept that Clark was " ... good to the core " . The episode showed how protective he could be over someone , even when that person annoyed him . In this case , he was trying to warn Lois that Arthur Curry may not have been the man she believed him to be . This concept was echoed by the Seattle Times ' Julia Waterhous , who noted that Clark , despite all his flaws , always put others before himself . Welling 's fellow actors also had their own insights into the character . Kristin Kreuk saw Clark as a kindred spirit who was sad , lonely , but also endearing ; whereas John Schneider classified Clark as a special needs child . 
 Just like his comic book counterpart , Smallville 's Clark Kent was a symbolic representation of Jesus Christ . Established early on , the pilot episode contained a moment when Clark was crucified on a scarecrow post during a high school hazing . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette 's Rob Owen noted the Christ @-@ like imagery of the scene , stating , " Is it any wonder Clark gets tied up there since Superman , too , was ' sent to save us ' ? " Echoing Owen , Judge Byun identified the same symbolism : " Superman is , in a way , the secular pop culture stand @-@ in for Jesus Christ , a messiah figure for our generation . The series makes this theme explicit in its pilot episode , in which Clark is symbolically ' crucified ' in a cornfield . That striking bit of symbolism becomes the central preoccupation of the series ; Clark is the savior who sacrifices all for the greater good of humanity , and Smallville shows us how he comes to accept and embrace that role . " 
 This was extended to the end of season nine , where Clark sacrificed his own life in the finale , in order to send General Zod and the rest of the Kandorians to their own world . In doing so , Clark fell off a building " ... in full crucifixion pose , driving home the point that he is sacrificing himself for the good of the planet " . To this point , Cinefantastique 's Tom Powers suggested that these images and metaphorical emphasis through dialogue exchanges came across so heavy @-@ handed that a very devout individual might have found them offensive . 
 In addition to religious allusions , the crew used color schemes and camera movements to create their own themes for the characters . Since the show was told from Clark 's point of view , particular visual elements were utilized to illustrate a particular characteristic . When he was safe at home the colors used to illustrate the environment were warm and gentle , with an earth tone , while the camera movement was gentle as well . When Clark was keeping his secret , but there was no danger around , the lighting was more neutral , with greater camera movement . When there was danger , the lighting became colder with more grays and blues , and the camera shifted to a handheld , allowing more extreme angles . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Clark 's relationships with the other characters evolved over the course of the show . Clark 's relationship with Lex Luthor was symbolic , as the two shared a yin and yang type of relationship . In the pilot , Clark first saved Lex from drowning after a car accident ; at the end of the episode , Lex saved Clark when he was strung up in the cornfield and immobilized by kryptonite . His relationship with Lex was tested by his lack of honesty , just like it was with Lana for the first six seasons ; the same could be said for Lex 's dishonesty with Clark . Both characters wanted to be completely honest with each other , but knew they could not , which inhibited their friendship . 
 His relationship with Lana Lang was one of Smallville 's central relationships . When Clark and Lana met in the cemetery , Clark realized that he had found someone who understood him , who he could talk to , even though it was not in as strong a way as he would have liked . Although Clark felt close to Lana , his fear that she would " ... kick him out of her life ... " if she learned his secret — that he came in the meteor shower that killed her parents — was strong enough to keep him from becoming as close to her as he wished . The lack of honesty caused issues between them . Judge Byun wondered how this Clark Kent would have room in his heart for Lois Lane later in life , as the he bounced back and forth between Lana and Chloe in the first season . 
 With Lana 's boyfriend gone by season two , the door opened for Clark , but Welling stated he understood why the producers continued to keep Clark and Lana apart , even after Whitney 's departure : " There 's the cliché that television shows with a main lover interest fail once they get it together . " After briefly being together at the beginning of the fifth season , Clark 's upbringing was not enough to help him cope with the loss of Lana to Lex toward the end of season five . Welling admits that Clark had learned to let Lana make her own choices and not stand in her way , but his problem with her relationship with Lex was that Lex is a dangerous individual and it put Lana 's safety in jeopardy . Apart from that , Clark had learned to walk the lonely road of a hero . His inability to cope with Lana moving on with Lex was carried over to season six . This season was the time the writers put Clark through an emotional wringer when they had Lana accept Lex 's marriage proposal . For writer Kelly Souders , this presented Clark 's worst fear : the woman he loved was marrying his worst enemy . 
 Apart from Lana , Clark had a growing relationship with Lois . Season five saw the melting of the ice between the two characters , who continued to butt heads . Executive producer Darren Swimmer believed that the audience could finally start to see a growing attraction between the two , and the fact that both would be there for the other in a time of need . Erica Durance believed that Lois in season five , because of her self @-@ imposed walls , laughed off any notion that she had a romantic interest in Clark , even if that notion was true . In season six , Durance described the relationship between Lois and Clark as something neither character wanted to put an official label on . Instead , Durance believed that , by that point in the series , Clark and Lois were satisfied with identifying with a " brother and sister friendship " label , rather than trying to discover how each truly feels . By season eight , Durance noted that Lois was starting to accept the idea that she may be in love with Clark more than she had been with anyone else in her life . His relationship with Lois was included in TV Guide 's list of the best TV couples of all time . 
 = = = Costume = = = 
 For most of the series , Clark did not wear any sort of costume when in his superhero persona . From seasons one through eight , Clark was typically dressed in either red , yellow and blue ( the traditional colors of the Superman costume ) , or in the All @-@ American colors of red , white , and blue . This included the primary usage of either a blue t @-@ shirt underneath a red jacket , or a red t @-@ shirt worn under a blue jacket . In season nine , the producers decided to design an actual costume for Clark to wear while patrolling the streets of Metropolis . Abandoning the theme of red , blue , and yellow , the producers chose to keep the costume completely black , save for a silver Superman " S " shield painted on the front . Instead of the traditional cape , Clark 's red jacket is traded for a black trenchcoat . This drew comparison to the character of Neo from The Matrix film series . It was also compared to the black suit Superman wore after being resurrected , following his death at the hands of Doomsday in the comic books . 
 In the season ten premiere , the audience got its first glimpse of the traditional Superman costume , which was left for Clark by Martha in the season nine finale . Although the suit was briefly seen through a reflection in Clark 's eyes in the season nine finale , the suit that appeared in the season ten premiere was a different design . The producers , working alongside Warner Bros. and DC Comics , procured the costume worn by Brandon Routh in Superman Returns , which the team chose over the Christopher Reeve suit of the 1980s . DC Comics offered the suit worn by Reeve , but Peterson explained that it " ... just didn 't quite fit with our world . " According to producer Kelly Souders , " Well , the process was really a group effort . We worked with DC , and we have Alicia Louis , who does a lot of stuff for us at the studio , and who was really instrumental . It took quite a bit to get that costume . There 's a lot of sign @-@ offs , it really was Warner Bros. and DC and us working to make it happen . " Peterson stated that the costume plays a more prominent role in the final season , with the last scene of Smallville ending with Clark wearing it . Before then , Clark began wearing a new costume in the season ten episode " Shield " . Here , Clark replaced the black <unk> with a red leather jacket , and the " S " shield now embossed onto the chest of that jacket . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2002 , Welling was nominated for his first Saturn Award for Best Actor in a Television series , for his portrayal of Clark Kent in Smallville . Following that , Welling was nominated another four consecutive years , 2003 to 2006 , for the Saturn Award for Best Actor in a Television series . The same year he was nominated for his first Saturn Award , Welling won a Teen Choice Award for Choice Breakout TV Star , Male . Although he has not won a Teen Choice Award since , just like with the Saturn Awards , he has been nominated for Choice Actor in television for the four consecutive years after his win , 2003 to 2006 , Although not nominated in 2007 , he did receive a nomination in 2008 and 2009 for Choice Male in an Action / Adventure series . Welling was also nominated for the 2006 Teen Choice Awards for Most Beautiful Couple ( TV — Choice Chemistry ) , with his co @-@ star Kristin Kreuk . In the 2009 Teen Choice Awards , Tom Welling received the award for Choice TV Actor — Action Adventure . Welling was included in TV Guide 's list of " TV 's Sexiest Crime Fighters " . 
 Bryan Byun , of DVD Verdict , believes that Welling was the perfect choice for Clark Kent : " I can 't imagine a more ideal actor to play this superpowered farm boy than Tom Welling , with his wholesome , honest face and heroic good looks — Welling not only resembles Christopher Reeve physically , but has all of the earnest charm that made Reeve the quintessential Superman . " The Free Lance – Star 's Ron Hedelt likened Welling 's performances as Clark Kent to that of Christopher Reeve 's performances in the Superman films , stating that Welling manages to portray a " ... sweet , unassuming teenager ... " while showing Clark struggle with the truth about himself . <unk> 's Rob Worley also wrote of the physical resemblance Welling has to Christopher Reeve , noting that the actor gave the character depth with his convincing portrayal of Clark 's longing to fit in . When comparing Smallville 's Clark Kent to Bryan Singer 's Superman ( Brandon Routh ) in Superman Returns , Seattle Times ' Julia Waterhous found Smallville 's Clark Kent to be the more intriguing character . Waterhous explained that this was due to the inner turmoil of Clark — not being able to tell those he loved his secret — and the fact that no matter what his faults were he continued to put others before himself , remaining " ... pure and good ... " . She explained that this allowed the audience to become intimate with the character , something lacking in the film version . According to the Associated Press , Welling 's popularity as Clark Kent on Smallville had fans of the show wishing he would take the role Routh received in Superman Returns . 
 = = Other media appearances = = 
 = = = Young Adult novels = = = 
 Smallville 's Clark Kent has also appeared in two series of young adult novels . The first was published by Aspect publishing ; consisting of eight novels , which began in October 2002 and ended in March 2004 . The second series was published by Little , Brown Young Readers , also beginning in October 2002 , with a total of ten young adult novels published through April 2004 . 
 In Aspect 's first novel , Smallville : Strange Visitors , written by Roger Stern , Clark attempted to stop two religious con @-@ men from robbing the town with their kryptonite @-@ enhanced spiritual seminars . Little 's first novel , Arrival , chronicled the events of the show 's pilot as written by author Michael Teitelbaum , and their second book , See No Evil , also published in October 2002 and was written by Cherie Bennett and Jeff Gottesfeld — who have also written episodes of the show — featured Clark trying to stop Dawn Mills , a young actress , from hurting people who speak badly about her , by using her power to turn invisible . 
 On November 1 , 2002 , Aspect published Alan Grant 's book , Smallville : Dragon , which had Clark being hypnotized into believing that he was a normal , human teenager , with no abilities . Little 's Flight featured Clark trying to lend emotional support to a young girl who has full @-@ sized wings . The next Aspect novel , Hauntings , followed Clark and his friends as they investigate a ghostly presence in one of Smallville 's haunted houses . Animal Rage followed Clark as he tries to stop an animal rights activist when she tries to hurt the people harming animals in Smallville . Aspect brought in Dean Wesley Smith for their next novel , <unk> , which involved Clark , Chloe , Lana and Pete investigating the murder of a boy and his sister . 
 Little published their next two books in April and June 2003 . The first , Speed , had Clark fighting hate crimes in Smallville . The second , Buried Secrets , followed Clark and Lex as they both fell in love with a mind @-@ reading , substitute Spanish teacher . In the novel , Clark and Lex 's friendship was put in jeopardy as the two competed for the teacher 's love . On September 9 , 2004 , Aspect published Shadows , where Clark must stop a girl 's scientist father , who has created a monster that is killing people . Runaway featured Clark leaving Smallville and living on the streets of Metropolis with other homeless teenagers . Clark fell in love with one of the girls before eventually returning home . Smallville : Silence has Clark and his friends investigating the appearance of zombies . Little 's Greed followed Clark and his friends as they took jobs as summer counselors to disadvantaged youths . Pete tried to abuse Clark 's abilities by tricking him into playing in a basketball game , and then betting on the outcome . 
 Alan Grant returned for a second outing to write Curse , about a grave digger who unleashed a 150 @-@ year @-@ old curse onto Smallville , and Clark 's attempt to put everything back the way it was . In Temptation , Clark used red kryptonite to try and impress Lana and Chloe after they become infatuated with a new , French foreign exchange student . Aspect released their final novel on March 1 , 2004 ; written by Devin K. Grayson , City chronicled Clark and Lex 's trip to Metropolis . While in the city , the pair got caught between the Japanese mafia and a secret agent who believed he has found an alien . In Little , Brown Young Readers ' final novel , written by Cherie Bennett and Jeff Gottesfeld , Sparks featured Clark trying to save Chloe after she was exposed to a kryptonite fireworks display that makes her the desire of every man . For one of the men , when the desire wears off he decides that he really does want Chloe and kidnaps her . 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 In 2012 , the series was continued in Smallville : Season 11 , a comic book available both in digital and print formats . Every Friday for three weeks in a row , the stories which follow the primary story arcs , were released online and were referred to as episodes . The following week , the preceding three episodes were released as a print comic . Parallel to the main story arc , other story arcs featuring other characters ( many of which were part of the future " Justice League America " ) were released online every fourth Friday , and collected and printed in special editions by themselves , separate from the main story . Written by Bryan Q. Miller , who wrote for the television series , the comic took up the story of the Smallville characters six months after The Blur saved Earth from the Apokolips . Clark no longer fights crime by the alias The Blur , but has been dubbed Superman by the masses . 
 During the season Clark continued his battles with Lex Luthor , who had lost his memory . New characters were introduced , such as Commander Hank Henshaw , a participant in LexCorp 's project , Guardian Defense Platforms . In the third issue , Clark confronted Lex , during which Clark inadvertently implied that he knew Lex before his amnesia . Superman and Batman met and battled , but declared a truce , and began working together , eventually becoming friends . Clark also reunited with Bart Allen , who was seeking Clark 's aid in battling the Black Flash , who , ended up killing Bart during an ensuing battle . 
 At one point , Clark and Michael Jon Carter ( Booster Gold ) inadvertently traveled to the 31st century , where they found themselves caught in a war between New Krypton , led by Kara , and an army of <unk> , during which Doomsday is reawakened , then defeated when all the belligerents form an alliance . While in the future , Clark met a child named Bartholomew Allen , causing Clark to suspect he was a descendant of Bart and giving him hope that he was still alive . After meeting Diana Prince , with whom he teamed to defeat Hades and Felix Faust , Clark , as Superman , chose to reveal to the President that he was not a meteor @-@ infected individual as the public believed but was from another planet . Later , Clark attempted to rally the heroes and the world to make a stand against the Monitors . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 DC Direct has released action figures for Clark Kent , along with other Smallville characters . The first set of action figures was released on October 2 , 2002 , and was modeled after Clark 's appearance in the first season . The second series was released on May 7 , 2008 and was designed after Clark 's appearance in the season six episode " Justice " . 
 = Saido Berahino = 
 Saido Berahino ( born 4 August 1993 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for Premier League club West Bromwich Albion . 
 Having fled his native Burundi as a child , he received political asylum in Birmingham , and credits football with helping him integrate into English society . Berahino joined West Bromwich Albion at the age of 11 and turned professional seven years later . He spent time out on loan at Football League clubs Northampton Town , Brentford and Peterborough United ; the latter two spells were ended prematurely by a feud with his manager Uwe Rösler , and a knee injury , respectively . 
 Berahino made his first starts for West Bromwich Albion in the 2013 – 14 season , with highlights of that campaign including a hat @-@ trick against Newport County , and the winning goal at Old Trafford against Manchester United . In his second full season , he recorded 20 goals in 45 games across all competitions . Following that successful campaign , Berahino became involved in a lengthy transfer saga involving Tottenham Hotspur , straining his relationships with manager Tony Pulis and West Bromwich Albion chairman Jeremy Peace . 
 Berahino represented England at all youth levels from under @-@ 16 to under @-@ 21 , and was part of their under @-@ 17 team which won the 2010 European Championship . He was called up for the first time to the senior team in November 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Bujumbura , the capital of Burundi , Berahino played football as a child with a ball of plastic bags tied up with laces . His father was killed in 1997 during the Burundian Civil War . He travelled to England alone at the age of 10 , fleeing the ongoing war to join his mother , brother and sisters who had already been granted asylum in Newtown , Birmingham . He could not locate his family on arrival , and was put in a care home . After his mother Liliane was traced , immigration officials had to administer a DNA test to confirm their relationship . 
 Berahino attended Aston Manor School , where he gained ten GCSE certificates and competed in basketball and athletics in addition to football . His childhood friends included <unk> Javid and <unk> Gordon , both of whom went on to play County Championship cricket for Warwickshire . Initially speaking only French and having played street football in his native Burundi , Berahino attributed his love for the sport with helping him integrate quickly into English society . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 Berahino signed for the West Bromwich Albion Centre of Excellence in 2004 at under @-@ 12 level , joining from inner @-@ city team Phoenix United . He progressed through the youth system of the Baggies and in summer 2011 , he signed a professional contract with them . 
 = = = = Loans = = = = 
 On 20 October 2011 , Berahino joined League Two side Northampton Town on a one @-@ month loan deal . He made his professional debut for the Cobblers two days later in 2 – 1 defeat to Bradford City at Valley Parade , playing the full 90 minutes . Three days after that , he scored his first senior goal against Hereford United , albeit in a 1 – 3 home loss at <unk> . His loan was extended twice , on 3 November and on 5 January 2012 . Two days after his first extension , Berahino scored twice away to Gillingham , a goal in each half of a 4 – 3 loss . He ended his spell with 6 league goals in 14 appearances for Northampton , although they were struggling in League Two . 
 On 9 February 2012 , Berahino went out on loan again , this time at a higher level than before , by joining League One side Brentford through to the end of the season . He made his debut five days later , replacing Marcus Bean at the end of a 2 – 1 loss at Colchester United . In the next game , at Griffin Park on the 20th , he came on for Gary Alexander in the 28th minute and scored in each half of a 4 – 0 win against Carlisle United . He also scored both goals in a 2 – 0 win over Exeter City on 6 March , after which the club 's caretaker manager Alan Kernaghan praised him by saying : " Saido got the nod and he did well , but this was win [ sic ] built on a strong defensive performance as shown by another clean sheet . " Due to arguments with new manager Uwe Rösler , the loan spell with Brentford ended early and he returned to West Bromwich Albion on 3 April , having scored 4 goals in 8 appearances . 
 Berahino made his debut for West Brom as a substitute against Yeovil Town in a League Cup second round tie on 28 August 2012 , replacing Shane Long for the final six minutes of a 4 – 2 away win . 
 He signed on loan for Championship club Peterborough United on 1 October , in a deal until 2 January 2013 . The following day , he made his debut in a 2 – 0 win at Barnsley , replacing Emile Sinclair after 65 minutes . On 27 October , Berahino scored twice in a 3 – 0 win over Derby County . At <unk> United , manager Darren Ferguson said that Berahino would play more regularly . He played ten matches on his loan spell , which was cut short by a knee injury . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 At the start of the 2013 – 14 season , manager Steve Clarke suggested that Berahino should become West Bromwich Albion 's main centre forward , instead of the club signing a new one . Of their strikers from the previous season , <unk> <unk> had left for Everton and Peter Odemwingie had fallen out of favour at the club . 
 On 27 August 2013 he made his first start for West Brom in a League Cup tie against Newport County and scored a hat @-@ trick in a 3 – 0 home win . He made his first league appearance for the Baggies when he came on as a substitute in a 2 – 0 home defeat against Swansea City on 1 September 2013 , replacing Scott Sinclair for the last 15 minutes of the match . On 28 September , he replaced the injured Sinclair in the first half and scored his first Premier League goal , the winner in a 2 – 1 win against Manchester United at Old Trafford . He scored again on 2 November , opening a 2 – 0 home win over Crystal Palace . Berahino extended his contract with West Bromwich Albion on 2 December , committing him to the club until June 2017 . 
 Berahino scored the last goal of a 3 – 3 draw away to West Ham United at the Boleyn Ground on 28 December . His penalty four days later won the match against Newcastle United , ending a 10 @-@ match streak without a win for the team , and on 26 April he again netted the only goal , to defeat West Ham at home . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
