 Berahino scored both of West Brom 's goals in their first game of the 2014 – 15 Premier League season , a draw against Sunderland on 16 August 2014 . He scored twice more for the Baggies on 28 September , netting in either side of the half @-@ time whistle as West Brom defeated Burnley 4 – 0 . He equalled his league tally from the previous season with a penalty in a 2 – 1 loss to Liverpool on 4 October , having won the penalty after being fouled by Dejan <unk> . 
 On 20 October 2014 Berahino again scored against Manchester United , netting West Brom 's second in a home Premier League fixture which ended 2 – 2 . He converted an added @-@ time penalty at The Hawthorns against Crystal Palace on 1 November to secure a draw with the same score . His good start to the season prompted the club to consider a new contract worth over £ 50 @,@ 000 per week , but discussion of it was put on hold in late November due to his arrest on suspicion of drink driving . 
 On 3 January 2015 in the FA Cup third round , Berahino scored four goals in a 7 – 0 win against Gateshead . He did not celebrate any of these goals , which brought questions to new manager Tony Pulis who explained " you should go and see him in the dressing room , he 's more happy in there " . Berahino later stated " I was just handling business and acting professionally and that 's it " . 
 In February 2015 , West Bromwich Albion abandoned their contract talks with Berahino , and said they would consider offers above £ 20 million to sell him at the end of the season . The club had been put off by his conduct , as well as an unauthorised interview with Sky Sports in which he declared that he was playing in order to get a transfer to a " bigger " club . On 11 February , Berahino scored his 10th goal of the Premier League season , and fifteenth overall , concluding a 2 – 0 home win over Swansea City . Three days later , he scored the team 's final goal in a 4 – 0 defeat of West Ham United to put the Baggies into the quarter @-@ finals of the FA Cup for the first time since 2008 . On 28 February , Berahino netted his 17th goal of the season across all competitions , scoring the only goal of the game after 72 seconds for a league victory against Southampton . 
 Away at Manchester United on 2 May , he conceded a penalty by handling Antonio Valencia 's cross , but Boaz Myhill saved from Robin van Persie and West Bromwich Albion won 1 – 0 . Sixteen days later , Berahino scored twice in a 3 – 0 win over recently crowned league champions Chelsea , the second goal was his 20th of the season , a penalty after he was fouled by John Terry . He finished the season with the club 's Player 's Player of the Year Award . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 In August 2015 , West Bromwich Albion rejected a bid estimated at £ 15 million for Berahino to sign for Tottenham Hotspur , with the club valuing him at £ 25 million . After the bids , Pulis left Berahino out of his squad for the game against Chelsea on 23 August , replacing him with new record signing José Salomón <unk> . When interviewed after the match , Pulis stated that Berahino was left out because previous events in the transfer market had been " disruptive " . The following day , the club rejected Berahino 's transfer request . After they rejected a fourth bid for the player on transfer deadline day , Berahino stated he was unhappy with the conduct of his club and wrote on Twitter that he would never play for the club again under chairman Jeremy Peace ; he was fined for these comments . On 7 September , Pulis told the press that all parties had reconciled , and that Berahino was training again as normal . 
 Berahino returned as a substitute for Albion in 0 – 0 draw against Southampton on 12 September , receiving a mixed reception . He started a week later against local rivals Aston Villa , scoring the only goal of the game by deflecting James Morrison 's shot into the net . The following week against Everton , he opened the scoring and Albion went on to lead 2 – 0 before eventually losing 2 – 3 . After the international break , Berahino scored the only goal in home win against Sunderland on 17 October , exploiting a fumble by their goalkeeper <unk> <unk> . From 31 October until the end of the calendar year , Berahino did not start a single game , with Pulis saying that " He 's lucky to be on the bench , never mind starting . He 's a smashing kid but lets himself down at times . " 
 In January 2016 , Berahino scored in a 2 – 2 draw against Bristol City in the third round of the FA Cup , but did not appear in the squad for the replay . Pulis attributed this to an infection , and re @-@ stated that he wanted to keep the player at West Bromwich Albion by the end of the month 's transfer window . He returned for the next round on 30 January , scoring both goals in a 2 – 2 home draw against former loan team Peterborough . The next day , Newcastle made a £ 21 million bid for the player . However , Berahino remained at West Bromwich Albion ; on 26 February he apologised for having threatened to strike . On 16 April , Berahino had two penalty kicks saved by Heurelho Gomes in a 1 – 0 home loss to Watford . 
 Stoke City tabled an offer of £ 17 million , potentially rising to £ 20 million , for Berahino in July 2016 . West Bromwich Albion rejected that bid and an equal one from Crystal Palace . 
 = = International career = = 
 Regarding his allegiance in international football , Berahino said in 2013 : 
 Berahino made appearances at various youth levels for England . He represented England under @-@ 17 as they won the 2010 European Championship in Liechtenstein , scoring the equaliser in the final group game as they came from behind to defeat Turkey 2 – 1 . In 2012 , he represented the under @-@ 19 team at the European Championship in Estonia , helping them reach the semi @-@ finals before losing in extra time to Greece . 
 He was called up to the England under @-@ 21 squad for the first time for the match against Scotland on 13 August 2013 . He scored on his England under @-@ 21 debut on 6 September , a European qualifier against Moldova in his side 's 1 – 0 win , this game was also Gareth Southgate 's first game in charge . Four days later , Berahino equalised for a 1 – 1 draw against Finland in the next qualifier away in Tampere . On 15 October , Berahino scored twice in a 4 – 0 qualifying win against Lithuania , taking his tally for the team to 4 goals in 3 games . 
 Berahino was yellow @-@ carded after the first of his two goals in a 3 – 0 win against Finland under @-@ 21 in a European qualifier on 15 November 2013 , for lifting his shirt to reveal a message to his late father , who died in the Burundian Civil War . He was voted the 2014 Under @-@ 21 Player of the Year by fans , finishing ahead of Harry Kane with 16 % of the vote after a year in which he scored at a rate of a goal every other game , including three to help the team qualify for the European Championship . Berahino has the all @-@ time third @-@ highest goal tally for the England under @-@ 21 side with 10 goals in 13 appearances , behind Francis Jeffers and Alan Shearer . 
 On 6 November 2014 , England manager Roy Hodgson — who promoted Berahino to the West Bromwich Albion first team in 2011 — named Berahino in his squad for the first time , ahead of a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying match against Slovenia at Wembley Stadium on the 15th and a friendly against Scotland at Celtic Park three days afterwards . Berahino did not take part in either of the senior England matches for which he was called up . 
 In March 2015 , Berahino was approached to represent his native Burundi at international level , a decision which can be taken as he has not played for England in a competitive senior international . 
 Berahino was named in the England under @-@ 21 squad for 2015 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship in the Czech Republic but withdrew through injury on 18 June , to be replaced by Benik <unk> . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 In October 2013 , Berahino told The Daily Telegraph that the strikers he aims to emulate are Samuel Eto 'o , Didier Drogba and Jermain Defoe " because of their movement and the way they finish " . 
 When interviewed by BBC Sport in February 2015 , West Bromwich Albion manager Tony Pulis said that Berahino could be a " top class player " but that he needed " direction " . 
 Berahino 's England under @-@ 21 manager Gareth Southgate has said that he has an ability to create space on the pitch for his teammates , and has become physically and mentally stronger since he began working with him . West Bromwich Albion goalkeeper Ben Foster stated that Berahino is more committed in training than other players of his age , and follows a healthy diet . His former West Bromwich Albion teammate Steven Reid said that Berahino 's attitude to training improved as a result of dealing with two " turning points " , namely his expulsion from Brentford and knee injury at Peterborough . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Berahino supports Manchester United . He is a Christian and regularly studies the Bible with his mother . 
 In April 2014 , Berahino apologised to West Bromwich Albion after videos of him inhaling nitrous oxide for recreational purposes were discovered by the media . He confessed that " This was very poor judgement on my part and not the right example to be setting . At the time , I wasn ’ t fully aware of the serious health risks involved but now I know , I won ’ t be doing it again " . However , Berahino denied allegations that he drove 120 miles under the influence of the substance . 
 On 22 October 2014 , Berahino was arrested on the M6 near Lymm , Cheshire , on suspicion of drink driving . He was charged with the offence in January 2015 , and admitted to it before North Cheshire Magistrates in Runcorn , who gave him a 12 @-@ month driving ban and a fine of £ 3 @,@ 400 . 
 In April 2015 , Berahino set up his own charity foundation to help WaterAid improve the lives of disadvantaged people in Britain and abroad . He stated " Having grown up in Burundi , I know only too well the devastating impact the lack of access to clean water or sanitation can have on families " . His manager Pulis said that " His story is an inspiring one and this shows what I have been saying for several months now about his attitude and his growing maturity " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of matches played 29 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 England Under @-@ 17 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Championship : 2010 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 England U21 Player of the Year : 2014 
 = M @-@ 217 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 217 , also known as Michiana Parkway , is a multi @-@ lane state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan . The Michiana Parkway , which extends into Indiana , was constructed as a joint effort of the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , the Cass County Road Commission and the Elkhart County Highway Department . Michigan 's segment of the parkway is 1 @.@ 563 miles ( 2 @.@ 515 km ) long continuing County Road 17 ( CR 17 ) in Elkhart County north into the state . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 217 starts at State Line Road on the Michigan – Indiana state line . It is the continuation of CR 17 that runs due north to an intersection with US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in Porter Township in Cass County . The highway crosses farmland between the two termini . In 2008 , 4 @,@ 239 vehicles used the highway on a daily basis in MDOT 's average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) survey . The survey calculated how many vehicles used the roadway on average each day . The 2008 counts also showed that 75 trucks were included in the total . For 2009 , the figured dropped to 3 @,@ 738 vehicles and 67 trucks . M @-@ 217 is not listed on the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The Michiana Parkway was constructed from CR 4 , just south of the " Elkhart East " interchange ( exit 96 ) of the Indiana Toll Road , to US 12 in Porter Township , along the boundary with Mason Township . The Indiana portion was an upgrade and extension of Elkhart County Road 17 to the state line ; Michigan 's portion was entirely new construction built by the Michigan Department of Transportation and numbered M @-@ 217 . With the completion of M @-@ 217 , MDOT and the Cass County Road Commission swapped roads on September 25 , 2002 . MDOT took over jurisdiction of M @-@ 217 and gave M @-@ 205 to the road commission , an action that decommissioned M @-@ 205 as a state trunkline . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is along the Porter – Mason township line , Cass County . 
 = Washington State Route 531 = 
 State Route 531 ( SR 531 ) is a short Washington state highway in Snohomish County . It extends east 9 @.@ 88 miles ( 15 @.@ 90 km ) , from Wenberg County Park in the community of Lake Goodwin , to SR 9 in southeast Arlington . SR 531 intersects Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) , and passes the Arlington Airport . The route connects I @-@ 5 to SR 9 , Smokey Point , and Wenberg County Park . The Washington State Legislature approved SR 531 's current route in 1991 . Since then , construction projects , arranged by the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) , have turned this small road into an arterial street . Even though the Washington State Legislature and WSDOT approved SR 531 in 1991 , they erected no signs until April 1 , 1992 , when the law creating the road took effect . 
 The road now used by SR 531 has existed as a separate route since at least 1911 . A map dating from 1911 shows that 172nd Street , then known simply as Lakewood Road and Edgecomb Road , extended east from its current intersection with SR 9 to the banks of the South Fork Stillaguamish River . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 531 runs about 9 @.@ 88 miles ( 15 @.@ 90 km ) , from Wenberg County Park to State Route 9 south of Arlington . The route links the communities of Lake Goodwin , North Lakewood ( also known as Lakewood ) , Smokey Point , and Edgecomb . It also passes four schools in the Lakewood School District , as well as Weston High School in the Arlington School District . The road intersects four major arteries : Forty @-@ Five Road , Interstate 5 , Smokey Point Boulevard ( formerly known as U.S. Route 99 ) , and 67th Avenue , before ending at SR 9 . WSDOT found that , based on average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) data , about 35 @,@ 000 motorists utilize the road daily at the I @-@ 5 interchange . 
 Starting at Wenberg County Park , the route runs north along East Lake Goodwin Road until it intersects Lakewood Road . From there , SR 531 travels east along Lakewood Road around Lake Ki before reaching Forty @-@ Five Road . Here , Lakewood Road becomes the main artery of North Lakewood and Smokey Point , 172nd Street . Continuing east , SR 531 intersects 11th Avenue . 
 After intersecting 11th Avenue , SR 531 becomes the northern boundary of the Lakewood High School campus . SR 531 continues east from 11th Avenue to 16th Drive , shortly after entering Marysville city limits . Soon thereafter , the road intersects 19th Drive , which connects the southeastern section of North Lakewood with SR 531 . Continuing east across a double track , the highway intersects 27th Avenue , which connects the road with Lakewood Crossing , a shopping center in Lakewood . SR 531 then continues further east to the interchange with I @-@ 5 . 
 After leaving the interchange with I @-@ 5 , along with North Lakewood and Marysville city limits , SR 531 continues east to Smokey Point Boulevard ( formerly U.S. Route 99 ) in Smokey Point . The road then maintains straight east , passing Weston High School and Arlington Municipal Airport before intersecting 67th Avenue . From 67th Avenue , SR 531 travels east to a suburban community of Edgecomb . The road curves northeast and then southeast while on a hill . SR 531 travels east past the Arlington Gun Range and <unk> , a large housing area , before ending at an intersection with SR 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 The whole stretch highway from Wenberg County Park to current SR 9 has been known to exist earlier than 1911 . 172nd Street NE , now SR 531 , once extended from what is currently SR 9 to the banks of the South Fork Stillaguamish River . This part of the highway has been removed . 
 SR 531 became a state highway in 1991 , but the highway designation did not take effect until April 1 , 1992 . In 2006 , WSDOT announced it would complete three more projects over about five years to improve SR 531 . The first , to improve the bridge and interchange between I @-@ 5 and SR 531 , began immediately . The <unk> , Stillaguamish , Samish and <unk> Tribes helped fund the construction of the project . On April 30 , 2005 , the old two @-@ lane SR 531 bridge was demolished during the night . WSDOT redirected traffic on SR 531 to the completed north side of the new bridge , while the northbound lanes of Interstate 5 were closed to all traffic and rerouted on ramps from I @-@ 5 to SR 531 . During construction , eastbound SR 531 left @-@ turn lanes were closed ; a detour on Smokey Point Boulevard and SR 530 provided direct drivers access to northbound I @-@ 5 . The other half of the bridge was later demolished in May 2005 . All of the temporary structures on the bridge were subsequently removed in December 2005 . Partly finished in June 2006 , WSDOT plans to complete the project after adding a loop ramp in 2011 . In August 2007 , WSDOT completed a project to add sidewalks along SR 531 to the adjacent schools of the Lakewood School District . 
 An upcoming project , adding a loop ramp onto the I @-@ 5 interchange , started in March 2009 and will end in 2011 . WSDOT has awarded the contract for the project to Northwest Construction , Inc . Part of the project includes widening the main entry point to Lakewood Crossing , by adding turn pockets . Widening SR 531 between 43rd Avenue NE and 67th Avenue NE from its current two to five lanes near the Arlington Airport is another planned project . The project is currently in planning stages and WSDOT has set up a webpage for the project . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Snohomish County . 
 = HMS Diana ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Diana was a D @-@ class destroyer of the Royal Navy . Ordered in 1931 , the ship was constructed by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , and entered naval service in 1932 . Diana was initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before she was transferred to the China Station in early 1935 . She was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea during late 1935 during the Abyssinia Crisis , before returning to her duty station where she remained until mid @-@ 1939 . Diana was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet just before the Second World War began in September 1939 . She served with the Home Fleet during the Norwegian Campaign . The ship was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy in 1940 and renamed HMCS Margaree . She served for just over a month with the Canadians before being sunk in a collision with a large freighter she was escorting on 22 October 1940 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Diana displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Diana carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Diana had a single 12 @-@ pounder AA gun between her funnels and two QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on the side of her bridge . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 Diana was ordered under the 1930 Naval Estimates on 2 February 1931 from the yards of Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , Hebburn @-@ on @-@ Tyne . She was laid down on 12 June 1931 , launched on 16 June 1932 and finally commissioned into the Navy on 21 December 1932 . She cost a total of £ 229 @,@ 502 , excluding the weapons and the communications equipment which were supplied by the Admiralty . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = With the Royal Navy = = = 
 The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in September – November 1933 . While in the Mediterranean , Diana was commanded by Geoffrey Oliver for a time . The ship was refitted at Sheerness Dockyard between 3 September and 23 October 1934 for service on the China Station with the 8th ( later the 21st ) Destroyer Flotilla and arrived there in January 1935 . She was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in the Red Sea from September 1935 to May 1936 during the Abyssinian Crisis and made port visits in Bombay and East Africa before returning to Hong Kong on 7 August . On one occasion in 1937 Diana investigated why a lighthouse near Amoy was not lit and discovered that it had been attacked by pirates . She remained in the Far East until the rise in tensions before World War II began prompted her recall in August 1939 . 
 With the outbreak of war , Diana and her sisters Duncan , Daring , and Dainty , were assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , arriving there in October . She was repaired at Malta during November and rejoining the fleet in December where she was briefly placed on contraband control duties before she was transferred to the Home Fleet 's 3rd Destroyer Flotilla . Diana arrived in Home waters in January 1940 , and was assigned to the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla . Here her duties included screening units of the Home Fleet and carrying out patrols . On 15 February , the ship escorted HMS Duncan as she towed by tugs from Invergordon to the Forth for permanent repairs , after the latter had been damaged in a collision whilst escorting a convoy . 
 During the Norwegian Campaign , Diana escorted the aircraft carrier HMS Furious as she returned to Scapa Flow on 25 April to replenish her aircraft . On 1 May , she screened the light cruisers HMS Manchester and HMS Birmingham of the 18th Cruiser Squadron as they covered the evacuations from Åndalsnes and the ship transported the Norwegian Commander @-@ in @-@ chief Major General Otto Ruge from Molde to Tromsø . The ship escorted the carriers HMS Glorious and Furious as the latter flew off RAF Gloster Gladiators fighters to Bardufoss airfield on 21 May . Ten days later Diana escorted the carriers HMS Ark Royal and Furious during Operation Alphabet , the Allied withdrawal from Norway . 
 = = = Transfer to Canada = = = 
 The ship was taken in hand for refit and repair in London in July . After their completion , Diana was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy to replace HMCS Fraser which had been sunk in a collision on 25 June 1940 with the British anti @-@ aircraft cruiser HMS Calcutta . The ship was formally commissioned into the Royal Canadian Navy as HMCS Margaree on 6 September 1940 . On 17 October , she escorted Convoy <unk> bound for Canada , but the ship was sunk five days later when she collided with the freighter MV Port Fairy . Of the 176 men aboard Margaree at the time , six officers and 28 ratings were rescued by Port Fairy , but the other 142 were lost . 
 = Twelfth Siege of Gibraltar = 
 The Twelfth Siege of Gibraltar was fought between September 1704 and May 1705 during the War of the Spanish Succession . It followed the capture in August 1704 of the fortified town of Gibraltar , at the southern tip of Spain , by an Anglo – Dutch naval force led by Sir George Rooke and Prince George of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt . The members of the Grand Alliance , Holy Roman Empire , England , the Netherlands , Pro @-@ Habsburg Spain , Portugal and the Savoy , had allied to prevent the unification of the French and Spanish thrones by supporting the claim of the Habsburg pretender Archduke Charles VI of Austria as Charles III of Spain . They were opposed by the rival claimant , the Bourbon Philip , Duke of Anjou , ruling as Philip V of Spain , and his patron and ally , Louis XIV of France . The war began in northern Europe and was largely contained there until 1703 , when Portugal joined the confederate powers . From then , English naval attentions were focused on mounting a campaign in the Mediterranean to distract the French navy and disrupt French and Bourbon Spanish shipping or capture a port for use as a naval base . The capture of Gibraltar was the outcome of that initial stage of the Mediterranean campaign . 
 At the start of the siege , Gibraltar was garrisoned by around 2 @,@ 000 Dutch , English , Austrian and pro @-@ Habsburg Spanish troops facing a besieging force of up to 8 @,@ 000 French , pro @-@ Bourbon Spanish and Irish troops . The defenders were able to hold off the numerically superior besieging force through exploiting Gibraltar 's geography and the small town 's fortifications , though they were frequently short of manpower and ammunition . The besiegers were undermined by disputes between the French and Spanish officers and terrible conditions in their trenches and bastions , which led to outbreaks of epidemic disease and undermined morale . Sea power proved crucial , as the French navy sought unsuccessfully to prevent the Grand Alliance shipping in fresh troops , ammunition and food . Three naval battles were fought during the siege , two of which were clear defeats for the French and the last of which resulted in the siege being abandoned as hopeless after nine months of fruitless shelling . The outcome was disastrous for the French and Bourbon Spanish side , which was said to have lost 10 @,@ 000 men against only 400 for the Grand Alliance . 
 = = Aftermath of the capture of Gibraltar = = 
 The loss of Gibraltar in August 1704 posed a strategic threat to the rule of the Bourbon claimant to the Spanish throne , Philip V of Spain . It was not only , as a later Spanish writer put it , " the first town in Spain to be dismembered from the domination of King Philip and forced to recognise Charles , " but it also potentially had great value as an entry point for the Grand Alliance armies . Its possibilities were recognised immediately by the Alliance forces ' leader Prince George of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt , who told Charles in a letter of September 1704 , that Gibraltar was " a door through which to enter Spain " . An army landed at Gibraltar could advance rapidly along the coast to Cadiz , supported by naval forces , and capture the major port . From there , it was a relatively short distance to Seville , where the Habsburg claimant Charles could be proclaimed king , following which the Alliance could march to Madrid and finish the war . 
 Gibraltar itself had been largely emptied of its population , most of whom left the town after its capture and had moved to temporary accommodation elsewhere in the Campo de Gibraltar . Only a few dozen Spaniards and a small community of neutral Genoese remained . The town was garrisoned by a motley assortment of Alliance forces , consisting of around 2 @,@ 000 British and Dutch marines , 60 gunners and several hundred Spanish , mostly Catalans , followers of Charles of Austria . They were supported by Sir George Rooke 's Anglo @-@ Dutch fleet consisting of 51 ships of the line operating in the Strait of Gibraltar . The Alliance had two significant disadvantages – limited supplies and a pressing need for their ships , which had already been at sea for six months , to be repaired and reprovisioned . 
 As soon as Gibraltar was captured , the Alliance set about preparing for a Bourbon counter @-@ attack . The Alliance fleet sailed a short distance across the strait to <unk> in Morocco , where it took on fresh water . On 22 August , a French fleet was sighted in the strait but began to withdraw after being spotted . Rooke caught up with the French off Málaga on 24 August and attacked , in a bid to prevent the French from slipping past him and attacking Gibraltar . The two fleets were evenly matched but the French ships were faster and had more ammunition than the confederates . They did not manage to make this advantage count , however , and the Battle of Vélez @-@ Málaga was effectively fought to a draw . No ships were sunk but both fleets took very heavy casualties with around 3 @,@ 000 killed or wounded on each side , including the French commander . The Anglo @-@ Dutch fleet was hampered by a shortage of shot and gunpowder , much of which had already been used in bombarding Gibraltar during the operation to capture it , and Sir George Byng 's squadron was forced to pull back when it ran out of ammunition . The rest of the fleet was dangerously low on ammunition but fortunately for the confederates , the French withdrew the following day , leaving the Anglo @-@ Dutch fleet to limp back to Gibraltar . 
 Having dealt with the French naval threat , Rooke left as many men , guns and supplies at Gibraltar as he could before sailing for home . He split off part of his fleet , leaving Admiral Sir John Leake with 18 ships to patrol the strait and the Portuguese coast . The Spanish had already mobilised their forces and at the start of September the Marquis of Villadarias , the captain @-@ general of Andalusia , arrived in the vicinity of Gibraltar with an army of 4 @,@ 000 men . Villadarias planned to increase his force to 12 @,@ 000 , consisting of 9 @,@ 000 Spaniards and 3 @,@ 000 Frenchmen . The Two Crowns force was also supplemented by many of the civilian refugees from Gibraltar . 
 = = Start of the siege = = 
 Hesse set about improving Gibraltar 's defences to make it as difficult as possible for the enemy to mount a frontal attack . The town is set on the western side of a rocky peninsula connected to the Spanish mainland by a narrow sandy isthmus . The north side of the Rock of Gibraltar presents a vertical cliff ; the only access to the town was via a narrow strip , only about 400 feet ( 120 m ) wide , which was blocked by the heavily fortified curtain wall known as the Muralla de San Bernardo ( later the Grand Battery ) . The prince sought to reduce this strip even further by flooding it , forcing any attackers to use a narrow path between the Rock and the inundated area or to advance along the narrow shoreline . He set up cannon in five batteries along the north side of Gibraltar : on the Old Mole , to provide flanking fire from the west ; on the Baluarte de San Pablo ( later North Bastion ) and on the Landport curtain walls , to provide direct fire onto the isthmus ; on the Baluarte de San Pedro ( later Hesse 's Demi Bastion ) , to provide flanking fire from the east ; and in a Round Tower , on a clifftop spur overlooking the isthmus ( later the site of Forbes ' Batteries ) , from where fire could be directed onto enemy troops on the far side of the inundated area . A " bomb ship " was also installed off the Old Mole , carrying a heavy mortar to provide additional flanking fire from the west . 
 Although Hesse was confident that he would be able to hold Gibraltar against the numerically superior Franco @-@ Spanish force , he was undermined by political disputes between the Habsburg and English commanders . There was widespread resentment among the English marines that they had not been allowed to return with Rooke 's fleet . There was a particularly poisonous relationship between the English Colonel of Marines Edward Fox and the Irish Colonel Henry Nugent , whom Hesse had appointed as Governor of Gibraltar . The two men had fought on opposite sides during the Irish campaign of William III ; the Protestant Fox had gone on to serve Queen Anne , while the Catholic Nugent had joined the service of Charles of Austria . Hesse wrote that Fox was " furious at being under my orders and at not being allowed to leave for England . His respect for the Governor I have appointed is even less . There is confusion everywhere . Orders are not carried out , and the officers are the first to make trouble . . . " 
 The besieging French and Spanish forces were reinforced on 4 October when 19 French warships " great and small of the line of battle " escorted troop ships carrying 3 @,@ 000 men with heavy guns and supplies of ammunition to a landing point near the ruined Roman town of Carteia at the head of the Bay of Gibraltar . This brought the number of soldiers under Villadarias 's command to some 7 @,@ 000 , which Hesse estimated consisted of eight Spanish and six French battalions of foot plus nine cavalry squadrons . Most of the French ships left on 24 October , to the surprise of the defenders , though six remained behind to blockade Gibraltar . 
 After the reinforcements had settled in , the Spanish began digging siege lines and trenches towards the confederate positions . The first attack came on 26 October when Spanish guns opened fire on the confederate defences around the Round Tower , causing considerable damage . A French force carried out a simultaneous raid of Gibraltar 's harbour , burning the bomb ship . Villadarias then carried out a heavy bombardment of the San Pablo bastion using 27 guns and 16 mortars , which managed to breach it . Among the casualties were the two feuding colonels , Fox and Nugent , who were killed on successive days . At the same time , an epidemic disease broke out among the Gibraltar garrison , reducing their effective numbers to about 1 @,@ 300 men . 
 The position of the garrison looked increasingly precarious . Hesse sent a message to Admiral Leake at Lisbon requesting his urgent assistance after the appearance of French ships in the bay . After receiving the message on 21 October , Leake set sail at once , bringing more supplies for the defenders . In the meantime , Hesse had to deal with an internal threat – a plot by some Habsburg Spanish officers , aided by some clergymen and British officers , to betray the garrison . He wrote to Charles in mid @-@ October to inform the Archduke of what had happened : 
 I 've discovered a tremendous plot . . . I 've had a man hanged who communicated with the enemy . Clergymen persuaded him , though he had been convinced and had confessed under torture , to take everything back . . . assuring him I would not have him hanged . They went so far as to give the delinquent poison so that he would reveal nothing more . . . It 's all very confused and difficult to sort out . [ Colonels ] Gonzalez and Husson and some clergymen are the principals . . . though against the two named I have taken no action . . . for lack of definite proof . Friar Santa Maria will give you personally a long account of the business . . . I will not confront Gonzalez and Husson unless it becomes a matter of absolute necessity . . . 
 Charles wrote back advising Hesse to carry out a court @-@ martial with independent judges to avoid any suspicion of prejudice . As the accused were Habsburg subjects , a court @-@ martial consisting of British and Dutch officers – who did not owe allegiance to Charles – was convened to adjudicate the case . The British officers who were implicated in the plot appear to have been sent back to England ; their fate is not recorded . Gonzalez was convicted and on 23 February 1705 , " being guilty of high treason [ he ] was shot in the face of the whole garrison . " 
 = = Assault on the east side = = 
 The Bourbon Spanish , meanwhile , were planning to carry out a surprise attack . Simón Susarte , a Spanish goatherd who had fled Gibraltar after its capture by Rooke a few months earlier , told Villadarias that there was a secret route by which the east side of the Rock of Gibraltar could be scaled . It required a climb of around 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) , of which the upper section was near @-@ vertical , but was passable with the use of rope and ladders via the Great Sand Dune . As the east side was considered virtually impregnable , only the west side was fortified ; if the Rock could be climbed from the east , an attacker could evade the fortifications and descend directly into the town . The route was reconnoitred and found to be passable by a lightly armed force . 
 Villadarias decided to send a force of 2 @,@ 000 men – nearly a third of his entire army – divided into two groups : an initial force of 500 to seize the heights at night , followed by a further 1 @,@ 500 the following daybreak . The first 500 set off at dusk on 11 November , led by a Colonel Figueroa and guided by Simón Susarte . They made it to the top of the Rock , reaching its southernmost peak near where O 'Hara 's Battery stands today , and descended part @-@ way down the west side where they sheltered overnight in St. Michael 's Cave . At daybreak they climbed the Philip II Wall , which extends up the west side of the Rock , and killed the English sentries in the lookout point at Middle Hill . A drummer boy bringing food to the lookout saw the invaders and raised the alarm . 
 Hesse had anticipated some kind of attack from the rear and had kept a mobile force in reserve to guard against such an eventuality . It was formed by an English company , and two Spanish companies : a regular company under captain Francisco de Sandoval and a Catalan company of miquelets under Jaume <unk> , numbering 300 men , all of them led by Hesse 's brother Heinrich . This reserve immediately responded and engaged the Spanish Bourbons at Middle Hill . Although the Bourbons had the advantage of height , they were effectively trapped against the precipice of the Rock and only had three rounds of ammunition each , as a result of travelling light ; they had not come prepared for a pitched battle . 
 The Spanish Habsburg force led by Captain <unk> , made up of miquelets and regulars , marched ahead and dislodged the Spanish Bourbon grenadiers from the top of the hill . At the same time , Sandoval , with his remaining regulars and miquelets , charged upon the bulk of the assaulting force from one flank , while Heinrich von Hesse attacked from the other side . Around a hundred of the Bourbon force , including their colonel , were captured . Hundreds more were killed , either by defending fire or by falling off the Rock while attempting to flee . Only a few , including Simón Susarte , made it back to the Bourbon lines . The English subsequently ensured that there would be no repeat of this episode by blasting away the path used by the Spanish . 
 The other 1 @,@ 500 members of the Spanish force did not even set off to support the attack because , after the first 500 had left , Admiral Leake 's squadron was sighted entering the bay with 20 ships . In the subsequent naval engagement , six French frigates were destroyed and a seventh ship was captured intact . Villadarias had apparently intended to carry out a multi @-@ pronged attack but Leake 's timely arrival meant that it fell apart . The French naval support for an assault on the moles evaporated , and a frontal assault via the isthmus – reinforced with the 1 @,@ 500 men originally earmarked for the climb on the eastern side – failed entirely . Hesse 's relief at Leake 's timely arrival was evident in the letter that he sent the admiral after the battle , thanking him for turning up just as " the enemy were attacking us that very night of your entrance in many places at once with a great number of men . " 
 Leake had not brought many supplies to Gibraltar but provided what he could , and loaned Hesse the fleet 's skilled manpower , of which the confederate garrison was desperately short . A labour force of some 500 men was assembled from the ships ' companies and was put to work repairing the fortifications , remounting guns dislodged by Spanish fire and hauling cannon up the Rock to increase the fire being directed onto the Spanish batteries . One of those involved , Captain Willis , played such a prominent role that the track he used was renamed ( and is still known as ) Willis ' Road , and he also gave his name to Willis ' Battery ( now Princess Royal 's Battery ) , Magazine and Guard . 
 The siege settled down into a routine of bombardment and counter @-@ bombardment . This proved increasingly trying for the defenders , who were running short of manpower , ammunition and supplies . Captain Joseph Bennett , an engineer whom Leake had brought with him , helped to bolster the fortifications but earned the wrath of some in the garrison , who felt that Gibraltar should be abandoned . He wrote to a friend on 6 December to tell him that " many officers had a design to quit the place and blow up the works but I always opposed them , and mentioned the garrison could be kept with the number of 900 men we had , and no more , as I believe you will have an [ account ] of . Some was for <unk> ( sic ) my Throat and others for <unk> ( sic ) off my Ears & c . " 
 Many members of the garrison tried to sneak aboard Leake 's ships to escape the siege . The situation was precarious and was only worsened when a storm damaged many of Leake 's ships on 4 – 5 December . By this time , the garrison was critically short of medicines and supplies . Many were sick or injured and too few remained to carry out repairs to the shell @-@ damaged fortifications . Only 1 @,@ 300 were healthy enough to man the defences . Their living conditions were increasingly grim ; their shoes had worn out and many men wore makeshift sandals made from hay and straw . 
 = = Reinforcements and the end of the siege = = 
 A few days later , Leake received the news that a convoy of 20 transport ships carrying supplies and reinforcements was on its way from Lisbon , escorted by four men @-@ of @-@ war . Adverse winds and currents meant that he was unable to sail to assist it against a French naval force that had left Cadiz , and he was forced to wait to see if the convoy would reach its destination . On 18 December , nine of the transports reached the bay , accompanied by two men @-@ of @-@ war , with another seven arriving on 20 December . Four were missing , having been intercepted by the French ; three of them had been sunk or captured while the last one eventually made it to Gibraltar at the end of December . They brought with them 2 @,@ 200 men from the Grenadier Guards , Donegal 's Foot and Barrymore 's Foot , plus some Dutch troops , guns and supplies of powder , tools and food . Further reinforcements arrived between 16 – 18 January . With Gibraltar safe for the moment , Leake left for Lisbon on 3 January with sick and wounded members of the garrison aboard his ships . 
 The Bourbon Spanish and French land force continued to bombard Gibraltar , inflicting further damage on the town 's somewhat weak fortifications but were unable to make any progress against the reinforced garrison . They were being vigorously opposed with counter @-@ bombardments , which killed many of their number , and by sallies , two of which were carried out successfully by the confederates on 23 and 31 December . Relations steadily worsened between the Spanish and French components of the besieging force , a trend that was exacerbated by the lack of progress they were making , the appalling conditions they were enduring in the open and the steady stream of casualties being caused by the counter @-@ bombardment and outbreaks of epidemic disease . The weather , too , was terrible , with storms and heavy rain making life a misery . By the New Year of 1705 , the besieging force was disintegrating and had dropped in numbers from around 7 @,@ 000 men to only 4 @,@ 000 , the remainder having either become casualties or simply deserting . 
 The situation was sufficiently alarming that King Louis XIV of France despatched Marshal René de <unk> de Tessé along with 4 @,@ 500 French and Irish reinforcements to recover the situation . Villadarias , however , was determined to make one more effort to take Gibraltar before Tessé arrived . On 7 February , he sent 1 @,@ 500 French , Spanish and Irish troops to seize the Round Tower , an outlying fortification on the cliff face above the present Laguna Estate . The attackers captured the tower but a confederate counter @-@ attack drove them out , leaving 200 of them dead . The Spanish accused the French of fleeing the battlefield and leaving their flank unprotected . 
 Tessé arrived in mid @-@ February but was appalled to find how badly the siege was being run . His criticism of the Spanish officers led some to quit the siege in the face of what they saw as his insults . Their morale improved somewhat when Admiral Bernard <unk> , Baron de Pointis sailed into the bay on 26 February with a force of 18 men @-@ of @-@ war from Cadiz . Gibraltar 's garrison immediately went on alert , expecting a landing at the south end of the peninsula , but this did not materialise . The reason soon became clear ; Leake had returned with a combined English , Dutch and Portuguese force of 35 ships . In the subsequent battle in the Strait of Gibraltar , the French lost five of their ships , including Pointis ' flagship , and Pointis himself was fatally wounded . Leake 's fleet sailed into the bay on 31 March , bringing with it fresh troops from Mountjoy 's Grenadiers and units of the Portuguese army . Hesse rejoiced at the admiral 's arrival : 
 I expected with great impatience this good opportunity to express my hearty joy of your great and good success you had at your second appearing off this place ; which I hope hath been the final stroke towards our relief ; the enemy since five days have begun to withdraw their cannon . . . I in particular cannot enough express my hearty thanks and obligations I lie under . 
 Leake 's arrival was " the final stroke " , as the French abandoned the siege as hopeless following an order from Louis XIV on 12 April . Tessé wrote bitterly to the king to blame the Spanish , telling him that " we have failed before Gibraltar for want of method and planning . . . the ill @-@ fate of your vessels was due to lack of competence at Madrid . . . " With the French having gone home , Villadarias resumed command and began to convert the siege into a blockade by pulling back from the isthmus and removing his cannon . On 2 May , an Alliance scouting party found that the Spanish trenches had been abandoned . Later that day , Hesse accompanied a demolition party to destroy the Bourbon Spanish works , but some members of the party ventured out too far and were captured or killed by the Spanish cavalry . The following day , a larger party , protected by grenadiers , resumed the work of demolishing the Spanish batteries without further opposition , marking the end of the siege . 
 = Young Modern = 
 Young Modern is the fifth and final studio album by Australian alternative rock band Silverchair , released on 30 March 2007 . Young Modern entered the Australian albums chart at No. 1 on 15 April 2007 , their fifth consecutive album to do this , making them the first band to accomplish this feat in Australia . The album opened at No. 8 on the New Zealand albums chart . 
 Young Modern received four ARIA Awards at the 2007 ARIA Awards , including Single of the Year ( for " Straight Lines " ) and Album of the Year . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Silverchair spent five weeks in the Australian Hunter Region in late 2005 to practice and sharpen material that Daniel Johns had previously written . Following this , the band recorded intermediate full band demo versions of the songs . To record the final versions of these songs , the band travelled to Los Angeles to record with record producer Nick Launay at Seedy Underbelly Studios . Johns co @-@ produced the album alongside Launay . During the L.A. sessions , additional songs were written and recorded . Van Dyke Parks was hired to compose orchestral arrangements for three songs : " If You Keep Losing Sleep " , " All Across The World " and the 3 part epic " Those Thieving Birds / Strange Behaviour " . Johns and Parks travelled to Prague to have the orchestral arrangements recorded by The City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 Unlike previous Silverchair albums , Young Modern was funded independently by the band , rather than by a record label . This was done to " remove the added label pressures " , according to Billboard . The name Young Modern comes from a nickname given to Silverchair 's lead singer , Johns , by Van Dyke Parks during their time working together on Diorama in 2002 . The album features various guest appearances from Australian and international musicians such as Luke Steele , Julian Hamilton and Paul Mac , the latter of whom performed with Johns as The Dissociatives . 
 = = Album and single releases = = 
 Young Modern was released on 30 March 2007 in Australia , and 24 July 2007 in the United States of America . The album was released in several versions — the original contained 11 songs , while the iTunes version contained an extra song , " English Garden " . A limited edition DVD was also released , which contained a documentary entitled " The making of Young Modern " , as well as the " Straight Lines " music video . 
 The first single from Young Modern , " Straight Lines " , was released on 20 March 2007 , a week before the album 's release . " Straight Lines " entered the ARIA Charts at No. 1 on 25 March 2007 , and held that rank for four weeks . It also peaked at No. 11 on the RMNZ charts . " Straight Lines " was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . On 28 October 2007 , " Straight Lines " won Best Selling Australian Single at the ARIA Music Awards of 2007 , as well as Single of the Year . 
 A second single , " Reflections of a Sound " , was released on 14 July 2007 as a digital single . The music video for " Reflections of a Sound " was first screened on 8 June 2007 , and was produced by Damon Escott and Stephen Lance of Head Pictures . 
 The third single from Young Modern was " If You Keep Losing Sleep " , released on 9 October 2007 . The song spent one week on the ARIA charts at No. 16 , before dropping out of the charts . The music video for " If You Keep Losing Sleep " was orchestrated by Van Dyke Parks , and was produced by Damon Escott and Stephen Lance , who also created the " Reflections of a Sound " video . The video was described by Molly Meldrum as " the best video I ’ ve seen from Australia ever " . Young Modern 's fourth single , " Mind Reader " , was released as an internet @-@ only single on 23 February 2008 . It had first appeared on radio in January that year . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Young Modern front cover is a tribute to Dutch painter Piet Mondrian 's Composition II in Red , Blue , and Yellow . 
 = = Response = = 
 Young Modern was received with high acclaim from reviewers . Allmusic 's review said the album contained " catchy melodic hooks , inspired lyrical themes , and stunning string arrangements " , and called it the " pinnacle of the band 's fascinating development " . Reviewer Clayton Bolger heaped praise on most of the songs on the album , calling " Straight Lines " an " instant rock classic " . 
 Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke called Silverchair 's members " young ( in their late twenties ) ... [ and ] aggressively modern " , and Entertainment Weekly called the album a " polished glam @-@ rock suite " . Sputnikmusic reviewer Tyler Fisher also approved of the album , although he did not think it was as good as it was made out to be , commenting " It is not as good as the ARIA awards will undoubtedly make it out to be but still one of the better mainstream listens of the year . " 
 During his weekly entertainment segment on the popular Australian breakfast show Sunrise , Australian music personality Molly Meldrum made a sincere comparison of the album to the classic Beatles album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . 
 Nick Pearson of PopMatters , meanwhile , was critical of the album . He began his review with the statement " Once you reach the level of intellectual maturity where you can tell the difference between cryptic but poetic lyrics and nonsensical crap , you have outgrown Silverchair " , and continued in the same fashion throughout . Pearson likened Johns to Kurt Cobain , saying they share a common inability ; " his inability to write lyrics " . His only praise was for the third single released from the album , " If You Keep Losing Sleep " , stating " ' If You Keep Losing Sleep ' is proof that Silverchair are capable of recording interesting music " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Daniel Johns unless otherwise noted . 
 " Young Modern Station " – 3 : 11 ( Johns , Julian Hamilton ) 
 " Straight Lines " – 4 : 18 ( Johns , Hamilton ) 
 " If You Keep Losing Sleep " – 3 : 20 
 " Reflections of a Sound " – 4 : 09 
 " Those Thieving Birds ( Part 1 ) / Strange Behaviour / Those Thieving Birds ( Part 2 ) " – 7 : 26 
 " The Man That Knew Too Much " – 4 : 19 
 " Waiting All Day " – 4 : 28 ( Johns , Hamilton ) 
 " Mind Reader " – 3 : 07 ( Johns , Hamilton ) 
 " Low " – 3 : 48 
 " Insomnia " – 3 : 06 
 " All Across the World " – 4 : 01 
 iTunes Store bonus tracks 
 " English Garden " – 4 : 23 
 " Straight Lines " ( The Presets Remix ) – 3 : 53 ( iTunes special edition ) 
 Bonus DVD 
 The making of Young Modern documentary . 
 " Straight Lines " music video 
 A vinyl version of the album has been made limited to 1000 copies worldwide ( 400 Available in Australia and 600 elsewhere ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Rugby union = 
 Rugby union , or simply rugby , is a contact team sport which originated in England in the first half of the 19th century . One of the two codes of rugby football , it is based on running with the ball in hand . In its most common form , a game is between two teams of 15 players ( two more than rugby league ) using an oval @-@ shaped ball on a rectangular field with H @-@ shaped goalposts on each try line . 
 In 1845 , the first football laws were written by Rugby School pupils ; other significant events in the early development of rugby include the Blackheath Club 's decision to leave the Football Association in 1863 and the split between rugby union and rugby league in 1895 . Historically an amateur sport , in 1995 restrictions on payments to players were removed , making the game openly professional at the highest level for the first time . 
 World Rugby , originally the International Rugby Football Board ( IRFB ) and from 1998 to 2014 the International Rugby Board ( IRB ) , has been the governing body for rugby union since 1886 . Rugby union spread from the Home Nations of Great Britain and Ireland , and was absorbed by many of the countries associated with the British Empire . Early exponents of the sport included Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and France . Countries that have adopted rugby union as their de facto national sport include Fiji , Georgia , Madagascar , New Zealand , Samoa , Tonga and Wales . Rugby union is played in over 100 countries across six continents ; there are 101 full members and 18 associate members of World Rugby . 
 The Rugby World Cup , first held in 1987 , takes place every four years with the winner of the tournament receiving the Webb Ellis Cup . The Six Nations Championship in Europe and The Rugby Championship in the Southern Hemisphere are major annual competitions . 
 Major domestic competitions include the English Premiership in England , Top 14 in France , the Mitre 10 Cup in New Zealand and the Currie Cup in South Africa . Other transnational competitions include the Pro12 , involving Irish , Italian , Scottish and Welsh teams ; the European Rugby Champions Cup , involving the top European teams from their respective domestic competitions ; and Super Rugby , launched in 1996 with Australian , New Zealand and South African teams and since 2016 also including teams in Argentina and Japan . 
 = = History = = 
 The origin of rugby football is reputed to be an incident during a game of English school football at Rugby School in 1823 , when William Webb Ellis is said to have picked up the ball and run with it . Although the evidence for the story is doubtful , it was immortalised at the school with a plaque unveiled in 1895 . Despite the doubtful evidence , the Rugby World Cup trophy is named after Webb Ellis . Rugby football stems from the form of game played at Rugby School , which former pupils then introduced to their university . Old Rugbeian Albert Pell , a student at Cambridge , is credited with having formed the first " football " team . During this early period different schools used different rules , with former pupils from Rugby and Eton attempting to carry their preferred rules through to their universities . 
 A significant event in the early development of rugby football was the production of the first written laws of the game at Rugby School in 1845 , which was followed by the ' Cambridge Rules ' drawn up in 1848 . Other important events include the Blackheath Club 's decision to leave the Football Association in 1863 and the formation of the Rugby Football Union in 1871 . The code was originally known as " rugby football " ; it was not until after the schism in England in 1895 , which resulted in the separate code of rugby league , that the sport took on the name " rugby union " to differentiate it from the league game . Despite the sport 's full name of rugby union , it is known simply as rugby throughout most of the world . 
 = = = First internationals = = = 
 The first rugby football international was played on 27 March 1871 between Scotland and England . Scotland won the game 1 @-@ 0 . By 1881 both Ireland and Wales had representative teams , and in 1883 the first international competition , the Home Nations Championship had begun . 1883 is also the year of the first rugby sevens tournament , the Melrose Sevens , which is still held annually . 
 Two important overseas tours took place in 1888 : a British Isles team visited Australia and New Zealand — although a private venture , it laid the foundations for future British and Irish Lions tours ; and the 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team brought the first overseas team to British spectators . 
 During the early history of rugby union , a time before commercial air travel , teams from different continents rarely met . The first two notable tours both took place in 1888 — the British Isles team touring New Zealand and Australia , followed by the New Zealand team touring Europe . Traditionally the most prestigious tours were the Southern Hemisphere countries of Australia , New Zealand and South Africa making a tour of a Northern Hemisphere , and the return tours made by a joint British and Irish team . Tours would last for months , due to long traveling times and the number of games undertaken ; the 1888 New Zealand team began their tour in Hawkes Bay in June and did not complete their schedule until August 1889 , having played 107 rugby matches . Touring international sides would play Test matches against international opponents , including national , club and county sides in the case of Northern Hemisphere rugby , or provincial / state sides in the case of Southern Hemisphere rugby . 
 Between 1905 and 1908 , all three major Southern Hemisphere rugby countries sent their first touring teams to the Northern Hemisphere : New Zealand in 1905 , followed by South Africa in 1906 and Australia in 1908 . All three teams brought new styles of play , fitness levels and tactics , and were far more successful than critics had expected . 
 The New Zealand 1905 touring team performed a haka before each match , leading Welsh Rugby Union administrator Tom Williams to suggest that Wales player Teddy Morgan lead the crowd in singing the Welsh National Anthem , Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau , as a response . After Morgan began singing , the crowd joined in : the first time a national anthem was sung at the start of a sporting event . In 1905 France played England in its first international match . 
 Rugby union was included as an event in the Olympic Games four times during the early 20th century . No international rugby games and union @-@ sponsored club matches were played during the First World War , but competitions continued through service teams such as the New Zealand Army team . During the Second World War no international matches were played by most countries , though Italy , Germany and Romania played a limited number of games , and Cambridge and Oxford continued their annual University Match . 
 The first officially sanctioned international rugby sevens tournament took place in 1973 at Murrayfield , one of Scotland 's biggest stadiums , as part of the Scottish Rugby Union centenary celebrations . 
 = = = World Cup and professionalism = = = 
 In 1987 the first Rugby World Cup was held in Australia and New Zealand , and the inaugural winners were New Zealand . The first World Cup Sevens tournament was held at Murrayfield in 1993 . Rugby Sevens was introduced into the Commonwealth Games in 1998 and has been added to the Olympic Games of 2016 . 
 Rugby union was an amateur sport until the IRB declared the game " open " in 1995 , removing restrictions on payments to players . However , the pre @-@ 1995 period of rugby union was marked by frequent accusations of " shamateurism " , including an investigation in Britain by a House of Commons Select committee . Following the introduction of professionalism trans @-@ national club competitions were started , with the Heineken Cup in the Northern Hemisphere and Super Rugby in the Southern Hemisphere . The Tri Nations , an annual international tournament involving Australia , New Zealand and South Africa , kicked off in 1996 . In 2012 , this competition was extended to include Argentina , a country whose impressive performances in international games ( especially finishing in third place in the 2007 Rugby World Cup ) was deemed to merit inclusion in the competition . As a result of the expansion to four teams , the tournament was renamed The Rugby Championship . 
 = = Teams and positions = = 
 Each team starts the match with 15 players on the field and seven or eight substitutes . Players in a team are divided into eight forwards ( two more than in rugby league ) and seven backs . 
 = = = Forwards = = = 
 The main responsibilities of the forward players are to gain and retain possession of the ball . Players in these positions are generally bigger and stronger and take part in the scrum and line @-@ out . The forwards are often collectively referred to as the ' pack ' , especially when in the scrum formation . 
 Front row 
 The front row consists of three players : two props ( the loosehead prop and the <unk> prop ) and the hooker . The role of the two props is to support the hooker during scrums , to provide support for the jumpers during line @-@ outs and to provide strength and power in <unk> and mauls . The third position in the front row is the hooker . The hooker is a key position in attacking and defensive play and is responsible for winning the ball in the scrum . Hookers normally throw the ball in at line @-@ outs . 
 Second row 
 The second row consists of two locks or lock forwards . Locks are usually the tallest players in the team , and specialise as line @-@ out jumpers . The main role of the lock in line @-@ outs is to make a standing jump , often supported by the other forwards , to either collect the thrown ball or ensure the ball comes down on their side . Locks also have an important role in the scrum , binding directly behind the three front row players and providing forward drive . 
 Back row 
 The back row , not to be confused with ‘ Backs ’ , is the third and final row of the forward positions , they are often referred to as the loose forwards . The three positions in the back row are the two flankers and the number 8 . The two flanker positions , called the blindside flanker and openside flanker , are the final row in the scrum . They are usually the most mobile forwards in the game . Their main role is to win possession through ' turn overs ' . The number 8 packs down between the two locks at the back of the scrum . The role of the number 8 in the scrum is to control the ball after it has been heeled back from the front of the pack and the position provides a link between the forwards and backs during attacking phases . 
 = = = Backs = = = 
 The backs ' role is to create and convert point @-@ scoring opportunities . They are generally smaller , faster and more agile than the forwards . Another distinction between the backs and the forwards is that the backs are expected to have superior kicking and ball handling skills , especially the fly @-@ half , scrum @-@ half and full @-@ back . 
 Half @-@ backs 
 The half @-@ backs consist of two positions , the scrum @-@ half and the fly @-@ half . The fly @-@ half is crucial to a team 's game plan , orchestrating the team 's performance . They are usually the first to receive the ball from the scrum @-@ half following a breakdown , lineout , or scrum , and need to be decisive with what actions to take and be effective at communicating with the outside backs . Many fly @-@ <unk> are also their team 's goal kickers . The scrum @-@ half is the link between the forwards and the backs . They receive the ball from the lineout and remove the ball from the back of the scrum , usually passing it to the fly @-@ half . They also feed the scrum and sometimes have to act as a fourth loose forward . 
 Three quarters 
 There are four three quarter positions , the inside centre , outside centre and left and right wings . The centres will attempt to tackle attacking players ; whilst in attack they should employ speed and strength to breach opposition defences . The wings are generally positioned on the outside of the backline . Their primary function is to finish off moves and score tries . Wings are usually the fastest players in the team and are elusive runners who use their speed to avoid tackles . 
 Fullbacks 
 The fullback normally positions himself several metres behind the back line . He fields any opposition kicks and is often the last line of defence should an opponent break through the back line . Two of the most important attributes of a good fullback are dependable catching skills and a good kicking game . 
 = = Laws = = 
 = = = Scoring = = = 
 Rugby union is played between two teams – the one that scores more points wins the game . Points can be scored in several ways : a try , scored by grounding the ball in the in @-@ goal area ( between the goal line and the dead @-@ ball line ) , is worth 5 points and a subsequent conversion kick scores 2 points ; a successful penalty kick or a drop goal each score 3 points . The values of each of these scoring methods have been changed over the years . 
 = = = Playing field = = = 
 The field of play on a rugby pitch is as near as possible to a maximum of 144 metres ( 157 yd ) long by 70 metres ( 77 yd ) wide . In actual gameplay there should be a maximum of 100 metres ( 109 yd ) between the two try @-@ lines , with anywhere between 10 and 22 metres behind each try line to serve as the in @-@ goal area . Several lines cross the field , notably the half way line and the " twenty two " , which is 22 metres ( 24 yd ) from the goal line . 
 Stricter rules apply to the pitch size for matches between national representative teams . The same maximums apply in this case , but the distance between the two try @-@ lines must also be at least 94 metres ( 103 yd ) and the pitch must be at least 68 metres ( 74 yd ) wide . 
 Rugby goalposts are H @-@ shaped , and consist of two poles , 5 @.@ 6 metres ( 6 @.@ 1 yd ) apart , connected by a horizontal crossbar 3 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 yd ) above the ground . 
 = = = Match structure = = = 
 At the beginning of the game , the captains and the referee toss a coin to decide which team will kick off first . Play then starts with a drop kick , with the players chasing the ball into the opposition 's territory , and the other side trying to retrieve the ball and advance it . If the ball does not reach the opponent ’ s 10 @-@ metre line the opposing team has two choices : to have the ball kicked off again , or to have a scrum at the centre of the half @-@ way line . If the player with the ball is tackled , frequently a ruck will result . 
 Games are divided into 40 @-@ minute halves , with a break in the middle . The sides exchange ends of the field after the half @-@ time break . <unk> for injury or to allow the referee to take disciplinary action do not count as part of the playing time , so that the elapsed time is usually longer than 80 minutes . The referee is responsible for keeping time , even when — as in many professional tournaments — he is assisted by an official time @-@ keeper . If time expires while the ball is in play , the game continues until the ball is " dead " , and only then will the referee blow the whistle to signal half @-@ time or full @-@ time ; but if the referee awards a penalty or free @-@ kick , the game continues . 
 In the knockout stages of rugby competitions , most notably the Rugby World Cup , two extra time periods of 10 minutes periods are played ( with an interval of 5 minutes in between ) if the game is tied after full @-@ time . If scores are level after 100 minutes then the rules call for 20 minutes of sudden @-@ death extra time to be played . If the sudden @-@ death extra time period results in no scoring a kicking competition is used to determine the winner . However , no match in the history of the Rugby World Cup has ever gone past 100 minutes into a sudden @-@ death extra time period . 
 = = = Passing and kicking = = = 
 Forward passing ( throwing the ball ahead to another player ) is not allowed ; the ball can be passed laterally or backwards . The ball tends to be moved forward in three ways — by kicking , by a player running with it or within a scrum or maul . Only the player with the ball may be tackled or <unk> . When a ball is knocked forward by a player with his / her arms , a " knock @-@ on " is committed , and play is restarted with a scrum . 
 Any player may kick the ball forward in an attempt to gain territory . When a player anywhere in the playing area kicks indirectly into touch so that the ball first bounces in the field of play , the throw @-@ in is taken where the ball went into touch . If the player kicks directly into touch ( i.e. without bouncing in @-@ field first ) from within one 's own 22 @-@ metre line , the lineout is taken by the opposition where the ball went into touch , but if the ball is kicked into touch directly by a player outside the 22 @-@ metre line , the lineout is taken level to where the kick was taken . 
 = = = Breakdowns = = = 
 The aim of the defending side is to stop the player with the ball , either by bringing them to ground ( a tackle , which is frequently followed by a ruck ) , or by contesting for possession with the ball @-@ carrier on their feet ( a maul ) . Such a circumstance is called a breakdown and each is governed by a specific law . 
 Tackling A player may tackle an opposing player who has the ball by holding them while bringing them to ground . <unk> cannot tackle above the shoulder ( the neck and head are out of bounds ) , and the tackler has to attempt to wrap their arms around the player being tackled to complete the tackle . It is illegal to push , shoulder @-@ charge , or to trip a player using feet or legs , but hands may be used ( this being referred to as a tap @-@ tackle or ankle @-@ tap ) . <unk> may not tackle an opponent who has jumped to catch a ball until the player has landed . 
 <unk> <unk> occur after a player with the ball has come into contact with an opponent but the handler remains on his feet ; once any combination of at least three players have bound themselves a maul has been set . A ruck is similar to the maul , but in this case the ball has gone to ground with at least three attacking players binding themselves on the ground in an attempt to secure the ball . 
 = = = Set pieces = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 When the ball leaves the side of the field , a line @-@ out is awarded against the team which last touched the ball . Forward players from each team line up a metre apart , perpendicular to the touchline and between 5 m and 15 m from the touchline . The ball is thrown from the touchline down the centre of the lines of forwards by a player ( usually the hooker ) from the team that did not play the ball into touch . The exception to this is when the ball went out from a penalty , in which case the side who gained the penalty throws the ball in . 
 Both sides compete for the ball and players may lift their teammates . A jumping player cannot be tackled until they stand and only shoulder @-@ to @-@ shoulder contact is allowed ; deliberate infringement of this law is dangerous play , and results in a penalty kick . 
 = = = = Scrum = = = = 
 A scrum is a way of restarting the game safely and fairly after a minor infringement . It is awarded when the ball has been knocked or passed forward , if a player takes the ball over his own try line and puts the ball down , when a player is accidentally offside or when the ball is trapped in a ruck or maul with no realistic chance of being retrieved . A team may also opt for a scrum if awarded a penalty . 
 A scrum is formed by the eight forwards from each team binding together in three rows . The front row consists of the two props ( loosehead and <unk> ) either side of the hooker . The second row consists of two locks and the two flankers . Behind the second row is the number 8 . This formation is known as the 3 – 4 – 1 formation . Once a scrum is formed the scrum @-@ half from the team awarded the feed rolls the ball into the gap between the two front @-@ rows known as the tunnel . The two hookers then compete for possession by hooking the ball backwards with their feet , while each pack tries to push the opposing pack backwards to help gain possession . The side that wins possession transfers the ball to the back of the scrum , where it is picked up either by the number 8 or by the scrum @-@ half . 
 = = = Officials and offences = = = 
 There are three match officials : a referee , and two assistant referees . The latter , formerly known as touch judges , had the primary function of indicating when the ball had gone into " touch " ; their role has been expanded and they are now expected to assist the referee in a number of areas , such as watching for foul play and checking offside lines . In addition , for matches in high level competitions , there is often a television match official ( <unk> ; popularly called the " video referee " ) , to assist with certain decisions , linked up to the referee by radio . The referees have a system of hand signals to indicate their decisions . 
 Common offences include tackling above the shoulders , collapsing a scrum , ruck or maul , not releasing the ball when on the ground , or being offside . The non @-@ offending team has a number of options when awarded a penalty : a " tap " kick , when the ball is kicked a very short distance from hand , allowing the kicker to regather the ball and run with it ; a punt , when the ball is kicked a long distance from hand , for field position ; a place @-@ kick , when the kicker will attempt to score a goal ; or a scrum . Players may be sent off ( signalled by a red card ) or temporarily suspended ( " sin @-@ binned " ) for ten minutes ( yellow card ) for foul play or repeated infringements , and may not be replaced . 
 Occasionally , infringements are not caught by the referee during the match and these may be " cited " by the citing commissioner after the match and have punishments ( usually suspension for a number of weeks ) imposed on the infringing player . 
 = = = Replacements and substitutions = = = 
 During the match , players may be replaced ( for injury ) or substituted ( for tactical reasons ) . A player who has been replaced may not rejoin play unless he was temporarily replaced to have bleeding controlled ; a player who has been substituted may return temporarily , to replace a player who has a blood injury or has suffered a concussion , or permanently , if he is replacing a front @-@ row forward . In international matches , eight replacements are allowed ; in domestic or cross @-@ border tournaments , at the discretion of the responsible national union ( s ) , the number of replacements may be nominated to a maximum of eight , of whom three must be sufficiently trained and experienced to provide cover for the three front row positions . 
 Prior to 2016 , all substitutions , no matter the cause , counted against the limit during a match . In 2016 , World Rugby changed the law so that substitutions made to replace a player deemed unable to continue due to foul play by the opposition would no longer count against the match limit . This change was introduced in January of that year in the Southern Hemisphere and June in the Northern Hemisphere . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The most basic items of equipment for a game of rugby union are the ball itself , a rugby shirt ( also known as a " jersey " ) , rugby shorts , socks and boots . The rugby ball is oval in shape , ( technically a prolate spheroid ) , and is made up of four panels . The ball was historically made of leather , but in the modern era most games use a ball made from a synthetic material . The WR lays out specific dimensions for the ball , 280 @-@ <unk> in length , 740 @-@ <unk> in circumference of length and 580 @-@ <unk> in circumference of width . Rugby boots have soles with studs to allow grip on the turf of the pitch . The studs may be either metal or plastic but must not have any sharp edges or ridges . 
 Protective equipment is optional and strictly regulated . The most common items are mouthguards , which are worn by almost all players , and are compulsory in some rugby @-@ playing nations . Other protective items that are permitted include head gear ; thin ( not more than 10 mm thick ) , non @-@ rigid shoulder pads and shin guards ; which are worn underneath socks . <unk> or tape can be worn to support or protect injuries ; some players wear tape around the head to protect the ears in scrums and <unk> . Female players may also wear chest pads . Although not worn for protection , some types of fingerless mitts are allowed to aid grip . 
 It is the responsibility of the match officials to check players ' clothing and equipment before a game to ensure that it conforms to the laws of the game . 
 = = Governing bodies = = 
 The international governing body of rugby union ( and associated games such as sevens ) is World Rugby ( WR ) . The WR headquarters are in Dublin , Ireland . WR , founded in 1886 , governs the sport worldwide and publishes the game 's laws and rankings . As of February 2014 , WR ( then known as the IRB , for International Rugby Board ) recorded 119 unions in its membership , 101 full members and 18 associate member countries . According to WR , rugby union is played by men and women in over 100 countries . WR controls the Rugby World Cup , the Women 's Rugby World Cup , Rugby World Cup Sevens , HSBC Sevens Series , HSBC Women 's Sevens Series , World Under 20 Championship , World Under 20 Trophy , Nations Cup and the Pacific Nations Cup . WR holds votes to decide where each of these events are be held , except in the case of the Sevens World Series for men and women , for which WR contracts with several national unions to hold individual events . 
 Six regional associations , which are members of WR , form the next level of administration ; these are : 
 Rugby Africa , formerly Confederation of African Rugby ( CAR ) 
 Asia Rugby , formerly Asian Rugby Football Union ( <unk> ) 
 Rugby Americas North , formerly North America Caribbean Rugby Association ( <unk> ) 
 Rugby Europe , previously Fédération Internationale de Rugby Amateur – Association Européenne de Rugby ( FIRA @-@ AER ) 
 Oceania Rugby , formerly Federation of Oceania Rugby Unions ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Rugby , formerly Confederación Sudamericana de Rugby ( South American Rugby Confederation , or <unk> ) 
 <unk> ( South Africa , New Zealand , Australia and Argentina Rugby ) is a joint venture of the South African Rugby Union , the New Zealand Rugby Union , the Australian Rugby Union and the Argentine Rugby Union ( UAR ) that operates Super Rugby and The Rugby Championship ( formerly the Tri Nations before the entry of Argentina ) . Although UAR initially had no representation on the former SANZAR board , it was granted input into the organisation 's issues , especially with regard to The Rugby Championship , and became a full <unk> member in 2016 ( when the country entered Super Rugby ) . 
 National unions oversee rugby union within individual countries and are affiliated to WR . The WR Council has 26 seats . Each of the eight foundation unions – Scotland , Ireland , Wales , England , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and France – have two seats , and Argentina , Canada , Italy , Japan and the six regional associations each have one seat . 
 = = Global reach = = 
 The earliest countries to adopt rugby union were England , the country of inception , and the other three Home Nations , Scotland , Ireland and Wales . The spread of rugby union as a global sport has its roots in the exporting of the game by British expatriates , military personnel and over @-@ seas university students . The first rugby club in France was formed by British residents in Le Havre in 1872 , while the next year Argentina recorded its first game : ' Banks ' v ' City ' in Buenos Aires . 
 At least six countries have adopted rugby union as their de facto national sport ; they are Fiji , Georgia , New Zealand , Samoa , Tonga and Wales . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 A rugby club was formed in Sydney , New South Wales , Australia in 1864 ; while the sport was said to have been introduced to New Zealand by Charles Monro in 1870 , who played rugby while a student at Christ 's College , Finchley . 
 Several island nations have embraced the sport of rugby . Rugby was first played in Fiji circa 1884 by European and Fijian soldiers of the Native Constabulary at Ba on Viti Levu island . Fiji then sent their first overseas team to Samoa in 1924 , who in turn set up their own union in 1927 . Along with Tonga , other countries to have national rugby teams in Oceania include the Cook Islands , Niue , Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands . 
 = = = North America and Caribbean = = = 
 In North America a club formed in Montreal in 1868 , Canada 's first club . The city of Montreal also played its part in the introduction of the sport in the United States , when students of McGill University played against a team from Harvard University in 1874 . 
 Although the exact date of arrival of rugby union in Trinidad and Tobago is unknown , their first club Northern RFC was formed in 1923 , a national team was playing by 1927 and due to a cancelled tour to British Guiana in 1933 , switched their venue to Barbados ; introducing rugby to the island . Other Atlantic countries to play rugby union include Jamaica and Bermuda . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The growth of rugby union in Europe outside the 6 Nations countries in terms of playing numbers has been sporadic . Historically , British and Irish home teams played the Southern Hemisphere teams of Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa , as well as France . The rest of Europe were let to play amongst themselves . During a period when it had been isolated by the British and Irish Unions , France , lacking international competition , became the only European team from the top tier to regularly play the other European countries ; mainly Belgium , the Netherlands , Germany , Spain , Romania , Poland , Italy and Czechoslovakia . In 1934 , instigated by the French Rugby Federation , FIRA ( Fédération Internationale de Rugby Amateur ) was formed to organise rugby union outside the authority of the IRFB . The founding members were Italy , Romania , Netherlands , Portugal , Czechoslovakia , and Sweden . Other European rugby playing nations of note include Russia , whose first officially recorded match is marked by an encounter between Dynamo Moscow and the Moscow Institute of Physical Education in 1933 . Rugby union in Portugal also took hold between the First and Second World Wars , with a Portuguese National XV set up in 1922 and an official championship started in 1927 . 
 In 1999 , FIRA agreed to place itself under the auspices of the IRB , transforming itself into a strictly European organising body . Accordingly , it changed its name to FIRA – AER ( Fédération Internationale de Rugby Amateur – Association Européenne de Rugby ) . It adopted its current name of Rugby Europe in 2014 . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 Although Argentina is the best @-@ known rugby playing nation in South America , founding the Argentine Rugby Union in 1899 , several other countries on the continent have a long history . Rugby had been played in Brazil since the end of the 19th century , but the game was played regularly only from 1926 , when São Paulo beat Santos in an inter @-@ city match . It took Uruguay several aborted attempts to adapt to rugby , led mainly by the efforts of the Montevideo Cricket Club ; these efforts succeeded in 1951 with the formation of a national league and four clubs . Other South American countries that formed a rugby union include Chile ( 1948 ) , and Paraguay ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Many Asian countries have a tradition of playing rugby dating from the British Empire . India began playing rugby in the early 1870s , the Calcutta Football Club forming in 1873 . However , with the departure of a local British army regiment , interest in rugby diminished in the area . In 1878 , The Calcutta Football Club was disbanded , and rugby in India faltered . Sri Lanka claims to have founded their union in 1878 , and although little official information from the period is available , the team won the All @-@ India cup in Madras in 1920 . The first recorded match in Malaysia was in 1892 , but the first confirmation of rugby is the existence of the HMS Malaya Cup which was first presented in 1922 and is still awarded to the winners of the Malay sevens . 
 Rugby union was introduced to Japan in 1899 by two Cambridge students : <unk> Tanaka and Edward Bramwell Clarke . The Japan RFU was founded in 1926 and its place in rugby history was cemented with the news that Japan will host the 2019 World Cup . It will be the first country outside the Commonwealth , Ireland and France to host the event , and this is viewed by the IRB as an opportunity for rugby union to extend its reach , particularly in Asia . Other Asian playing countries of note include Singapore , South Korea , China and The Philippines , while the former British colony of Hong Kong is notable within rugby for its development of the rugby sevens game , especially the Hong Kong Sevens tournament which was founded in 1976 . 
 Rugby in the Middle East and the Gulf States has its history in the 1950s , with clubs formed by British and French Services stationed in the region after the Second World War . When these servicemen left , the clubs and teams were kept alive by young professionals , mostly Europeans , working in these countries . The official union of Oman was formed in 1971 . Bahrain founded its union a year later , while in 1975 the Dubai Sevens , the Gulf 's leading rugby tournament , was created . Rugby remains a minority sport in the region with Israel , as of 2011 , being the only member union from the Middle East to be included in the IRB World Rankings . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 In 1875 , rugby was introduced to South Africa by British soldiers garrisoned in Cape Town . During the late 19th and early 20th century , the sport in Africa was spread by settlers and colonials who often adopted a " whites @-@ only " policy to playing the game . This resulted in rugby being viewed as a bourgeois sport by the indigenous people with limited appeal . The earliest countries to see the playing of competitive rugby include South Africa , and neighbouring Rhodesia ( modern @-@ day Zimbabwe ) , which formed the Rhodesia Rugby Football Union in 1895 . 
 In more recent times the sport has been embraced by several African nations . In the early 21st century Madagascar has experienced crowds of 40 @,@ 000 at national matches , while Namibia , whose history of rugby can be dated from 1915 , have qualified for the final stages of the World Cup four times since 1999 . Other African nations to be represented in the World Rugby Rankings as Member Unions include Côte d 'Ivoire , Kenya , Uganda and Zambia . South Africa and Kenya are among the 15 " core teams " that participate in every event of the men 's Sevens World Series . 
 = = Women 's rugby union = = 
 Records of women 's rugby football date from the late 19th century , with the first documented source being Emily Valentine 's writings , stating that she set up a rugby team in Portora Royal School in Enniskillen , Ireland in 1887 . Although there are reports of early women 's matches in New Zealand and France , one of the first notable games to prove primary evidence was the 1917 war @-@ time encounter between Cardiff Ladies and Newport Ladies ; a photo of which shows the Cardiff team before the match at the Cardiff Arms Park . In the past 30 years the game has grown in popularity among female athletes , and , according to WR , is now played in over 100 countries . 
 The English @-@ based Women 's Rugby Football Union ( <unk> ) , responsible for women 's rugby in England , Scotland Ireland and Wales , was founded in 1983 , and is the oldest formally organised national governing body for women 's rugby . This was replaced in 1994 by the Rugby Football Union for Women ( <unk> ) in England with each of the other Home Nations governing their own countries . The premier international competition in rugby union for women is the Women 's Rugby World Cup , first held in 1991 . Since 1994 it has been held every four years . 
 = = Major international competitions = = 
 = = = Rugby World Cup = = = 
 The most important tournament in rugby union is the Rugby World Cup , a men 's tournament that has taken place every four years since 1987 among national rugby union teams . New Zealand has won the Rugby World Cup the most ( 3 times ) and is the current cup holder , winning the 2015 Rugby World Cup held at Twickenham , beating Australia in the final . England ( 2003 ) were the first team from the Northern Hemisphere to win , the previous champions being New Zealand ( 1987 , 2011 and 2015 ) , Australia ( 1991 and 1999 ) , and South Africa ( 1995 and 2007 ) . 
 The Rugby World Cup has continued to grow since its inception in 1987 . The first tournament , in which 16 teams competed for the title , was broadcast to 17 countries with an accumulated total of 230 million television viewers . Ticket sales during the pool stages and finals of the same tournament was less than a million . The 2007 World Cup was contested by 94 countries with ticket sales of 3 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 over the pool and final stage . The accumulated television audience for the event , then broadcast to 200 countries , was 4 @.@ 2 billion . 
 = = = Regional tournaments = = = 
 Major international competitions are the Six Nations Championship and The Rugby Championship , held in Europe and the Southern Hemisphere respectively . 
 The Six Nations is an annual competition involving the European teams England , France , Ireland , Italy , Scotland and Wales . Each country plays the other five once . After the initial internationals between England and Scotland , Ireland and Wales began competing in the 1880s , forming the Home International Championships . France joined the tournament in the 1900s and in 1910 the term Five Nations first appeared . However , the Home Nations ( England , Ireland , Scotland , and Wales ) excluded France in 1931 amid a run of poor results , allegations of professionalism and concerns over on @-@ field violence . France then rejoined in 1939 – 1940 , though World War II halted proceedings for a further eight years . France has played in all the tournaments since WWII , the first of which was played in 1947 . In 2000 , Italy became the sixth nation in the contest and Rome 's Stadio Olimpico has replaced Stadio Flaminio , as the venue for their home games since 2013 . The current Six Nations champions are England . 
 The Rugby Championship is the Southern Hemisphere 's annual international series for that region 's top national teams . From its inception in 1996 through 2011 , it was known as the Tri Nations , as it featured the hemisphere 's traditional powers of Australia , New Zealand and South Africa . These teams have dominated world rankings in recent years , and many considered the Tri Nations to be the toughest competition in international rugby . The Tri Nations was initially played on a home and away basis with the three nations playing each other twice . In 2006 a new system was introduced where each nation plays the others three times , though in 2007 and 2011 the teams played each other only twice , as both were World Cup years . Since Argentina 's strong performances in the 2007 World Cup , after the 2009 Tri Nations tournament , SANZAR ( South Africa , New Zealand and Australian Rugby ) invited the Argentine Rugby Union ( UAR ) to join an expanded Four Nations tournament in 2012 . The competition has been officially rechristened as The Rugby Championship beginning with the 2012 edition . The competition reverted to the Tri Nations ' original home @-@ and @-@ away format , but now involving four teams . In 2015 , the first World Cup year after the entry of Argentina , an abbreviated tournament was held in which each team played the others only once . Australia are the current champions . 
 = = = Rugby within international tournaments = = = 
 Rugby union was played at the Olympic Games in 1900 , 1908 , 1920 and 1924 . As per Olympic rules , the nations of Scotland , Wales and England were not allowed to play separately as they are not sovereign states . In 1900 , France won the gold , beating Great Britain 27 points to 8 and defeating Germany 27 points to 17 . In 1908 , Australia defeated Great Britain , claiming the gold medal , the score being 32 points to three . In 1920 , the United States , fielding a team with many players new to the sport of rugby , upset France in a shock win , eight points to zero . In 1924 , the United States again defeated France 17 to 3 , becoming the only team to win gold twice in the sport . In 2009 the International Olympic Committee voted with a majority of 81 to 8 that rugby union be reinstated as an Olympic sport in at least the 2016 and 2020 games , but in the sevens , 4 @-@ day tournament format . This is something the rugby world has aspired to for a long time and Bernard <unk> , president of the International Rugby Board , said the Olympic gold medal would be considered to be " the pinnacle of our sport " ( Rugby Sevens ) . 
 Rugby sevens has been played at the Commonwealth Games since the 1998 Games in Kuala Lumpur . The most gold medal holders are New Zealand who have won the competition on four successive occasions until South Africa beat them in 2014 . Rugby union has also been an Asian Games event since the 1998 games in Bangkok , Thailand . In the 1998 and 2002 editions of the games , both the usual fifteen @-@ a @-@ side variety and rugby sevens were played , but from 2006 onwards , only rugby sevens was retained . In 2010 , the women 's rugby sevens event was introduced . The event is likely to remain a permanent fixture of the Asian Games due to elevation of rugby sevens as an Olympic sport from the 2016 Olympics onwards . The present gold medal holders in the sevens tournament , held in 2010 , are Japan in the male event and Kazakhstan in the women 's . 
 = = = Women 's international rugby = = = 
 Women 's international rugby union began in 1982 , with a match between France and Netherlands played in Utrecht . As of 2009 over six hundred women 's internationals have been played by over forty different nations . 
 The first Women 's Rugby World Cup was held in Wales in 1991 , and was won by the United States . The second tournament took place in 1994 , and since that date the competition has been held every four years . The New Zealand Women 's team then won four straight World Cups ( 1998 , 2002 , 2006 , 2010 ) before England won in 2014 . 
 As well as the Women 's Rugby World Cup there are also other regular tournaments , including a Six Nations , run in parallel to the men 's competition . The Women 's Six Nations , first played in 1996 has been dominated by England , who have won the tournament on 13 occasions , including a run of seven consecutive wins from 2006 to 2012 . However , England have failed to win the tournament since ; Ireland and France have alternated titles in the last four editions , with France as the current holders . 
 = = Professional rugby = = 
 Rugby union has been professionalized since 1995 . The following table shows fully professional rugby competitions . ( Semi @-@ professional competitions are excluded ) . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The game of rugby union has spawned several variants of the full @-@ contact , 15 @-@ a @-@ side code . The two more common differences applied to the variants of the sport lie in either fewer players or reduced player contact . Of the variants , the oldest is Rugby sevens ( 7 's , or VIIs ) , a fast @-@ paced variant which originated in Melrose , Scotland in 1883 . In rugby sevens , there are only seven players per side , and each half is normally seven minutes . Major tournaments include the Hong Kong Sevens and Dubai Sevens , both held in areas not normally associated with the highest levels of the 15 @-@ a @-@ side game . A more recent variant of the sport is Rugby tens ( 10 's or Xs ) , a Malaysian variant with ten players per side . 
 Due to the physical nature of playing rugby , several variants have been created to introduce the sport to children with a reduced level of physical contact . Of these versions , Touch rugby , in which " tackles " are made by simply touching the ball carrier with two hands , is popular as a mixed sex version of the sport played by both children and adults . Tag Rugby , is a version in which the participants wear a belt with two hook @-@ and @-@ loop fastener tags , the removal of either counting as a ' tackle ' . Tag Rugby also varies in the fact that kicking the ball is not allowed . Mini rugby is another variant of rugby union aimed at fostering the sport in children . It is played with only eight players and on a smaller pitch . Similar to Tag Rugby , American Flag Rugby , ( AFR ) , is a mixed gender , non @-@ contact imitation of rugby union designed for American children entering grades K @-@ 9 . Both American Flag Rugby and Mini Rugby differ to Tag Rugby in that they introduce more advanced elements of rugby union as the participants age . 
 Other less formal variants include beach rugby and snow rugby . 
 = = Influence on other sports = = 
 Rugby union football , and its immediate ancestor rugby football , has had a strong influence on several other sports . Most obviously rugby league which originally was formed as an administrative break from the English union before changing its laws , becoming a code in its own right . The two sports continue to influence each other to this day . 
 The Gridiron codes , American football and Canadian football , are derived from early forms of rugby . Confusingly , in Canada , Canadian football has also frequently been referred to as " rugby football " , and a number of national and provincial bodies were called " Rugby Football Unions " or " Rugby Unions " , such as the Ontario and Quebec Rugby Football Unions . For example , in the Encyclopedia Canadiana , the entry Rugby Football begins by referring to " the Canadian development of rugby union or " English rugger " introduced into Canada in the third quarter of the nineteenth century " , but later states that " the Canadian game is a radical departure from rugby union " . 
 The primary influence on early Australian rules football was rugby football and other games originating in English public schools . Tom Wills , who is recognised as the principal founder of Australian football , also attended Rugby School . 
 James Naismith took aspects of many sports including rugby to invent basketball . The most obvious contribution is the jump ball 's similarity to the line @-@ out as well as the underhand shooting style that dominated the early years of the sport . Naismith played many years of rugby at McGill University . 
 Swedish football was a code whose rules were a mix of the association football rules and the rugby football rules . Some played the game with a round ball , while others played with an oval ball . It is no longer played . 
 Rugby lends its name to wheelchair rugby ( also known as " quad rugby " or " <unk> " ) , and although the sport takes from wheelchair basketball , ice hockey and handball , it contains elements of rugby such as crossing a try line with the ball to score and the central theme of it being a full contact sport . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 According to a 2011 report by the Centre for the International Business of Sport , over four and a half million people play rugby union or one of its variants organised by the IRB . This is an increase of 19 percent since the previous report in 2007 . The report also claimed that since 2007 participation has grown by 33 percent in Africa , 22 percent in South America and 18 percent in Asia and North America . In 2014 the IRB published a breakdown of the total number of players worldwide by national unions . It recorded a total of 6 @.@ 6 million players globally , of those , 2 @.@ 36 million were registered members playing for a club affiliated to their country 's union . 
 The most capped international player from the tier 1 nations is New Zealand openside flanker and captain Richie McCaw who has played in 145 internationals . While the top scoring tier 1 international player is New Zealand 's Dan Carter , who has amassed 1442 points during his career . In April 2010 Lithuania broke the record of consecutive international wins previously held by New Zealand and South Africa , which was 17 consecutive wins against tier 1 nations , with their 18th win in tier 2 in a match against Serbia . The highest scoring international match between two recognised unions was Hong Kong 's 164 – 13 victory over Singapore on 27 October 1994 While the largest winning margin of 152 points is held by two countries , Japan ( a 155 – 3 win over Chinese Taipei ) and Argentina ( 152 – 0 over Paraguay ) both in 2002 . 
 The record attendance for a rugby union game was set on 15 July 2000 in which New Zealand defeated Australia 39 – 35 in a Bledisloe Cup game at Stadium Australia in Sydney before 109 @,@ 874 fans . The record attendance for a match in Europe of 104 @,@ 000 ( at the time a world record ) was set on 1 March 1975 when Scotland defeated Wales 12 – 10 at Murrayfield in Edinburgh during the 1975 Five Nations Championship . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Thomas Hughes 1857 novel Tom Brown 's Schooldays , set at Rugby School , includes a rugby football match , also portrayed in the 1940s film of the same name . James Joyce mentions Irish team <unk> Rangers in several of his works , including Ulysses ( 1922 ) and Finnegans Wake ( 1939 ) , while his 1916 semi @-@ autobiographical work A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man has an account of Ireland international James Magee . Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , in his 1924 Sherlock Holmes tale The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire , mentions that Dr Watson played rugby for Blackheath . 
 Henri Rousseau 's 1908 work <unk> de football shows two pairs of rugby players competing . Other French artists to have represented the sport in their works include Albert Gleizes ' Les <unk> de football ( 1912 ) , Robert Delaunay 's Football . L 'Equipe de Cardiff ( 1916 ) and André Lhote 's Partie de Rugby ( 1917 ) . The 1928 Gold Medal for Art at the Antwerp Olympics was won by Luxembourg 's Jean Jacoby for his work Rugby . 
 In film , Ealing Studios ' 1949 comedy A Run for Your Money and the 1979 BBC Wales television film Grand Slam both centre on fans attending a match . Films that explore the sport in more detail include independent production Old Scores ( 1991 ) and Forever Strong ( 2008 ) . Invictus ( 2009 ) , based on John Carlin 's book Playing the Enemy , explores the events of the 1995 Rugby World Cup and Nelson Mandela 's attempt to use the sport to connect South Africa 's people post @-@ apartheid . 
 In public art and sculpture there are many works dedicated to the sport . There is a 27 ft bronze statue of a rugby line @-@ out by pop artist Gerald Laing at Twickenham and one of rugby administrator Sir Tasker Watkins at the Millennium Stadium . Rugby players to have been honoured with statues include Gareth Edwards in Cardiff and Danie Craven in Stellenbosch . 
 = = = Printed sources = = = 
 = = = Electronic sources = = = 
 " Laws of Rugby Union " . IRB . 2010 . Retrieved 16 January 2011 . 
 " IRB Regulations " . IRB . Retrieved 16 January 2011 . 
 <unk> Rugby guide 
 = Mixco Viejo = 
 Mixco Viejo ( / <unk> <unk> / ) ( " Old Mixco " ) , occasionally spelt <unk> Viejo , is an archaeological site in the north east of the Chimaltenango department of Guatemala , some 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) to the north of Guatemala City and 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the junction of the rivers Pixcaya and Motagua . It is a moderate sized ruined city of the Postclassic Maya civilization . 
 The archaeological site and tourist attraction of Mixco Viejo was named after being erroneously associated with the Postclassic Poqomam capital referred to in colonial records by that name . The archaeological site has now been identified as Jilotepeque Viejo , the capital of the Chajoma Kaqchikel kingdom . To distinguish between the two , the ruins of the Chajoma capital are now referred to as Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) while the former Poqomam capital is referred to as Mixco Viejo ( Chinautla Viejo ) . 
 This confusion in the identification of the site has hindered study . The Chajoma capital has been investigated archaeologically , under the assumption that it was the Poqomam capital . Although the Chajoma ruins of Jilotepeque Viejo have been well described archaeologically , the archaeological data has been associated with the history of a different site entirely . Doubts about the identification of the archaeological site were first raised by Robert M. Carmack , who realised that the supposed Poqomam capital was not located within the Poqomam linguistic area but rather within the linguistic area of the Kaqchikels . The Poqomam who were settled in the new colonial settlement of Mixco by the Spanish had a long history of fine polychrome ceramic production , but no evidence of such production had been recovered during archaeological investigations , and the ruins were considered too distant from colonial Mixco . 
 Chinautla Viejo was attacked by the invading Spanish in 1525 ; the first two attacks against the heavily fortified city were unsuccessful . The besieged city received Poqomam reinforcements that were comprehensively defeated on an open field of battle , with the Spanish cavalry being decisive . The capture of Poqomam prisoners allowed the Spanish to discover the location of a cave providing a secret entrance to the city . A third assault broke the month @-@ long siege , allowing the Spanish to take the city . The surviving inhabitants were moved to another settlement and Pedro de Alvarado ordered the city to be burned . 
 Jilotepeque Viejo was settled by the Chajoma in order to provide a capital that was safer from attack from the hostile Iximche Kaqchikel kingdom than their previous capital . In spite of this , the city fell under the domination of Iximche and the city 's architecture , spread in a number of fortified groups along a ridge surrounded by deep ravines , shows a mixture of Chajoma and Kaqchikel styles . At the time of the Spanish conquest , the Chajoma of Jilotepeque Viejo may have initially allied themselves with the Spanish together with Iximche and have joined in the general Kaqchikel uprising against the Spanish in 1524 . The site was abandoned after the conquest and never reoccupied . 
 = = Mixco Viejo in history : Chinautla Viejo = = 
 The historical Mixco Viejo has been identified as Chinautla Viejo ( " Old Chinautla " ) , near the modern town of Mixco . Mixco Viejo ( " Old Mixco " ) was the capital of the Poqomam Maya kingdom , and was founded on a defensive mountain @-@ top location in the 12th century AD . The peak population in the early 16th century may have been around 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 In 1525 Pedro de Alvarado sent a small company to conquer Mixco Viejo ( Chinautla Viejo ) , the capital of the Poqomam . At the Spanish approach , the inhabitants remained enclosed in the fortified city . The Spanish attempted an approach from the west through a narrow pass but were forced back with heavy losses . Alvarado himself launched the second assault with 200 Tlaxcalan allies but was also beaten back . The Poqomam then received reinforcements , possibly from Chinautla , and the two armies clashed on open ground outside of the city . The battle was chaotic and lasted for most of the day but was finally decided by the Spanish cavalry , forcing the Poqomam reinforcements to withdraw . The leaders of the reinforcements surrendered to the Spanish three days after their retreat and revealed that the city had a secret entrance in the form of a cave leading up from a nearby river , allowing the inhabitants to come and go . 
 Armed with the knowledge gained from their prisoners , Alvarado sent 40 men to cover the exit from the cave and launched another assault along the ravine from the west , in single file owing to its narrowness , with crossbowmen alternating with soldiers bearing muskets , each with a companion sheltering him from arrows and stones with a shield . This tactic allowed the Spanish to break through the pass and storm the entrance of the city . The Poqomam warriors fell back in disorder in a chaotic retreat through the city , and were hunted down by the victorious conquistadors and their Mesoamerican allies . Those who managed to retreat down the neighbouring valley were ambushed by Spanish cavalry who had been posted to block the exit from the cave , the survivors were captured and brought back to the city . The siege had lasted more than a month and because of the defensive strength of the city , Alvarado ordered it to be burned and moved the inhabitants to the new colonial village of Mixco . 
 = = Archaeological site : Jilotepeque Viejo = = 
 Although the site now known as Mixco Viejo was traditionally considered the Poqomam capital , recent investigations have instead identified the ruins as the capital of the Kaqchikel @-@ speaking Chajoma Maya , and have suggested that its identification as the historical Mixco Viejo is the result of confusion in the interpretation of colonial records . The site was apparently known to the Chajoma by a variety of names , including <unk> <unk> Nima Abaj ( also spelt <unk> Pek Q <unk> <unk> Nima Ab 'aj ) , meaning " Great stone in front of the Cave of the Children of Night " , <unk> and <unk> . Jilotepeque Viejo is estimated to have had a population of approximately 1 @,@ 500 inhabitants . Jilotepeque was close to the San Martín Jilotepeque obsidian source , giving the inhabitants ready access to the resource . 
 The site is open to the public and has a small museum . The site was declared a protected archaeological zone by Ministerial Accord 1210 of the Guatemalan Ministry of Education on 12 June 1970 . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The ruins are situated at the northeastern extreme of the department of Chimaltenango within the municipality of San Martín Jilotepeque ; they are strung out over 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) along a 880 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 890 ft ) high ridge approximately 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the point where the Pixcaya River flows into the Motagua River , which drains into the Caribbean Sea . The ruins are surrounded by deep ravines dropping off sharply into a tributary of the Pixcaya River . The site is 53 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 33 @.@ 1 mi ) from Guatemala City by road . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = = = = Known rulers = = = = 
 All dates are approximate . 
 = = = = Postclassic = = = = 
 Around 1450 the Chajoma , led by their king <unk> No 'j , moved to Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) from <unk> to make their capital more inaccessible to their hostile neighbours . In spite of this , Iximche defeated the Chajoma and Jilotepeque Viejo became subject to the Kaqchikel kingdom . Groups C and E show Kaqchikel influence in their architectural styles , while groups A and B have a purer Chajoma architectural style . Both ballcourts appear to have been remodelled after the Kaqchikel fashion , with thick coatings of stucco . 
 Around the 13th century , Group A underwent a major remodelling , including the construction of a new retaining wall and the infilling of the 12 @-@ metre ( 39 ft ) wide area between the old and new walls , creating a much expanded terrace for the construction of the group 's architecture . Owing to its possession of two ballcourts , it is possible that Jilotepeque Viejo served as a regional centre for the Mesoamerican ballgame during the Postclassic ; no other Postclassic ballcourt has been identified in the area of San Martín Jilotepeque although three of four Classic period ballcourts at other sites appear to have continued in use . Shortly before the Spanish Conquest , the Chajoma under their lord Achi Q 'alel rebelled against the Kaqchikels of Iximche . 
 It is possible that the Chajoma of Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) initially allied themselves with the Spanish together with the Kaqchikel kingdom of Iximche , and that they also rebelled against the Spanish in 1524 . It is known that when the lords of Iximche broke their alliance with the conquistadors , they took refuge in Jilotepeque . The site was abandoned after the Spanish conquest and the inhabitants were moved by the Spanish to San Martín Jilotepeque , after which the area was never reoccupied . 
 = = = = Modern history = = = = 
 German geographer Karl Sapper visited the ruins in 1896 and published a brief description of the ruins together with a site map two years later in a 6 @-@ page pamphlet by the Internationales Archiv für <unk> of Leyden in the Netherlands , entitled Die <unk> von Mixco , Guatemala . It was Sapper who labelled each of the archaeological groups and their attendant structures . American archaeologist A. Ledyard Smith visited the ruins in 1949 and wrote a chapter about the site in his Archaeological Reconnaissance in Central America , published by the Carnegie Institution of Washington in 1955 . Archeological excavations were carried out from 1954 through 1967 by the Musée de l 'Homme of Paris under the direction of archaeologist Henri Lehmann , who certainly believed that he was excavating the <unk> capital as described in Colonial records . 
 Although the site was restored during the archaeological investigations , it suffered considerable damage in the 1976 Guatemala earthquake . This resulted in destruction of some of the restoration work , although some of the damage has now been repaired . 
 = = = Site description = = = 
 The ruins consist of 15 groups containing the remains of over 120 major structures , including temples , palaces , and courts for playing the Mesoamerican ballgame . When the site was excavated , the surface was found to be littered with abundant obsidian blades and arrowheads . Originally the city had its main entrance on the western side , a modern road has now been cut through to the ruins from the west along a similar route . 
 The relatively short period of occupation at Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) led to an unusual unity of architectural styles for a Mesoamerican city . Almost all archaeological finds at the city , including both artefacts and earlier versions of later structures , date to the last few hundred years before the Spanish conquest . The architecture was built with mica and pumice slabs , in some cases this was coated with stucco . Stone sculpture is almost totally absent from the city , the only example being a ballcourt marker in the form of a serpent 's head with jaws agape and a human head emerging from its mouth . Originally some buildings were decorated with painted stucco but this is so poorly preserved that only a few fragments remain . 
 A population estimate derived from the number of residential remains suggests that the city had approximately 1450 to 1600 inhabitants . 
 = = = = Architectural groups = = = = 
 The architecture is divided into a number of groups and subgroups , labelled by archaeologists as Groups A through to L ; those subgroups belonging to Groups A , B , C and E that fall outside the city walls are indicated with the addition of an X or an apostrophe after the group name , to give Group A @-@ X , Group B @-@ X , Group C ' and Group E ' . 
 = = = = = Group A = = = = = 
 Group A is located on the northern end of the ridge . The group was extended during major remodelling work that included the building of the final versions of Platforms A2 and A3 on the north side ; this involved building a new retaining wall some 12 metres ( 39 ft ) further north , east and southeast and filling in the area between the new and old walls to create a greatly expanded terrace . Traces of charcoal at the base of the old retaining wall have been radiocarbon dated to the 13th century , indicating that the expansion of Group A took place no earlier than that . 
 Pyramid A1 is one of the principal structures of Group A , together with the ballcourt . The pyramid is 6 @.@ 9 metres ( 23 ft ) high and measures 15 @.@ 4 by 7 @.@ 25 metres ( 50 @.@ 5 by 23 @.@ 8 ft ) at the base . It was built using cut stone and has four stepped levels , each of which terminates in a cornice . The pyramid faces west onto the plaza and has two access stairways with 27 steps each . The stairways are flanked by smooth balustrades built from well @-@ fitted slabs . The summit of the pyramid supports a 60 @-@ centimetre ( 24 in ) high platform that once formed the base for the summit temple . The pyramid was built over another structure , a stucco platform with two levels , the upper of which terminated in a cornice . 
 Platform A2 is built along the edge of the retaining wall behind Pyramid A1 . It faces west towards the pyramid and has two access stairways . Three successive versions of the platform were built , each overlying the previous . The earliest version sat upon the early retaining wall , as did the second version . The final version was much larger and was built after the new retaining wall had extended the available area for Group A. 
 Platform A3 encloses the north side of the eastern part of the Group A plaza . It faces south onto the plaza and was accessed via two stairways on that side . The platform was built over an earlier structure that was built on top of an early tiered retaining wall ; the earlier structure extended 1 @.@ 27 metres ( 4 @.@ 2 ft ) above the retaining wall . The final version extended 4 metres ( 13 ft ) further to the west and 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) further to the north . It had two levels , each terminating in a cornice . On the north side a 1 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) wide bench extends along the base of the wall . 
 Platform A4 divides the Group A plaza in two . It was a later addition to Group A during the reorganisation of the group that involved the destruction of the earlier building under Platform A5 . When excavated it was very poorly reserved but was able to be reliably restored . There was no earlier version of the structure ; it consists of a platform with two levels that faces east towards the principal architecture of Group A. The upper level is topped with a cornice and access was via two stairways flanked by balustrades . 
 Platform A5 closes the north side of the Group A plaza . The platform has two levels upon a base and a cornice terminating the walls . The platform faces south towards the plaza and ballcourt . The platform was accessed via four stairways , each with nine steps ; they were flanked by steep ramps or balustrades . The visible version of Platform A5 covers the remains of an earlier structure . The earlier building was a large platform with a north @-@ south orientation as opposed to the east @-@ west orientation of Platform A5 . The surviving parts were investigated by archaeologists and consist of the north wall and parts of the west facade . The north wall was 9 @.@ 1 metres ( 30 ft ) wide , suggesting that the earlier platform was very large and probably extended south almost as far as the ballcourt . Two funerary urns were excavated from the earlier platform . 
 Platform A6 encloses the western extreme of the Group A plaza . The platform has two levels , the upper of which has a vertical cornice . The platform faces east onto the plaza ; access was via two stairways flanked by balustrades terminating in vertical cornices . Platform A6 was built over an older version of the same building ; this earlier construction phase was smaller and its stairways were destroyed in order to build the stairways of the final version . During restoration work carried out by archaeologists the back wall and a section of the facade were left exposed . Four funerary urns were found associated with the platform , mostly interred under the front of the building . 
 Structure A7 is a small square altar in the middle of the eastern part of the Group A plaza . It faces west with steps on that side . 
 Platform A8 is to the east of Pyramid A1 , on the eastern side of the Group A plaza . It faces northwest towards the pyramid and had two access stairways . Behind the platform was a finely paved terrace extending along the edge of the retaining wall . 
 Platform A9 is to the east of the ballcourt ( A11 ) and faces towards it . It had four access stairways set between corniced balustrades ; each stairway had nine steps . 
 Ballcourt A11 encloses the west side of the Group A plaza , separating it from the retaining wall dropping off to the ravine behind the ballcourt . It is a sunken ballcourt with a north @-@ south orientation and is entirely enclosed . A short sunken stairway leads from the plaza to the top of the south wall . Another stairway descends the south wall to the southern end zone of the ballcourt . A matching stairway in the northern end zone provides access from that direction . The interior of the ballcourt playing area measures 37 @.@ 21 metres ( 122 @.@ 1 ft ) north @-@ south and the playing alley is 9 @.@ 46 metres ( 31 @.@ 0 ft ) wide between the side benches . The walls were built of small stone slabs and have a slight slope ; as is common with the architecture of Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) , the walls were topped with vertical cornices . However , the end zone walls are all completely vertical . Fragments of stucco recovered around the ballcourt indicate that it was at least partly coated . 
 Structure A12 was a residential structure on the southwest side of the Group A plaza between the ballcourt and Platform A6 . All that remains of this structure is its outline marked in stones . 
 Structure A14 was a residential structure immediately northeast of Platform A5 . 
 Structures A31 and A32 were residential structures near platform A5 on the north side of the Group A plaza . 
 = = = = = Group A @-@ X = = = = = 
 Group A @-@ X defines a number of structures in two subgroups lying outside the walls of Group A , to the northeast and northwest of the main group . 
 = = = = = Group B = = = = = 
 Group B is near the centre of the site , roughly equidistant between Group A ( to the northeast ) and Group C ( to the southwest ) . The main plaza of Group B was at the northern end of the group and was enclosed by the ballcourt on the south side , a double pyramid on the east side and three platforms . A stairway with 28 steps descends the Group B retaining wall behind the northeast corner of the double pyramid , providing an access route towards Group D. On the north side of the group another stairway , with 18 steps divided into two flights , descends towards Group A. 
 Ballcourt B1 is immediately south of the Group B plaza , with the northern entrance to the ballcourt directly accessing the plaza itself . It is an enclosed sunken ballcourt , as was common in the Maya highlands during the Late Postclassic . The ballcourt is aligned north @-@ south with two transverse end zones forming a capital I shape . The ballcourt has two entrances in the form of inset stairways in the end zones , in the centre of the ballcourt 's north and south walls . The side walls of the playing alley are slightly sloped and are topped by a cornice ; the playing alley is flanked by two low benches set against the east and west walls . The end zones also possess sloping walls . All the ballcourt walls were built of large stones . The ballcourt playing area measures 44 @.@ 5 metres ( 146 ft ) north @-@ south and is 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide between the benches . The end zones measure 17 @.@ 46 metres ( 57 @.@ 3 ft ) east @-@ west . The ballcourt was originally coated in stucco painted in a variety of colours ; very little of this coating now remains . A drain opening empties runoff rainwater from the east side of the northern end zone ; the drain continues under Platform B 2 and empties outside the retaining wall of Group B. 
 During archaeological investigation of the ballcourt a well @-@ preserved tennoned ballgame marker was found placed on the western bench . Its original placement was indicated by a hole in the upper part of the ballcourt wall . The second marker that would have been placed directly opposite the first has never been found and the area of the ballcourt wall where it would have been had collapsed prior to excavations . Replicas of the ballcourt marker have been placed in both walls ; the original is in the Museo Nacional de Arqueología y Etnología in Guatemala City . 
 Platform B2 is aligned northeast to southwest and faces northwest onto the Group B plaza . It had two access stairways flanked by steep balustrades topped with vertical cornices . Behind the platform two stairways descend Group B 's retaining wall towards Group B @-@ X. 
 Pyramid B3 is actually two pyramids built upon a single basal platform . Together they comprise the most important architectural unit in Group B. The northern pyramid of the pair is denominated <unk> ; the southern is <unk> . The two pyramids each have five stepped levels and face west onto the plaza . Each pyramid was accessed by a single stairway flanked by wide balustrades ; each had a small altar at the base of its stairway . Both stairways had nineteen steps and the pyramids stand 6 @.@ 17 metres ( 20 @.@ 2 ft ) high . Low platforms on their summits indicate where the temple buildings once stood . The double form of the twin pyramids had its origin in the Valley of Mexico and indicates foreign influences at the city . A broken stela was excavated from within the fill of Pyramid <unk> ; it was a plain monument broken in two parts . The bottom section still stood , while the upper section was lying beside it . It is one of very few such monuments raised in the Maya highlands and such stelae are characteristic of the Classic Period ( c . 250 – 900 ) . It is possible that it stands where originally erected before the pyramid was built over it . A funerary urn was excavated from underneath the rear of Pyramid <unk> . 
 A drain near the northeast corner of Pyramid B3 carries runoff rainwater from the Group B plaza and channels it outside the retaining wall to the area between Groups B and D. 
 Platform B4 encloses the north side of the Group B plaza . The platform consists of a single level set upon a base and possesses corniced walls . Access was via an inset stairway in the centre of the south side . The platform top was floored with slabs and possessed a low double terrace at the rear . 
 Platform B5 possesses two stepped levels with cornices and encloses the northern part of the west side of the Group B plaza . The lower level possesses a single inset stairway , while the upper terrace has two stairways flanked by balustrades , with a third balustrade dividing the two . The platform provides a broad view across the <unk> River valley to the west . Structure B5 was built on top of an earlier construction phase , which is exposed along the upper portion of the back wall because restoration of the building only rebuilt the lower portion . It was built from stone slabs and was originally taller than the final version of the platform but was cut back to the reduced height of the new building . 
 Pyramid B6 enclosed the southern portion of the west side of the Group B plaza . It is very poorly preserved and the top of the pyramid has collapsed , leaving only the lower walls . Archaeological investigation revealed that the final version of the pyramid had been build over a preceding version . 
 Structure B7 was a small , well @-@ proportioned rectangular structure south of the main Group A plaza , between the north end of the ballcourt ( B1 ) to the east and Structure B9 to the west . This structure was likely to have been an altar shrine . 
 Platform B8 is a range structure on the west side of Group B. It consists of a basal platform supporting inward @-@ sloping walls that terminate in a cornice . The building faces east and possesses four access stairways separated by near @-@ vertical balustrades . The retaining wall of Group B drops away into the neighbouring ravine 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) behind Platform B8 . A great number of funerary urns were excavated around the base of this platform . 
 = = = = = Group B @-@ X = = = = = 
 Group B @-@ X includes a number of structures in three subgroups outside the walls of Group B ; they are to the northwest , northeast and east of Group B itself . 
 Structure B @-@ X3 is a step pyramid with sides so steep that it is almost cubic in shape . This temple platform would originally have supported a perishable superstructure but no trace of this now remains . The pyramid faces west and was accessed by an extremely steep stairway with fifteen steps that faces directly onto the massive 13 @-@ metre ( 43 ft ) high retaining wall of Group B. The stairway is flanked by wide balustrades that form the western facade of the temple platform . Structure B @-@ X3 has been restored . 
 Structure B @-@ X4 has also been restored . It is a south @-@ facing range structure with four inset access stairways . 
 = = = = = Group C = = = = = 
 Group C lies to the southwest of Group B and east of Group E. Group C is arranged around two large structures ( C1 and C2 ) . It possesses two small plazas ; the East Plaza is the larger of the two , enclosing an area to the east of the main temple , Pyramid C1 . The East Plaza was accessed via a narrow alley that ran between a large , low platform and a high @-@ status residential structure with a patio ( C8 ) . An inset stairway climbed outside of the retaining wall of Group C and accessed the East Plaza between the high @-@ status residence and a platform to its east . The West Plaza is located behind Platform C2 and is enclosed to the north by three platforms ( C9 , C10 and C17 ) . 
 Pyramid C1 is the principal structure in Group C. Archaeological investigation uncovered three versions of the pyramid , each built over the last . The archaeologists restored the pyramid in such a way as to make a part of each of the three construction phases visible . The first phase of construction consisted of a platform of cut pumice blocks . This was buried under the second construction phase , which consisted of a five @-@ level stepped pyramid . It had a double stairway on the west side ; each stairway had 16 steps . The stairways were flanked and separated by ramps that terminated in sizeable masonry blocks at the top . The top of the pyramid stood 6 @.@ 1 metres ( 20 ft ) high and was topped by a temple , parts of which survive and have been restored . The walls were built from packed earth coated with stucco ; a section of the northern portion of the rear wall still stands to a height of 1 @.@ 1 metres ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) . A wide stucco bench was built against the rear wall and a concave hollow in the floor was <unk> designed for the burning of incense . The roof of the temple was likely to have been thatched . The third and final construction phase was considerably larger than the preceding versions of the pyramid . In its final form the pyramid base measured 18 @.@ 25 by 9 @.@ 75 metres ( 59 @.@ 9 by 32 @.@ 0 ft ) ; it had five corniced levels and only possessed a single stairway in place of the earlier <unk> stairway was flanked by two wide ramps , only the lower portion of the stairway and ramps survive . The top of the pyramid stood almost 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) higher than the preceding version and preserved parts of the earlier temple building in its infill ; the upper platform has largely collapsed and no trace remains of the final version of the temple superstructure . Both the second and third versions of the pyramid were originally coated in stucco , parts of which were preserved . New stucco was applied during restoration work to match the original coating . Although the pyramid was restored after it was excavated , the 1976 Guatemala earthquake caused considerable damage and the upper portion of the pyramid was reduced to rubble . 
 A burial was excavated from in front of the wall of the earliest version of the pyramid . The associated offerings included a number of clay vessels , a necklace of small gold bells and a copper axe . The earliest metal artefacts in the Maya region have been dated to the Terminal Classic period ( <unk> @-@ 900 ) ; the presence of metal artefacts associated with the earliest construction phase at Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) demonstrates the short span of the site and suggests that all three construction phases succeeded each other relatively rapidly . Further ceramic offerings were deposited under both of the latter two phases and an artificially deformed skull was interred under the central axis of the final version . 
 Platform C2 faces Pyramid C1 and borders the Group C Plaza . The platform is a long rectangular structure measuring 47 @.@ 3 by 14 metres ( 155 by 46 ft ) ( north @-@ south by east @-@ west ) and occupies the highest location of any structure at Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) . The platform has two levels and has a total height of 4 @.@ 4 metres ( 14 ft ) , the lower of which has a prominent cornice . The east side of the lower level has an inset stairway accessing the upper level . The upper level of the platform is recessed against the rear of the lower level and possesses an elaborate facade with four access stairways separated by corniced ramps . The entire platform was originally coated in stucco , of which only a few traces remain . On the upper level the stucco traces outline where walls once stood , leading archaeologists to conclude that several residential structures once stood on top . Platform C2 was built upon an earlier , shorter platform that possessed a facade composed of thin slabs . It is likely that Platform C2 provided restricted access to Pyramid C1 . A number of funerary urns were excavated from the base of Platform C2 . 
 Structure C6 was an observation platform that formed the south side of the East Plaza . It faced out southwards across the neighbouring valley . 
 Platform C7 is an L @-@ shaped platform that closes the east side and northeast corner of the East Plaza . Steps run the entire length of the platform . 
 Structure C8 is a residential compound that was accessed from the alley running to the East Plaza from behind Pyramid C1 . The entrance opened onto the alley from a patio situated in the southern portion of the compound . This patio was surrounded on the east , west and north sides by rooms , with the alley to the south . It was floored with stucco and Structure C8 was the only stuccoed residential building in the whole of the city . The north range of rooms backed directly onto the ravine immediately to the north of Group C ; the lower portion of the walls of the west room and of half of the north room still stand . The west room was square while the north room was narrow and probably extended the entire width of the patio . Wear marks in the stucco floor indicate that a door once accessed the north room from the west . The workmanship of Structure C8 was of very high quality and indicates that it was the residence of a member of the city 's elite . Its proximity to the large pyramid @-@ temple C1 has led archaeologist Henri Lehmann to speculate that it was once the house of the high priest . 
 Structure C11 was a small pyramid temple in the lower ( western ) section of Group C. It was built from small slabs of stone and faced west with an access stairway flanked by ramps . The structure overlies an earlier version that was built using pumice . 
 Structure C12 is a south @-@ facing platform built from pumice . It divides the West Plaza in two . The upper surface of the platform is marked by a circle of burnt clay formed by the burning of incense . 
 Structure C13 is a platform closing the southern half of the west side of the West Plaza . 
 Structure C14 is a platform in the lower part of Group C , close to Pyramid C11 . 
 = = = = = Group C ' = = = = = 
 Group C ' is a small group east of Group C ; it is immediately south of Group B and adjoins it . 
 Structure C ' 1 is an unexcavated mound . 
 Structure C ' 2 is another unexcavated mound ; it is smaller than Structure C ' 1 . 
 = = = = = Group D = = = = = 
 Group D is a dispersed group to the east of Group B. 
 Pyramid D1 is on the east side of the Group D plaza . The pyramid had three stepped levels erected upon a low base . It faces west towards the plaza and had a single access stairway flanked by sloping balustrades that terminate in vertical sections at the upper extremes . The pyramid was of fine workmanship using well @-@ cut stone slabs . However , <unk> was poorly preserved and the southern part had partially collapsed . The surviving portions of the building allowed it to be accurately restored by archaeologists . 
 Platform D2 is on the north side of the Group D plaza ; it has not been <unk> by archaeologists . 
 Platform D3 is on the south side of the Group D plaza and has not been subject to archaeological investigation . 
 Structure D4 is a small altar in the centre of the Group D plaza . 
 Platform D5 is a south @-@ facing range structure of great length with just two access stairways . Excavations uncovered a number of funerary urns deposited under the back wall of the structure , the only example burial urns being interred behind such a platform . 
 = = = = = Group E = = = = = 
 Group E is located to the west of Group C. Group E is largely surrounded by steep ravines ; the inhabitants of the city cut the cliffs to make them steeper and more defensible , and reinforced them with a retaining wall . Archaeological investigations failed to find any access stairway through the retaining wall to Group E. 
 Pyramid E1 is located on the east side of the Group E plaza and was the most important building in Group E. The pyramid had three construction phases , the oldest of which was built from pumice upon a natural 2 @-@ metre ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high elevation and was found to be well preserved during excavations of the site . This early phase was packed with rounded pebbles to provide the infill for the second phase of construction . The second version of the pyramid was very poorly preserved ; excavations uncovered many stucco fragments but were unable to determine which of the first tow construction phases they belonged to . The third and final phase of construction was larger than the preceding versions of the building and encased both them and the natural elevation upon which they stood . The pyramid had four stepped levels upon a basal platform . It faced west with an access stairway flanked by two ramps that terminated in projecting masonry blocks at the top . A small altar was excavated at the base of the pyramid ; two stones were found placed upon it . One of these stones was ball @-@ shaped while the other was perforated and may have been a mace or club . A number of funerary urns were excavated at the base of the southern side of the pyramid . 
 Structure E2 is a range structure on the north side of the Group E plaza . It has not been subject to archaeological investigation . 
 Structure E3 is a square altar in the middle of the Group E plaza . It faces towards Pyramid E1 . 
 Structure E4 is a platform located behind Pyramid E1 and encloses the eastern side of the Group E plaza . It faces west onto the plaza and has two access stairways , both flanked by ramps built from small slabs of stone and with cornices at the top . The platform walls are of fine workmanship , being built with well @-@ cut and carefully fitted pumice . The front portion of the upper platform was paved with stone slabs , and a bench ran the entire length of the back of the platform . The clay floor between the paving and the bench was found to have been burnt . An offering was excavated from the central axis of the platform 's base , it consisted of two ring @-@ shaped clubs placed on either side of a stone ball . 
 Platform E6 is situated on the west side of the Group E plaza . It is roughly built from irregularly sized , poorly cut stones . The platform faces east towards Pyramid E1 and has four access stairways . The platform once supported perishable residences ; these were built from maize stalks bound together with clay , as evidenced by the imprint of the maize stalks in the fragments of clay wall recovered during excavations . The platform itself was once covered with stucco . 
 = = = = = Other groups = = = = = 
 Group E ' is a cluster of small buildings in the trough between the hilltops supporting Groups C and E. 
 Group F is to the west of Group E. Mound F is the main structure within Group F. It slopes gradually away to the west and was not easily defensible on that side , however it lay outside the strong retaining walls of the fortress and appears to have been an observation platform covering the western pass to the city . A retaining wall supported the mound above the pass and a round earth platform upon the mound may have supported a perishable watchtower . 
 Group G consists of a number of small structures strung out along the ridge to the north of Group A. 
 Group H is a small group to the northeast of Group A. Structure H1 is a platform that uses a natural mound as its base . 
 Group I is also known as the Campana Group . It is the northernmost group at Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) . 
 Group J is a cluster of small buildings immediately southwest of Group A and adjoining it . 
 = = = = Caves = = = = 
 Three small caves are found in the sides of the ridge supporting the ruins of the city ; archaeological investigations have revealed that two of these caves were artificially modified in antiquity . 
 Cueva de La Lola ( " Lola 's Cave " ) is situated below Group A , near the bank of the <unk> River as it flows to the northwest of the ruins . The cave is 8 @.@ 7 metres ( 29 ft ) deep and 6 @.@ 1 metres ( 20 ft ) wide ; for most of its length it is 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high . The cave had been artificially widened and heightened . During the rain season rainwater filtering through the ground below the city flows out as a small waterfall at the bottom of the cave . The cave was used for ceremonial activities , related to the presence of the spring within it and the fact that the walls are formed from green phyllite ; greenstone was sacred to the Maya and was associated with water and fertility . Ritual activities in the cave have continued into modern times , with ceremonial fires being lit within . 
 Cueva del Murciélago ( " Cave of the Bat " ) is located at the southern extreme of the site . It is 14 @.@ 3 metres ( 47 ft ) deep ; at its widest point it is 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) wide and the cave is 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) high . It was artificially widened to permit access and was still used for Maya ceremonies in the late 20th century , when archaeologists found recent evidence of activity . 
 = = = Funerary offerings = = = 
 A large quantity of funerary urns have been excavated from the bases of buildings ; the deceased were cremated and their ashes collected in the urns . The sides of the urns were perforated with three holes , perhaps to represent the eyes and mouth of the deceased . The urns were decorated with polychrome motifs in the form of highly stylised serpent decorations painted in black , red and cream ; this style of Maya ceramics has been labelled as Chinautla Polychrome after the site where it was first identified . The Postclassic Maya custom of interring the cremated remains of the deceased in urns was restricted to the elite ; commoners where buried in simple tombs outside the city centre . In Jilotepeque Viejo urns were usually buried under the front of platform bases or under the sides of pyramids and altars . This was not a general practice among the highland Maya in the Postclassic and represents a tradition unique to the city . Funerary urns have been found interred under all the principal plazas of the city . Approximately equal proportions of urns were interred under platforms and under the ceremonial architecture represented by pyramids and altars , although it is impossible to say if those individuals buried under religious architecture had differing roles than those buried under secular architecture . 
 A total of 52 urns were excavated from the ruins of Jilotepeque Viejo ; 8 of these were destroyed by the 1976 earthquake leaving 44 available for study . Twelve of these were in the collection of the Musée de l 'Homme in Paris for approximately thirty years ; These urns , together with all other artefacts from Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) , were repatriated to Guatemala in 1998 . Each urn contained the cremated remains of a single adult . All of these appeared to be mature or elderly adults ; the remains of young adults were notably absent , indicating that elite warriors were buried in some other manner . The urns themselves represented a variety of highland ceramic types . Analysis of bone fragments in the cremated remains indicates that the entire body was burnt without any special treatment for the skull , although the offering of a skull was excavated from Pyramid C1 . Surviving skull fragments indicated the practice of artificial skull deformation among the elite inhabitants of the city . The remains of animal bones were found mixed among a significant portion of the contents of the urns ; where identifiable these included deer bones and those of a number of bird species , particularly parrots and birds of prey . 
 Only six of the urns contained associated funerary offerings : 
 = Curtly Ambrose = 
 Sir Curtly <unk> <unk> Ambrose , KCN ( born 21 September 1963 ) is a former cricketer from Antigua who played 98 Test matches for the West Indies . A fast bowler , he took 405 Test wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 99 and topped the ICC Player Rankings for much of his career to be rated the best bowler in the world . His great height — he is 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) tall — allowed him to make the ball bounce unusually high after he delivered it ; allied to his pace and accuracy , it made him a difficult bowler for batsmen to face . A man of few words during his career , he was notoriously reluctant to speak to journalists . He was chosen as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1992 ; after he retired he was entered into the International Cricket Council Hall of Fame and selected as one of West Indies all @-@ time XI by a panel of experts . 
 Born in Swetes , Antigua , Ambrose came to cricket at a relatively late age , having preferred basketball in his youth , but quickly made an impression as a fast bowler . Progressing through regional and national teams , he was first chosen for the West Indies in 1988 . He was almost immediately successful and remained in the team until his retirement in 2000 . On many occasions , his bowling was responsible for the West Indies winning matches which seemed lost , particularly in association with Courtney Walsh . Against Australia in 1993 , he took seven wickets while conceding a single run ; in 1994 he was largely responsible for bowling England out for 46 runs , taking six for 24 ( six wickets for 24 runs ) . 
 Ambrose 's bowling method relied on accuracy and conceding few runs ; several of his best performances came when he took wickets in quick succession to devastate the opposition . He was particularly successful against leading batsmen . From 1995 , Ambrose was increasingly affected by injury , and several times critics claimed that he was no longer effective . However , he continued to take wickets regularly up until his retirement , although he was sometimes less effective in the early matches of a series . In his final years , the West Indies team was in decline and often relied heavily on Ambrose and Walsh ; both men often bowled with little support from the other bowlers . Following his retirement , Ambrose has pursued a career in music as the bass guitarist in a reggae band . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ambrose was born in Swetes , Antigua on 21 September 1963 , the fourth of seven children . His father was a carpenter from the village . The family had no background in cricket , but his mother was a fan , and Ambrose played in his youth , primarily as a batsman . At school , he performed well academically , particularly in mathematics and French , and became an apprentice carpenter upon leaving at the age of 17 . He briefly considered emigrating to America . At the time , his favourite sport was basketball , although he occasionally umpired cricket matches . Ambrose was not particularly tall until he reached his late teens , when he grew several inches to reach a height of 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) . Around this time , his mother encouraged him to become more involved in cricket . Success as a fast bowler in a softball cricket match persuaded Ambrose to play in some club matches at the age of 20 . He quickly attracted the attention of coaches and progressed to the St John 's cricket team . Selected in the Leeward Islands competition , he took seven for 67 ( seven wickets for 67 runs ) for Antigua against St Kitts . He made his first @-@ class debut for the Leeward Islands in 1985 – 86 and took four wickets in the game , but failed to retain his place the following year . 
 A Viv Richards scholarship provided funding for him to play club cricket in England for Chester Boughton Hall Cricket Club in the highly rated Liverpool Competition during 1986 where he took 84 wickets at an average of 9 @.@ 80 . The following year , he returned to England to play for Heywood Cricket Club in the Central Lancashire League , for whom he took 115 wickets in the season ; these experiences helped to improve his bowling technique . 
 Upon his return to Antigua , Ambrose practised intensely , regained his place in the Leeward Islands team and , in the absence of leading bowlers Winston Benjamin and <unk> Baptiste with the West Indies team , became the main attacking bowler in the side . He was no @-@ balled for throwing in the first match , which Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack later attributed to confusion caused by his attribute of flicking his wrist prior to releasing the ball to impart extra pace , and there were no subsequent doubts about the legality of his bowling action . Retaining his place when the international bowlers returned , he took 35 wickets — including 12 in a match against Guyana , of which nine were bowled — in five matches in the competition . Wisden 's report on the West Indian season said his performance was " dominant " , although few had heard of him previously . Identifying his yorker as his most effective delivery , it noted that he " never lost his pace , his accuracy , or his thirst for wickets " . 
 = = International bowler = = 
 = = = Debut and first years = = = 
 When Pakistan toured the West Indies in 1988 , Ambrose played in the One Day International ( ODI ) series , taking the place of the recently retired Joel Garner . He made his debut during the first match , on 12 March 1988 in Kingston , Jamaica , taking wickets with his third and ninth deliveries ; he ended the innings with four for 39 from 10 overs . In the second match , he took four for 35 and followed with another two wickets in the third . West Indies won those first three matches to take the series , and Ambrose did not play in the fourth or fifth game . In the Test series which followed , Ambrose was less effective . In the first Test , he took two for 121 as West Indies lost at home for the first time in 10 years . Wisden noted that his debut was " unimpressive " , but that he improved in the subsequent matches . He finished the series with seven wickets at an average of over 50 runs per wicket . Later that year , Ambrose was chosen to tour England . After appearing in early tour games , he was chosen for the first two ODIs , taking three wickets in total , but was omitted from the third . In the Test series , he played in all five matches to take 22 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 22 ; his best figures of four for 58 came in the fourth Test , in which he took seven wickets and was named man of the match . Writing in Wisden , commentator Tony Cozier described Ambrose as " a ready @-@ made replacement for Garner " ; the amount of bounce he generated after the ball pitched " made him a constant menace " . 
 In 1988 – 89 , West Indies took part in an ODI tournament in Sharjah . Ambrose took 8 wickets , and was man of the match with four for 29 when West Indies defeated Pakistan in the final . From there , West Indies travelled to Australia for a series in which Ambrose was a dominant figure . The West Indies won the Test series 3 – 1 , using controversial short @-@ pitched bowling tactics . Ambrose 's height made him difficult to play as made the ball bounce more than other bowlers . Writing in Wisden , John Woodcock noted : " As in England , earlier in 1988 , Ambrose 's bowling was a telling factor ... [ His ] advance compensated for something of a decline in [ Malcolm ] Marshall 's effectiveness " . In the first Test , he took seven wickets ; in the second , he took five wickets in a Test innings for the first time with five for 72 , and finished with eight in the game ; and in the third , he took six wickets . His performances earned him man of the match award in the first and third games , and he ended the series with 26 wickets at an average of 21 @.@ 46 . He was West Indies leading wicket @-@ taker and headed the team bowling averages . In the ODI tournament that took place during the tour , West Indies defeated Australia in the final ; Ambrose took 21 wickets in the series and twice took five wickets in an innings . 
 Suffering from fatigue and illness , Ambrose was less successful later in 1989 when India toured the West Indies : he took just five wickets in the four @-@ Test series at an average of 54 @.@ 60 . 
 = = = County cricketer and success against England = = = 
 Ambrose made his debut in the English County Championship for Northamptonshire County Cricket Club in 1989 — the club signed him for the 1988 season but as he was playing in the West Indies touring team , he was unavailable that year . He took a wicket with his first delivery for the club , but was not particularly successful in the first part of the season ; he settled down later and took 28 first @-@ class wickets at 28 @.@ 39 for Northamptonshire in nine games . 
 Early in 1990 , England toured the West Indies and played four Tests — a fifth was abandoned owing to rain . The visiting team dominated the first part of the series but West Indies eventually won 2 – 1 . Ambrose was unfit for the first Test , which West Indies lost , and the first four ODIs , but returned to take four for 18 in an ODI organised to replace the rained @-@ off second Test . After a drawn third Test , West Indies won the fourth game . The home captain , Viv Richards , set England 356 to win , but after losing early wickets , the English batsmen entered the last hour of the game with five wickets still to fall . Ambrose took the new ball and removed the last five batsmen for 18 runs in 46 deliveries , four of them leg before wicket . He finished with figures of eight for 45 , ten wickets in the match , and West Indies levelled the series with a 164 @-@ run win . Ambrose was man of the match . He took six wickets in the final match , to finish the series with 20 wickets at 15 @.@ 35 , finishing top of the West Indies ' averages . Ambrose , along with the other home bowlers , was described by Alan Lee in Wisden as an " awesome handful in the latter part of the series " , and described his match @-@ winning spell in the fourth Test as " unforgettable " . Ambrose 's other appearances for West Indies in 1989 – 90 were all in ODIs , although he did take more than two wickets in any innings except in the match against England . He also took 22 first @-@ class wickets for the Leeward Islands , and when he returned to England to play for Northamptonshire in 1990 , took 58 first @-@ class wickets to top the club 's bowling averages . In one @-@ day cricket for the county , he took 13 wickets while conceding an average of just 2 @.@ 53 runs per over . 
 = = Leading bowler in the Universe = = 
 = = = Series against Australia and England = = = 
 West Indies toured Pakistan in late 1990 , and Ambrose topped the team 's bowling averages in a three @-@ match series which was drawn 1 – 1 . He took 14 wickets at 17 @.@ 07 , but was overshadowed slightly by the performances of Ian Bishop . He played the first two ODIs , but missed the third after Pakistan had already won the series , and his best figures in the Tests came in the final match when he took five for 35 . Then , when Australia toured West Indies from February 1991 , Ambrose took 18 wickets in the five Tests at an average of 27 @.@ 38 . West Indies won the series 2 – 1 , and Ambrose was fourth in the averages , but Tony Cozier observed in Wisden that the whole West Indies attack was dependable . Ambrose made an impression batting as part of a West Indian lower batting order which repeatedly added crucial runs during the series . He took part in two important partnerships to help his team recover from a difficult situation , and in the third match , he scored his only half @-@ century in Tests . He also took 20 first @-@ class wickets for Leeward Islands . 
 West Indies ' next matches were in England . The Test series was drawn 2 – 2 and Ambrose was the team 's leading wicket @-@ taker with 28 ( averaging 20 @.@ 00 ) ; he also came top of the bowling averages . He had a particular impact on Graeme Hick , who was appearing in Test cricket for the first time , dismissing him six times in seven innings with short @-@ pitched bowling . Accurate bowling was important in the series , played on a series of slow @-@ paced pitches ; according to Scyld Berry , writing in Wisden , " Since the 1988 tour , Ambrose had improved his control to the point where a batsman had to play almost every ball — and not with a scoring stroke , either " . Berry suggests that West Indies may have won the series had Viv Richards used a different tactical approach with Ambrose 's bowling . The bowler was not fully fit in the final Test , which may have affected the outcome . Berry describes " Ambrose 's rise to the status of a giant — with the mannerism of celebrating each wicket by whirling his arms upwards , like a flock of doves taking to the air . " Ambrose twice took five wickets in an innings — his best figures were six for 52 in the first Test , when he twice took wickets with consecutive deliveries . Ambrose was named man @-@ of the @-@ match in the third Test and adjudged West Indies man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ series . For his performances , Ambrose was named one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation remarked on his consistency and stated : " Ambrose has the ability to exert a debilitating psychological influence which so often precipitates a cluster of wickets after the initial breach has been made ... Moreover , he was arguably the essential difference between the two sides in what proved to be a zestful series . " The West Indies wicket @-@ keeper , Jeff Dujon , said : " He is mature beyond his years , has pace , accuracy , heart and determination , plus , importantly , real pride in economical figures . " 
 = = = Victory against South Africa = = = 
 During the 1991 – 92 season , West Indies played mainly one @-@ day cricket , taking part in tournaments in Sharjah — where Ambrose took seven wickets , including an analysis of five for 53 — and Australia , and took part in the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand . In this tournament , Ambrose took seven wickets in seven games at an average of 33 @.@ 57 and was the seventh most economical bowler among those who played more than one game . West Indies finished sixth in the qualifying table and failed to reach the semi @-@ finals . Ambrose returned home to play twice for the Leeward Islands in January 1992 . 
 In April 1992 , South Africa toured West Indies for the first time , and played their first Test match for 22 years . Ambrose played in all three ODIs , all of which were won by West Indies . The Test match was the first time West Indies bowled under a new playing regulation which permitted only one bouncer per over ; this seemed to affect the home bowlers , but Ambrose took two for 47 from 36 overs . South Africa began the final day of the match requiring 79 runs to win with just two batsmen out , but Ambrose and Courtney Walsh took the last eight wickets for 26 runs to bowl West Indies to a 52 @-@ run win . On a difficult pitch for batting , the ball bounced unevenly , and both bowlers concentrated on accuracy . Ambrose took six for 34 in the second innings , and was named joint man of the match ; in just over 60 overs , he took eight for 81 in the match . 
 Returning to play for Northamptonshire , he was less effective . Hampered by a knee injury , which necessitated surgery after the English season , and suffering from many dropped catches , he took 50 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 26 @.@ 14 , but his performance compared unfavourably with other bowlers on the team . He was more effective in the NatWest Trophy , a one @-@ day competition that Northamptonshire won that season , in which he conceded fewer than two runs per over across five games . 
 = = = Second tour of Australia = = = 
 The West Indies toured Australia in 1992 – 93 , recovering from losing the second Test to win the final two matches and take the series 2 – 1 . The team also won the annual World Series Cup . In the first three Tests , Ambrose was hampered by pitches which did not suit his bowling and , according to Tony Cozier writing in Wisden , was often unlucky when he bowled , although he took five for 66 in the first Test . In the final two Tests , he took 19 wickets . In the fourth he took ten wickets , including six for 74 in the first innings ; in the second innings , he took three wickets in 19 deliveries and the West Indies won the match by one run . According to Cozier , the captains of both teams , Richie Richardson and Allan Border , " paid tribute to the man who made the result possible : Ambrose consolidated his reputation as the world 's leading bowler " . On the first day of the decisive final Test , Ambrose took seven wickets at the cost of one run from 32 deliveries and finished with figures of seven for 25 . Cozier described it as " one of Test cricket 's most devastating spells " . West Indies won by an innings and Ambrose was named man of the series , having taken 33 wickets to equal the record in an Australia @-@ West Indies Test series . He topped the West Indian bowling averages with an average of 16 @.@ 42 . Cozier described Ambrose 's performance as " instrumental in winning [ the series ] " and his bowling as " flawless " . 
 In the one @-@ day tournament , Ambrose took 18 wickets at 13 @.@ 38 . He took eight wickets in the two @-@ match final — both games were won by the West Indies . In the first final , he took five for 32 , driven to bowl with more hostility when the Australian batsman Dean Jones asked him to remove his white wristbands while bowling . He followed up with three for 26 in the second match to be named player of the finals . After a one @-@ day tournament in South Africa , West Indies returned home for Test and ODI series against Pakistan . The ODI series was drawn , but the West Indies defeated Pakistan 2 – 0 in the Tests . Ambrose took nine wickets at 23 @.@ 11 to be fifth in the team bowling averages . The Wisden report suggested that he was suffering from fatigue after his team 's busy schedule , but although not at his best , he continued to take important wickets . For Northamptonshire in 1993 , Ambrose was second in the team first @-@ class bowling averages with 59 wickets at 20 @.@ 45 . 
 Having developed a slower ball , and using the yorker more sparingly , Ambrose took five wickets in three games as West Indies won an ODI tournament in Sharjah in late October and November 1993 . The team competed in another tournament , this time in India , later that November . They finished as runners @-@ up , and Ambrose took four wickets in five matches . Immediately following this , West Indies toured Sri Lanka to play three ODIs and a Test , a rain @-@ ruined match in which Ambrose took three wickets . 
 = = = More success against England = = = 
 When he returned to the West Indies , Ambrose took 19 first @-@ class wickets for the Leeward Islands at an average of 11 @.@ 68 , in his first appearances for the islands in two years , but as England arrived to tour West Indies , he complained of fatigue and there were rumours he planned to retire . He played in three times in the five @-@ match ODI series , taking two wickets , and took a further two wickets in the first Test , which West Indies won . In Wisden , Alan Lee described his performances at this time as " lethargic " , and in the Guardian , Paul Allott wrote that he bowled " like a shadow " owing to the effects of continuous cricket . Ambrose was ineffective at the start of the second Test , but recovered , ending the match with eight wickets ; according to Lee , he " struck the critical blows of the match " in the first innings . In the third Test , played in Trinidad , he took five for 60 in England 's first innings , but after the visiting team built a substantial lead , West Indies were bowled out to leave England needing 194 to win and an hour to bat on the fourth evening . Ambrose took six wickets to leave England 40 for eight at the close of play ; the next morning , they were bowled out for 46 and Ambrose had figures of six for 24 in the innings and match figures of 11 for 84 ; he was named man of the match . Lee described the collapse as " staggering " , and judged Ambrose bowling to be " of the highest calibre " . He continued : " He delivered one of the most devastating spells of even his career . " Allott called it " the definitive spell of fast bowling " . 
 Ambrose took four wickets in the fourth Test , but West Indies lost the match , their first defeat in Barbados for 59 years , and Ambrose was fined £ 1 @,@ 000 by the match referee for knocking down his stumps in frustration when he was the last man out . He took one more wicket in the drawn final Test to finish the series with 26 wickets and top the West Indian bowling averages . Writing in Wisden , Lee summarised Ambrose 's performances : " Ambrose was magnificent . He was deservedly named man of the series , not only for taking 26 wickets at an average of 19 @.@ 96 apiece and winning the Trinidad Test single @-@ handed , but for the more profound truth that West Indies now look to him whenever they need wickets ... [ He ] carried the attack alone " . 
 Ambrose returned to play for Northamptonshire in 1994 , but arrived later than scheduled . Claiming to need a rest , he missed his scheduled flight and arrived four days late . His absence may have contributed to Northamptonshire 's elimination in the preliminary stages of the Benson and Hedges Cup . At the time , members of the county were unhappy with Ambrose 's performances for the team ; the committee fined him , and he expressed contrition . During the remainder of the season , he bowled extremely effectively to take 77 first @-@ class wickets , the most for the club in 18 years , at an average of 14 @.@ 45 to top the national bowling averages . According to Andrew <unk> in Wisden , the club were mollified by his success , but he wrote : " Rarely in Northamptonshire 's history have the performances and the personality of one cricketer dominated a season to the extent that Curtly Ambrose did in 1994 . " Ambrose missed the final match of the season with a shoulder problem . 
 = = Apparent decline = = 
 = = = Shoulder injury = = = 
 Ambrose 's shoulder injury , caused by his bowling workload , caused him to miss the West Indies ' tour of India in the last three months of 1994 . Although he returned to join the tour of New Zealand in early 1995 , he did not reach his full bowling pace ; he took one wicket in the ODI series and five in the two Test matches . He remained in the team when Australia toured the Caribbean later in 1995 ; the West Indies lost the Test series 2 – 1 , their first defeat in a Test series since 1980 . After taking two wickets in four ODIs , Ambrose took 13 wickets at 19 @.@ 84 in the four @-@ Test series to lead the West Indian averages . He took nine of these wickets in Trinidad during the third Test , when West Indies levelled the series having lost the first Test ( the second was drawn ) . Bowling on a pitch that was extremely difficult for batting , and which both teams considered to be unsatisfactory , Ambrose took nine for 65 in the match and was named man of the match . During the game , Ambrose had to be pulled away from a verbal confrontation with Steve Waugh by the captain , Richardson . But outside of this match , the Australian team judged his bowling to have declined in pace following his shoulder injury , and that he lacked the variety to adapt to a different role . The West Indies ' cricket manager , former Test bowler Andy Roberts , publicly claimed during the series that several of his team possessed " attitude problems " , and complained that the fast bowlers would not follow his advice . 
 During the tour of England which followed , Ambrose did not take a wicket in the three @-@ match ODI series ; according to journalist Simon Barnes , both Ambrose and the team lacked confidence following their defeat by Australia ; he lacked rhythm and displayed signs of frustration and unhappiness . He was more effective in the Test series , and according to Tony Cozier in Wisden , " was always <unk> of a spell of incisive , quality bowling " . But he was affected by injury throughout the six @-@ match series ; he withdrew injured from the third Test having bowled fewer than eight overs and missed the fifth Test completely . Other bowlers in the team overshadowed Ambrose , and it was not until the final Test that he reached his most effective form in taking five for 96 in the first innings and seven wickets in the match . Waving to the crowd as he left the field on the final day with an injury , Ambrose seemed to indicate that he would not tour England again . He ended the series third in the bowling averages with 21 wickets at 24 @.@ 09 . But according to Cozier , the senior players in the team caused problems for the management , and when the players returned home , Ambrose and three other members of the team were fined 10 per cent of their tour fee — in Ambrose 's case , the fine was for " general failings of behaviour and attitude " , and setting a bad example to younger team @-@ mates . 
 Along with other senior players , Ambrose was rested from West Indies ' next tour , an ODI tournament in October 1995 , but he returned to play in a three @-@ team ODI tournament in Australia in December and January . However , affected by the refusal of Brian Lara to tour following after being fined for his behaviour during the tour of England , the team failed to qualify for the final . Ambrose took ten wickets in the tournament , and took three wickets in consecutive innings ; in the latter game , he was man of the match . West Indies were more successful in the World Cup in India , Pakistan and Sri Lanka which began in February . They reached the semi @-@ finals , losing to Australia . Ambrose was man of the match with three for 28 in his team 's opening match , and took ten wickets at 17 @.@ 00 in the competition . He conceded an average of just three runs per over over the tournament , the second best among those who played in more than two games . In March , Ambrose played in a home series against New Zealand . In the five match ODI series , 10 wickets at 17 @.@ 60 , including four for 36 in the opening game . He took eight wickets in the two @-@ Test series at an average of 20 @.@ 50 , leading the team averages , and took five for 68 in the second match . During the English cricket season , he returned to Northamptonshire and took 43 wickets in nine games to lead the national bowling averages , but he missed several matches with recurring injuries and his contract was not renewed for the following year . He was replaced by the much younger Mohammad Akram as overseas player . 
 = = = Team in decline = = = 
 Following Australia 's victory in 1994 – 95 , when West Indies toured Australia in 1996 – 97 the series was heavily publicised as a re @-@ match . However , the visiting team were often ineffective , continuing a trend of decline , and depended heavily on their senior players , one of whom was Ambrose . He began the series poorly , continuing a pattern established in several preceding series , and critics suggested that he was no longer effective . After taking only three wickets in the first two Tests , both of which were lost by West Indies , Ambrose told his team @-@ mates that he would take ten wickets in the third . On a difficult pitch for batting , he managed to take nine in the match , including three in the first hour of the game , despite struggling with a hamstring injury . West Indies won , and Ambrose was named man of the match , but he missed the fourth Test with an injury . Writing in Wisden , Greg Baum suggested that Ambrose absence possibly affected the outcome of the series ; Australia won easily to ensure they won the series . Ambrose returned for the final match , and on another difficult batting pitch , took five for 43 on the first day . West Indies won and Ambrose was again man of the match . He led the West Indies bowling averages with 19 wickets at 23 @.@ 36 , but had been the driving factor in West Indies ' two wins . Ambrose also played in an ODI tournament during the tour of Australia , taking nine wickets at 27 @.@ 33 . Later in the season , between March and May 1997 , India toured West Indies ; Ambrose took ten wickets at 30 @.@ 10 in the Test series , including five for 87 in the second Test , but was no longer the home team 's most effective bowler . Then in June , Sri Lanka played a two @-@ Test series , won 1 – 0 by West Indies . In the first , Ambrose took five for 37 in the first innings , and eight wickets in the game , to be named man of the match . This included his 300th wicket in Test matches ; he was the 12th bowler , and fourth West Indian , to reach this landmark . Ambrose also played five ODIs during the West Indies home season , taking nine wickets . 
 West Indies ' loss of form continued in late 1997 when they lost every international match during their tour of Pakistan . Ambrose played in two out of West Indies ' three matches in an ODI tournament , taking one wicket , but his performance in taking one wicket in the two Test matches he played — he missed the third match with injury — prompted <unk> Mohammed , writing in Wisden , to describe Ambrose as " a shadow of his former self " . Any danger that Ambrose might have retired after this series was forestalled when Brian Lara was appointed West Indies captain and immediately spoke to Ambrose and Walsh to ask them to continue in the team . When England toured the West Indies between January and April 1998 , he took 30 wickets at 14 @.@ 26 to top the bowling averages for the series . Many of the pitches during the tour were poor for batting , but Ambrose was very effective , particularly in the second , third and fourth Tests . In addition , he dismissed Mike Atherton , the England captain , six times in the series . Scyld Berry wrote in Wisden that Ambrose was " back to something near his peak form ... [ He ] defied every prediction that he was finished after his tour of Pakistan . " In the second Test , Ambrose took eight wickets ; he conceded only 23 runs from 26 overs in the first innings and bowled a spell of five wickets for 16 runs from 47 deliveries in the second to complete figures of five for 52 . Having won the second match , West Indies lost the third , but according to Matthew Engel , " Ambrose 's abiding power was the most constant feature of a fluctuating match " . His eight wickets in the game , including five for 25 in the first innings , took him past fifty Test wickets in Trinidad . He followed up with six wickets in West Indies victory in the fourth Test , taking four for 38 in the final innings . Tony Cozier wrote that Ambrose " thundered in , arms and knees pumping like pistons , to generate all of his old pace . " Following the Test series , which West Indies won 3 – 1 , Ambrose played in the first three matches of the ODI series , and took three wickets . 
 = = Final years of career = = 
 Ambrose and Walsh missed the Mini World Cup ODI tournament in October 1998 , in Ambrose 's case following damage to his house caused by Hurricane Georges . They returned to the team for West Indies ' first ever tour of South Africa , and Ambrose took 13 wickets in the series at an average of 23 @.@ 76 , but West Indies lost every game of the five @-@ match series . In the first Test match , Ambrose and Walsh bowled effectively but lacked support from the other members of the attack . In the second Test , the pair again lacked support , but bowled well . The visiting team generally bowled too many bouncers to be effective , but Ambrose took eight wickets in the game , including six for 51 in the second innings . He was ineffective in the third Test , and despite bowling what Geoffrey Dean in Wisden called a " superb opening spell " , could not prevent South Africa building up a large total against an attack lacking two other main bowlers . Ambrose pulled out of the attack himself later in the innings with a back injury , and did not bowl in the second innings . He missed the final Test with a hamstring injury . He was fit to play in the first six games of a seven @-@ match ODI series , won 6 – 1 by South Africa , and took six wickets . In March 1999 , West Indies then faced Australia in a home series , and contrary to expectations , West Indies drew the series 2 – 2 . The outcome of the series was decided by a small group of players , including Ambrose , whom Mike Coward described in Wisden as " five of the most distinguished cricketers of all time " . Ambrose took 19 wickets at 22 @.@ 26 , second to Walsh in the averages . His best figures came in the fourth and final Test , when he took five for 94 in the first innings and eight wickets in the match , but in the third match , although he only took four wickets in total , Coward described Ambrose as " rampant " and wrote that Steve Waugh , who scored 199 , had to survive " some extraordinary pace bowling from Ambrose " . He played four of the ODIs which followed in April , taking three wickets . The following month , Ambrose took part in the 1999 World Cup in England , and he was the second most economical bowler in the tournament in conceding an average 2 @.@ 35 runs per over while taking seven wickets at 13 @.@ 42 . West Indies went out in the group stages , and Matthew Engel suggested that the bowlers were tired and judged the team " outright failures " . 
 Following the World Cup , the West Indian selectors chose to rest Ambrose , along with Walsh , from alternate ODI tournaments . Ambrose consequently missed two ODI series , but in October 1999 he played two ODIs in a series against Bangladesh in Dhaka and three in a tournament in Sharjah . In the latter competition , Ambrose conceded five runs from ten overs against Sri Lanka , the second most economical bowling figures from a full allocation of 10 overs in all ODIs . However , in all five matches , he took just one wicket , and he injured his elbow in Sharjah which forced him to miss West Indies ' tour of New Zealand which began in December . Ambrose recovered in time to play for the Leeward Island in domestic cricket , taking 31 wickets at 12 @.@ 03 in seven first @-@ class games . When Zimbabwe toured the West Indies , he returned to the West Indies team to be named man of the match in the first Test — Zimbabwe were bowled out for 63 when chasing 99 runs to win . He took a wicket in the second and final Test , and four wickets in six matches during a three @-@ way ODI series also involving Zimbabwe and Pakistan . These were his final ODIs ; in 176 matches , he took 225 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 12 and conceding 3 @.@ 48 runs per over . Pakistan subsequently played a three @-@ Test series against West Indies ; in his last home series , Ambrose took 11 wickets at 19 @.@ 90 to head the West Indian bowling averages . 
 Before his next series , a five @-@ match series in England , Ambrose announced that he would retire after the final Test , although the president of the West Indies Cricket Board unavailingly tried to persuade him to continue for a little longer . West Indies lost the series 3 – 1 , Tony Cozier , reviewing the series , suggested that only Ambrose and Walsh of the West Indian team emerged from the series with any credit . The other bowlers were ineffective , and Ambrose publicly commented during the series on the lack of support that he and Walsh received . He was second in the averages to Walsh with 17 wickets at 18 @.@ 64 . After taking just one wicket in the first Test , although Martin Johnson , in Wisden , suggested he bowled very well , Ambrose took five wickets in the second Test but was again unlucky as the batsmen were beaten by many deliveries that he bowled . After this match , Ambrose returned to the West Indies having been rested from an ODI tournament involving England and Zimbabwe . He took four wickets in the first innings of both the third and fourth Tests , passing 400 wickets in the latter match . After he took three wickets in his final Test match , the crowd gave him a standing ovation and the England players formed a guard @-@ of @-@ honour when he came out to bat . In 98 Test matches , he took 405 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 99 ; according to Mike Selvey , in Swetes , his mother rang a bell each time he took a Test wicket . 
 Having retired from cricket , Ambrose has concentrated on music , playing with several bands . He played bass guitar with the reggae band Big Bad Dread and the <unk> ; one fellow band member was his former team @-@ mate Richie Richardson . Ambrose was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Nation ( KCN ) by the Antiguan Barbudan government on 28 February 2014 , alongside Richardson and Andy Roberts . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Mike Selvey wrote in The Guardian in 1991 that Ambrose had " the sort of easy , repetitive , no @-@ sweat action which is the key to unyielding accuracy . There is no respite and all his other qualities are byproducts . " At his peak , Ambrose did not rely on pronounced swing or seam movement of the ball . Instead , he repeatedly bowled into the same areas of the pitch and the height from which he delivered the ball made him extremely difficult to face . The ball bounced sharply after pitching , sometimes deviating slightly from a straight line after pitching on the seam , and frequently took the edge of the batsman 's bat to be caught behind the wicket . His 1992 citation as Wisden Cricketer of the Year states that he had " outright pace and he generates a disconcerting , steepling bounce from fuller @-@ length deliveries ... His height and a slender , sinewy wrist contribute greatly to the final velocity [ of the ball ] , the wrist snapping forward at the instant of release to impart extra thrust " . Writing in 2001 following Ambrose 's retirement , Michael Atherton , whom Ambrose dismissed more often than any other batsman , said : " At his best , there is no doubt that [ Ambrose ] moved beyond the fine line that separates the great from the very good . Quality bowlers essentially need two of three things : pace , movement and accuracy . Ambrose had all three . " 
 Ambrose 's height , and the accuracy with which he bowled , made it difficult for batsmen to play forward to the ball ; instead they were forced to play with their weight going back . His accuracy meant that he was effective if the pitch favoured batsmen . He bowled an effective yorker , and unlike other fast bowlers , used short @-@ pitched deliveries sparingly , although he could bowl a hostile bouncer , and concentrated on bowling a full length aimed at the wickets . Ambrose rarely engaged in verbal sparring with batsmen , although in later years he occasionally inspected the pitch in an area close to the batsman before an innings began and rubbed his hands to suggest that he would enjoy bowling there . He always aimed to concede as few runs as possible when bowling , and frequently berated himself when he offered an easy delivery from which to score . Following his dismissal of a batsman , Ambrose often celebrated by pumping the air with his fists . With Courtney Walsh , Ambrose developed a reputation for performing at his best when his team seemed likely to lose , and he often took wickets in clusters which devastated the opposition . In addition , he was often most effective against the leading batsmen on a team ; he was also capable of exploiting vulnerabilities in the techniques of other batsmen . 
 As of 2012 , Ambrose 's 405 Test wickets place him 11th on the list of leading Test wicket @-@ takers . Of those who have taken over 200 Test wickets , Ambrose has the third best bowling average behind Malcolm Marshall and Joel Garner , and has the eighth best economy rate ; he rises to third if only those who have taken over 250 wickets are included . For much of his career , Ambrose was rated the world 's best bowler in the ICC player rankings , first reaching the top in 1991 ; he rarely dropped below second and was ranked in the top 10 from 1989 until the end of his career . His highest rating of 912 in the rankings , which he achieved in 1994 , is the equal sixth best rating of all time . In 2010 , Ambrose was chosen by a panel of writers and experts as a member of ESPNcricinfo 's " All @-@ Time XI " for West Indies . The following year , he was inducted into the International Cricket Council Hall of Fame . During his playing days , Ambrose had a reputation for reticence , and rarely spoke to journalists or the opposition . His response to a request for an interview in 1991 — " Curtly talks to no @-@ one " — became associated with him throughout his career , but he was more willing to talk to journalists after he retired . 
 = Book embedding = 
 In graph theory , a book embedding is a generalization of planar embedding of a graph to embeddings into a book , a collection of half @-@ planes all having the same line as their boundary . Usually , the vertices of the graph are required to lie on this boundary line , called the spine , and the edges are required to stay within a single half @-@ plane . The book thickness of a graph is the smallest possible number of half @-@ planes for any book embedding of the graph . Book thickness is also called <unk> , <unk> or fixed <unk> . Book embeddings have also been used to define several other graph invariants including the <unk> and book crossing number . 
 Every graph with n vertices has book thickness at most <formula> , and this formula gives the exact book thickness for complete graphs . The graphs with book thickness one are the outerplanar graphs . The graphs with book thickness at most two are the subhamiltonian graphs , which are always planar ; more generally , every planar graph has book thickness at most four . All minor @-@ closed graph families , and in particular the graphs with bounded treewidth or bounded genus , also have bounded book thickness . It is NP @-@ hard to determine the exact book thickness of a given graph , with or without knowing a fixed vertex ordering along the spine of the book . 
 One of the original motivations for studying book embeddings involved applications in VLSI design , in which the vertices of a book embedding represent components of a circuit and the wires represent connections between them . Book embedding also has applications in graph drawing , where two of the standard visualization styles for graphs , arc diagrams and circular layouts , can be constructed using book embeddings . 
 In transportation planning , the different sources and destinations of foot and vehicle traffic that meet and interact at a traffic light can be modeled mathematically as the vertices of a graph , with edges connecting different source @-@ destination pairs . A book embedding of this graph can be used to design a schedule that lets all the traffic move across the intersection with as few signal phases as possible . In bioinformatics problems involving the folding structure of RNA , single @-@ page book embeddings represent classical forms of nucleic acid secondary structure , and two @-@ page book embeddings represent pseudoknots . Other applications of book embeddings include abstract algebra and knot theory . 
 There are several open problems concerning book thickness . It is unknown whether the book thickness of an arbitrary graph can be bounded by a function of the book thickness of its subdivisions . Testing the existence of a three @-@ page book embedding of a graph , given a fixed ordering of the vertices along the spine of the embedding , has unknown computational complexity : it is neither known to be solvable in polynomial time nor known to be NP @-@ hard . And , although every planar graph has book thickness at most four , it is unknown whether there exists a planar graph whose book thickness is exactly four . 
 = = History = = 
 The notion of a book , as a topological space , was defined by C. A. Persinger and Gail Atneosen in the 1960s . As part of this work , Atneosen already considered embeddings of graphs in books . The embeddings he studied used the same definition as embeddings of graphs into any other topological space : vertices are represented by distinct points , edges are represented by curves , and the only way that two edges can intersect is for them to meet at a common endpoint . 
 In the early 1970s , Paul C. Kainen and L. Taylor <unk> developed a more restricted type of embedding that came to be used in most subsequent research . In their formulation , the graph 's vertices must be placed along the spine of the book , and each edge must lie in a single page . Important milestones in the later development of book embeddings include the proof by Mihalis Yannakakis in the late 1980s that planar graphs have book thickness at most four , and the discovery in the late 1990s of close connections between book embeddings and bioinformatics . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 A book is a particular kind of topological space , also called a fan of half @-@ planes . It consists of a single line ℓ , called the spine or back of the book , together with a collection of one or more half @-@ planes , called the pages or leaves of the book , each having the spine as its boundary . Books with a finite number of pages can be embedded into three @-@ dimensional space , for instance by choosing ℓ to be the z @-@ axis of a Cartesian coordinate system and choosing the pages to be the k half @-@ planes whose dihedral angle with respect to the xz @-@ plane is an integer multiple of 2π / k . 
 A book drawing of a finite graph G onto a book B is a drawing of G on B such that every vertex of G is drawn as a point on the spine of B , and every edge of G is drawn as a curve that lies within a single page of B. The k @-@ page book crossing number of G is the minimum number of crossings in a k @-@ page book drawing . 
 A book embedding of G onto B is a book drawing that forms a graph embedding of G into B. That is , it is a book drawing of G on B that does not have any edge crossings . Every finite graph has a book embedding onto a book with a large enough number of pages . For instance , it is always possible to embed each edge of the graph on its own separate page . The book thickness , <unk> , or stack number of G is the minimum number of pages required for a book embedding of G. Another parameter that measures the quality of a book embedding , beyond its number of pages , is its <unk> . This is the maximum number of edges that can be crossed by a ray perpendicular to the spine within a single page . Equivalently ( for book embeddings in which each edge is drawn as a monotonic curve ) , it is the maximum size of a subset of edges within a single page such that the intervals defined on the spine by pairs of endpoints of the edges all intersect each other . 
 It is crucial for these definitions that edges are only allowed to stay within a single page of the book . As Atneosen already observed , if edges may instead pass from one page to another across the spine of the book , then every graph may be embedded into a three @-@ page book . For such a three @-@ page topological book embedding in which spine crossings are allowed , every graph can be embedded with at most a logarithmic number of spine crossings per edge , and some graphs need this many spine crossings . 
 = = Specific graphs = = 
 As shown in the first figure , the book thickness of the complete graph K5 is three : as a non @-@ planar graph its book thickness is greater than two , but a book embedding with three pages exists . More generally , the book thickness of every complete graph with n ≥ 4 vertices is exactly <formula> . This result also gives an upper bound on the maximum possible book thickness of any n @-@ vertex graph . 
 The two @-@ page crossing number of the complete graph <unk> is 
 <formula> 
 matching a still @-@ unproven conjecture of Anthony Hill on what the unrestricted crossing number of this graph should be . That is , if Hill 's conjecture is correct , then the drawing of this graph that minimizes the number of crossings is a two @-@ page drawing . 
 The book thickness of the complete bipartite graph Ka , b is at most min ( a , b ) . To construct a drawing with this book thickness , for each vertex on the smaller side of the bipartition , one can place the edges incident with that vertex on their own page . This bound is not always tight ; for instance , <unk> has book thickness three , not four . However , when the two sides of the graph are very unbalanced , with b > a ( a − 1 ) , the book thickness of Ka , b is exactly a . 
 For the <unk> graph T ( kr , r ) ( a complete <unk> graph Kk , k , ... formed from r independent sets of k vertices per independent set , with an edge between every two vertices from different independent sets ) the book thickness t is sandwiched between 
 <formula> 
 and when r is odd the upper bound can be improved to 
 <formula> 
 The book thickness of binary de Bruijn graphs , shuffle @-@ exchange graphs , and cube @-@ connected cycles ( when these graphs are large enough to be <unk> ) is exactly three . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = 
 The book thickness of a given graph G is at most one if and only if G is an outerplanar graph . An outerplanar graph is a graph that has a planar embedding in which all vertices belong to the outer face of the embedding . For such a graph , placing the vertices in the same order along the spine as they appear in the outer face provides a one @-@ page book embedding of the given graph . ( An articulation point of the graph will necessarily appear more than once in the cyclic ordering of vertices around the outer face , but only one of those copies should be included in the book embedding . ) Conversely , a one @-@ page book embedding is automatically an outerplanar embedding . For , if a graph is embedded on a single page , and another half @-@ plane is attached to the spine to extend its page to a complete plane , then the outer face of the embedding includes the entire added half @-@ plane , and all vertices lie on this outer face . 
 Every two @-@ page book embedding is a special case of a planar embedding , because the union of two pages of a book is a space topologically equivalent to the whole plane . Therefore , every graph with book thickness two is automatically a planar graph . More precisely , the book thickness of a graph G is at most two if and only if G is a subgraph of a planar graph that has a Hamiltonian cycle . If a graph is given a two @-@ page embedding , it can be augmented to a planar Hamiltonian graph by adding ( into any page ) extra edges between any two consecutive vertices along the spine that are not already adjacent , and between the first and last spine vertices . The Goldner – <unk> graph provides an example of a planar graph that does not have book thickness two : it is a maximal planar graph , so it is not possible to add any edges to it while preserving planarity , and it does not have a Hamiltonian cycle . Because of this characterization by Hamiltonian cycles , graphs that have two @-@ page book embeddings are also known as subhamiltonian graphs . 
 All planar graphs whose maximum degree is at most four have book thickness at most two . Planar 3 @-@ trees have book thickness at most three . More generally , all planar graphs have book thickness at most four . It has been claimed by Mihalis Yannakakis in 1986 that there exist some planar graphs that have book thickness exactly four . However , a detailed proof of this claim , announced in a subsequent journal paper , has never been published . For this reason , <unk> & Wood ( 2007 ) list the problem of determining the maximum book thickness of planar graphs as still unsolved . 
 = = = Behavior under subdivisions = = = 
 <unk> every edge of a graph into two @-@ edge paths , by adding new vertices within each edge , may sometimes increase its book thickness . For instance , the diamond graph has book thickness one ( it is outerplanar ) but its subdivision has book thickness two ( it is planar and subhamiltonian but not outerplanar ) . However , this subdivision process can also sometimes significantly reduce the book thickness of the subdivided graph . For instance , the book thickness of the complete graph <unk> is proportional to its number of vertices , but subdividing each of its edges into a two @-@ edge path produces a subdivision whose book thickness is much smaller , only <formula> . Despite the existence of examples such as this one , Blankenship & <unk> ( 1999 ) conjectured that a subdivision 's book thickness cannot be too much smaller than that of the original graph . Specifically , they conjectured that there exists a function f such that , for every graph G and for the graph H formed by replacing every edge in G by a two @-@ edge path , if the book thickness of H is t then the book thickness of G is at most f ( t ) . As of 2013 , the Blankenship – <unk> conjecture remains unproven . 
 = = = Relation to other graph invariants = = = 
 Book thickness is related to thickness , the number of planar graphs needed to cover the edges of the given graph . A graph G has thickness θ if it can be drawn in the plane , and its edges colored with θ colors , in such a way that edges of the same color as each other do not cross . Analogously , a graph G has book thickness θ if it can be drawn in a half plane , with its vertices on the boundary of the half plane , with its edges colored with θ colors with no crossing between two edges of the same color . In this formulation of book thickness , the colors of the edges correspond to the pages of the book embedding . However , thickness and book thickness can be very different from each other : there exist graphs ( subdivisions of complete graphs ) that have unbounded book thickness , despite having thickness two . 
 Graphs of treewidth k have book thickness at most k + 1 and this bound is tight for k > 2 . Graphs with m edges have book thickness <formula> , and graphs of genus g have book thickness <formula> . More generally , every minor @-@ closed graph family has bounded book thickness . On the other hand , the 1 @-@ planar graphs , which are not closed under minors , have also bounded book thickness , but some 1 @-@ planar graphs including <unk> have book thickness at least four . 
 Every shallow minor of a graph of bounded book thickness is a sparse graph , whose ratio of edges to vertices is bounded by a constant that depends only on the depth of the minor and on the book thickness . That is , in the terminology of <unk> & Ossona de Mendez ( 2012 ) , the graphs of bounded book thickness have bounded expansion . However , even the graphs of bounded degree , a much stronger requirement than having bounded expansion , can have unbounded book thickness . 
 Because graphs of book thickness two are planar graphs , they obey the planar separator theorem : they have separators , subsets of vertices whose removal splits the graph into pieces with at most 2n / 3 vertices each , with only <formula> vertices in the separator . Here , n refers to the number of vertices in the graph . However , there exist graphs of book thickness three that do not have separators of <unk> size . 
 The edges within a single page of a book embedding behave in some ways like a stack data structure . This can be formalized by considering an arbitrary sequence of push and pop operations on a stack , and forming a graph in which the stack operations correspond to the vertices of the graph , placed in sequence order along the spine of a book embedding . Then , if one draws an edge from each pop operation that pops an object x from the stack , to the previous push operation that pushed x , the resulting graph will automatically have a one @-@ page embedding . For this reason , the page number of a graph has also been called its stack number . In the same way , one may consider an arbitrary sequence of <unk> and <unk> operations of a queue data structure , and form a graph that has these operations as its vertices , placed in order on the spine of a single page , with an edge between each <unk> operation and the corresponding <unk> . Then , in this graph , each two edges will either cross or cover disjoint intervals on the spine . By analogy , researchers have defined a queue embedding of a graph to be an embedding in a topological book such that each vertex lies on the spine , each edge lies in a single page , and each two edges in the same page either cross or cover disjoint intervals on the spine . The minimum number of pages needed for a queue embedding of a graph is called its queue number . 
 = = = Computational complexity = = = 
 Finding the book thickness of a graph is NP @-@ hard . This follows from the fact that finding Hamiltonian cycles in maximal planar graphs is NP @-@ complete . In a maximal planar graph , the book thickness is two if and only if a Hamiltonian cycle exists . Therefore , it is also NP @-@ complete to test whether the book thickness of a given maximal planar graph is two . 
 If an ordering of the vertices of a graph along the spine of an embedding is fixed , then a two @-@ page embedding ( if it exists ) can be found in linear time , as an instance of planarity testing for a graph formed by augmenting the given graph with a cycle connecting the vertices in their spine ordering . Unger ( 1992 ) claimed that finding three @-@ page embeddings with a fixed spine ordering can also be performed in polynomial time although his writeup of this result omits many details . However , for graphs that require four or more pages , the problem of finding an embedding with the minimum possible number of pages remains NP @-@ hard , via an equivalence to the NP @-@ hard problem of coloring circle graphs , the intersection graphs of chords of a circle . Given a graph G with a fixed spine ordering for its vertices , drawing these vertices in the same order around a circle and drawing the edges of G as line segments produces a collection of chords representing G. One can then form a circle graph that has the chords of this diagram as vertices and crossing pairs of chords as edges . A coloring of the circle graph represents a partition of the edges of G into subsets that can be drawn without crossing on a single page . Therefore , an optimal coloring is equivalent to an optimal book embedding . Since circle graph coloring with four or more colors is NP @-@ hard , and since any circle graph can be formed in this way from some book embedding problem , it follows that optimal book embedding is also NP @-@ hard . For a fixed vertex ordering on the spine of a two @-@ page book drawing , it is also NP @-@ hard to minimize the number of crossings when this number is nonzero . 
 If the spine ordering is unknown but a partition of the edges into two pages is given , then it is possible to find a 2 @-@ page embedding ( if it exists ) in linear time by an algorithm based on <unk> trees . However , it is NP @-@ complete to find a 2 @-@ page embedding when neither the spine ordering nor the edge partition is known . Finding the book crossing number of a graph is also NP @-@ hard , because of the NP @-@ completeness of the special case of testing whether the 2 @-@ page crossing number is zero . 
 As a consequence of bounded expansion , the subgraph isomorphism problem , of finding whether a pattern graph of bounded size exists as a subgraph of a larger graph , can be solved in linear time when the larger graph has bounded book thickness . The same is true for detecting whether the pattern graph is an induced subgraph of the larger graph , or whether it has a graph homomorphism to the larger graph . For the same reason , the problem of testing whether a graph of bounded book thickness obeys a given formula of first order logic is fixed @-@ parameter tractable . 
 <unk> , Kaufmann & Zielke ( 2015 ) describe a system for finding optimal book embeddings by transforming the problem into an instance of the Boolean satisfiability problem and applying a SAT solver to the resulting problem . They state that their system is capable of finding an optimal embedding for 400 @-@ vertex maximal planar graphs in approximately 20 minutes , and that it was successfully applied to a 600 @-@ vertex graph that Yannakakis had proposed as requiring four pages , but that turned out to require only three pages . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Fault @-@ tolerant multiprocessing = = = 
 One of the main motivations for studying book embedding cited by Chung , Leighton & Rosenberg ( 1987 ) involves an application in VLSI design , to the organization of fault @-@ tolerant multiprocessors . In the <unk> system developed by these authors , the CPUs of a multiprocessor system are arranged into a logical sequence corresponding to the spine of a book ( although this sequence may not necessarily be placed along a line in the physical layout of this system ) . Communication links connecting these processors are grouped into " bundles " which correspond to the pages of a book and act like stacks : connecting one of the processors to the start of a new communications link pushes all the previous links upward in the bundle , and connecting another processor to the end of a communication link connects it to the one at the bottom of the bundle and pops all the other ones down . Because of this stack behavior , a single bundle can handle a set of communications links that form the edges of a single page in a book embedding . By organizing the links in this way , a wide variety of different network topologies can be implemented , regardless of which processors have become faulty , as long as enough non @-@ faulty processors remain to implement the network . The network topologies that can be implemented by this system are exactly the ones that have book thickness at most equal to the number of bundles that have been made available . Book embedding may also be used to model the placement of wires connecting VLSI components into the layers of a circuit . 
 = = = Stack sorting = = = 
 Another application cited by Chung , Leighton & Rosenberg ( 1987 ) concerns sorting permutations using stacks . An influential result of Donald Knuth ( 1968 ) showed that a system that processes a data stream by pushing incoming elements onto a stack and then , at appropriately chosen times , popping them from the stack onto an output stream can sort the data if and only if its initial order is described by a permutation that avoids the permutation pattern 231 . Since then , there has been much work on similar problems of sorting data streams by more general systems of stacks and queues . In the system considered by Chung , Leighton & Rosenberg ( 1987 ) , each element from an input data stream must be pushed onto one of several stacks . Then , once all of the data has been pushed in this way , the items are popped from these stacks ( in an appropriate order ) onto an output stream . As Chung et al. observe , a given permutation can be sorted by this system if and only if a certain graph , derived from the permutation , has a book embedding with the vertices in a certain fixed order along the spine and with a number of pages that is at most equal to the number of stacks . 
 = = = Traffic control = = = 
 As Kainen ( 1990 ) described , a book embedding may be used to describe the phases of a traffic signal at a controlled intersection . At an intersection , the incoming and outgoing lanes of traffic ( including the ends of pedestrian crosswalks and bicycle lanes as well as lanes for motor vehicles ) may be represented as the vertices of a graph , placed on the spine of a book embedding in their clockwise order around the junction . The paths through the intersection taken by traffic to get from an incoming lane to an outgoing lane may be represented as the edges of an undirected graph . For instance , this graph might have an edge from an incoming to an outgoing lane of traffic that both belong to the same segment of road , representing a U @-@ turn from that segment back to that segment , only if U @-@ turns are allowed at the junction . For a given subset of these edges , the subset represents a collection of paths that can all be traversed without interference from each other if and only if the subset does not include any pair of edges that would cross if the two edges were placed in a single page of a book embedding . Thus , a book embedding of this graph describes a partition of the paths into non @-@ interfering subsets , and the book thickness of this graph ( with its fixed embedding on the spine ) gives the minimum number of distinct phases needed for a signalling schedule that includes all possible traffic paths through the junction . 
 = = = Graph drawing = = = 
 Book embedding has also been frequently applied in the visualization of network data . Two of the standard layouts in graph drawing , arc diagrams and circular layouts , can be viewed as book embeddings , and book embedding has also been applied in the construction of clustered layouts , simultaneous embeddings , and three @-@ dimensional graph drawings . 
 An arc diagram or linear embedding places vertices of a graph along a line , and draws the edges of the graph as semicircles either above or below this line , sometimes also allowing edges to be drawn on segments of the line . This drawing style corresponds to a book embedding with either one page ( if all semicircles are above the line ) or two pages ( if both sides of the line are used ) , and was originally introduced as a way of studying the crossing numbers of graphs . Planar graphs that do not have two @-@ page book embeddings may also be drawn in a similar way , by allowing their edges to be represented by multiple semicircles above and below the line . Such a drawing is not a book embedding by the usual definition , but has been called a topological book embedding . For every planar graph , it is always possible to find such an embedding in which each edge crosses the spine at most once . 
 In another drawing style , the circular layout , the vertices of a graph are placed on a circle and the edges are drawn either inside or outside the circle . Again , a placement of the edges within the circle ( for instance as straight line segments ) corresponds to a one @-@ page book drawing , while a placement both inside and outside the circle corresponds to a two @-@ page book drawing . 
 For one @-@ page drawings of either style , it is important to keep the number of crossings small as a way of reducing the visual clutter of the drawing . Minimizing the number of crossings is NP @-@ complete , but may be approximated with an approximation ratio of O ( log2 n ) where n is the number of vertices . Minimizing the one @-@ page or two @-@ page crossing number is fixed @-@ parameter tractable when parameterized by the <unk> number of the given graph , or by a combination of the crossing number and the treewidth of the graph . <unk> methods for reducing the crossing complexity have also been devised , based e.g. on a careful vertex insertion order and on local optimization . 
 Two @-@ page book embeddings with a fixed partition of the edges into pages can be interpreted as a form of clustered planarity , in which the given graph must be drawn in such a way that parts of the graph ( the two subsets of edges ) are placed in the drawing in a way that reflects their clustering . Two @-@ page book embedding has also been used to find simultaneous embeddings of graphs , in which two graphs are given on the same vertex set and one must find a placement for the vertices in which both graphs are drawn <unk> with straight edges . 
 Book embeddings with more than two pages have also been used to construct three @-@ dimensional drawings of graphs . In particular , Wood ( 2002 ) used a construction for book embeddings that keep the degree of each vertex within each page low , as part of a method for embedding graphs into a three @-@ dimensional grid of low volume . 
 = = = RNA folding = = = 
 In the study of how RNA molecules fold to form their structure , the standard form of nucleic acid secondary structure can be described diagrammatically as a chain of bases ( the RNA sequence itself ) , drawn along a line , together with a collection of arcs above the line describing the basepairs of the structure . That is , although these structures actually have a complicated three @-@ dimensional shape , their connectivity ( when a secondary structure exists ) can be described by a more abstract structure , a one @-@ page book embedding . However , not all RNA folds behave in this simple way . <unk> & Stadler ( 1999 ) have proposed a so @-@ called " bi @-@ secondary structure " for certain RNA pseudoknots that takes the form of a two @-@ page book embedding : the RNA sequence is again drawn along a line , but the basepairs are drawn as arcs both above and below this line . In order to form a bi @-@ secondary structure , a graph must have maximum degree at most three : each base can only participate in one arc of the diagram , in addition to the two links to its neighbors in the base sequence . Advantages of this formulation include the facts that it excludes structures that are actually knotted in space , and that it matches most known RNA pseudoknots . 
 Because the spine ordering is known in advance for this application , testing for the existence of a bi @-@ secondary structure for a given basepairing is straightforward . The problem of assigning edges to the two pages in a compatible way can be formulated as either an instance of 2 @-@ satisfiability , or as a problem of testing the <unk> of the circle graph whose vertices are the basepairs and whose edges describe crossings between basepairs . Alternatively and more efficiently , as <unk> & Stadler ( 1999 ) show , a bi @-@ secondary structure exists if and only if the diagram graph of the input ( a graph formed by connecting the bases into a cycle in their sequence order and adding the given basepairs as edges ) is a planar graph . This characterization allows bi @-@ secondary structures to be recognized in linear time as an instance of planarity testing . 
 Blin et al . ( 2007 ) used the connection between secondary structures and book embeddings as part of a proof of the NP @-@ hardness of certain problems in RNA secondary structure comparison . And if an RNA structure is tertiary rather than bi @-@ secondary ( that is , if it requires more than two pages in its diagram ) , then determining the page number is again NP @-@ hard . 
 = = = Computational complexity theory = = = 
 Pavan , Tewari & <unk> ( 2012 ) used book embedding to study the computational complexity theory of the reachability problem in directed graphs . As they have observed , reachability for two @-@ page directed graphs may be solved in unambiguous logarithmic space ( the analogue , for logarithmic space complexity , of the class UP of unambiguous polynomial @-@ time problems ) . However , reachability for three @-@ page directed graphs requires the full power of nondeterministic logarithmic space . Thus , book embeddings seem intimately connected with the distinction between these two complexity classes . 
 The existence of expander graphs with constant page number is the key step in proving that there is no <unk> @-@ time simulation of two @-@ tape non @-@ deterministic Turing machines by one @-@ tape non @-@ deterministic Turing machines . 
 = = = Other areas of mathematics = = = 
 McKenzie & Overbay ( 2010 ) study applications of book thickness in abstract algebra , using graphs defined from the zero divisors of a finite local ring by making a vertex for each zero divisor and an edge for each pair of values whose product is zero . 
 In a multi @-@ paper sequence , <unk> has studied the topological book embeddings of knots and links , showing that these embeddings can be described by a combinatorial sequence of symbols and that the topological equivalence of two links can be demonstrated by a sequence of local changes to the embeddings . 
 = Morning / Evening = 
 Morning / Evening is the eighth full @-@ length solo album by British electronic musician Kieran Hebden , released under his alias Four Tet in 2015 by Hebden 's own Text Records and via the online music store Bandcamp . As a child , Hebden had inherited a collection of Hindu devotional music from his late grandfather but did not listen to it until his maternal grandmother died during the making of his 2013 album , Beautiful Rewind . After sampling the voice of Indian playback singer Lata Mangeshkar , Hebden was inspired to make a record with a similar structure to Indian music , particularly the raga mode and decided to break the album into a " Morning Side " and an " Evening Side " . Alongside the sampled vocals , Morning / Evening contains complex drum programming , electronic sounds and manipulated found sounds . 
 Morning / Evening was announced in May 2015 , with an expected release date of July 2015 . It was made available to stream and download from Hebden 's Bandcamp page on 21 June 2015 to celebrate the summer solstice . Music critics praised Hebden for continuing to release challenging and unique electronic music . The physical release of Morning / Evening became Hebden 's second highest @-@ charting album , peaking at number 48 in the UK Albums Chart . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Kieran Hebden , who is of Indian descent , acquired a collection of Hindu devotional music from his late grandfather when he was ten years old but had never listened to it . When his maternal grandmother died during the making of his 2013 album Beautiful Rewind , Hebden played some of the records and began experimenting by looping a vocal sample of Indian playback singer Lata Mangeshkar for three days before deciding to base an album around it . 
 Hebden wanted to make a record with a similar structure to Indian music , particularly the raga mode , and decided to divide the album into a " Morning Side " and an " Evening Side " since many ragas relate to certain times of the day . Hebden also drew influences from English electronic music group Autechre and early electronic music , including American electronic composer Morton Subotnick 's 1967 composition Silver Apples of the Moon , and wanted the album 's production to sound like a low fidelity recording , while maintaining moments of high fidelity . 
 Morning / Evening contains two tracks of electronic sounds and " skittering " drum programming with a total running time of 40 minutes . " Morning Side " features prominent vocal samples from Mangeshkar 's performance of " Main Teri <unk> <unk> Hoon " , recorded for the 1983 Hindi @-@ language feature film <unk> , coupled with complex drum programming and arpeggiated synthesizers . " Evening Side " , which also features a sample of filmi music , begins with guitar , drones and " sparse " keyboards . It contains a conclusion that features a garage rhythm , with Hebden wanting the end of the album to feature " the most hectic , percussive part " to emphasise an evening 's relationship with nightclubs . The song fades out " to implicate that the music went to infinity . " Hebden recorded the album between August 2014 and February 2015 , using a laptop running the digital audio workstation Ableton Live to control <unk> synthesizers and manipulate found sounds . 
 = = Release = = 
 Hebden announced Morning / Evening on 6 May 2015 with a release date of July 2015 . Although no marketing campaign was used , Hebden performed the album for the first time at the Mayfield Depot in Manchester as part of The Warehouse Project on 17 June 2015 . He decided to issue the album early , making it available to stream and download from his page at online music store Bandcamp on 21 June 2015 to celebrate the summer solstice because he thought it was " a lovely day " . He included tracks from Morning / Evening in his live set at the 2015 Electric Forest Festival in Rothbury , Michigan . It was released on compact disc and vinyl on 10 July by Hebden 's label , Text Records . Morning / Evening entered the UK Albums Chart during the week commencing 23 July 2015 and became Hebden 's second highest @-@ charting album , peaking at number 48 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Morning / Evening received an average score of 77 based on 17 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Exclaim ! reviewer Chad Barnes called it " a gorgeous , daring album " , saying that " Hebden spins intricate sonic gold while subtly exploring a range of moods and moments on the complex , constantly morphing compositions " . Kitty Empire , writing for The Observer , said that it was a " low key treat " that contained " effortless prettiness . " Pitchfork Media reviewer Andy Beta called the album " daring and expansive " and said that " the scope and ambition of Morning / Evening is profound , and will hopefully inspire producers to take bigger chances and not be satisfied with <unk> or club @-@ friendly lengths . " NME called " Morning Side " " one of the most moving pieces of music Hebden has ever put his name to " and said the album ranked " alongside Four Tet 's very best work . " Critic Nina Corcoran of Consequence of Sound said that " Hebden has done what he does best : create an atmosphere so encompassing that you lose sight of wherever you are while you 're listening " . Spin 's Dan Weiss called the album " ambitious " and " beautiful in its own right , if you ’ re patient . " 
 In his review for PopMatters , Casey <unk> called the album both " classic Four Tet " and " a step in a new direction for the veteran producer " . <unk> felt the vocal sample on " Morning Side " was too prominent in the mix , saying that " Side two , ' Evening Side ' , is where Hebden really shines " , and praised Hebden for continuing to release challenging and unique music " in an electronica landscape that 's increasingly devoid of it " . XLR8R 's Chas Reynolds said that while the album 's " narrative ambivalence " might not make Morning / Evening Hebden 's most " immediate " record , it lent Morning / Evening a " near infinite replay value " . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman said that the album " isn 't among the most substantive Four Tet albums , but it does reward repeated casual listening . " Angus Finlayson , reviewing the album for Resident Advisor , called the album " the prettiest Four Tet record in some time " and said that " in its best moments , Morning / Evening is perfectly paced . " Finlayson highlighted the " vagueness " of the record 's " disparate material " but concluded that " even with these faults [ ... ] Hebden has brought a refreshing addition to his discography . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kieran Hebden . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Kieran Hebden – music , production 
 Additional personnel 
 Matt Cooper – design 
 Jason Evans – photography , design 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Elephant = 
 Elephants are large mammals of the family Elephantidae and the order Proboscidea . Two species are traditionally recognised , the African elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) and the Asian elephant ( Elephas maximus ) , although some evidence suggests that African bush elephants and African forest elephants are separate species ( L. africana and L. cyclotis respectively ) . Elephants are scattered throughout sub @-@ Saharan Africa , South Asia , and Southeast Asia . Elephantidae is the only surviving family of the order Proboscidea ; other , now extinct , members of the order include <unk> , gomphotheres , mammoths , and mastodons . Male African elephants are the largest extant terrestrial animals and can reach a height of 4 m ( 13 ft ) and weigh 7 @,@ 000 kg ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) . All elephants have several distinctive features , the most notable of which is a long trunk or proboscis , used for many purposes , particularly breathing , lifting water and grasping objects . Their incisors grow into tusks , which can serve as weapons and as tools for moving objects and digging . Elephants ' large ear flaps help to control their body temperature . Their pillar @-@ like legs can carry their great weight . African elephants have larger ears and concave backs while Asian elephants have smaller ears and convex or level backs . 
 Elephants are herbivorous and can be found in different habitats including savannahs , forests , deserts and marshes . They prefer to stay near water . They are considered to be keystone species due to their impact on their environments . Other animals tend to keep their distance where predators such as lions , tigers , hyenas , and wild dogs usually target only the young elephants ( or " calves " ) . Females ( " cows " ) tend to live in family groups , which can consist of one female with her calves or several related females with offspring . The groups are led by an individual known as the matriarch , often the oldest cow . Elephants have a fission – fusion society in which multiple family groups come together to socialise . Males ( " bulls " ) leave their family groups when they reach puberty , and may live alone or with other males . Adult bulls mostly interact with family groups when looking for a mate and enter a state of increased testosterone and aggression known as musth , which helps them gain dominance and reproductive success . Calves are the centre of attention in their family groups and rely on their mothers for as long as three years . Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild . They communicate by touch , sight , smell and sound ; elephants use infrasound , and seismic communication over long distances . Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans . They appear to have self @-@ awareness and show empathy for dying or dead individuals of their kind . 
 African elephants are listed as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) , while the Asian elephant is classed as endangered . One of the biggest threats to elephant populations is the ivory trade , as the animals are poached for their ivory tusks . Other threats to wild elephants include habitat destruction and conflicts with local people . Elephants are used as working animals in Asia . In the past they were used in war ; today , they are often controversially put on display in zoos , or exploited for entertainment in circuses . Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art , folklore , religion , literature and popular culture . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " elephant " is based on the Latin <unk> ( genitive <unk> ) ( " elephant " ) , which is the Latinised form of the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) ( genitive <unk> ( <unk> ) ) , probably from a non @-@ Indo @-@ European language , likely Phoenician . It is attested in Mycenaean Greek as e @-@ re @-@ pa and e @-@ re @-@ pa @-@ to in Linear B syllabic script . As in Mycenaean Greek , Homer used the Greek word to mean ivory , but after the time of Herodotus , it also referred to the animal . The word " elephant " appears in Middle English as <unk> ( <unk> ) and was borrowed from Old French <unk> ( 12th century ) . Loxodonta , the generic name for the African elephants , is Greek for " oblique @-@ sided tooth " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Classification , species and subspecies = = = 
 Elephants belong to the family Elephantidae , the sole remaining family within the order Proboscidea . Their closest extant relatives are the sirenians ( dugongs and manatees ) and the hyraxes , with which they share the clade <unk> within the superorder Afrotheria . Elephants and sirenians are further grouped in the clade <unk> . Traditionally , two species of elephants are recognised ; the African elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) of sub @-@ Saharan Africa , and the Asian elephant ( Elephas maximus ) of South and Southeast Asia . African elephants have larger ears , a concave back , more wrinkled skin , a sloping abdomen and two finger @-@ like extensions at the tip of the trunk . Asian elephants have smaller ears , a convex or level back , smoother skin , a horizontal abdomen that occasionally sags in the middle and one extension at the tip of the trunk . The looped ridges on the molars are narrower in the Asian elephant while those of the African are more diamond @-@ shaped . The Asian elephant also has dorsal bumps on its head and some patches of depigmentation on its skin . In general , African elephants are larger than their Asian cousins . 
 Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus first described the genus Elephas and an elephant from Sri Lanka ( then known as Ceylon ) under the binomial Elephas maximus in 1758 . In 1798 , Georges Cuvier classified the Indian elephant under the binomial Elephas indicus . Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck described the Sumatran elephant in 1847 under the binomial Elephas sumatranus . English zoologist Frederick Nutter Chasen classified all three as subspecies of the Asian elephant in 1940 . Asian elephants vary geographically in their colour and amount of depigmentation . The Sri Lankan elephant ( Elephas maximus maximus ) inhabits Sri Lanka , the Indian elephant ( E. m. indicus ) is native to mainland Asia ( on the Indian subcontinent and Indochina ) , and the Sumatran elephant ( E. m. sumatranus ) is found in Sumatra . One disputed subspecies , the Borneo elephant , lives in northern Borneo and is smaller than all the other subspecies . It has larger ears , a longer tail , and straighter tusks than the typical elephant . Sri Lankan zoologist Paules Edward Pieris <unk> described it in 1950 under the trinomial Elephas maximus borneensis , taking as his type an illustration in National Geographic . It was subsequently subsumed under either E. m. indicus or E. m. sumatranus . Results of a 2003 genetic analysis indicate its ancestors separated from the mainland population about 300 @,@ 000 years ago . A 2008 study found that Borneo elephants are not indigenous to the island but were brought there before 1521 by the Sultan of Sulu from Java , where elephants are now extinct . 
 The African elephant was first named by German naturalist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach in 1797 as Elephas africana . The genus Loxodonta was commonly believed to have been named by Georges Cuvier in 1825 . Cuvier spelled it <unk> and an anonymous author romanised the spelling to Loxodonta ; the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature recognises this as the proper authority . In 1942 , 18 subspecies of African elephant were recognised by Henry Fairfield Osborn , but further morphological data has reduced the number of classified subspecies , and by the 1990s , only two were recognised , the savannah or bush elephant ( L. a. africana ) and the forest elephant ( L. a. cyclotis ) ; the latter has smaller and more rounded ears and thinner and straighter tusks , and is limited to the forested areas of western and Central Africa . A 2000 study argued for the elevation of the two forms into separate species ( L. africana and L. cyclotis respectively ) based on differences in skull morphology . DNA studies published in 2001 and 2007 also suggested they were distinct species , while studies in 2002 and 2005 concluded that they were the same species . Further studies ( 2010 , 2011 , 2015 ) have supported African savannah and forest elephants ' status as separate species . The two species are believed to have diverged 6 million years ago . The third edition of Mammal Species of the World lists the two forms as full species and does not list any subspecies in its entry for Loxodonta africana . This approach is not taken by the United Nations Environment Programme 's World Conservation Monitoring Centre nor by the IUCN , both of which list L. cyclotis as a synonym of L. africana . Some evidence suggests that elephants of western Africa are a separate species , although this is disputed . The pygmy elephants of the Congo Basin , which have been suggested to be a separate species ( Loxodonta pumilio ) are probably forest elephants whose small size and / or early maturity are due to environmental conditions . 
 = = = Evolution and extinct relatives = = = 
 Over 161 extinct members and three major evolutionary radiations of the order Proboscidea have been recorded . The earliest <unk> , the African <unk> and <unk> of the late Paleocene , heralded the first radiation . The Eocene included <unk> , <unk> and <unk> from Africa . These animals were relatively small and aquatic . Later on , genera such as <unk> and <unk> arose ; the latter likely inhabited forests and open woodlands . <unk> diversity declined during the Oligocene . One notable species of this epoch was Eritreum <unk> of the Horn of Africa , which may have been an ancestor to several later species . The beginning of the Miocene saw the second diversification , with the appearance of the <unk> and the <unk> . The former were related to <unk> , lived in Africa and Eurasia , while the latter may have descended from Eritreum and spread to North America . 
 The second radiation was represented by the emergence of the gomphotheres in the Miocene , which likely evolved from Eritreum and originated in Africa , spreading to every continent except Australia and Antarctica . Members of this group included <unk> and <unk> . The third radiation started in the late Miocene and led to the arrival of the <unk> , which descended from , and slowly replaced , the gomphotheres . The African <unk> <unk> gave rise to Loxodonta , Mammuthus and Elephas . Loxodonta branched off earliest , around the Miocene and Pliocene boundary , while Mammuthus and Elephas diverged later during the early Pliocene . Loxodonta remained in Africa , while Mammuthus and Elephas spread to Eurasia , and the former reached North America . At the same time , the <unk> , another proboscidean group descended from gomphotheres , spread throughout Asia , including the Indian subcontinent , China , southeast Asia and Japan . <unk> continued to evolve into new species , such as the American mastodon . 
 At the beginning of the Pleistocene , <unk> experienced a high rate of speciation . Loxodonta atlantica became the most common species in northern and southern Africa but was replaced by Elephas <unk> later in the Pleistocene . Only when Elephas disappeared from Africa did Loxodonta become dominant once again , this time in the form of the modern species . Elephas diversified into new species in Asia , such as E. <unk> and E. <unk> ; the latter the likely ancestor of the modern Asian elephant . Mammuthus evolved into several species , including the well @-@ known woolly mammoth . In the Late Pleistocene , most proboscidean species vanished during the Quaternary glaciation which killed off 50 % of genera weighing over 5 kg ( 11 lb ) worldwide . 
 <unk> experienced several evolutionary trends , such as an increase in size , which led to many giant species that stood up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) tall . As with other <unk> , including the extinct sauropod dinosaurs , the large size of elephants likely developed to allow them to survive on vegetation with low nutritional value . Their limbs grew longer and the feet shorter and broader . Early proboscideans developed longer mandibles and smaller <unk> , while more advanced ones developed shorter mandibles , which shifted the head 's centre of gravity . The skull grew larger , especially the cranium , while the neck shortened to provide better support for the skull . The increase in size led to the development and elongation of the mobile trunk to provide reach . The number of premolars , incisors and canines decreased . The cheek teeth ( molars and premolars ) became larger and more specialized , especially after elephants started to switch from C3 @-@ plants to C4 @-@ grasses , which caused their teeth to undergo a three @-@ fold increase in teeth height as well as substantial multiplication of lamellae after about five million years ago . Only in the last million year or so did they return to a diet mainly consisting of C3 trees and shrubs . The upper second incisors grew into tusks , which varied in shape from straight , to curved ( either upward or downward ) , to spiralled , depending on the species . Some proboscideans developed tusks from their lower incisors . Elephants retain certain features from their aquatic ancestry such as their middle ear anatomy and the internal testes of the males . 
 There has been some debate over the relationship of Mammuthus to Loxodonta or Elephas . Some DNA studies suggest Mammuthus is more closely related to the former , while others point to the latter . However , analysis of the complete mitochondrial genome profile of the woolly mammoth ( sequenced in 2005 ) supports Mammuthus being more closely related to Elephas . Morphological evidence supports Mammuthus and Elephas as sister taxa , while comparisons of protein albumin and collagen have concluded that all three genera are equally related to each other . Some scientists believe a cloned mammoth embryo could one day be implanted in an Asian elephant 's womb . 
 = = = = Dwarf species = = = = 
 Several species of proboscideans lived on islands and experienced insular dwarfism . This occurred primarily during the Pleistocene , when some elephant populations became isolated by fluctuating sea levels , although dwarf elephants did exist earlier in the Pliocene . These elephants likely grew smaller on islands due to a lack of large or viable predator populations and limited resources . By contrast , small mammals such as rodents develop gigantism in these conditions . Dwarf proboscideans are known to have lived in Indonesia , the Channel Islands of California , and several islands of the Mediterranean . 
 Elephas <unk> of Sulawesi is believed to have descended from Elephas <unk> . Elephas falconeri of Malta and Sicily was only 1 m ( 3 ft ) , and had probably evolved from the straight @-@ tusked elephant . Other descendants of the straight @-@ tusked elephant existed in Cyprus . Dwarf elephants of uncertain descent lived in Crete , Cyclades and Dodecanese , while dwarf mammoths are known to have lived in Sardinia . The Columbian mammoth colonised the Channel Islands and evolved into the pygmy mammoth . This species reached a height of 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 4 – 6 ft ) and weighed 200 – 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 440 – 4 @,@ 410 lb ) . A population of small woolly mammoths survived on Wrangel Island , now 140 km ( 87 mi ) north of the Siberian coast , as recently as 4 @,@ 000 years ago . After their discovery in 1993 , they were considered dwarf mammoths . This classification has been re @-@ evaluated and since the Second International Mammoth Conference in 1999 , these animals are no longer considered to be true " dwarf mammoths " . 
 = = Anatomy and morphology = = 
 Elephants are the largest living terrestrial animals . African elephants stand 3 – 4 m ( 10 – 13 ft ) and weigh 4 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 kg ( 8 @,@ 800 – 15 @,@ 400 lb ) while Asian elephants stand 2 – 3 @.@ 5 m ( 7 – 11 ft ) and weigh 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 6 @,@ 600 – 11 @,@ 000 lb ) . In both cases , males are larger than females . Among African elephants , the forest form is smaller than the savannah form . The skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326 – 351 bones . The vertebrae are connected by tight joints , which limit the backbone 's flexibility . African elephants have 21 pairs of ribs , while Asian elephants have 19 or 20 pairs . 
 An elephant 's skull is resilient enough to withstand the forces generated by the leverage of the tusks and head @-@ to @-@ head collisions . The back of the skull is flattened and spread out , creating arches that protect the brain in every direction . The skull contains air cavities ( sinuses ) that reduce the weight of the skull while maintaining overall strength . These cavities give the inside of the skull a honeycomb @-@ like appearance . The cranium is particularly large and provides enough room for the attachment of muscles to support the entire head . The lower jaw is solid and heavy . Because of the size of the head , the neck is relatively short to provide better support . Lacking a lacrimal apparatus , the eye relies on the <unk> gland to keep it moist . A durable nictitating membrane protects the eye globe . The animal 's field of vision is compromised by the location and limited mobility of the eyes . Elephants are considered dichromats and they can see well in dim light but not in bright light . The core body temperature averages 35 @.@ 9 ° C ( 97 ° F ) , similar to a human . Like all mammals , an elephant can raise or lower its temperature a few degrees from the average in response to extreme environmental conditions . 
 = = = Ears = = = 
 Elephant ears have thick bases with thin tips . The ear flaps , or pinnae , contain numerous blood vessels called capillaries . Warm blood flows into the capillaries , helping to release excess body heat into the environment . This occurs when the pinnae are still , and the animal can enhance the effect by flapping them . Larger ear surfaces contain more capillaries , and more heat can be released . Of all the elephants , African bush elephants live in the hottest climates , and have the largest ear flaps . Elephants are capable of hearing at low frequencies and are most sensitive at 1 kHz . 
 = = = Trunk = = = 
 The trunk , or proboscis , is a fusion of the nose and upper lip , although in early fetal life , the upper lip and trunk are separated . The trunk is elongated and specialised to become the elephant 's most important and versatile appendage . It contains up to 150 @,@ 000 separate muscle fascicles , with no bone and little fat . These paired muscles consist of two major types : superficial ( surface ) and internal . The former are divided into dorsals , <unk> and laterals , while the latter are divided into transverse and radiating muscles . The muscles of the trunk connect to a bony opening in the skull . The nasal septum is composed of tiny muscle units that stretch horizontally between the nostrils . <unk> divides the nostrils at the base . As a muscular <unk> , the trunk moves by precisely coordinated muscle contractions . The muscles work both with and against each other . A unique proboscis nerve – formed by the maxillary and facial nerves – runs along both sides of the trunk . 
 Elephant trunks have multiple functions , including breathing , olfaction , touching , grasping , and sound production . The animal 's sense of smell may be four times as sensitive as that of a bloodhound . The trunk 's ability to make powerful twisting and coiling movements allows it to collect food , wrestle with conspecifics , and lift up to 350 kg ( 770 lb ) . It can be used for delicate tasks , such as wiping an eye and checking an orifice , and is capable of cracking a peanut shell without breaking the seed . With its trunk , an elephant can reach items at heights of up to 7 m ( 23 ft ) and dig for water under mud or sand . Individuals may show lateral preference when grasping with their trunks : some prefer to twist them to the left , others to the right . Elephants can suck up water both to drink and to spray on their bodies . An adult Asian elephant is capable of holding 8 @.@ 5 L ( 2 @.@ 2 US gal ) of water in its trunk . They will also spray dust or grass on themselves . When underwater , the elephant uses its trunk as a snorkel . 
 The African elephant has two finger @-@ like extensions at the tip of the trunk that allow it to grasp and bring food to its mouth . The Asian elephant has only one , and relies more on wrapping around a food item and squeezing it into its mouth . Asian elephants have more muscle coordination and can perform more complex tasks . Losing the trunk would be detrimental to an elephant 's survival , although in rare cases individuals have survived with shortened ones . One elephant has been observed to graze by kneeling on its front legs , raising on its hind legs and taking in grass with its lips . Floppy trunk syndrome is a condition of trunk paralysis in African bush elephants caused by the degradation of the peripheral nerves and muscles beginning at the tip . 
 = = = Teeth = = = 
 Elephants usually have 26 teeth : the incisors , known as the tusks , 12 deciduous premolars , and 12 molars . Unlike most mammals , which grow baby teeth and then replace them with a single permanent set of adult teeth , elephants are <unk> that have cycles of tooth rotation throughout their lives . The chewing teeth are replaced six times in a typical elephant 's lifetime . Teeth are not replaced by new ones emerging from the jaws vertically as in most mammals . Instead , new teeth grow in at the back of the mouth and move forward to push out the old ones . The first chewing tooth on each side of the jaw falls out when the elephant is two to three years old . The second set of chewing teeth falls out when the elephant is four to six years old . The third set is lost at 9 – 15 years of age , and set four lasts until 18 – 28 years of age . The fifth set of teeth lasts until the elephant is in its early 40s . The sixth ( and usually final ) set must last the elephant the rest of its life . Elephant teeth have loop @-@ shaped dental ridges , which are thicker and more diamond @-@ shaped in African elephants . 
 = = = = Tusks = = = = 
 The tusks of an elephant are modified incisors in the upper jaw . They replace deciduous milk teeth when the animal reaches 6 – 12 months of age and grow continuously at about 17 cm ( 7 in ) a year . A newly developed tusk has a smooth enamel cap that eventually wears off . The dentine is known as ivory and its cross @-@ section consists of crisscrossing line patterns , known as " engine turning " , which create diamond @-@ shaped areas . As a piece of living tissue , a tusk is relatively soft ; it is as hard as the mineral calcite . Much of the incisor can be seen externally , while the rest is fastened to a socket in the skull . At least one @-@ third of the tusk contains the pulp and some have nerves stretching to the tip . Thus it would be difficult to remove it without harming the animal . When removed , ivory begins to dry up and crack if not kept cool and moist . Tusks serve multiple purposes . They are used for digging for water , salt , and roots ; debarking or marking trees ; and for moving trees and branches when clearing a path . When fighting , they are used to attack and defend , and to protect the trunk . 
 Like humans , who are typically right- or left @-@ handed , elephants are usually right- or left @-@ tusked . The dominant tusk , called the master tusk , is generally more worn down , as it is shorter with a rounder tip . For the African elephants , tusks are present in both males and females , and are around the same length in both sexes , reaching up to 3 m ( 10 ft ) , but those of males tend to be thicker . In earlier times elephant tusks weighing over 200 pounds ( more than 90 kg ) were not uncommon , though it is rare today to see any over 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) . 
 In the Asian species , only the males have large tusks . Female Asians have very small ones , or none at all . <unk> males exist and are particularly common among Sri Lankan elephants . Asian males can have tusks as long as Africans ' , but they are usually slimmer and lighter ; the largest recorded was 3 @.@ 02 m ( 10 ft ) long and weighed 39 kg ( 86 lb ) . Hunting for elephant ivory in Africa and Asia has led to natural selection for shorter tusks and <unk> . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 An elephant 's skin is generally very tough , at 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) thick on the back and parts of the head . The skin around the mouth , anus and inside of the ear is considerably thinner . Elephants typically have grey skin , but African elephants look brown or reddish after wallowing in coloured mud . Asian elephants have some patches of depigmentation , particularly on the forehead and ears and the areas around them . Calves have brownish or reddish hair , especially on the head and back . As elephants mature , their hair darkens and becomes sparser , but dense concentrations of hair and bristles remain on the end of the tail as well as the chin , genitals and the areas around the eyes and ear openings . Normally the skin of an Asian elephant is covered with more hair than its African counterpart . 
 An elephant uses mud as a sunscreen , protecting its skin from ultraviolet light . Although tough , an elephant 's skin is very sensitive . Without regular mud baths to protect it from burning , insect bites , and moisture loss , an elephant 's skin suffers serious damage . After bathing , the elephant will usually use its trunk to blow dust onto its body and this dries into a protective crust . Elephants have difficulty releasing heat through the skin because of their low surface @-@ area @-@ to @-@ volume ratio , which is many times smaller than that of a human . They have even been observed lifting up their legs , presumably in an effort to expose their soles to the air . 
 = = = Legs , locomotion and posture = = = 
 To support the animal 's weight , an elephant 's limbs are positioned more vertically under the body than in most other mammals . The long bones of the limbs have cancellous bone in place of medullary cavities . This strengthens the bones while still allowing <unk> . Both the front and hind limbs can support an elephant 's weight , although 60 % is borne by the front . Since the limb bones are placed on top of each other and under the body , an elephant can stand still for long periods of time without using much energy . Elephants are incapable of rotating their front legs , as the ulna and radius are fixed in pronation ; the " palm " of the manus faces backward . The pronator <unk> and the pronator teres are either reduced or absent . The circular feet of an elephant have soft tissues or " cushion pads " beneath the manus or pes , which distribute the weight of the animal . They appear to have a sesamoid , an extra " toe " similar in placement to a giant panda 's extra " thumb " , that also helps in weight distribution . As many as five toenails can be found on both the front and hind feet . 
 Elephants can move both forwards and backwards , but cannot trot , jump , or gallop . They use only two gaits when moving on land , the walk and a faster gait similar to running . In walking , the legs act as pendulums , with the hips and shoulders rising and falling while the foot is planted on the ground . With no " aerial phase " , the fast gait does not meet all the criteria of running , although the elephant uses its legs much like other running animals , with the hips and shoulders falling and then rising while the feet are on the ground . Fast @-@ moving elephants appear to ' run ' with their front legs , but ' walk ' with their hind legs and can reach a top speed of 18 km / h ( 11 mph ) . At this speed , most other quadrupeds are well into a gallop , even accounting for leg length . Spring @-@ like kinetics could explain the difference between the motion of elephants and other animals . During locomotion , the cushion pads expand and contract , and reduce both the pain and noise that would come from a very heavy animal moving . Elephants are capable swimmers . They have been recorded swimming for up to six hours without touching the bottom , and have travelled as far as 48 km ( 30 mi ) at a stretch and at speeds of up to 2 @.@ 1 km / h ( 1 mph ) . 
 = = = Internal and sexual organs = = = 
 The brain of an elephant weighs 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 kg ( 10 – 12 lb ) compared to 1 @.@ 6 kg ( 4 lb ) for a human brain . While the elephant brain is larger overall , it is proportionally smaller . At birth , an elephant 's brain already weighs 30 – 40 % of its adult weight . The cerebrum and cerebellum are well developed , and the temporal lobes are so large that they bulge out laterally . The throat of an elephant appears to contain a pouch where it can store water for later use . 
 The heart of an elephant weighs 12 – 21 kg ( 26 – 46 lb ) . It has a double @-@ pointed apex , an unusual trait among mammals . When standing , the elephant 's heart beats approximately 30 times per minute . Unlike many other animals , the heart rate speeds up by 8 to 10 beats per minute when the elephant is lying down . The lungs are attached to the diaphragm , and breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage . Connective tissue exists in place of the pleural cavity . This may allow the animal to deal with the pressure differences when its body is underwater and its trunk is breaking the surface for air , although this explanation has been questioned . Another possible function for this adaptation is that it helps the animal suck up water through the trunk . Elephants inhale mostly through the trunk , although some air goes through the mouth . They have a hindgut fermentation system , and their large and small intestines together reach 35 m ( 115 ft ) in length . The majority of an elephant 's food intake goes undigested despite the process lasting up to a day . 
 A male elephant 's testes are located internally near the kidneys . The elephant 's penis can reach a length of 100 cm ( 39 in ) and a diameter of 16 cm ( 6 in ) at the base . It is S @-@ shaped when fully erect and has a Y @-@ shaped orifice . The female has a well @-@ developed clitoris at up to 40 cm ( 16 in ) . The vulva is located between the hind legs instead of near the tail as in most mammals . Determining pregnancy status can be difficult due to the animal 's large abdominal cavity . The female 's mammary glands occupy the space between the front legs , which puts the suckling calf within reach of the female 's trunk . Elephants have a unique organ , the temporal gland , located in both sides of the head . This organ is associated with sexual behaviour , and males secrete a fluid from it when in musth . Females have also been observed with secretions from the temporal glands . 
 = = Behaviour and life history = = 
 = = = Ecology and activities = = = 
 The African bush elephant can be found in habitats as diverse as dry savannahs , deserts , marshes , and lake shores , and in elevations from sea level to mountain areas above the snow line . Forest elephants mainly live in equatorial forests , but will enter gallery forests and ecotones between forests and savannahs . Asian elephants prefer areas with a mix of grasses , low woody plants and trees , primarily inhabiting dry thorn @-@ scrub forests in southern India and Sri Lanka and evergreen forests in Malaya . Elephants are herbivorous and will eat leaves , twigs , fruit , bark , grass and roots . They are born with sterile intestines , and require bacteria obtained from their mothers feces to digest vegetation . African elephants are mostly browsers while Asian elephants are mainly grazers . They can consume as much as 150 kg ( 330 lb ) of food and 40 L ( 11 US gal ) of water in a day . Elephants tend to stay near water sources . Major feeding bouts take place in the morning , afternoon and night . At midday , elephants rest under trees and may doze off while standing . Sleeping occurs at night while the animal is lying down . Elephants average 3 – 4 hours of sleep per day . Both males and family groups typically move 10 – 20 km ( 6 – 12 mi ) a day , but distances as far as 90 – 180 km ( 56 – 112 mi ) have been recorded in the Etosha region of Namibia . Elephants go on seasonal migrations in search of food , water and mates . At Chobe National Park , Botswana , herds travel 325 km ( 202 mi ) to visit the river when the local waterholes dry up . 
 Because of their large size , elephants have a huge impact on their environments and are considered keystone species . Their habit of uprooting trees and undergrowth can transform savannah into grasslands ; when they dig for water during drought , they create waterholes that can be used by other animals . They can enlarge waterholes when they bathe and wallow in them . At Mount <unk> , elephants excavate caves that are used by ungulates , hyraxes , bats , birds and insects . Elephants are important seed dispersers ; African forest elephants ingest and defecate seeds , with either no effect or a positive effect on germination . The seeds are typically dispersed in large amounts over great distances . In Asian forests , large seeds require giant herbivores like elephants and rhinoceros for transport and dispersal . This ecological niche cannot be filled by the next largest herbivore , the tapir . Because most of the food elephants eat goes undigested , their dung can provide food for other animals , such as dung beetles and monkeys . Elephants can have a negative impact on ecosystems . At Murchison Falls National Park in Uganda , the overabundance of elephants has threatened several species of small birds that depend on woodlands . Their weight can compact the soil , which causes the rain to run off , leading to erosion . 
 Elephants typically coexist peacefully with other herbivores , which will usually stay out of their way . Some aggressive interactions between elephants and rhinoceros have been recorded . At Aberdare National Park , Kenya , a rhino attacked an elephant calf and was killed by the other elephants in the group . At Hluhluwe – Umfolozi Game Reserve , South Africa , introduced young orphan elephants went on a killing spree that claimed the lives of 36 rhinos during the 1990s , but ended with the introduction of older males . The size of adult elephants makes them nearly invulnerable to predators , though there are rare reports of adult elephants falling prey to tigers . Calves may be preyed on by lions , spotted hyenas , and wild dogs in Africa and tigers in Asia . The lions of <unk> , Botswana , have adapted to hunting juvenile elephants during the dry season , and a pride of 30 lions has been recorded killing juvenile individuals between the ages of four and eleven years . Elephants appear to distinguish between the growls of larger predators like tigers and smaller ones like leopards ( which have not been recorded killing calves ) ; the latter they react less fearfully and more aggressively to . Elephants tend to have high numbers of parasites , particularly nematodes , compared to other herbivores . This is due to lower predation pressures that would otherwise kill off many of the individuals with significant parasite loads . 
 = = = Social organisation = = = 
 Female elephants spend their entire lives in tight @-@ knit matrilineal family groups , some of which are made up of more than ten members , including three pairs of mothers with offspring , and are led by the matriarch which is often the eldest female . She remains leader of the group until death or if she no longer has the energy for the role ; a study on zoo elephants showed that when the matriarch died , the levels of faecal corticosterone ( ' stress hormone ' ) dramatically increased in the surviving elephants . When her tenure is over , the matriarch 's eldest daughter takes her place ; this occurs even if her sister is present . The older matriarchs tend to be more effective decision @-@ makers . 
 The social circle of the female elephant does not necessarily end with the small family unit . In the case of elephants in Amboseli National Park , Kenya , a female 's life involves interaction with other families , clans , and subpopulations . Families may associate and bond with each other , forming what are known as bond groups . These are typically made of two family groups . During the dry season , elephant families may cluster together and form another level of social organisation known as the clan . Groups within these clans do not form strong bonds , but they defend their dry @-@ season ranges against other clans . There are typically nine groups in a clan . The Amboseli elephant population is further divided into the " central " and " peripheral " subpopulations . 
 Some elephant populations in India and Sri Lanka have similar basic social organisations . There appear to be cohesive family units and loose aggregations . They have been observed to have " nursing units " and " juvenile @-@ care units " . In southern India , elephant populations may contain family groups , bond groups and possibly clans . Family groups tend to be small , consisting of one or two adult females and their offspring . A group containing more than two adult females plus offspring is known as a " joint family " . Malay elephant populations have even smaller family units , and do not have any social organisation higher than a family or bond group . Groups of African forest elephants typically consist of one adult female with one to three offspring . These groups appear to interact with each other , especially at forest clearings . 
 The social life of the adult male is very different . As he matures , a male spends more time at the edge of his group and associates with outside males or even other families . At Amboseli , young males spend over 80 % of their time away from their families when they are 14 – 15 . The adult females of the group start to show aggression towards the male , which encourages him to permanently leave . When males do leave , they either live alone or with other males . The former is typical of bulls in dense forests . Asian males are usually solitary , but occasionally form groups of two or more individuals ; the largest consisted of seven bulls . Larger bull groups consisting of over 10 members occur only among African bush elephants , the largest of which numbered up to 144 individuals . A dominance hierarchy exists among males , whether they range socially or solitarily . Dominance depends on the age , size and sexual condition . Old bulls appear to control the aggression of younger ones and prevent them from forming " gangs " . Adult males and females come together for reproduction . Bulls appear to associate with family groups if an oestrous cow is present . 
 = = = Sexual behaviour = = = 
 = = = = Musth = = = = 
 Adult males enter a state of increased testosterone known as musth . In a population in southern India , males first enter musth at the age of 15 , but it is not very intense until they are older than 25 . At Amboseli , bulls under 24 do not go into musth , while half of those aged 25 – 35 and all those over 35 do . Young bulls appear to enter musth during the dry season ( January – May ) , while older bulls go through it during the wet season ( June – December ) . The main characteristic of a bull 's musth is a fluid secreted from the temporal gland that runs down the side of his face . He may urinate with his penis still in his sheath , which causes the urine to spray on his hind legs . Behaviours associated with musth include walking with the head held high and swinging , picking at the ground with the tusks , marking , rumbling and waving only one ear at a time . This can last from a day to four months . 
 Males become extremely aggressive during musth . Size is the determining factor in agonistic encounters when the individuals have the same condition . In contests between musth and non @-@ musth individuals , musth bulls win the majority of the time , even when the non @-@ musth bull is larger . A male may stop showing signs of musth when he encounters a musth male of higher rank . Those of equal rank tend to avoid each other . Agonistic encounters typically consist of threat displays , chases and minor sparring with the tusks . Serious fights are rare . 
 = = = = Mating = = = = 
 Elephants are polygynous breeders , and copulations are most frequent during the peak of the wet season . A cow in oestrus releases chemical signals ( pheromones ) in her urine and vaginal secretions to signal her readiness to mate . A bull will follow a potential mate and assess her condition with the flehmen response , which requires the male to collect a chemical sample with his trunk and bring it to the vomeronasal organ . The oestrous cycle of a cow lasts 14 – 16 weeks with a 4 – 6 @-@ week follicular phase and an 8 – 10 @-@ week luteal phase . While most mammals have one surge of luteinizing hormone during the follicular phase , elephants have two . The first ( or anovulatory ) surge , could signal to males that the female is in oestrus by changing her scent , but ovulation does not occur until the second ( or ovulatory ) surge . Fertility rates in cows decline around 45 – 50 years of age . 
 Bulls engage in a behaviour known as mate @-@ guarding , where they follow oestrous females and defend them from other males . Most mate @-@ guarding is done by musth males , and females actively seek to be guarded by them , particularly older ones . Thus these bulls have more reproductive success . Musth appears to signal to females the condition of the male , as weak or injured males do not have normal <unk> . For young females , the approach of an older bull can be intimidating , so her relatives stay nearby to provide support and reassurance . During copulation , the male lays his trunk over the female 's back . The penis is very mobile , being able to move independently of the pelvis . Prior to mounting , it curves forward and upward . Copulation lasts about 45 seconds and does not involve pelvic thrusting or ejaculatory pause . 
 Homosexual behaviour is frequent in both sexes . As in heterosexual interactions , this involves mounting . Male elephants sometimes stimulate each other by <unk> and " championships " may form between old bulls and younger males . Female same @-@ sex behaviours have been documented only in captivity where they are known to masturbate one another with their trunks . 
 = = = Birthing and calves = = = 
 Gestation in elephants typically lasts around two years with interbirth intervals usually lasting four to five years . Births tend to take place during the wet season . Calves are born 85 cm ( 33 in ) tall and weigh around 120 kg ( 260 lb ) . Typically , only a single young is born , but twins sometimes occur . The relatively long pregnancy is maintained by five corpus <unk> ( as opposed to one in most mammals ) and gives the foetus more time to develop , particularly the brain and trunk . As such , newborn elephants are precocial and quickly stand and walk to follow their mother and family herd . A new calf is usually the centre of attention for herd members . Adults and most of the other young will gather around the newborn , touching and caressing it with their trunks . For the first few days , the mother is intolerant of other herd members near her young . Alloparenting – where a calf is cared for by someone other than its mother – takes place in some family groups . <unk> are typically two to twelve years old . When a predator is near , the family group gathers together with the calves in the centre . 
 For the first few days , the newborn is unsteady on its feet , and needs the support of its mother . It relies on touch , smell and hearing , as its eyesight is poor . It has little precise control over its trunk , which wiggles around and may cause it to trip . By its second week of life , the calf can walk more firmly and has more control over its trunk . After its first month , a calf can pick up , hold and put objects in its mouth , but cannot suck water through the trunk and must drink directly through the mouth . It is still dependent on its mother and keeps close to her . 
 For its first three months , a calf relies entirely on milk from its mother for nutrition after which it begins to forage for vegetation and can use its trunk to collect water . At the same time , improvements in lip and leg coordination occur . Calves continue to suckle at the same rate as before until their sixth month , after which they become more independent when feeding . By nine months , mouth , trunk and foot coordination is perfected . After a year , a calf 's abilities to groom , drink , and feed itself are fully developed . It still needs its mother for nutrition and protection from predators for at least another year . Suckling bouts tend to last 2 – 4 min / hr for a calf younger than a year and it continues to suckle until it reaches three years of age or older . Suckling after two years may serve to maintain growth rate , body condition and reproductive ability . Play behaviour in calves differs between the sexes ; females run or chase each other , while males play @-@ fight . The former are sexually mature by the age of nine years while the latter become mature around 14 – 15 years . Adulthood starts at about 18 years of age in both sexes . Elephants have long lifespans , reaching 60 – 70 years of age . Lin Wang , a captive male Asian elephant , lived for 86 years . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Touching is an important form of communication among elephants . Individuals greet each other by stroking or wrapping their trunks ; the latter also occurs during mild competition . Older elephants use trunk @-@ slaps , kicks and shoves to discipline younger ones . Individuals of any age and sex will touch each other 's mouths , temporal glands and genitals , particularly during meetings or when excited . This allows individuals to pick up chemical cues . Touching is especially important for mother – calf communication . When moving , elephant mothers will touch their calves with their trunks or feet when side @-@ by @-@ side or with their tails if the calf is behind them . If a calf wants to rest , it will press against its mother 's front legs and when it wants to suckle , it will touch her breast or leg . 
 Visual displays mostly occur in agonistic situations . Elephants will try to appear more threatening by raising their heads and spreading their ears . They may add to the display by shaking their heads and snapping their ears , as well as throwing dust and vegetation . They are usually bluffing when performing these actions . Excited elephants may raise their trunks . Submissive ones will lower their heads and trunks , as well as flatten their ears against their necks , while those that accept a challenge will position their ears in a V shape . 
 Elephants produce several sounds , usually through the larynx , though some may be modified by the trunk . Perhaps the most well known is the trumpet , which is made during excitement , distress or aggression . Fighting elephants may roar or squeal , and wounded ones may bellow . Rumbles are produced during mild arousal and some appear to be infrasonic . <unk> calls are important , particularly for long @-@ distance communication , in both Asian and African elephants . For Asian elephants , these calls have a frequency of 14 – 24 Hz , with sound pressure levels of 85 – 90 dB and last 10 – 15 seconds . For African elephants , calls range from 15 – 35 Hz with sound pressure levels as high as 117 dB , allowing communication for many kilometres , with a possible maximum range of around 10 km ( 6 mi ) . 
 At Amboseli , several different infrasonic calls have been identified . A greeting rumble is emitted by members of a family group after having been separated for several hours . Contact calls are soft , unmodulated sounds made by individuals that have been separated from their group and may be responded to with a " contact answer " call that starts out loud , but becomes softer . A " let 's go " soft rumble is emitted by the matriarch to signal to the other herd members that it is time to move to another spot . Bulls in musth emit a distinctive , low @-@ frequency pulsated rumble nicknamed the " motorcycle " . Musth rumbles may be answered by the " female chorus " , a low @-@ frequency , modulated chorus produced by several cows . A loud <unk> call may be made by an oestrous cow after mating . When a cow has mated , her family may produce calls of excitement known as the " mating pandemonium " . 
 Elephants are known to communicate with seismics , vibrations produced by impacts on the earth 's surface or acoustical waves that travel through it . They appear to rely on their leg and shoulder bones to transmit the signals to the middle ear . When detecting seismic signals , the animals lean forward and put more weight on their larger front feet ; this is known as the " freezing behaviour " . Elephants possess several adaptations suited for seismic communication . The cushion pads of the feet contain cartilaginous nodes and have similarities to the acoustic fat found in marine mammals like toothed whales and sirenians . A unique sphincter @-@ like muscle around the ear canal constricts the passageway , thereby dampening acoustic signals and allowing the animal to hear more seismic signals . Elephants appear to use seismics for a number of purposes . An individual running or mock charging can create seismic signals that can be heard at great distances . When detecting the seismics of an alarm call signalling danger from predators , elephants enter a defensive posture and family groups will pack together . Seismic waveforms produced by locomotion appear to travel distances of up to 32 km ( 20 mi ) while those from vocalisations travel 16 km ( 10 mi ) . 
 = = = Intelligence and cognition = = = 
 Elephants exhibit mirror self @-@ recognition , an indication of self @-@ awareness and cognition that has also been demonstrated in some apes and dolphins . One study of a captive female Asian elephant suggested the animal was capable of learning and distinguishing between several visual and some acoustic discrimination pairs . This individual was even able to score a high accuracy rating when re @-@ tested with the same visual pairs a year later . Elephants are among the species known to use tools . An Asian elephant has been observed modifying branches and using them as <unk> . Tool modification by these animals is not as advanced as that of chimpanzees . Elephants are popularly thought of as having an excellent memory . This could have a factual basis ; they possibly have cognitive maps to allow them to remember large @-@ scale spaces over long periods of time . Individuals appear to be able to keep track of the current location of their family members . 
 Scientists debate the extent to which elephants feel emotion . They appear to show interest in the bones of their own kind , regardless of whether they are related . As with chimps and dolphins , a dying or dead elephant may elicit attention and aid from others , including those from other groups . This has been interpreted as expressing " concern " , however , others would dispute such an interpretation as being anthropomorphic ; the Oxford Companion to Animal Behaviour ( 1987 ) advised that " one is well advised to study the behaviour rather than attempting to get at any underlying emotion " . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Status = = = 
 African elephants were listed as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) in 2008 , with no independent assessment of the conservation status of the two forms . In 1979 , Africa had an estimated minimum population of 1 @.@ 3 million elephants , with a possible upper limit of 3 @.@ 0 million . By 1989 , the population was estimated to be 609 @,@ 000 ; with 277 @,@ 000 in Central Africa , 110 @,@ 000 in eastern Africa , 204 @,@ 000 in southern Africa , and 19 @,@ 000 in western Africa . About 214 @,@ 000 elephants were estimated to live in the rainforests , fewer than had previously been thought . From 1977 to 1989 , elephant populations declined by 74 % in East Africa . After 1987 , losses in elephant numbers accelerated , and savannah populations from Cameroon to Somalia experienced a decline of 80 % . African forest elephants had a total loss of 43 % . Population trends in southern Africa were mixed , with anecdotal reports of losses in Zambia , Mozambique and Angola , while populations grew in Botswana and Zimbabwe and were stable in South Africa . Conversely , studies in 2005 and 2007 found populations in eastern and southern Africa were increasing by an average annual rate of 4 @.@ 0 % . Due to the vast areas involved , assessing the total African elephant population remains difficult and involves an element of guesswork . The IUCN estimates a total of around 440 @,@ 000 individuals for 2012 . 
 African elephants receive at least some legal protection in every country where they are found , but 70 % of their range exists outside protected areas . Successful conservation efforts in certain areas have led to high population densities . As of 2008 , local numbers were controlled by contraception or translocation . Large @-@ scale cullings ceased in 1988 , when Zimbabwe abandoned the practice . In 1989 , the African elephant was listed under Appendix I by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , making trade illegal . Appendix II status ( which allows restricted trade ) was given to elephants in Botswana , Namibia and Zimbabwe in 1997 and South Africa in 2000 . In some countries , sport hunting of the animals is legal ; Botswana , Cameroon , Gabon , Mozambique , Namibia , South Africa , Tanzania , Zambia , and Zimbabwe have CITES export quotas for elephant trophies . 
 In 2008 , the IUCN listed the Asian elephant as endangered due to a 50 % population decline over the past 60 – 75 years , while CITES lists the species under Appendix I. Asian elephants once ranged from Syria and Iraq ( the subspecies Elephas maximus <unk> ) , to China ( up to the Yellow River ) and Java . It is now extinct in these areas , and the current range of Asian elephants is highly fragmented . The total population of Asian elephants is estimated to be around 40 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 , although this may be a loose estimate . It is likely that around half of the population is in India . Although Asian elephants are declining in numbers overall , particularly in Southeast Asia , the population in the Western Ghats appears to be increasing . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 The poaching of elephants for their ivory , meat and hides has been one of the major threats to their existence . Historically , numerous cultures made ornaments and other works of art from elephant ivory , and its use rivalled that of gold . The ivory trade contributed to the African elephant population decline in the late 20th century . This prompted international bans on ivory imports , starting with the United States in June 1989 , and followed by bans in other North American countries , western European countries , and Japan . Around the same time , Kenya destroyed all its ivory stocks . CITES approved an international ban on ivory that went into effect in January 1990 . Following the bans , unemployment rose in India and China , where the ivory industry was important economically . By contrast , Japan and Hong Kong , which were also part of the industry , were able to adapt and were not badly affected . Zimbabwe , Botswana , Namibia , Zambia , and Malawi wanted to continue the ivory trade and were allowed to , since their local elephant populations were healthy , but only if their supplies were from elephants that had been culled or died of natural causes . 
 The ban allowed the elephant to recover in parts of Africa . In January 2012 , 650 elephants in Bouba Njida National Park , Cameroon , were killed by Chadian raiders . This has been called " one of the worst concentrated killings " since the ivory ban . Asian elephants are potentially less vulnerable to the ivory trade , as females usually lack tusks . Still , members of the species have been killed for their ivory in some areas , such as Periyar National Park in India . China was the biggest market for poached ivory but announced they would phase out the legal domestic manufacture and sale of ivory products in May , 2015 , and in September 2015 China and the United States " said they would enact a nearly complete ban on the import and export of ivory . " 
 Other threats to elephants include habitat destruction and fragmentation . The Asian elephant lives in areas with some of the highest human populations . Because they need larger amounts of land than other sympatric terrestrial mammals , they are the first to be affected by human encroachment . In extreme cases , elephants may be confined to small islands of forest among human @-@ dominated landscapes . Elephants cannot coexist with humans in agricultural areas due to their size and food requirements . Elephants commonly trample and consume crops , which contributes to conflicts with humans , and both elephants and humans have died by the hundreds as a result . Mitigating these conflicts is important for conservation . One proposed solution is the provision of ‘ urban corridors ’ which allow the animals access to key areas . 
 = = Elephants and humans = = 
 = = = Working animal = = = 
 Elephants have been working animals since at least the Indus Valley Civilization and continue to be used in modern times . There were 13 @,@ 000 – 16 @,@ 500 working elephants employed in Asia as of 2000 . These animals are typically captured from the wild when they are 10 – 20 years old , when they can be trained quickly and easily , and will have a longer working life . They were traditionally captured with traps and lassos , but since 1950 , tranquillisers have been used . Individuals of the Asian species are more commonly trained to be working animals , although the practice has also been attempted in Africa . The taming of African elephants in the Belgian Congo began by decree of Leopold II of Belgium during the 19th century and continues to the present with the Api Elephant Domestication Centre . 
 Asian elephants perform tasks such as hauling loads into remote areas , moving logs into trucks , transporting tourists around national parks , pulling wagons and leading religious processions . In northern Thailand , the animals are used to digest coffee beans for Black Ivory coffee . They are valued over mechanised tools because they can work in relatively deep water , require relatively little maintenance , need only vegetation and water as fuel and can be trained to memorise specific tasks . Elephants can be trained to respond to over 30 commands . Musth bulls can be difficult and dangerous to work with and are chained until the condition passes . In India , many working elephants are alleged to have been subject to abuse . They and other captive elephants are thus protected under the The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act of 1960 . 
 In both Myanmar and Thailand , deforestation and other economic factors have resulted in sizable populations of unemployed elephants resulting in health problems for the elephants themselves as well as economic and safety problems for the people amongst whom they live . 
 = = = Warfare = = = 
 Historically , elephants were considered formidable instruments of war . They were equipped with armour to protect their sides , and their tusks were given sharp points of iron or brass if they were large enough . War elephants were trained to grasp an enemy soldier and toss him to the person riding on them or to pin the soldier to the ground and impale him . 
 One of the earliest references to war elephants is in the Indian epic Mahabharata ( written in the 4th century BCE , but said to describe events between the 11th and 8th centuries BCE ) . They were not used as much as horse @-@ drawn chariots by either the Pandavas or Kauravas . During the Magadha Kingdom ( which began in the 6th century BCE ) , elephants began to achieve greater cultural importance than horses , and later Indian kingdoms used war elephants extensively ; 3 @,@ 000 of them were used in the <unk> ( 5th and 4th centuries BCE ) army , while 9 @,@ 000 may have been used in the Mauryan army ( between the 4th and 2nd centuries BCE ) . The Arthashastra ( written around 300 BCE ) advised the Mauryan government to reserve some forests for wild elephants for use in the army , and to execute anyone who killed them . From South Asia , the use of elephants in warfare spread west to Persia and east to Southeast Asia . The Persians used them during the Achaemenid Empire ( between the 6th and 4th centuries BCE ) , while Southeast Asian states first used war elephants possibly as early as the 5th century BCE and continued to the 20th century . 
 Alexander the Great trained his foot soldiers to injure the animals and cause them to panic during wars with both the Persians and Indians . Ptolemy , who was one of Alexander 's generals , used corps of Asian elephants during his reign as the ruler of Egypt ( which began in 323 BCE ) . His son and successor Ptolemy II ( who began his rule in 285 BCE ) obtained his supply of elephants further south in Nubia . From then on , war elephants were employed in the Mediterranean and North Africa throughout the classical period . The Greek king Pyrrhus used elephants in his attempted invasion of Rome in 280 BCE . While they frightened the Roman horses , they were not decisive and Pyrrhus ultimately lost the battle . The Carthaginian general Hannibal took elephants across the Alps during his war with the Romans and reached the Po Valley in 217 BCE with all of them alive , but they later succumbed to disease . 
 = = = Zoos and circuses = = = 
 Elephants were historically kept for display in the menageries of Ancient Egypt , China , Greece and Rome . The Romans in particular pitted them against humans and other animals in gladiator events . In the modern era , elephants have traditionally been a major part of zoos and circuses around the world . In circuses , they are trained to perform tricks . The most famous circus elephant was probably Jumbo ( 1861 – 15 September 1885 ) , who was a major attraction in the Barnum & Bailey Circus . These animals do not reproduce well in captivity , due to the difficulty of handling musth bulls and limited understanding of female oestrous cycles . Asian elephants were always more common than their African counterparts in modern zoos and circuses . After CITES listed the Asian elephant under Appendix I in 1975 , the number of African elephants in zoos increased in the 1980s , although the import of Asians continued . Subsequently , the US received many of its captive African elephants from Zimbabwe , which had an overabundance of the animals . As of 2000 , around 1 @,@ 200 Asian and 700 African elephants were kept in zoos and circuses . The largest captive population is in North America , which has an estimated 370 Asian and 350 African elephants . About 380 Asians and 190 Africans are known to exist in Europe , and Japan has around 70 Asians and 67 Africans . 
 Keeping elephants in zoos has met with some controversy . Proponents of zoos argue that they offer researchers easy access to the animals and provide money and expertise for preserving their natural habitats , as well as safekeeping for the species . Critics claim that the animals in zoos are under physical and mental stress . Elephants have been recorded displaying stereotypical behaviours in the form of swaying back and forth , trunk swaying or route tracing . This has been observed in 54 % of individuals in UK zoos . Elephants in European zoos appear to have shorter lifespans than their wild counterparts at only 17 years , although other studies suggest that zoo elephants live as long those in the wild . 
 The use of elephants in circuses has also been controversial ; the Humane Society of the United States has accused circuses of mistreating and distressing their animals . In testimony to a US federal court in 2009 , Barnum & Bailey Circus CEO Kenneth Feld acknowledged that circus elephants are struck behind their ears , under their chins and on their legs with metal @-@ tipped prods , called bull hooks or <unk> . Feld stated that these practices are necessary to protect circus workers and acknowledged that an elephant trainer was reprimanded for using an electric shock device , known as a hot shot or electric prod , on an elephant . Despite this , he denied that any of these practices harm elephants . Some trainers have tried to train elephants without the use of physical punishment . Ralph Helfer is known to have relied on gentleness and reward when training his animals , including elephants and lions . In January 2016 Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey circus announced it would retire its touring elephants in May 2016 . 
 = = = Disease transmission = = = 
 Like many mammals , elephants can contract and transmit diseases to humans , one of which is tuberculosis . In 2012 , two elephants in Tete d ’ Or zoo , Lyon were diagnosed with the disease . Due to the threat of transmitting tuberculosis to other animals or visitors to the zoo , their euthanasia was initially ordered by city authorities but a court later overturned this decision . At an elephant sanctuary in Tennessee , a 54 @-@ year @-@ old African elephant was considered to be the source of tuberculosis infections among eight workers . 
 As of 2015 , tuberculosis appears to be widespread among captive elephants in the US . It is believed that the animals originally acquired the disease from humans , a process called reverse zoonosis . Because the disease can spread through the air to infect both humans and other animals , it is a public health concern affecting circuses and zoos . 
 = = = Attacks = = = 
 Elephants can exhibit bouts of aggressive behaviour and engage in destructive actions against humans . In Africa , groups of adolescent elephants damaged homes in villages after cullings in the 1970s and 1980s . Because of the timing , these attacks have been interpreted as vindictive . In India , male elephants regularly enter villages at night , destroying homes and killing people . Elephants killed around 300 people between 2000 and 2004 in Jharkhand , while in Assam 239 people were reportedly killed between 2001 and 2006 . Local people have reported their belief that some elephants were drunk during their attacks , although officials have disputed this explanation . Purportedly drunk elephants attacked an Indian village a second time in December 2002 , killing six people , which led to the killing of about 200 elephants by locals . 
 = = = Cultural depictions = = = 
 Elephants have been represented in art since Paleolithic times . Africa in particular contains many rock paintings and engravings of the animals , especially in the Sahara and southern Africa . In the Far East , the animals are depicted as motifs in Hindu and Buddhist shrines and temples . Elephants were often difficult to portray by people with no first @-@ hand experience with them . The ancient Romans , who kept the animals in captivity , depicted anatomically accurate elephants on mosaics in Tunisia and Sicily . At the beginning of the Middle Ages , when Europeans had little to no access to the animals , elephants were portrayed more like fantasy creatures . They were often depicted with horse- or bovine @-@ like bodies with trumpet @-@ like trunks and tusks like a boar ; some were even given hooves . Elephants were commonly featured in motifs by the stonemasons of the Gothic churches . As more elephants began to be sent to European kings as gifts during the 15th century , depictions of them became more accurate , including one made by Leonardo da Vinci . Despite this , some Europeans continued to portray them in a more stylised fashion . Max Ernst 's 1921 surrealist painting The Elephant Celebes depicts an elephant as a silo with a trunk @-@ like hose protruding from it . 
 Elephants have been the subject of religious beliefs . The <unk> people believe that the souls of their dead ancestors resided in elephants . Similar ideas existed among other African tribes , who believed that their chiefs would be reincarnated as elephants . During the 10th century AD , the people of Igbo @-@ Ukwu buried their leaders with elephant tusks . The animals ' religious importance is only totemic in Africa but is much more significant in Asia . In Sumatra , elephants have been associated with lightning . Likewise in Hinduism , they are linked with thunderstorms as Airavata , the father of all elephants , represents both lightning and rainbows . One of the most important Hindu deities , the elephant @-@ headed Ganesha , is ranked equal with the supreme gods Shiva , Vishnu , and Brahma . Ganesha is associated with writers and merchants and it is believed that he can give people success as well as grant them their desires . In Buddhism , Buddha is said to have been a white elephant reincarnated as a human . In Islamic tradition , the year 570 , when Muhammad was born , is known as the Year of the Elephant . Elephants were thought to be religious themselves by the Romans , who believed that they worshipped the sun and stars . The ' Land of a Million Elephants ' was the name of the ancient kingdom of Lan Xang and later the Lan Chang Province and it is now a nickname for Laos . 
 Elephants are ubiquitous in Western popular culture as emblems of the exotic , especially since – as with the giraffe , hippopotamus and rhinoceros – there are no similar animals familiar to Western audiences . The use of the elephant as a symbol of the US Republican Party began with an 1874 cartoon by Thomas Nast . As characters , elephants are most common in children 's stories , in which they are generally cast as models of exemplary behaviour . They are typically surrogates for humans with ideal human values . Many stories tell of isolated young elephants returning to a close @-@ knit community , such as " The Elephant 's Child " from Rudyard Kipling 's Just So Stories , Disney 's Dumbo and Kathryn and Byron Jackson 's The <unk> Baggy Elephant . Other elephant heroes given human qualities include Jean de <unk> 's Babar , David McKee 's Elmer and Dr. Seuss 's Horton . 
 Several cultural references emphasise the elephant 's size and exotic uniqueness . For instance , a " white elephant " is a byword for something expensive , useless and bizarre . The expression " elephant in the room " refers to an obvious truth that is ignored or otherwise unaddressed . The story of the blind men and an elephant teaches that reality may be viewed by different perspectives . 
 = Jailhouse Rock ( film ) = 
 Jailhouse Rock is a 1957 American musical drama film directed by Richard Thorpe and starring Elvis Presley , Judy Tyler , and Mickey Shaughnessy . Distributed by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) and dramatized by Guy Trosper from a story written by <unk> Young , the film is about a young man sentenced to prison for manslaughter who is mentored in music by his prison cellmate who realizes his musical abilities . After his release from jail , while looking for a job as a club singer , the young man meets a musical promoter who helps him launch his career . As he develops his musical abilities and becomes a star , his self @-@ centered personality begins to affect his relationships . 
 The wife of producer Pandro S. Berman convinced him to create a film with Presley in the last role . Berman delegated the casting to Benny Thau , head of the studio and Abraham <unk> , the then president of William Morris Agency . Berman hired Richard Thorpe , who was known for shooting productions quickly . The production of Jailhouse Rock began on May 13 , 1957 , and concluded on June 17 of that year . The dance sequence to the film 's title song " Jailhouse Rock " is often cited as " Presley 's greatest moment on screen " . 
