 Before pre @-@ production began , songwriters Mike Stoller and Jerry Leiber were commissioned to integrate the film 's soundtrack . In April , Leiber and Stoller were called for a meeting in New York City to show the progress of the repertoire . The writers , who had not produced any material , toured the city and were confronted in a hotel room by Jean Aberbach , who locked them into their hotel room by blocking the hotel room door with a sofa until they wrote the material . Presley recorded the soundtrack at Radio Recorders in Hollywood on April 30 and May 3 , with an additional session at the MGM Soundstage on May 9 . During post @-@ production , the songs were dubbed into the films scenes , in which Presley mimed the lyrics . 
 Jailhouse Rock premiered on October 17 , 1957 in Memphis , Tennessee and was released nationwide on November 8 , 1957 . It peaked at number 3 on the Variety box office chart , and reached number 14 in the year 's box office totals , grossing $ 4 million . Jailhouse Rock earned mixed reviews , with most of the negative reception directed towards Presley 's persona . In 2004 , the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Construction worker Vince Everett ( Elvis ) accidentally kills a drunken and belligerent man in a barroom brawl . He is sentenced to between one and ten years in the state penitentiary for manslaughter . His new cellmate , washed @-@ up country singer Hunk Houghton ( Shaughnessy ) , starts teaching Vince to play the guitar after hearing Vince sing and strum Hunk 's guitar . Hunk then convinces Vince to participate in an upcoming inmate show , which is broadcast on nationwide television . Vince receives numerous fan letters as a result ; but out of apparent jealousy , Hunk ensures they are not delivered to Vince . Hunk then convinces Vince to sign a " contract " to become equal partners in his act . Meanwhile , during an inmate riot in the mess hall , a guard shoves Vince , who retaliates by striking the guard . As a result , the warden orders Vince to be lashed with a whip . Afterwards , it was discovered that Hunk attempted to bribe the guards to drop the punishment , but to no avail . 
 Upon Vince 's release 20 months later , the warden gives Vince his fan mail . Hunk then promises Vince a singing job at a nightclub owned by a friend , where Vince meets Peggy Van Alden ( Tyler ) , a promoter for pop singer Mickey Alba . Vince is surprised when the club owner denies him a job as a singer but offers him a job as a bar boy . Undeterred , Vince takes the stage when the house band takes a break and starts singing " Young and Beautiful . " But one of the customers laughs obnoxiously throughout the performance , enraging Vince , who smashes his guitar on the customer 's table and leaves the club . Peggy follows Vince and persuades him to record a demo so that he can listen to himself sing . Vince records " Don 't Leave Me Now , " which Peggy takes to Geneva Records . The manager seems unimpressed , but he reluctantly agrees to play the tape for his boss in New York . The next day , Peggy informs Vince that the song has been sold . She then takes him to a party at her parents ' home , but Vince leaves after he offends a guest he mistakenly believes is belittling him . ( The guests were talking about progressive jazz , a genre that Vince hates as much as Elvis himself hated jazz , which he could not understand in real life . ) Angry and offended , Peggy confronts Vince , who kisses her brutally . Peggy <unk> calls the gesture " cheap tactics , " to which Vince replies , " Them ain 't tactics , honey ; it 's just the beast in me . " 
 Later , Vince and Peggy visit a local record store to check out Vince 's new single , but they are shocked to discover that the Geneva Records manager gave the song to Mickey Alba , who recorded and released the song himself , thereby stealing Vince 's song . Outraged , Vince blurts , " He stole my style , my arrangements , my <unk> ! " With that , Vince storms into the label 's office and confronts the manager , violently slapping him around . To avoid making the same mistake twice , Vince suggests that he and Peggy should form their own label . They do , naming the new label Laurel Records and hiring an attorney , Mr. Shores ( Vaughn Taylor ) . Vince then records " Treat Me Nice " and begins pitching it , but it is universally rejected . Peggy convinces her friend , disc jockey Teddy Talbot ( Dean Jones ) , to air the song . He does , and it becomes an immediate hit . Later that evening , Vince asks Peggy out to celebrate the success of his new single , but is disappointed when he learns that she has accepted a dinner date for that evening with Teddy . 
 Meanwhile , Vince makes arrangements for another television show . During a party , Hunk visits him after being paroled and persuades Vince to give him a spot on the upcoming show . Prior to taping , Vince rehearses " Jailhouse Rock " in a stylized cell block ( a performance Elvis himself choreographed ) . Hunk 's number is cut because of his outdated music style . Afterwards , Vince informs Hunk that according to his lawyer , the above @-@ mentioned " contract " they signed in prison was worthless . However , as a consolation , and never forgetting that Hunk tried to intercede on his behalf when he was punished for striking the prison guard , Vince offers Hunk a job with his entourage for a fee equal to ten percent of Vince 's annual gross , which Hunk accepts . 
 Within a few months , Vince officially became a star . However , Peggy is no longer on speaking terms with Vince , as his success has made him arrogant . Vince then signs a movie deal with Climax Studios . The studio head asks him to spend the day with Sherry Wilson ( Jennifer Holden ) , the studio 's new leading lady , for publicity purposes . The conceited actress is less than thrilled with her co @-@ star at first ; but she eventually falls in love with Vince after shooting a kissing scene , saying that she 's " come all unglued " ( indicating that she 's no longer " stuck up " ) . 
 Meanwhile , Hunk grows tired of Vince 's self @-@ centered attitude . When Peggy shows up unexpectedly at another of Vince 's parties , Vince is happy to see her at first but becomes upset when she says the purpose of her visit is to talk about business . Mr. Shores then approaches Vince with an offer from Geneva Records to purchase Laurel Records and sign him to a rich contract . Peggy refuses to sell , but Vince announces that he will close the deal since he owns a controlling interest , which deeply devastates Peggy . Enraged by Vince 's attitude — and his treatment of Peggy — Hunk provokes Vince to fight , who refuses to fight back . Hunk then strikes Vince in the throat , endangering his voice and therefore his singing ability . Vince is then rushed to a hospital , where he forgives Hunk and realizes he loves Peggy and she loves him . After being released from the hospital , Vince 's doctor informs him that his vocal cords are fully recovered , but Vince is worried that his voice might have been affected . To test it , he sings " Young and Beautiful " to Peggy , which reassures him that his fears are unfounded . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Elvis Presley as Vince Everett , a prisoner who , after being released , becomes a star for his singing talent . Producer Pandro S. Berman 's wife convinced him to make a film with Presley starring in the leading role . Berman contacted Presley 's manager , Colonel Thomas Parker , and asked if he could send Presley or Parker the script to read it . Parker was uninterested and denied the request . Berman asked Parker under which conditions would he take the project , to which Parker replied that he was only interested in the music score of the movie and owning the rights for record sales and publishing royalties . Presley 's payment was settled at US $ 250 @,@ 000 and 50 % of the royalties from the distribution of the movie . 
 Judy Tyler as Peggy Van Alden , a music promoter who helps Vince build his career and eventually becomes his lover . Tyler was previously known for her part as Princess <unk> <unk> in the television show Howdy Doody and her role as Suzy in the Broadway musical Pipe Dream ( 1955 ) . Tyler took a three @-@ month leave of absence from Howdy Doody to shoot the movie . Tyler and her husband were both killed in a car crash on July 3 , days after production of the movie was completed and before the movie premiered . For this reason , Presley refused to watch the film . 
 Mickey Shaughnessy as Hunk Houghton , Vince 's cellmate and a former country and western singer . He teaches Vince to improve his guitar skills , and after his release from jail becomes Vince 's assistant . Shaughnessy was known for his role as Leva in From Here to Eternity ( 1953 ) . He was also a comedian ; Variety reported before the production of the film that during one of his shows in Omaha , Nebraska , Shaughnessy performed a forty @-@ five @-@ minute routine that derided Presley . Elaine <unk> , author of the book Elvis and Gladys ( 1985 ) , considered that his casting was an " odd choice " , and a product of Berman 's disinterest and his decision to delegate the casting of the actors . 
 Vaughn Taylor as Mr. Shores , an attorney whom Vince and Peggy hire to manage Vince 's financial affairs . 
 Jennifer Holden as Sherry Wilson , a starlet of Climax Studios and Vince 's co @-@ star . The movie was Holden 's debut ; she auditioned for the role at MGM in May 1956 and was selected immediately for the role . She studied drama with Lillian Roth and participated in a small role in a play at the Palace Theatre in New York City . 
 Dean Jones as Teddy Talbot , a disc jockey who plays Vince 's debut record as a favor to Peggy . Jones himself was formerly a blues singer , and he was coached for the role by disc jockeys Ira Cooke and Dewey Phillips . 
 " Jailhouse Rock " co @-@ writer Mike Stoller ( of the Leiber and Stoller songwriting partnership ) and Presley 's regular band during that period — Scotty Moore , Bill Black and D. J. Fontana — appeared as Vince 's band throughout the film , but were uncredited . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jailhouse Rock was Presley 's third film and his first for MGM . It was filmed at the MGM studios in Culver City , California . Filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white , the film was the first production that MGM filmed with the recently developed 35 mm anamorphic lens by Panavision . The film was originally titled The Hard Way , which was changed to Jailhouse Kid before MGM finally settled on Jailhouse Rock . It was not listed with the studio 's planned releases for the year , which it published in Variety magazine , because it was based on an original story by <unk> Young , a blacklisted writer . In addition , the studio traditionally did not produce any original scripts that were not adaptations of already @-@ successful works such as books or theater plays . During the production of the movie , Pandro Berman 's attention was centered on another of his productions , the 1958 film The Brothers Karamazov . He let the head of the studio , Benny Thau , and Abe <unk> , president of the William Morris Agency , decide the cast . Richard Thorpe , who had the reputation of quickly finishing his projects , was chosen to direct the film . 
 The first scene to be filmed was the title dance sequence to the song " Jailhouse Rock " . Brett Farmer places the " orgasmic gyrations " of the dance sequence within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a " spectacular eroticization , if not <unk> , of the male image " ; it has often been cited as Presley 's greatest moment on screen . Alex Romero , who created moves inspired by Fred Astaire and Gene Kelly , choreographed the sequence . Presley was not convinced by Romero 's initial choreography , so Romero played some music and asked Presley to dance , using his own moves to choreograph the final sequence . Impressed with the dance sequence , Kelly himself applauded one of the rehearsals during a visit to the set . 
 Shooting of the film began on May 13 , 1957 , with the newly created choreography . Presley 's characteristic hairstyle and sideburns were covered with a wig and makeup for the scenes in musical number and those set in the jail . During the performance , one of Presley 's dental caps fell out and became lodged in his lung . He was taken to the Cedars of Lebanon Hospital , where he spent the night after the cap was removed . Shooting was resumed the next day . Throughout the film , Presley mimed the songs , which had been previously recorded in the studio and were added to the finished scenes . Thorpe , who usually filmed scenes in a single take , finished the rest of the movie by June 17 , 1957 . Jailhouse Rock was Judy Tyler 's last film ; she died in an automobile accident that also killed her husband two weeks after shooting was completed . Presley , moved by the death of his co @-@ star , did not attend the film premiere . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Before the production began , rock ' n ' roll songwriting partners Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were commissioned to create the film 's soundtrack . The writers , who accepted the work , did not send any material to MGM for months . In April 1957 , the studio called a meeting with the writers in New York City to be updated on the progress of the work . Leiber and Stoller , who had not written any material , traveled to New York where , instead of working , they toured the city . They were confronted in their hotel room by Jean Aberbach , director of Hill & Range music publishing company , who asked to see the songs . When he was told that there was no material , Aberbach decided to lock the songwriters in their hotel room by blocking the door with a sofa . Aberbach told them that they would not leave the room until they had created the material . Four hours later , Leiber and Stoller had written " I Want to Be Free " , " Treat Me Nice " , " ( You 're So Square ) Baby I Don 't Care " , and " Jailhouse Rock " . 
 Presley recorded the finished songs at Radio Recorders in Hollywood on April 30 and May 3 , 1957 , with an additional session at the MGM soundstage in Hollywood on May 9 for " Don 't Leave Me Now " . Leiber and Stoller were invited to the recording session of April 30 , where they met Presley . During the session , Stoller helped Presley with the song " Treat Me Nice " and taught him , using a piano , the method he should use while recording the song . Presley was impressed by Stoller and convinced MGM to cast him as the band 's pianist in the film . 
 The following songs in the film were performed by Elvis unless otherwise noted : 
 " One More Day " ( Sid Tepper , Roy C. Bennett ) – performed by Mickey Shaughnessy 
 " Young and Beautiful " ( Abner Silver , Aaron Schroeder ) 
 " I Want to Be Free " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller ) 
 " Don 't Leave Me Now " ( Aaron Schroeder , Ben Weisman ) 
 " Treat Me Nice " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller ) 
 " Jailhouse Rock " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller ) – dance routine was also choreographed by Elvis Presley 
 " ( You 're So Square ) Baby I Don 't Care " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller ) - Presley also played electric bass 
 = = Release = = 
 Jailhouse Rock premiered on October 17 , 1957 , at Loews State Theater in Memphis , Tennessee . It opened nationally on November 8 . 
 = = = Box Office = = = 
 The film peaked at number 3 on the Variety box office chart , and reached number 14 for the year at the box office . 
 According to MGM records the film earned $ 3 @.@ 2 million in the US and Canada and $ 1 @,@ 075 @,@ 000 elsewhere during its initial theatrical run , resulting in a profit of $ 1 @,@ 051 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1957 , Presley was ranked the fourth leading box office commodity in the film industry . According to Variety , by 1969 , Jailhouse Rock 's gross income in the United States and Canada was comparable to that of The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Despite the success in the box office , Jailhouse Rock earned mixed reviews from critics . It was looked upon as scandalous once it was released because it portrayed Vince Everett as an anti @-@ heroic character , presented a convict as a hero , used the word " hell " as a profanity , and included a scene showing Presley in bed with co @-@ star Tyler . The Parent @-@ Teacher Association described the movie as " a hackneyed , blown @-@ up tale with cheap human values . " The New York Times criticized Guy Trosper for writing a screenplay where the secondary characters whom Mickey <unk> and Judy Tyler acted out were " forced to hang on to the hero 's flying mane and ego for the entire picture . " Cue magazine called the film " [ an ] unpleasant , mediocre and tasteless drama . " 
 Some publications criticized Presley . Time criticized his onstage personality , while The Miami News compared the film with horror movies , and said , " Only Elvis Presley and his ' Jailhouse Rock ' can keep pace with the movie debut of this ' personality , ' the records show . In estimating the lasting appeal of their grotesque performer . " Jazz magazine Down Beat said Presley 's acting was " amateurish and bland . " British magazine The Spectator described Presley 's evolution from his " silly " performance in Loving You to " dangerously near being repulsive . " 
 Other reviewers responded positively to the film . Louise <unk> of the The Schenectady Gazette wrote that " it 's dear Elvis that gets the soft focus camera and the arty photography . " <unk> remarked upon the low production costs of the film , and said that Presley was " in top singing and personality form . " The Gadsden Times said , " Elvis Presley not only proves himself as a dramatic actor ... but also reveals his versatility by dancing on the screen for the first time . The movie ... also contains Elvis ' unique style of singing . " Look favored the movie , describing the reception of an audience in a Los Angeles theater that " registered , loud and often , its approval of what may accurately be described as the star 's first big dramatic singing role . " 
 Author Thomas Doherty wrote in his 2002 book Teenagers and <unk> : The <unk> of American Movies in the 1950s : " In Jailhouse Rock , the treatment of rock ' n ' roll music , both as narrative content and as cinematic performance is knowing and respectful ... The elaborate choreography for the title tune , the long takes and uninterrupted screen time given to the other numbers , and the musical pacing — the rock ' n ' roll builds in quality and intensity — all show an indigenous appreciation of Presley 's rock ' n ' Roll . " Critic Hal Erickson of AllRovi wrote that the film " is a perfect balance of song and story from beginning to end " . Mark Deming , also a critic for AllRovi , wrote that Jailhouse Rock it was " one of [ Presley 's ] few vehicles which really caught his raw , sexy energy and sneering charisma on film . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 1991 , Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were awarded with an ASCAP Award for Most Performed Feature Film Standards for the song " Jailhouse Rock " . In 2004 , Jailhouse Rock was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry , as it was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " The film is famous for the dance sequence ( also choreographed by Presley ) in which Presley sings the title track while on stage , cavorting with other " inmates " through a set which resembles a block of jail cells . The sequence is widely acknowledged as the most memorable musical scene in Presley 's 30 narrative movies , and is credited by music historians as the prototype for the modern music video . Jailhouse Rock ranked <unk> on Empire 's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time . The review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an overall 79 % " Fresh " approval rating based on 14 reviews , with a rating average of 6 @.@ 9 out of 10 . 
 = Blaine Anderson = 
 Blaine Devon Anderson is a fictional character from the American musical comedy @-@ drama television series Glee . Played by Darren Criss , Blaine was introduced in the sixth episode of the second season as the openly gay lead singer of the Dalton Academy Warblers , a rival show choir to New Directions , the show 's primary musical group . Blaine initially served as a mentor for New Directions member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) . Chemistry between the two , combined with fan support for the couple , led series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy to pair them romantically . Their relationship has been well received by critics , and they have been named " one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium " by Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post . At the beginning of the third season , Blaine transfers to McKinley High and joins New Directions ; concurrently , Criss was promoted from recurring guest star to the show 's main cast . 
 Criss auditioned for Glee several times before being cast as Blaine , including for the lead role of Finn Hudson . He believed he would be ill @-@ suited to that character , but identifies with Blaine , having been raised among the " gay community " . He plays Blaine as charismatic and confident , and finds his youthful self @-@ acceptance a fitting counterpoint to common media portrayals of gay characters . 
 As the Warblers ' lead vocalist and subsequent New Directions member , Blaine has performed a number of songs on the television series . His first , a cover version of " Teenage Dream " by Katy Perry , became the fastest @-@ selling Glee single , reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was certified gold in the U.S. Tracks by the Warblers have sold over 1 @.@ 3 million copies . The songs became popular enough to warrant a Warbler soundtrack album , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers . Blaine has received mostly positive reviews from critics ; Criss has been awarded a Rising Star accolade from the Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association for his portrayal . While the Blaine – Kurt ( " Klaine " ) relationship has been met with acclaim , an episode storyline in which Blaine questioned his sexuality attracted negative reviews for undermining his previous characterization as a confident gay teenager . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 Blaine Anderson is introduced in the episode " Never Been Kissed " as the lead soloist of the Dalton Academy Warblers a cappella musical group . He meets Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , a member of the rival glee club New Directions . When Kurt asks if Blaine is gay , Blaine matter @-@ of @-@ factly says he is ; Kurt tells Blaine that he is being bullied at school for being gay , and Blaine reveals that he too was harassed at his old school , so he transferred to Dalton Academy , which enforces a no @-@ bullying policy . Blaine befriends Kurt , and helps him stand up to his tormentor , Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) . When the threats and violence against Kurt reach a dangerous level , he transfers to Dalton Academy . He falls in love with Blaine , who is initially oblivious to Kurt 's feelings even as their friendship grows . Blaine enlists Kurt 's help to serenade his crush Jeremiah ( Alexander <unk> ) , the assistant manager at a local Gap store . Jeremiah is subsequently fired and rebuffs Blaine . Kurt confesses his feelings , and Blaine tells Kurt that he cares for him , but is terrible at romance and does not want to risk damaging their friendship . 
 Kurt and Blaine attend a party hosted by New Directions co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) . The attendees play spin the bottle , which results in Rachel and Blaine kissing . In the aftermath , Blaine wonders whether he might be bisexual , and goes on a date with Rachel . When she kisses him again while they are both sober , he concludes that he is indeed gay , which relieves Kurt . 
 After learning of Kurt ’ s ignorance of sexual matters , Blaine visits Kurt 's father , Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) , and prompts him to give Kurt " the talk " about sex . As the Warblers prepare to perform at the Regional show choir competition , Kurt admits that he is jealous of how many solos Blaine gets . At a subsequent group meeting , Kurt arrives late and announces that the group 's mascot canary is dead ; he sings " Blackbird " in honor of the bird . While Kurt is singing , Blaine has a revelation , and later tells Kurt that he reciprocates his feelings and kisses him . At Regionals , the two sing a duet of " Candles " by Hey Monday . The Warblers lose to New Directions , but while Kurt is very disappointed , Blaine tells him that even though they lost , in reality , they won each other which makes losing Regionals worth it . After Kurt transfers back to McKinley , he invites Blaine to be his date at his junior prom in " Prom Queen " ; both are shocked when Kurt wins Prom Queen due to having received an overwhelming number of unwanted write @-@ in votes in the secret balloting . Karofsky , the Prom King , leaves to avoid dancing with a guy in the traditional dance between King and Queen , and Kurt dances with Blaine instead . After Kurt returns from Nationals in New York , he and Blaine admit their love for one another . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 In the first episode of the third season , " The Purple Piano Project " , Blaine transfers to McKinley High at the beginning of his junior year to be closer to Kurt , who is a senior , and joins New Directions . He later auditions for the role of Bernardo in the school musical West Side Story , so as not to compete against Kurt who wants to play the male lead , Tony , but is cast as Tony himself . In the episode " The First Time " , Blaine is pursued by Sebastian Smythe ( Grant Gustin ) , a new Dalton Academy Warbler . Kurt and Blaine meet up with Sebastian at a gay bar , Blaine gets drunk , and afterward tries to get Kurt to have sex with him in the car . Kurt refuses , they have a fight , and Blaine decides to walk home . After the West Side Story opening night , they apologize to each other , and decide to go to Blaine 's house . They are later shown in bed together , apparently having just had sex for the first time . When New Directions and the Warblers informally compete in " Michael " to determine which club can perform Michael Jackson 's music at the upcoming show choir Regionals , Sebastian throws a slushie containing rock salt at Kurt , but Blaine interposes himself and is hit in the eye ; his cornea is badly scratched and requires surgery . His eye heals , and he is back in time for New Directions to defeat the Warblers at Regionals . Blaine 's older brother Cooper ( Matt Bomer ) , a successful actor in commercials , visits Ohio , and the two achieve a rapprochement . Blaine 's relationship with Kurt is later strained when Kurt text @-@ flirts with a boy he met while preparing for his NYADA audition , and by Kurt 's eagerness to leave for New York after graduation , which would separate the two at least until Blaine graduated the following year . The two patch things up , the glee club wins at Nationals , and the pair is still a couple at the end of the school year , though Blaine is still uneasy about the prolonged physical separation facing them . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In the first episode of the fourth season , " The New Rachel " , Blaine becomes the lead singer of New Directions and successfully prompts Kurt to follow his New York City dreams . In addition , Blaine successfully runs for senior class president with Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) , and the two subsequently develop a friendship . Kurt inadvertently pulls away from Blaine due to his Vogue.com internship ; distraught and feeling isolated from his friends , Blaine cheats on Kurt . After confessing to Kurt of his infidelity , Kurt severs all ties . New Directions ' Nationals trophy is stolen by Hunter Clarington ( Nolan Gerard Funk ) , the new captain of the Dalton Academy Warblers . When Blaine goes to Dalton Academy to retrieve it , Hunter and Sebastian attempt to seduce Blaine into returning to the Warblers . Blaine becomes conflicted , believing that he does not belong in New Directions . Sam ultimately convinces him that , despite having done a bad thing to Kurt , Blaine is still a good person and an important member of New Directions . 
 Kurt begins to mend their relationship in " Thanksgiving " , just before New Directions loses at Sectionals to the Warblers , and they spend Christmas together in New York City . Though he and Kurt continue to be on good terms , Blaine finds himself developing a crush on his best friend , Sam , which he knows will come to nothing as he knows Sam is not gay ; the two of them team up to find evidence that the Warblers cheated at Sectionals , which means New Directions will be competing at Regionals . He ends up going to the Sadie Hawkins dance with Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , who has developed a crush on him , but as friends only . When Kurt comes to Lima for the wedding of glee club director Will ( Matthew Morrison ) and Emma ( Jayma Mays ) — which Emma flees — he and Blaine make out beforehand , and sleep together afterward , though they do not resume a permanent relationship . 
 Blaine had briefly joined the Cheerios when it looked like New Directions would be disbanding after their Sectionals loss , and cheerleading coach Sue ( Jane Lynch ) blackmails Blaine into rejoining ; Blaine and Sam hatch up a plan to bring Sue down from the inside . Blaine eventually confesses to Sam that he has feelings for him , to which Sam assures him that he is somewhat flattered by Blaine 's honesty and attraction , and that it would not change the fact that Blaine is still Sam 's best friend . Blaine still loves Kurt and asks Burt for his permission to propose to Kurt , but Burt tells him they 're too young to marry , and advises him to wait . Blaine remains determined , however , and while shopping for a ring , he meets Jan ( Patty Duke ) , a lesbian jeweler who has been with her partner Liz ( Meredith Baxter ) for over thirty years . Jan offers to be a mentor to him , and Blaine and Kurt later have dinner with Jan and Liz , where Jan and Liz explain how their relationship evolved over the years and their experience with the growing mainstream acceptance of gay people . New Directions wins at Regionals , and Will and Emma get married immediately afterward , with the glee club , plus some graduates including Kurt , in attendance . Blaine is shown , after the ceremony is over , holding a jewelry box behind his back . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 In the season premiere , " Love Love Love " , Blaine and Kurt agree to be boyfriends again . Blaine still wants to marry Kurt , and stages an elaborate and successful marriage proposal at Dalton Academy where he and Kurt first met , accompanied by New Directions , and all their rival show choir groups , including the Warblers . He auditions for NYADA and is accepted . New Directions comes in second at Nationals , and is disbanded by Sue for not being champions . Blaine graduates as class valedictorian , and then moves to New York to be with Kurt . They start off living together , but though they remain engaged , Blaine ultimately moves out because the two of them realize they still need their own space . The relationship between them goes through rocky patches , including Blaine 's insecurity when Kurt becomes popular at school , and when an influential socialite and NYADA supporter hears Blaine perform and takes an interest in his future career , though she is not impressed by Kurt and ultimately tries to break them up , though she fails and ultimately supports them both . Their engagement is strengthened by having weathered these storms , and Blaine moves back in with Kurt . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Blaine returns to Lima after Kurt ended their engagement , having become so despondent that his schoolwork suffered and he was cut by NYADA . He becomes the coach of the Dalton Academy Warblers , and begins dating Dave Karofsky after a chance encounter at the local gay bar . Kurt , having realized he still loves Blaine and regretting that he ended the engagement , arranges for his NYADA off @-@ campus semester to be in Lima , helping Rachel to coach a reinstated New Directions — Will had left McKinley High to coach Vocal Adrenaline . Unfortunately , by the time he arrives , Blaine and Karofsky are already a couple , and there is further strain between Kurt and Blaine as coaches of rival show choirs . In " The Hurt Locker , Part Two " , Sue , who " ships Klaine " and is desperate for Kurt and Blaine to reunite , locks them both in a fake elevator and refuses to let them leave until they kiss . After resisting for a great many hours , Blaine and Kurt share a passionate kiss , but do not reunite afterward . In " Transitioning " , Blaine sings a duet with Kurt , " Somebody Loves You " , and afterward , kisses Kurt . The following day , Blaine , knowing that he is still in love with Kurt , breaks up with Karofsky ; however , Kurt is still seeing an older man , Walter . In " A Wedding " , Kurt tells Walter that he is going to Brittany and Santana 's wedding with Blaine , not him , and on Walter 's advice , returns to Blaine ; the two again become a couple . At the wedding , Brittany insists that Kurt and Blaine get married alongside her and Santana . Though skeptical at first , Kurt and Blaine agree and get married , with Burt officiating the joint ceremony . Dalton Academy burns down in " The Rise and Fall of Sue Sylvester " , and the Warblers who transfer to McKinley are accepted into New Directions , with Blaine joining Rachel and Kurt as the coaches of the combined glee club . In the series finale , " Dreams Come True " , after New Directions wins Nationals , Blaine and Kurt leave for New York , with Blaine attending NYU and Kurt returning to NYADA along with a reinstated Rachel . The episode jumps ahead to 2020 , and Blaine and Kurt are shown to be actors and a celebrity married couple ; they also visit schools to entertain and talk about acceptance . Rachel , who is married to Jesse , is pregnant with Blaine and Kurt 's child . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Blaine is portrayed by actor Darren Criss , who had auditioned for Glee several times for several roles before the character Blaine was created . He originally auditioned to play Finn Hudson . Criss made several audition videos for Glee , of which he posted only one to the social networking website MySpace where he sang a cover of Bill Withers ' song Lean on Me . Although the series writers have seen them , he considers them supplemental to his main audition , which was for series creator Ryan Murphy . Murphy had not seen any of Criss 's previous auditions , but knew he was the right actor for Blaine as soon as he saw this one . The actor cut his long hair before auditioning , to suit the " serious and preppy " role . 
 Prior to the production of season two , rumors circulated that upcoming episodes would feature a love interest for Kurt . Initial fan and media speculation suggested that Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) was created to fill this role ; however , according to Overstreet , Sam 's storyline quickly paired him with Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) as a result of the chemistry the producers detected between him and Agron . In September 2010 , it was confirmed that Criss would join the show in a " much @-@ talked @-@ about new gay role " . Media speculation suggested that Blaine would be Kurt 's new love interest . His original character description was : " a cute and charismatic gay student from a rival Glee club named the Dalton Academy Warblers — will maintain a strictly platonic friendship with McKinley High 's most out and proud pupil . But could that change as the season progresses ? Yes , it could . " Murphy stated that Blaine 's arc would be a significant one . He explained , " He sort of becomes Kurt 's mentor and then maybe love [ ... ] Kurt really admires him and respects him . " 
 Following his first few appearances , it was reported that Criss had been confirmed as a series regular for the remainder of season two and for season three of Glee . This was based on comments by Murphy , who said : " Darren has become such a sensation in one week , which I love . I think there 's a hunger for him and a positive relationship role model . He ’ ll definitely continue through the year and longer . " However , the actor later denied that his role had been upgraded and said : " It 's never really been officially confirmed to me . I think the option is there and that they want to keep Blaine around . " Murphy revealed that Blaine may join New Directions during the third season . Criss hoped that this would not come to pass , as he enjoys being at Dalton Academy , but conceded : " it 's not my call . I 'm happy to serve whatever story they want . " For the third season of Glee , Criss was promoted to a series regular , and Blaine did join New Directions when he transferred to McKinley High to be with Kurt . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Upon Blaine 's first appearance , Criss described his character as being a " very charismatic , put @-@ together , composed guy . " He stated that although Blaine is gay , he is not " overly <unk> , and not too butch either , " and that while his sexuality is a " huge part of who he is " , it is not a major facet of how he wishes to be perceived . Due to similarities which stem from their shared sexuality , Blaine " sees a lot of himself in Kurt , in terms of experiences and the way they feel about the world around them . He feels the need to impart his knowledge , be a source of strength for him , and really help him through what he 's going through . " Initially , Criss felt that the most important element of his character was to give Kurt " someone he can relate to " , and demonstrate that Kurt could have " a young out male friend , a support system " . 
 Criss discussed his personal connection with Blaine in an interview with Vanity Fair . He explained that he grew up among the " gay community " , being with theater performers , so was raised without a concept of sexuality being an issue . Criss stated that , although he identifies as straight , " it really doesn 't come into play with me in this role . As an actor , your objective is always to play the scene . And this in case , he happens to be a gay teen . " Talk show host and media personality Ellen DeGeneres deemed Blaine " a very confident gay teen , which is something you don 't see much on television . " However , Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times assessed that " despite the image he projects , he , too , is just a kid trying to figure things out as he goes along . " Criss feels that Blaine 's confidence is an important aspect of his character , as it is rare for gay teenagers on television to be so " sure of themselves . " He hopes that " all the kids struggling with this issue can look to a guy like Blaine and feel [ inspired ] by his confidence . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 The Kurt – Blaine relationship , sometimes referred to by the portmanteau " Klaine " by Glee fans and the media , developed slowly . As the series showrunner , Murphy felt tasked with keeping the two apart as long as possible . He was initially unsure whether the relationship would become a romantic one , and intended to gauge public response to their friendship before planning future developments . He commented , " Part of me thinks he should be the boyfriend , part of me thinks he should just be the mentor . I didn 't want to decide that until we got into sort of the middle of the season . " In December 2010 , Colfer said , " Fans really want it to happen . It 's funny how many people want to see these boys hook up . We 'll see . " Based on the characters ' chemistry and the " immediate outcry " from fans who wanted to see them as a couple , Murphy decided to have Blaine become Kurt 's love interest . Criss noted : " We all want to see Kurt happy , and like all great love stories , if you have two people that can be together you 've got to hold it up . " 
 Considering Blaine and Kurt 's potential future together , Murphy planned to treat them the same as all other Glee relationships , by making their pairing " as flawed and as exposed as everyone else 's . " This sentiment was re @-@ iterated by executive producer Brad Falchuk , after the characters kissed for the first time . He revealed that their relationship would not run smoothly , and observed that once couples start dating , " Everything goes to hell . " Colfer suggested that Kurt returning to McKinley may cause difficulties in their relationship , but noted " Distance makes the heart grow fonder , right ? That ’ s what they tell me . So even if they do go through some bumps in the road , it would be very realistic . " In a Q & A with Billboard on the day " Born This Way " ran with Kurt 's McKinley return , Criss stated that Blaine and Kurt were " in the honeymoon stages " of their relationship , and would still be " at the end of the [ second ] season " . 
 In a July 2012 interview with E ! News , Colfer said , " I would like to do something besides say ' I love you , ' and I think Darren [ Criss ] and I agree on that . We 're ready for the next step . They 've been together for a while . Let 's throw some spice and drama into that . " Colfer quipped that he did not know what was in store for the couple , " I hear mixed things . I hear they 're still together but then maybe they 're breaking up . " In September 2012 , Criss seconded Colfer , " We 're like an old married couple now . Let 's shake it up ! " 
 In the second season episode " Sexy " , Blaine reveals he has a strained relationship with his father . 
 = = Musical performances = = 
 As Blaine , Criss features in many musical performances , which have been released as singles , available for download . His first performance , " Teenage Dream " by Katy Perry , was featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 . It reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 in the week ending November 27 , 2010 , and was the best @-@ selling song in the U.S. that week , selling 214 @,@ 000 copies : the largest figure for a Glee title . It was only the second <unk> gold single in the show 's history . Both Billboard 's Jillian Mapes and Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone deemed " Teenage Dream " the best song of " Never Been Kissed " , the episode in which it featured . The Daily News 's Anthony Benigno gave the song an " A " , and noted that it was " flawless " and improved on Perry 's original . The performance was nominated for the Best Gay Moment of the Year and Favorite Music Video awards at the 2010 AfterElton.com Visibility Awards . A Billboard cover @-@ feature on Criss noted that the performance " arguably ushered in the trend of more current pop hits being reworked by the [ Glee ] cast . " 
 Later songs performed by Blaine and the Warblers became popular enough to warrant a Warbler soundtrack album , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers . The tracks had sold over 1 @.@ 3 million copies as singles by the time the album was released . Blaine performed the lead vocal on covers of Train 's " Hey , Soul Sister " , which peaked at number 32 in Canada , " Bills , Bills , Bills " by Destiny 's Child , which reached number 44 in the U.S. , and Robin Thicke 's " When I Get You Alone " , which got to number 47 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Criss downplayed his performance of " Bills , Bills , Bills " , and jested that he ought to issue the group 's lead singer , Beyoncé Knowles , an apology for his cover . Blaine also led on " Silly Love Songs " by Wings , and Maroon 5 's " Misery " , which reached 45 and 52 respectively in the U.S. , and Pink 's " Raise Your Glass " , which peaked at number 30 in Australia . 
 Blaine duetted with Kurt on Frank Loesser 's " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " , which was included on Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album and reached number 53 in Canada . It was reportedly the most downloaded track of the album , and called " by far the gayest thing that has ever been on TV " by Colfer . Murphy expressed his pride in the number for " push [ ing ] the envelope a bit . " Jessica Ronayne of Zap2it called the duet one of the Christmas episode 's few saving graces . Blaine and Kurt also duetted on Neon Trees ' " Animal " and Hey Monday 's " Candles " , which peaked at 62 and 71 in the U.S. respectively . In an April 2011 interview , Criss stated that he did not feel established enough within the cast to make song suggestions , but had mentioned liking " Animal " to Murphy , who included it in a script soon thereafter . Blaine shared a duet of " Don 't You Want Me " by The Human League with Rachel , which Reiter deemed a musical highlight of the episode " Blame It on the Alcohol " . It was included on Glee : The Music , Volume 5 , and peaked at number 44 in Australia . 
 Over the course of the season , Blaine 's musical performances leading the Warblers became so prevalent that he was called out for it on @-@ screen . Criss offered the insight : " Blaine definitely had his moment in the sun . I think it 's time to focus back on the characters that fans of the show really know and love . Completely objectively from watching the show , I was like , ' Why does Blaine get all these songs ? This is ridiculous . I want to hear other people doing stuff . ' I think we 're focusing a little more back on New Directions and taking a little bit of a break from the Warblers . " 
 In the first episode of season three of Glee , " The Purple Piano Project " , Blaine sings " It 's Not Unusual " by Tom Jones when he transfers to McKinley and quits the Warblers for New Directions . After successfully auditioning later in the season for the school 's production of West Side Story with " Something 's Coming " from the musical , he sings " Tonight " in rehearsal and " One Hand , One Heart " in performance , both with his co @-@ star Rachel . He sings lead or co @-@ lead on several songs with New Directions , including " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " ; " Perfect " and " Let It Snow ! Let It Snow ! Let It Snow ! " with Kurt ; " Control " and " Man in the Mirror " with Artie and others ; and his first original song , the duet " Extraordinary Merry Christmas " , with Rachel . 
 In special tribute episode to Michael Jackson , " Michael " , Blaine sings " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . Futterman wrote that Blaine 's " slick showmanship " made him a " natural for lead vocals " , and TVLine 's Michael Slezak called it " the best use of Darren Criss ' voice on Glee in quite some time " and gave it an " A − " . Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch also gave it an " A − " , and said Criss " captured the excitement and the spunky bravado of the original " . MTV 's Kevin P. Sullivan was another fan of " the sheer awesomeness of Darren Criss " on the song , and characterized it as " a tribute that 's more respectful than any other in the episode " . In the fourteenth episode of the third season , " On My Way " , Blaine performs " Cough Syrup " by Young the Giant , which is sung during the Dave Karofsky suicide sequence . Futterman said Blaine " flawlessly deliver [ ed ] the vocal " . Lynch called it a " chilling rendition " that was " hard to shake " and gave it an " A − " , the same grade given by Slezak , who wrote , " taken on its own , Blaine 's vocal was strong and passionate — perhaps better than the original " . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle said it was the " best " of the episode , and added that the " scene was really , really well done and carried maximum emotional punch " . In the following episode , " Big Brother " , Blaine shares a duet of Gotye 's " Somebody That I Used to Know " with his brother Cooper ( Matt Bomer ) . Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV called it the " highlight of the episode " , and it was Hankinson 's favorite performance : " Bomer and Criss did a fantastic job bringing it to life " . Futterman said that " it was initially disconcerting to envision " two brothers singing about a " former love " , but she noted that it " was less weird in context " . In its first week , the cover sold 152 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the US , and was number twenty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Blaine has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Ellen DeGeneres praised Criss 's portrayal , and described him as one of Glee 's breakout stars . Entertainment Weekly named him one of the breakout stars of 2010 , with the comment : " It took about 2 minutes and 11 seconds on Glee for Darren Criss to turn into a bona fide Gleek phenomenon . [ ... ] And it doesn 't hurt that his character Blaine 's warm relationship with the show 's other openly gay character , Chris Colfer 's Kurt , continues to resonate with fans . " In November 2010 , the publication also named Criss the series ' best guest @-@ star to date , and praised him for " seamlessly entering the fold with his charm and great voice . " Ronayne deemed him " a much better addition to the show than Chord Overstreet " . Following his Glee debut , Criss won the We 're Wilde About You Rising Star Award at the 2011 Dorian Awards , presented by the Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association . He also won the 2011 Teen Choice Award for Choice TV Breakout Star . 
 Indecision over his sexuality in the episode " Blame It on the Alcohol " drew some negative reviews of Blaine . Reiter noted that , " So much of Blaine 's charm has been his certainty about who he is . " Though she found his subplot with Rachel " fun " , she commented : " Blaine 's overwrought speech in the coffee shop after Rachel asks him out just felt off @-@ key . Saying ' bye ' to the Blaine sexual @-@ confusion storyline wouldn 't make us angry at all . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club also criticised the storyline , which , he wrote , " seemed like it might be an interesting , complicated look at teenage sexuality and how it can seem formed but might be more fluid than most teens would give it credit for , then lost its nerve and took the easy way out . " AfterElton.com 's Chris O <unk> felt that the only aspect of the storyline handled acceptably was Blaine questioning whether he was bisexual , rather than outright straight . He criticized the shallow examination of his feelings , and wrote : " Bisexuality is such a contentious issue that it should not be fumbled this way . For a character to say ' maybe I 'm bi ' in one scene and then the next say , ' nope , definitely gay ' is almost cruel in how dismissive it is toward bisexuals by trivializing the intense confusion that many bisexual people feel in coming to terms with their orientation . " In a more positive review , Canning opined that Blaine and Kurt 's conversation about sexuality was " great " . He was " glad it wasn 't an easy talk for either of them " and said that it " felt very real for kids in this situation . " 
 Blaine and Kurt 's relationship has been generally well received . They were named Favorite TV Couple at the 2010 AfterElton.com Visibility Awards , and have been lauded for " leading the way " in representing gay teenagers on television by Entertainment Weekly . Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post referred to them as " one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium " . When they " finally solidified what their relationship actually is " in the episode " Silly Love Songs " , IGN 's Robert Canning noted that his opinion of Blaine improved . He commented : " I love that the [ serenading of Jeremiah ] blew up in Blaine 's face . The character has always come off to me as annoyingly arrogant , but " Silly Love Songs " humanized the guy . Guess I may have to like him now . " Their first kiss , in the episode " Original Song " , was met with critical acclaim . Mark Perigard of The Boston Herald wrote , " It was utterly , sweetly romantic , and Criss sold the hell out of the moment . It 's long overdue and it will silence the growing legion of critics out there who were unhappy with the pace of this story . " Entertainment Weekly 's Mandi Bierly was so impressed with the scene that she was initially concerned it may be a dream sequence , " because we don 't get romantic , unapologetic first kisses like that between young gay characters on network TV . " She wrote , " Relationships aren 't easy . They ’ ll make mistakes . But if they stay true to themselves , and continue to be as open and honest with each other , we 're in for something special . " Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic thought the kiss was " sweet " , and stated that he was pleased that it attracted no controversy whatsoever . Aly Semigran of MTV praised the interaction between Blaine and Kurt . She called the kiss scene a " sweet , real and , shockingly , un @-@ hyped moment " , and praised Criss and Colfer for " <unk> [ ing ] it with dignity and honesty " . 
 While Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter was pleased Blaine 's season three transfer to McKinley in the first episode increased Criss ' screen time with Colfer and the New Directions cast , she stated that the move " screams of co @-@ dependency . " In contrast , Entertainment Weekly 's Abby West found it romantic , and noted : " Blaine and Kurt , with their budding love and witty , pseudo @-@ urbane ways , are my favorite couple to watch . ... I look forward to hearing [ Blaine ] sing more , watching him bump up against the insular Glee clubbers , and seeing him show off his non @-@ uniform attire . Several reviewers were unhappy with the second episode 's revelation that Blaine was a junior , not a senior like Kurt , as had been implied in the previous season . VanDerWerff wrote that Blaine " seems to have simultaneously gotten younger and had a complete personality transplant over the summer " , Billboard 's Rae Votta noted " the continuity @-@ bending plot point that he 's somehow a Junior and not a Senior like his boyfriend " , and Samantha Urban of The Dallas Morning News allowed her exasperation to show : " Oh really , Glee ? Blaine 's a junior ? Blaine 's younger than Kurt ? Fine . FINE . " 
 Kurt and Blaine make the decision to have sex for the first time in " The First Time " episode ; many critics were enthusiastic about the fact that a gay couple was being given such a storyline . Canning said that Kurt and Blaine 's " attempts to get a little wild " , and " trying to grow up faster than they should " , were " the better parts of the episode as they felt the most realistic " . Futterman praised their departure from the bar as a " very faithful and honest scene " . VanDerWerff and BuddyTV contributor John Kubicek both had issues with Blaine 's characterization . The latter asserted that he " just behaves however the writers need him to behave in order for the scene to work " , while the former said that Blaine 's season three storyline " hasn ’ t been bad by any means , but it does feel like Darren Criss is playing someone who ’ s quite a bit different from the guy he was playing last season " . Bell was impressed by the way the characters ' relationship " inspires gay youth in a way that we haven 't seen on network television yet " and called them " amazing role models for all teens " , and The Atlantic writer Kevin Fallon said it was " remarkable " and a " milestone " that " the decision by gay teen characters to lose their virginities is given equal weight to that of a straight couple " . 
 Discussing public response to his character , Criss stated that he particularly enjoyed comments from " people from parts of the world who are maybe not as exposed to certain ideologies " , but had reconsidered their stance on relationships and human rights as a result of the Blaine – Kurt storyline . He called this response " phenomenal " , and said : " I was a straight kid growing up in a very gay community and it 's something that I 've had to watch so many friends have to struggle with and have no place to go to identify in kind of a grander media culture . To be a small piece of that machine is incredibly wonderful . " 
 = Michael Walker , Baron Walker of Aldringham = 
 Field Marshal Michael John Dawson Walker , Baron Walker of Aldringham , GCB , CMG , CBE , DL ( born 7 July 1944 ) is a retired British Army officer . Commissioned in 1966 , he served in Cyprus , Northern Ireland , and in a variety of staff posts in the United Kingdom until 1984 . After being given command of a battalion , he was mentioned in despatches for his service during a second tour of duty in Northern Ireland , this time in Derry , and subsequently served a tour on Gibraltar . He was promoted to brigadier , unusually having never held the rank of colonel , and took command of 20th Armoured Brigade in Germany before becoming I Corps chief of staff . 
 As a major general , Walker was appointed General Officer Commanding , Eastern District , before becoming Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff at the Ministry of Defence . He took command of NATO 's Allied Rapid Reaction Corps ( ARRC ) , which deployed to the Balkans in 1995 , Walker becoming the first officer to command the land component of the NATO @-@ led Implementation Force . For his service with the multi @-@ national forces in the Balkans , he was awarded the American Legion of Merit . After relinquishing command of the ARRC , Walker spent three years as Commander in Chief , Land Command , before being appointed Chief of the General Staff — the professional head of the British Army — in 2000 . In 2003 , he was promoted to Chief of the Defence Staff ( CDS ) — the professional head of all the British Armed Forces . While CDS , Walker attracted controversy during the modernisation of the armed forces , over allegations of prisoner abuse during the Iraq War , and over comments that the media coverage of Iraq may have endangered British troops . 
 Walker retired in 2006 and was subsequently appointed Governor of the Royal Hospital Chelsea , a post he held until 2011 . He is married and has three children . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Born in Salisbury in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia ( modern @-@ day Zimbabwe ) to William Hampden Dawson Walker and Dorothy Helena Walker ( née <unk> ) , Walker was educated both in Southern Rhodesia and in Yorkshire , first at Milton School , Bulawayo , and then at Woodhouse Grove School , West Yorkshire . He spent 18 months teaching in a Preparatory School before joining the British Army . Walker married Victoria ( " Tor " , née Holme ) , in 1973 and the couple have three children — two sons and one daughter . He lists his interests as sailing , shooting , tennis , skiing and golf . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 After attending the Royal Military Academy , Sandhurst , Walker was commissioned into the Royal Anglian Regiment as a second lieutenant on 29 July 1966 . He served as a platoon commander with the 1st Battalion and was promoted to lieutenant on 29 January 1968 . In 1969 he was posted to Cyprus for a two @-@ year tour , and served in Northern Ireland during The Troubles , before attending the Staff College , Camberley . He was promoted to captain on 29 July 1972 . 
 After serving in a staff position at the Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) , Walker was promoted to major at the end of 1976 , and rejoined 1st Battalion , to become a company commander , based in Tidworth , Wiltshire . In 1979 , he took up another staff post at the MoD , after which he was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1982 . Until 1985 , he served as Military Assistant ( MA ) to the Chief of the General Staff . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the New Year Honours List in December 1984 . 
 In command of the 1st Battalion from 1985 to 1987 , Walker served another tour in Northern Ireland , this time in Derry , and later a tour on Gibraltar . He was mentioned in despatches in 1987 " in recognition of gallant and distinguished service " in Northern Ireland . Unusually , Walker was promoted directly to brigadier at the end of 1987 , without having held the rank of colonel . He took command of 20th Armoured Brigade , based in Germany , from 1987 to 1989 , before holding the post of Chief of Staff , I Corps between 1989 and 1991 . 
 = = High command = = 
 Walker attained general officer status with promotion to acting major general in 1991 and took command of North East District and 2nd Infantry Division . Having served in the Gulf War , he was promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) later in 1991 . He was granted the substantive rank of major general on 2 December 1991 , with seniority from 14 February 1991 , going on to serve as General Officer Commanding of the Eastern District and then as Assistant Chief of the General Staff from 11 December 1992 to 3 October 1994 . 
 On 8 December 1994 , Walker was appointed commander of NATO 's Allied Rapid Reaction Corps ( ARRC ) , which had its headquarters in <unk> , Germany , and promoted to acting lieutenant general . He was granted the substantive rank of lieutenant general on 15 March 1995 , and knighted in the 1995 Queen 's Birthday Honours when he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . Under Walker 's command , the ARRC deployed to the Balkans in December 1995 . There , he became the first commander of the land component of the NATO @-@ led Implementation Force ( IFOR ) , until his return to the UK in November 1996 . 
 His IFOR command in Bosnia was indirectly criticised by Richard Holbrooke for his refusal to use his authority to also perform nonmilitary implementation tasks , including arresting indicted war criminals : 
 Based on Shalikashvili 's statement at White House meetings , Christopher and I had assumed that the IFOR commander would use his authority to do substantially more than he was obligated to do . The meeting with [ Admiral Leighton ] Smith shattered that hope . Smith and his British deputy , General Michael Walker , made clear that they intended to take a minimalist approach to all aspects of implementation other than force protection . Smith signalled this in his first extensive public statement to the Bosnian people , during a live call @-@ in program on Pale Television – an odd choice for his first local media appearance . 
 He was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George at the end of 1996 . 
 Succeeded as COMARRC by Sir Mike Jackson , Walker was promoted to acting general and appointed Commander in Chief , Land Command on 27 January 1997 . He was granted the substantive rank of general on 2 April 1997 . In recognition of his service with IFOR between 1995 and 1996 , Walker was awarded the American Legion of Merit ( Degree of Commander ) , and granted unrestricted permission to wear the decoration , in May 1997 . In September 1997 , he was appointed Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp General to Queen Elizabeth II , succeeding General Sir Michael Rose , until he in turn was succeeded by General Sir Richard Dannatt . He was promoted to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath in the New Year Honours List at the end of 1999 . 
 Having served just over three years as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Walker was appointed Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) — the professional head of the British Army — on 17 April 2000 , taking over from General Sir Roger Wheeler . He remained CGS for three years , after which he was promoted to Chief of the Defence Staff ( CDS ) — the professional head of all the British Armed Forces — on 2 May 2003 , succeeding Admiral Sir Michael Boyce ( later Lord Boyce ) . As CDS , Walker criticised some of the media coverage of British deployments in Iraq . In particular , he claimed that attacks on the Black Watch were " enhanced " due to news reports on their location . He went on to say that " [ as a result of the media coverage ] , there could well have been a response by those who wished us ill to go and meet us with something like a bomb " . His comments were rejected by a spokesman for the National Union of Journalists , who retaliated " When generals turn around and start blaming reporters for their own mistakes , it is a sign they aren 't doing their own jobs properly " . Also in 2004 , Walker , along with General Sir Mike Jackson , then Chief of the General Staff , attracted controversy over reforms of the armed forces , which included the amalgamation of several army regiments to form larger regiments , leading to the loss of historic names . 
 In an interview with the BBC in October 2005 , Walker suggested that the army 's recruitment had been adversely affected by the Iraq War . He also commented on the war in Afghanistan , on which he said " There 's a lot of work to be done , of which the military is only a very small part . Ten years , 15 years , long @-@ term . This is not going to be solved in a short term " . In the same month , he gave an interview for The Sunday Times , in which he said that soldiers ' morale had been damaged by the unpopularity of the war among the British public . Later in 2005 , Walker was instrumental in drawing up new procedures for the treatment of British service personnel accused of abusing Iraqi prisoners , following claims that the army had abandoned those soldiers charged in connection with the prisoner abuses . In February 2006 , Walker headed up a military delegation to Bulgaria to discuss military cooperation between the British and Bulgarian governments . 
 Walker gave evidence to the Iraq Inquiry on 1 February 2010 , in which he spoke about funding for the invasion of Iraq and subsequent planning . 
 = = = Honorary roles = = = 
 Lord Walker has held a variety of honorary and ceremonial roles in different regiments . He was granted the honorary titles of Colonel Commandant and Deputy Colonel of Queen 's Division ( of which the Royal Anglian Regiment is part ) in April 1992 and Honorary Colonel , 3rd Battalion Duke of Wellington 's Regiment ( West Riding ) ( Yorkshire Volunteers ) , in October 1993 , which he relinquished on 30 June 1999 . In 1994 , he succeeded General Sir John Learmont as Colonel Commandant of the Army Air Corps and held the title until April 2004 , when he was relieved by then Lieutenant General Sir Richard Dannatt ( later General Lord Dannatt ) . In 1997 , he was appointed honorary Colonel , The Royal Anglian Regiment , in succession to Major General Patrick Stone , and was himself succeeded as Deputy Colonel by Brigadier John Sutherell . Sutherell , then a major general , went on to succeed Walker as Honorary Colonel in February 2000 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Walker relinquished his appointment as Chief of the Defence Staff in April 2006 and retired from the Army , succeeded as CDS by Air Chief Marshal Jock Stirrup . In September 2006 , Walker was appointed Governor of the Royal Hospital Chelsea , holding the post until February 2011 when he resigned suddenly . On 24 November 2006 , it was announced that he would receive a life peerage , and , on 19 December , he was created Baron Walker of Aldringham , of Aldringham in the county of Suffolk , sitting in the House of Lords as a crossbencher . He was given the ceremonial appointment of Deputy Lieutenant of Greater London in 2007 . Walker was appointed as an honorary field marshal in the Queen 's 2014 Birthday Honours . 
 = = Arms = = 
 = Valentine 's Day ( The Office ) = 
 " Valentine 's Day " is the sixteenth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's twenty @-@ second episode overall . Written by Michael Schur and directed by Greg Daniels , the episode first aired in the United States on February 9 , 2006 on NBC . The episode guest stars Craig Anton , Andy Buckley , Charles Esten , and Conan O 'Brien as himself . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) travels to New York City to give a presentation , but accidentally tells everyone that he " hooked up " with Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) . Meanwhile , the rest of the office is jealous when Phyllis Lapin 's ( Phyllis Smith ) boyfriend Bob Vance gives her several gifts . Also , Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) gives Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) a bobblehead model of himself . 
 The episode was the first time that Pam Beesly ( Fischer ) had a different hairstyle . In addition , many of the scenes were improvised , including Dwight 's line about ham and Michael 's antics in New York . " Valentine 's Day " received mostly positive reviews from television critics and was watched by 8 @.@ 95 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Before a Valentine 's Day meeting at the corporate offices in New York City with Jan Levinson and the new CFO David Wallace , Michael Scott accidentally lets slip to the other branch managers that he and Jan " hooked up " . At the meeting , instead of simply providing the financial status of his branch as asked , Michael shows a heartwarming video called " The Faces of Scranton " before reluctantly providing the information requested . Craig , from the Albany branch , is completely unprepared for the meeting and attempts to cover for it by suggesting that " maybe I should 've slept with [ Jan ] , too . " In a private conversation with Michael , Jan is convinced that her career is over , but Michael defuses the situation by explaining to the CFO that it was a bad joke and accepts responsibility for the situation . As Michael leaves , Jan kisses him in the elevator , but then groans when she realizes they were caught on camera . 
 Meanwhile , back in the office , Angela Martin gives Dwight Schrute a " Dwight " bobblehead doll , and he gives her a key to his home . Phyllis Lapin is inundated with gifts from her boyfriend Bob Vance , while Pam Beesly is irritated with Roy Anderson when the only thing he gives her for Valentine 's Day is the promise of the " best sex of [ her ] life " . Jim Halpert is forced to listen to , and witness Ryan Howard turn Kelly Kapoor down for a date . At the end of the day , Jim tells Pam " Happy Valentine 's Day " and she watches him longingly as he leaves . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was the fourth episode of the series directed by series creator Greg Daniels . Daniels had previously directed the first season episode " Basketball " , along with the second season episodes " The Dundies " and " The Client " . " Valentine 's Day " was written by Michael Schur , who plays Dwight 's Amish cousin Mose . In the DVD commentary for this episode , Greg Daniels described how some of Michael 's actions in this episode , such as having the requested branch info , unlike Craig , and saving Jan 's job by deflecting Craig 's comments when talking to David Wallace , were scripted to show how he plausibly remains employed . 
 For the first time ever on The Office , Pam Beesly 's ( Jenna Fischer ) hair is in a different style . Several hairstyles were shown to Greg Daniels before the one used in the episode was selected . Dwight 's line about a ham being a romantic gift was written during filming on the set . The writers did not have a punchline in the scene , so they came up with several alternatives , including ham , as well as " a boombox " . Most of the street scenes in New York City were improvised . They had to be kept short because crowds quickly formed around Steve Carell when he was recognized . Conan O 'Brien appeared in a cameo in the episode . He previously worked with Daniels on the writing staffs for Not Necessarily the News , Saturday Night Live and The Simpsons and the two also went to Harvard University together . 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael handing out plastic roses , Michael choosing the most attractive part of a woman , Creed calling everybody " Ace " , Michael meeting Devon in New York , the Vance Refrigeration employees getting into a fistfight , Michael wondering why his meeting is on Valentine 's Day , Jim learning that Dwight has a girlfriend , and Kevin learning that his fiancée has returned to town . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael notes that New York is the " city so nice they named it twice " . He then proceeds to explain that the other name is Manhattan , failing to realize the limerick refers to the city of New York , which also lies in the state of New York . Later , he eats pizza at a Sbarro restaurant , a chain restaurant , but calls it his " favorite New York pizza joint " . At Rockefeller Center , Michael thinks he sees Tina Fey , but it turns out to be a random person . Unbeknownst to Michael , Conan O 'Brien walks past him . Near the end of the episode , Michael is posing in front of a Broadway sign for Fiddler on the Roof , and he says " Oy , vey ! <unk> ! " in a Yiddish accent . Michael 's " Faces of Scranton " video plays over " With or Without You " by the Irish rock band U2 . Michael later quotes a line from the 1980 comedy film Airplane ! when he talks to Jan : " Don 't call me Shirley " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Valentine 's Day " originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 9 , 2006 . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 95 million viewers . This marked a dramatic improvement from the previous episode " Boys and Girls " , which was viewed by only 5 @.@ 42 million viewers . 
 " Valentine 's Day " received mostly positive reviews . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad wrote that " The Office continues to deliver outstanding episodes week after week . " Sciannamea went on to say that the episode was " one of their best " and that it left him " wanting more " . " M. Giant " of Television Without Pity graded the episode with a " A " . Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict was pleased with the entry and awarded it an " A – " . He named the highlight of the episode " Michael 's overwrought ' The Faces of Scranton ' presentation played over U2 's ' With or Without You . ' " Betsy <unk> of DVD Journal called the episode " memorable " and noted that it illustrated Pam and Jim 's relationship ebb and flow . Francis <unk> of DVD Talk declared that Ryan 's statement about beginning to date Kelly before Valentine 's Day was " one of the funniest lines in the entire season . " 
 After the episode , fans wanted their own bobblehead dolls of Dwight . A petition was started to get NBC to sell them at their online store . NBC responded by creating an initial run of 4 @,@ 000 bobblehead dolls , which sold out almost immediately . The network decided to make more , and since then , the bobblehead has become the best @-@ selling merchandise on the NBC website , and has sold over 150 @,@ 000 units . 
 = Hale Barns = 
 Hale Barns is a village near Altrincham in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford , Greater Manchester , England . Historically part of Cheshire , Hale Barns lies about 12 miles ( 19 km ) south of Manchester city centre , 2 miles west of Manchester Airport and close to the River Bollin . At the 2001 census , the village had a population of 9 @,@ 143 , increasing to 9 @,@ 736 at the 2011 Census . 
 During the medieval period , Hale Barns was originally an outlying area of the township of Hale but the growth in prosperity of the area led Hale Barns to become established as a separate settlement . The village gets its name from the tithe barn that used to stand in Hale Barns . Before the industrial revolution , Hale Barns was an agricultural village , but since then evolved into a commuter settlement . Today the village is a rural place with ' The Square ' as its economic centre which is currently undergoing redevelopment . The Roman Catholic boys grammar school St Ambrose College is in Hale Barns . The village is also home to Ringway golf club . Cotteril Clough , in Hale Barns , is a Site of Special Scientific Interest for its ancient and diverse woodland where Ben Smith wandered as a child . 
 = = History = = 
 What were thought to be fragments of Roman pottery tiles were found in Hale Barns in the 1880s near the site of what is now St Ambrose College . The artefacts were lost before their antiquity could be confirmed , but led local historian W. Thompson <unk> to suggest there was probably a Roman villa in the area . 
 The first reference to Hale is contained within the Domesday Book , at the time ' Hale Barns ' was just an outlying hamlet contained within the manor of Hale . According to the Domesday Book , the manor of Hale was owned by a Saxon thegn Aelfward , who was replaced by the Norman , Hamon de Massey who also gained possession of Dunham and Bowdon and would remain barons of the area until the 14th century . The manor was considered prosperous in comparison to other manors in the north west of England . 
 The settlements of Hale and Hale Barns are closely linked ; what would later become Hale Barns spent most of the medieval period as an extension of the more dominant Hale . During this era the land around Hale and Hale Barns was used agriculturally because although the soil is poor draining , it is fertile . By the middle of the 15th century Hale Barns had established an identity completely separate from neighbouring Hale as demonstrated by the tithe barn which was established around this time . The tithe barn was for storing the tithes – a tenth of the farm 's produce which was to be given to the church . Such an establishment can be seen as a sign of the area 's prosperity . The original barn no longer survives but there is a drawing of it ( from 1844 ) . It is the source of the village 's name . The first explicit reference to the village of Hale Barns – rather than Hale – is in a document from 1616 . 
 The English Civil War affected all of England ; even families were split over Royalist or Parliamentarian loyalties . Little is recorded over the divisions within Hale Barns , but Hale and Hale Barns did emerge from the Civil War more or less untouched by events – though there was a heavy tax to pay to support the Parliamentarian army they avoided much of the requisitioning of supplies and animals for passing armies . None of the Royalists in Hale and Hale Barns had their lands confiscated or was forced to pay fines . 
 Having long been agricultural land , in the 18th century the town was divided up into five farms : Tanyard , Partington , Oakfield , Broadoak , and Elm . Hale Chapel was established in Hale Barns by Nonconformists in 1723 on what is now Chapel Lane . It underwent alterations around 1880 . The chapel is the earliest place of worship in either Hale or Hale Barns and is a Grade II * listed building , one of only nine in Trafford . It also houses an eighteenth @-@ century pulpit and nineteenth @-@ century stained glass . In 1740 , a school was founded by the Unitarian minister of Hale – a time when education was a rare commodity – and can be seen on a map of 1800 along with a tithe barn , two inns , five farms , four cottages , the school house and school rooms . 
 In the late 19th century a building called " Manor House " was built on the site of the old Tanyard farm , for the purpose of the owner 's retirement . In 2006 a timber @-@ framed barn built around 1701 – originally belonging to the Tanyard Farm and later converted to stables for Manor House – was torn down due to lack of funds to maintain the building . The Grade II listed building – known as " Manor House Stables " – was the last timber @-@ framed building in Hale Barns . 
 During the 20th century , urbanisation affected Hale Barns , turning the place from an agricultural village into the commuter settlement it is today , focused around ' The Square ' – a shopping precinct . Its main <unk> road – Hale Road – runs through the centre of Hale Barns and leads towards Manchester Airport and Wilmslow . 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Hale , which occurs throughout Britain , derives from the Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> meaning a nook or shelter , as supported by the surrounding area which has natural features that would provide shelter . The ' Barns ' element of Hale Barns comes from the Old Tithe Barn . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Hale Barns is part of Trafford Metropolitan Borough of Greater Manchester . Up until local government reforms in 1974 , Hale Barns formed part of the administrative county of Cheshire . The Hale Barns ward has three out of sixty @-@ three seats on Trafford Council , and at the 2012 local election all three seats were held by the Conservatives . Since 1997 , Hale Barns has formed part of the Altrincham and Sale West Constituency , before that it was encompassed by the Altrincham and Sale constituency . Since the formation of the Altrincham and Sale West constituency in 1997 it had been represented in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP , Graham Brady . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Hale Barns is located at 53 ° 22 ′ 3 @.@ 36 ″ N 2 ° 19 ′ 4 @.@ 8 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> , − 2 @.@ 318 ) , 12 miles ( 19 km ) to the south of Manchester city centre . It is just east of Hale and south east of Altrincham . The town is bounded by the River Bollin to the south , the M56 to the east and the residential areas of Altrincham to the west and Newhall Green to the north . The ward profile produced by Trafford MBC describes its location and economic nature as follows . 
 " Hale Barns lies at the southern tip of the Borough ( of Trafford ) ... The Ward contains a large amount of agricultural land including two private golf courses . There is also a number of private sports clubs within the Ward providing facilities for tennis , bowling and football . It is generally considered to be an affluent Ward in the top 10 % wealthiest areas in England . " 
 — Trafford MBC 2006 
 The climate of Hale Barns – and Greater Manchester as a whole – is generally temperate , with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom ; whereas annual rainfall and average amount of sunshine is slightly below the average for the UK . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the village of Hale Barns had a total population of 9 @,@ 143 and <unk> households . Of those households , 44 % were married couples living together , 5 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 6 % were lone parents . The town had a high percentage of households made up of married couples ( 44 % ) compared to the figure for the rest of Trafford ( 37 % ) and England ( also 37 % ) . The average household size was 2 @.@ 45 . For every 100 females , there were 93 @.@ 9 males . 
 The ethnicity of the Hale Barns is 91 @.@ 9 % white , 1 @.@ 1 % mixed race , 0 @.@ 4 % black , 5 @.@ 4 % non @-@ Chinese Asian , and 1 @.@ 2 % Chinese . The age distribution was 6 % aged 0 – 4 years , 15 % aged 5 – 15 years , 4 % aged 16 – 19 years , 27 % aged 20 – 44 years , 27 % aged 45 – 64 years and 22 % aged 65 years and over . The town had a high percentage of residents over 65 , compared with the national average of 16 % . 
 The Trafford MBC Ward Profile for the Hale Barns ward describes it as being 
 " Diverse in nature and home to a large Jewish and Muslim community groups . " 
 – Trafford MBC 2006 
 = = Religion = = 
 According to the 2001 census , the religious make up of Hale Barns is 70 @.@ 4 % Christian , 7 @.@ 9 % Jewish , 4 @.@ 1 % Muslim , 1 @.@ 5 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 3 % Buddhist and 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . 9 @.@ 5 % were recorded as having no religion , 0 @.@ 1 % had an alternative religion and 6 @.@ 2 % did not state their religion . Hale Barns is located in the Roman Catholic Diocese of <unk> and the Church of England Diocese of Chester . Places of worship include Holy Angels ' Church a large Roman Catholic Church linked to St Ambrose College which is situated in Wicker Lane at the junction with Hale Road at the western end of the village centre ; All Saints ' Church belongs to the Church of England and was built 1967 on the site . Hale and District Synagogue serves Hale and Hale Barns and is situated on Shay Lane in Hale Barns . It was rebuilt on its previous site in 2003 ; the modern structure has a synagogue , nursery , function suite and dedicated study room Beit <unk> . It is also the site of the South Manchester Mikveh with a utensil mikveh that is <unk> to the main mikveh building . 
 = = Education = = 
 Because of its small size , Hale Barns has few schools . Amongst them are St Ambrose College which provides education for 11- to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds and <unk> Primary . 
 Primary schools 
 <unk> Primary School is a co @-@ educational day school . It had 240 pupils in the 2011 / 12 school year . 
 Secondary schools 
 St. Ambrose College is a Catholic Boy 's Secondary School situated adjacent to Holy Angels Church and Hale Road , near the centre of Hale Barns village . The Christian Brothers came to England from Guernsey during the Second World War and remained to establish the college in 1946 . The college celebrated its 60th anniversary in 2006 . The school is a specialist Maths and Computing College . 
 In 2005 around 800 pupils attended the school . The College was awarded funding in the summer of 2006 for rebuilding on the current site as part of the Building Schools for the Future Programme . In 2006 , 98 @.@ 3 % of pupils achieved at least 5 A * -C grades at GCSE compared to an average of 66 @.@ 7 % for all secondary schools in Trafford and a national UK average of 61 @.@ 3 % ; 97 @.@ 5 % of its pupils gained at least 5 A * -C grades at GCSE including English and maths , ranking the school 4th out of Trafford 's 19 secondary schools . 
 In December 2012 , the college was implicated in a child sex abuse case involving teaching staff carrying out alleged acts of abuse both on and off school grounds , although no current staff are said to be involved . More than fifty former pupils contacted police , either as victims of , or witnesses to , sexual abuse . The alleged sexual abuse , including molestation of children while corporal punishment was administered , stemmed from 1962 onwards and continued over four decades . 
 = = Economy = = 
 According to Trafford MBC , Hale Barns is in the top 10 % wealthiest areas in England . At the 2001 UK census , the Hale Barns ward had a possible workforce of approximately 6 @,@ 449 people . The economic activity of residents in the Hale Barns electoral ward was 36 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 % in part @-@ time employment , 28 % self @-@ employed , 1 @.@ 5 % unemployed , 1 @.@ 7 % students with jobs , 4 @.@ 7 % students without jobs , 18 @.@ 7 % retired , 7 @.@ 3 % looking after home or family , 2 @.@ 6 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 2 % economically inactive for other reasons . Hale Barns has a very high rate of self @-@ employment ( 28 % ) compared with rest of Trafford ( 16 % ) and England ( 17 % ) . Hale Barns also has low rates of unemployment ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) compared with Trafford ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) and England ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) . The Office for National Statistics estimated that during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in Hale Barns was £ 660 ( £ 34 @,@ 320 per year ) . 
 According to the 2001 UK census , the industry of employment of residents in Hale Barns was 22 @.@ 9 % property and business services , 15 @.@ 7 % retail and wholesale , 12 @.@ 1 % health and social work , 11 @.@ 0 % manufacturing , 9 @.@ 4 % education , 6 @.@ 8 % transport and communications , 4 @.@ 7 % finance , 4 @.@ 5 % construction , 3 @.@ 9 % hotels and restaurants , 3 @.@ 2 % public administration and defence , 0 @.@ 6 % energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 5 % agriculture , and 4 @.@ 6 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the town 's relatively high percentage of workers in property and business services . 
 A shopping centre was built in Hale Barns in the 1960s called " The Square Shopping Centre " . The site was being considered for redevelopment and proposals were subjected to consultation in 2005 . In 2007 the Council and Developer participated in a Planning Inquiry after the council refused planning permission for the proposed redevelopment . However , in 2013 , the council agreed , and the new shopping Centre , containing a Booths and a Costa Coffee , is now open . 
 = = Leisure and Recreation = = 
 There are a number of private sports clubs within the Hale Barns providing facilities for tennis , bowling and football . This includes the home of Hale Barns Cricket Club . 
 Halecroft Park 
 Halecroft Park is near the centre of Hale Barns and was crowned North West region winner in the prestigious ' Britain 's Best Park ' competition . Designed by Edgar Wood , the ornamental gardens of Halecroft Park were created in 1891 as part of Halecroft House . The park was winner of the Green Flag Award 3 years running ( 2003 – 2006 ) for setting a standard for parks and green spaces in England and Wales . 
 The Tennis Club Hale Barns 
 Private members tennis club with 5 astroturf courts , one floodlit , established in 1924 at The Pavilion , Chapel Lane . 
 Ringway Golf Club 
 Covering 18 holes and 6 @,@ 482 yards , Ringway Golf Club was designed by Harry Colt in 1909 and further developed by James Braid . 
 Cotteril Clough 
 Cotteril Clough is a Site of Special Scientific Interest situated close to the River Bollin . It has been designated due to its ancient woodland which is among the most diverse in Greater Manchester . It is managed by the Cheshire Wildlife Trust . 
 = Goodrich Castle = 
 Goodrich Castle is a now ruinous Norman medieval castle situated to the north of the village of Goodrich in Herefordshire , England , controlling a key location between Monmouth and Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye . It was praised by William Wordsworth as the " noblest ruin in Herefordshire " and is considered by historian Adrian Pettifer to be the " most splendid in the county , and one of the best examples of English military architecture " . 
 Goodrich Castle was probably built by Godric of <unk> after the Norman invasion of England , initially as an earth and wooden fortification . In the middle of the 12th century the original castle was replaced with a stone keep , and was then expanded significantly during the late 13th century into a concentric structure combining luxurious living quarters with extensive defences . The success of Goodrich 's design influenced many other constructions across England over the following years . It became the seat of the powerful Talbot family before falling out of favour as a residence in late Tudor times . 
 Held first by Parliamentary and then Royalist forces in the English Civil War of the 1640s , Goodrich was finally successfully besieged by Colonel John Birch in 1646 with the help of the huge " Roaring Meg " mortar , resulting in the subsequent slighting of the castle and its descent into ruin . At the end of the 18th century , however , Goodrich became a noted picturesque ruin and the subject of many paintings and poems ; events at the castle provided the inspiration for Wordsworth 's famous 1798 poem " We are Seven " . By the 20th century the site was a well @-@ known tourist location , now owned by English Heritage and open to the public . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Goodrich Castle stands on a high rocky sandstone outcrop overlooking the River Wye . It commands a crossing of the river , known as <unk> or Walford , Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye , about 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) from Hereford and 6 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) from Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye . The castle guards the line of the former Roman road from Gloucester to Caerleon as it crosses from England into Wales . 
 At the heart of the castle is an early Norman square keep of light grey sandstone , with Norman windows and pilaster buttresses . Although the keep had thick walls , its relatively small size – the single chambers on each floor measure only 5 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 by 15 ft ) internally – would have made it more useful for defence than for day @-@ to @-@ day living . The keep originally had a first @-@ storey door for safety , this was later turned into a window and the entrance brought down to the ground floor . The keep would originally have had an earth mound built up against the base of it to protect against attack , and the stone work remains rougher in the first few courses of masonry . 
 Around the keep is an essentially square structure guarded by three large towers , all built during the 1280s from somewhat darker sandstone . On the more vulnerable southern and eastern sides of the castle , ditches 27 metres ( 90 ft ) long and 9 metres ( 28 ft ) deep have been cut into the rock , exploiting a natural fissure . These towers have large " spurs " , resulting from the interface of a solid , square @-@ based pyramid with the circular towers rising up against the walls . This feature is characteristic of castles in the Welsh Marches , including St Briavel 's and Tonbridge Castle , and was intended to prevent the undermining of the towers by attackers . 
 The castle 's fourth corner forms its gatehouse . Here the classic Edwardian gatehouse design has been transformed into an asymmetrical structure , with one tower much larger than the other . The gatehouse included portcullises , murder @-@ holes and a drawbridge . Beyond the gatehouse lies a large barbican , inspired by a similar design of the period at the Tower of London and possibly built by the same workmen , designed to protect the causeway leading to the gatehouse . The barbican today is only half of its original height , and includes its own gate , designed to trap intruders within the inner defences . The gatehouse and barbican are linked by a stone causeway . 
 The gatehouse 's eastwards @-@ facing tower contains the chapel , an unusual arrangement driven by a lack of space , with a recently restored east window of reset 15th @-@ century glass designed by Nicola Hopwood , which illuminates the priest 's seat , or <unk> . The 15th @-@ century window frame itself replaced an even taller , earlier 13th @-@ century window . The chapel 's west window is modern , and commemorates British servicemen who died between 1936 – 76 in radar development . The altar itself is particularly old , possibly pre @-@ dating the castle . 
 The bailey was designed to include a number of spacious domestic buildings . These include a great hall , a solarium , kitchen , buttery and pantry , with a luxuriously large number of <unk> and fireplaces . The large towers provided additional accommodation . The design of the domestic buildings was skilfully interlocked to support the defensive arrangements of the bailey . The great hall for example , 20 by 9 metres ( 66 by 30 ft ) , was placed in the strongest position overlooking the river Wye , allowing it to benefit from multiple large windows and a huge fireplace without sacrificing defensive strength . Water for the castle was originally raised from the courtyard well , but was later piped in from a spring across the valley ; the castle kitchens had acquired running water by the beginning of the 17th century . The design of the buildings ensured that the servants and nobility were able to live separately from one another in the confined space of the castle , revolutionary at the time . 
 Beyond the main bailey walls lies the stable block , now ruined but with a visible cobble floor . The stables and the north and west sides of the castle were protected by another , smaller curtain wall , but this is now largely ruined . Accounts suggest that the original stables could hold around 60 horses , although by the 17th century they had been expanded to accommodate more . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Medieval history = = = 
 = = = = 11th and 12th centuries = = = = 
 Goodrich Castle appears to have been in existence by 1101 , when it was known as Godric ’ s Castle , named probably after Godric of <unk> , a local Anglo @-@ Saxon thane and landowner mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086 . Victorian historians , however , believed the castle to date back further to the pre @-@ Norman conquest days of King Canute , and the site may have been among a small number of Saxon fortifications along the Welsh border . By Norman times , Goodrich formed part of the Welsh Marches , a sequence of territories granted to Norman nobles in , and alongside , Wales . Although Goodrich lay on the safer , English side of the border , the threat of raids and attacks continued throughout most of the period . 
 During the 12th century the attitudes of the English nobility towards the Welsh began to harden ; the policies of successive rulers , but especially Henry II , began to become more aggressive in the region . In the mid @-@ 12th century Godric 's original earth and timber fortification was dismantled and replaced by a tall but relatively small square keep built of stone , sometimes known as " Macbeth 's Tower " . The keep was designed to be secure and imposing but relatively cheap to build . It is uncertain , however , precisely who was responsible for this rebuilding or the date of the work , which may have been between 1120 and 1176 . 
 At the beginning of the 12th century , the castle had passed from Godric to William Fitz Baderon , thought to be his son @-@ in @-@ law , and on to his son , Baderon of Monmouth , in the 1120s . England descended into anarchy , however , during the 1130s as the rival factions of Stephen and his cousin the Empress Matilda vied for power . Baderon of Monmouth married Rohese de Clare , a member of the powerful de Clare family who usually supported Stephen , and there are records of Baderon having to seize Goodrich Castle during the fighting in the region , which was primarily held by supporters of Matilda . Some suspect that Baderon may have therefore built the stone keep in the early years of the conflict . Stephen went on , however , to appoint Baderon 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Gilbert de Claire , the Earl of Pembroke , and Gilbert de Clare eventually acquired Goodrich Castle himself . Gilbert 's son , Richard de Clare , known as " Strongbow " , succeeded him in 1148 , and Richard is another candidate for the construction of the keep . In 1154 Richard fell out of favour with King Henry II because of the de Clares ' support for Stephen , and the castle was taken into royal hands . Some argue that the king himself may have ordered the construction of the great keep . 
 = = = = 13th and 14th centuries = = = = 
 During the following reigns of King Richard I and his brother John , the castle and manor were held by the Crown . King John , however , lost many of his lands in France which in turn deprived key English nobles of their own estates – John became concerned about possible opposition to his rule . Accordingly , in 1203 John transferred Goodrich Castle and the surrounding manor to William Marshal , Earl of Pembroke , to partially compensate him for his lost lands on the continent . Marshal was a famous English knight with reputation as a heroic warrior , and he expanded Goodrich by building an additional towered curtain wall in stone , around the existing keep . Marshal had to intervene to protect Goodrich Castle from Welsh attack , most famously in 1216 when he was obliged to leave Henry III 's coronation feast in Gloucester to hurry back to Goodrich to reinforce the castle . 
 Marshal 's sons inherited the castle after their father 's death ; Marshal left the castle to his eldest son , William , who in turn gave it to his younger brother , Walter . After William 's death , however , Marshal 's second son , Richard , took over the castle . Richard led the baronial opposition to Henry III and allied himself with the Welsh , resulting in King Henry besieging Goodrich Castle in 1233 and retaking personal control for a period . Walter was eventually given Goodrich back once more , but died shortly afterwards in 1245 . 
 The castle briefly reverted to the Crown again , but in 1247 passed by marriage to William de Valence , half brother to Henry III . De Valence was a French nobleman from Poitiers and a noted soldier who spent most of his life fighting in military campaigns ; Henry arranged his marriage to Joan de <unk> , one of the heiresses to the Marshal estate . The marriage made Valence immensely rich and gave him the title of Earl of Pembroke . 
 The Welsh border situation remained unsettled however , and in the decades after 1250 security grew significantly worse , as the Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd conducted numerous raids into English territories . The Wye valley and Goodrich were particularly affected by these raids . 
 Accordingly , William de Valence began to build a much larger castle around the original keep from the 1280s onwards , demolishing Marshal 's earlier work . As part of the extremely expensive construction work , Valence used oak trees drawn from several royal forests . Valence was building at the same time that his nephew Edward I was constructing his major castles in the north of Wales , and the concentric castle that he built at Goodrich is both very similar in design and a rarity in England itself . Valence 's son , Aymer de Valence built an additional line of outer defences before his death in 1324 , including the external barbican , inspired by that at the Tower of London , and for which the earlier Valence barbican at Pembroke may have been an experimental forerunner . The effect was an early success in converting a fortress into a major dwelling , without damaging its defensive arrangements , and influenced the later castle conversion at Berkeley . 
 The castle then passed to Aymer 's niece , Elizabeth de Comyn , a well @-@ connected young noblewoman . By the middle of the 1320s , however , England was in the grip of the oppressive rule of the Marcher lords Hugh le Despenser the older and his son Hugh Despenser the younger , the royal favourites of King Edward II . As part of a " sweeping revenge " on their rivals , especially in the Marches , the Despensers illegally seized a wide range of properties , particularly from vulnerable targets such as widows , wives whose husbands were out of favour with the king or unmarried women . Upon her inheritance , Hugh le Despenser the younger promptly kidnapped Elizabeth in London and transported her to Herefordshire to be imprisoned in her own castle at Goodrich . Threatened with death , Elizabeth was finally forced to sign over the castle and other lands to the Despensers in April 1325 . Elizabeth then married Richard Talbot , the 2nd Baron Talbot , who seized back the castle in 1326 shortly before Queen Isabella of France landed in England and deposed both the Despensers and her husband Edward II ; Talbot and Elizabeth regained their legal title to the castle the following year . Richard later received permission from Isabella 's son Edward III to create a dungeon under the keep for holding prisoners . 
 = = = = 15th and 16th centuries = = = = 
 Goodrich remained the favourite home of the Richard Talbot 's descendants for many years . During the early years , the security situation in Wales remained of concern . Owain Glyndŵr rebelled against English rule in 1402 and Welsh forces invaded the Goodrich area in 1404 and 1405 . Gilbert Talbot was responsible for fighting back the Welsh advance and securing the castle . As time went on , however , the threat began to diminish . During the 15th century the Talbots considerably expanded the size of the lord 's quarters in the castle and provided additional accommodation for servants and retainers . 
 The Talbots became the Earls of Shrewsbury in 1442 , shortly before the Wars of the Roses in which they supported the Lancastrian faction . The wars meant that the Talbots were frequently fighting elsewhere in England , and often staying at their castle in Sheffield . John Talbot died in the Lancastrian defeat at Northampton in 1460 , and the castle was forfeited and transferred to the Yorkist William Herbert . John 's son , also called John Talbot , later made his peace with the king , however , and regained control of his lands and Goodrich Castle before his death in 1473 . 
 By the 16th century the castle was becoming less fashionable as a residence . Goodrich was too distant from London to be a useful power base , and was gradually abandoned in favour of more stylish residences , Goodrich continued to be used as a judicial centre however ; the antiquarian John Leland noted that some of the castle was used to hold prisoners for the local court during the 1530s , and the castle ditch was sometimes used to store confiscated cattle taken from local farmers . 
 In 1616 , Gilbert Talbot died with no male heir and Goodrich passed into the hands of Henry Grey , Earl of Kent . The Greys chose not to live at Goodrich , but instead rented the castle to a series of tenants . 
 = = = English Civil War = = = 
 Goodrich Castle became the scene of one of the most desperate sieges during the English Civil War in the 1640s , which saw the rival factions of Parliament and the king vie for power across England . In the years before the war , there had been a resurgence of building at the castle . Richard Tyler , a local lawyer , became the tenant and constable of the castle , and during the early 1630s there had been considerable renovation work . Shortly after the outbreak of war , the Earl of Stamford , with support from Tyler , garrisoned the castle for Parliament until December 1643 , when increasing Royalist pressure in the region forced his withdrawal to Gloucester . The castle was then occupied by a garrison led by the Royalist Sir Henry Lingen . The occupation was not peaceful , with Royalist troops burning surrounding farm buildings – Tyler himself was imprisoned by Lingen , although not before he had begun to sell off his livestock and other moveable property . Some references to Goodrich Castle during this period refer to it as <unk> Castle , a variant on the name Goodrich . 
 As the Royalist situation deteriorated , the south @-@ west became one of the few remaining Royalist strongholds . Lingen , with 200 men and 90 horses at Goodrich Castle , conducted raids on Parliamentary forces in the region , representing a continuing challenge . No action had been taken , however , to strengthen the castle 's defences with more modern 17th @-@ century earthworks , and the castle remained essentially in its medieval condition . 
 In 1646 , the Parliamentary Colonels John Birch and Robert Kyrle marched south from their successful Siege of Hereford and besieged the castle , with the aim of eliminating one of the few remaining Royalist strongholds . There was some personal animosity between Lingen and Birch , and both were outspoken , impulsive men . Birch 's first move was to prevent further attacks from Lingen , and on 9 March he burned the weakly defended stables in a surprise night attack , driving away the Royalist horses and temporarily denying the Royalist forces ' mobility . Birch was unable to press home his advantage however , and over the next few months Lingen succeeded in replacing some of his horses and resumed his attacks on Parliamentary forces . 
 In June , Birch returned and besieged the castle itself . He found that it was too strong to be taken by direct attack , and instead began laying down trenches to allow him to bring artillery to bear on the structure . Parliamentary attacks broke the pipe carrying water into the castle , and the cisterns in the courtyard were destroyed by exploding shells , forcing the garrison to depend on the older castle well . With the castle still holding out , Colonel Birch built an enormous mortar called " Roaring Meg " , able to fire a gunpowder @-@ filled shell 85 – 90 kilograms ( 187 – 198 lb ) in weight , in a local forge . 
 Birch concentrated his efforts on the north @-@ west tower , using his mortar against the masonry and undermining the foundations with his sappers . Lingen responded with a counter @-@ mine dug out under Parliament 's own tunnel . This would probably have succeeded , but Birch brought his mortar forward under the cover of darkness and launched a close @-@ range attack on the tower , which collapsed and buried Lingen 's counter @-@ mine . Down to their last four barrels of gunpowder and thirty barrels of beer , and with a direct assault now imminent , the Royalists surrendered . According to tradition , the garrison left to the tune of " Sir Henry Lingen 's Fancy " . 
 Despite the damage , Tyler was able to move back into his castle , which was now protected by a small Parliamentary garrison . After investigation by Parliamentary agents Brown and Selden , however , the castle was slighted the following year , which rendered it impossible to defend . The Countess of Kent , the new owner of the castle , was given £ 1 @,@ 000 in damages , but chose not to rebuild the fortification as it was by then virtually uninhabitable . 
 = = = 18th and 19th @-@ century history = = = 
 After the Civil War , Goodrich Castle remained with the Earls of Kent until 1740 , when it was sold by Henry Grey to Admiral Thomas Griffin . Griffin undertook some restoration of the castle but retained it as a ruin . 
 During the 1780s the concept of the picturesque ruin was popularised by the English clergyman William Gilpin . Goodrich Castle was one of the ruins he captured in his book Observations on the River Wye in 1782 , writing that the castle was an example of the " correctly picturesque " landscape . By this time , the castle was in a slow state of decay . Theodore Fielding , an early Victorian historian , noted how the " castle 's situation , far from human dwellings , and the stillness which that solitude , insures to its precinct , leaves contemplation to all the solemnity , that is inspired by the sight of grandeur sinking in dignity , into decay " . The Regency and Victorian watercolour artists David Cox and William Callow also captured Goodrich Castle and its landscape in paint , again invoking the picturesque , romantic mood of the setting at the time . 
 The castle was praised by William Wordsworth as the " noblest ruin in Herefordshire " . Wordsworth first visited Goodrich Castle in 1793 , and an encounter with a little girl he met while exploring the ruins led him to write the poem We are Seven in 1798 . Other poets from this period were also inspired by the castle , including Henry Neele in 1827 . 
 By the 1820s , visitors could purchase an early guidebook at the site outlining the castle 's history , and Victorian tourists recorded being charged six @-@ pence to wander around the castle . In the early 1820s , the antiquarian Sir Samuel Rush Meyrick attempted to purchase the site , with the aim of converting the castle back into a private dwelling , but was unable to convince the owners to sell . Instead , Meyrick built the neo @-@ gothic Goodrich Court in a similar style next door , which greatly displeased Wordsworth when he returned to Goodrich in 1841 and found the view spoilt by the new building . The new bridge over the river Wye , built in 1828 , and the 1873 railway line added to the number of visitors . 
 Goodrich Castle then passed through various hands , until in 1915 the Office of Works began discussions with its then owner , Mrs Edmund Bosanquet ; large @-@ scale collapses of parts of the north @-@ west tower and curtain wall in 1919 contributed to Bosanquet 's decision to grant the castle to the Commissioner of Works in 1920 . The Commissioners began a programme of repairs to stabilise the ruin in its current state . 
 = = Today = = 
 Today , the castle at Goodrich is considered by historians to be the " most splendid in the county , and one the best examples of English military architecture " . The castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a Scheduled Monument . 
 Substantial remains still exist and are open to the public , managed by English Heritage . The adjacent Victorian castle of Goodrich Court was demolished in 1949 , restoring the original landscape . The Roaring Meg mortar , preserved by Herefordshire Council , has been returned to the site , along with a number of civil war cannonballs found at Goodrich during excavations in the 1920s . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 Several legends surround the castle at Goodrich . The Great Keep has the alternative name of the " Macbeth tower " , after stories of an Irish chieftain held prisoner there . According to some tales , he died attempting to escape and his ghost is said to still haunt the tower . 
 The events of the English Civil War also have left their mark . Local stories tell that Colonel Birch 's niece , Alice Birch , fell in love with a handsome Royalist , Charles Clifford ; according to these stories the two attempted to escape before the final assault but died in a flash flood while trying to cross the River Wye , and live on as ghosts on the site . 
 = Nathaniel Parker Willis = 
 Nathaniel Parker Willis ( January 20 , 1806 – January 20 , 1867 ) , also known as N. P. Willis , was an American author , poet and editor who worked with several notable American writers including Edgar Allan Poe and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . He became the highest @-@ paid magazine writer of his day . For a time , he was the employer of former slave and future writer Harriet Jacobs . His brother was the composer Richard Storrs Willis and his sister Sara wrote under the name Fanny Fern . 
 Born in Portland , Maine , Willis came from a family of publishers . His grandfather Nathaniel Willis owned newspapers in Massachusetts and Virginia , and his father Nathaniel Willis was the founder of Youth 's Companion , the first newspaper specifically for children . Willis developed an interest in literature while attending Yale College and began publishing poetry . After graduation , he worked as an overseas correspondent for the New York Mirror . He eventually moved to New York and began to build his literary reputation . Working with multiple publications , he was earning about $ 100 per article and between $ 5 @,@ 000 and $ 10 @,@ 000 per year . In 1846 , he started his own publication , the Home Journal , which was eventually renamed Town & Country . Shortly after , Willis moved to a home on the Hudson River where he lived a semi @-@ retired life until his death in 1867 . 
 Willis embedded his own personality into his writing and addressed his readers personally , specifically in his travel writings , so that his reputation was built in part because of his character . Critics , including his sister in her novel Ruth Hall , occasionally described him as being effeminate and Europeanized . Willis also published several poems , tales , and a play . Despite his intense popularity for a time , at his death Willis was nearly forgotten . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Nathaniel Parker Willis was born on January 20 , 1806 , in Portland , Maine . His father Nathaniel Willis was a newspaper proprietor there and his grandfather owned newspapers in Boston , Massachusetts and western Virginia . His mother was Hannah Willis ( née Parker ) from <unk> , Massachusetts and it was her husband 's offer to edit the Eastern Argus in Maine that caused their move to Portland . Willis 's younger sister was Sara Willis Parton , who would later become a writer under the pseudonym Fanny Fern . His brother , Richard Storrs Willis , became a musician and music journalist known for writing the melody for " It Came Upon the Midnight Clear " . His other siblings were Lucy Douglas ( born 1804 ) , Louisa Harris ( 1807 ) , Julia Dean ( 1809 ) , Mary Perry ( 1813 ) , Edward Payson ( 1816 ) , and Ellen Holmes ( 1821 ) . 
 In 1816 , the family moved to Boston , where Willis 's father established the Boston Recorder and , nine years later , the Youth 's Companion , the world 's first newspaper for children . The elder Willis 's emphasis on religious themes earned him the nickname " Deacon " Willis . After attending a Boston grammar school and Phillips Academy at Andover , Nathaniel Parker Willis entered Yale College in October 1823 where he roomed with Horace Bushnell . Willis credited Bushnell with teaching him the proper technique for sharpening a razor by " drawing it from heel to point both ways ... the two cross frictions correct each other " . At Yale , he further developed an interest in literature , often neglecting his other studies . He graduated in 1827 and spent time touring parts of the United States and Canada . In Montreal , he met Chester Harding , with whom he would become a lifelong friend . Years later , Harding referred to Willis during this period as " the ' lion ' of the town " . Willis began publishing poetry in his father 's Boston Periodical , often using one of two literary personalities under the pen names " Roy " ( for religious subjects ) and " Cassius " ( for more secular topics ) . The same year , Willis published a volume of poetical Sketches . 
 = = = Literary career = = = 
 In the latter part of the 1820s , Willis began contributing more frequently to magazines and periodicals . In 1829 , he served as editor for the gift book The Token , making him the only person to be editor in the book 's 15 @-@ year history besides its founder , Samuel Griswold Goodrich . That year , Willis founded the American Monthly Magazine , which began publishing in April 1829 until it was discontinued in August 1831 . He blamed its failure on the " tight purses of Boston culture " and moved to Europe to serve as foreign editor and correspondent of the New York Mirror . In 1832 , while in Florence , Italy , he met Horatio Greenough , who sculpted a bust of the writer . Between 1832 and 1836 , Willis contributed a series of letters for the Mirror , about half of which were later collected as Pencillings by the Way , printed in London in 1835 . The romantic descriptions of scenes and modes of life in Europe sold well despite the then high price tag of $ 7 a copy . The work became popular and boosted Willis 's literary reputation enough that an American edition was soon issued . 
 Despite this popularity , he was censured by some critics for indiscretion in reporting private conversations . At one point he fought a bloodless duel with Captain Frederick Marryat , then editor of the Metropolitan Magazine , after Willis sent a private letter of Marryat 's to George Pope Morris , who had it printed . Still , in 1835 Willis was popular enough to introduce Henry Wadsworth Longfellow to important literary figures in England , including Ada Byron , daughter of Lord Byron . 
 While abroad , Willis wrote to a friend , " I should like to marry in England " . He soon married Mary Stace , daughter of General William Stace of Woolwich , on October 1 , 1835 , after a month @-@ long engagement . The couple took a two @-@ week honeymoon in Paris . The couple moved to London where , in 1836 , Willis met Charles Dickens , who was working for the Morning Chronicle at the time . 
 In 1837 , Willis and his wife returned to the United States and settled at a small estate on Owego Creek in New York , just above its junction with the Susquehanna River . He named the home <unk> and the 200 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 km2 ) rural setting inspired him to write Letters from under a Bridge . On October 20 , 1838 , Willis began a series of articles called " A New Series of Letters from London " , one of which suggested an illicit relationship between writer Letitia Elizabeth Landon and editor William Jordan . The article caused some scandal , for which Willis 's publisher had to apologize . 
 On June 20 , 1839 , Willis 's play <unk> , the <unk> premiered in Philadelphia at the Walnut Street Theatre . Edgar Allan Poe called it " by far the best play from the pen of an American author " . That year , he was also editor of the short @-@ lived periodical The Corsair , for which he enlisted William Makepeace Thackery to write short sketches of France . Another major work , Two Ways of Dying for a Husband , was published in England during a short visit there in 1839 – 1840 . Shortly after returning to the United States , his personal life was touched with grief when his first child was stillborn on December 4 , 1840 . He and Stace had a second daughter , Imogen , who was born June 20 , 1842 . 
 Later that year , Willis attended a ball in honor of Charles Dickens in New York . After dancing with Dickens 's wife , Willis and Dickens went out for " rum toddy and broiled oysters " . By this time , his fame had grown enough that he was often invited to lecture and recite poetry , including his presentation to the <unk> Society at Yale on August 17 , 1841 . Willis was invited to submit a column to the each weekly issue of Brother Johnathan , a publication from New York with 20 @,@ 000 subscribers , which he did until September 1841 . By 1842 , Willis was earning the unusually high salary of $ 4 @,@ 800 a year . As a later journalist remarked , this made Willis " the first magazine writer who was tolerably well paid " . 
 In 1842 , Willis employed Harriet Jacobs , an escaped slave from North Carolina , as a house servant and nanny . When her owners sought to have her returned to their plantation , Willis 's wife bought her freedom for $ 300 . Nearly two decades later , Jacobs would write in her fictionalized autobiography Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl , which she began composing while working for the Willis family , that she " was convinced that ... Nathaniel Parker Willis was proslavery " . Willis is depicted as " Mr. Bruce " , an unattractive Southern sympathizer in the book . One of Willis 's tales , " The Night Funeral of a Slave " , featured an abolitionist who visits the South and regrets his anti @-@ slavery views ; Frederick Douglass later used the work to criticize Northerners who were pro @-@ slavery . 
 = = = Evening Mirror = = = 
 Returning to New York City , Willis reorganized , along with George Pope Morris , the weekly New York Mirror as the daily Evening Mirror in 1844 with a weekly supplement called the Weekly Mirror , in part due to the rising cost of postage . By this time , Willis was a popular writer ( a joke was that Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was Germany 's version of N. P. Willis ) and one of the first commercially successful magazine writers in America . In the fall of that year , he also became the first editor of the annual gift book The Opal founded by Rufus Wilmot Griswold . During this time , he became the highest @-@ paid magazine writer in America , earning about $ 100 per article and $ 5 @,@ 000 per year , a number which would soon double . Even the popular poet Longfellow admitted his jealousy of Willis 's salary . 
 As a critic , Willis did not believe in including discussions of personalities of writers when reviewing their works . He also believed that , though publications should discuss political topics , they should not express party opinions or choose sides . The Mirror flourished at a time when many publications were discontinuing . Its success was due to the shrewd management of Willis and Morris and the two demonstrated that the American public could support literary endeavors . Willis was becoming an expert in American literature and so , in 1845 , Willis and Morris issued an anthology , The Prose and Poetry of America . 
 While Willis was editor of the Evening Mirror , its issue for January 29 , 1845 , included the first printing of Poe 's poem " The Raven " with his name attached . In his introduction , Willis called it " unsurpassed in English poetry for subtle conception , masterly ingenuity of versification , and consistent , sustaining of imaginative lift ... It will stick to the memory of everybody who reads it " . Willis and Poe were close friends , and Willis helped Poe financially during his wife Virginia 's illness and while Poe was suing Thomas Dunn English for libel . Willis often tried to persuade Poe to be less destructive in his criticism and concentrate on his poetry . Even so , Willis published many pieces of what would later be referred to as " The Longfellow War " , a literary battle between Poe and the supporters of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , whom Poe called overrated and guilty of plagiarism . Willis also introduced Poe to Fanny Osgood ; the two would later carry out a very public literary flirtation . 
 Willis 's wife Mary Stace died in childbirth on March 25 , 1845 . Their daughter , Blanche , died as well and Willis wrote in his notebook that she was " an angel without fault or foible " . He brought his surviving daughter Imogen to England to be with her mother 's family and left her behind when he returned to the United States . In October 1846 , he married Cornelia Grinnell , a wealthy Quaker from New Bedford and the adopted daughter of a local Congressman . She was two decades younger than Willis at the time and vocally disliked slavery , unlike her new husband . After the marriage , Willis 's daughter Imogen came to live with the newlyweds in New York . 
 = = = Home Journal = = = 
 In 1846 , Willis and Morris left the Evening Mirror and attempted to edit a new weekly , the National Press , which was renamed the Home Journal after eight months . Their prospectus for the publication , published November 21 , 1846 , announced their intentions to create a magazine " to circle around the family table " . Willis intended the magazine for the middle and lower classes and included the message of upward social mobility , using himself as an example , often describing in detail his personal possessions . When discussing his own social climbing , however , he emphasized his frustrations rather than his successes , endearing him to his audience . He edited the Home Journal until his death in 1867 . It was renamed Town & Country in 1901 , and it is still published under that title as of 2011 . During Willis 's time at the journal , he especially promoted the works of women poets , including Frances Sargent Osgood , Anne Lynch Botta , Grace Greenwood , and Julia Ward Howe . Willis and his editors favorably reviewed many works now considered important today , including Henry David Thoreau 's Walden and Nathaniel Hawthorne 's The Blithedale Romance . 
 = = = Idlewild = = = 
 In 1846 , Willis settled near the banks of Canterbury Creek near the Hudson River in New York and named his new home Idlewild . When Willis first visited the property , the owners said it had little value and that it was " an idle wild of which nothing could ever be made " . He built a fourteen @-@ room " cottage " , as he called it , at the edge of a plateau by <unk> Creek next to a sudden 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) drop into a gorge . Willis worked closely with the architect , Calvert Vaux , to carefully plan each gable and piazza to fully take advantage of the dramatic view of the river and mountains . 
 Because of failing health Willis spent the remainder of his life chiefly in retirement at Idlewild . His wife Cornelia was also recovering from a difficult illness after the birth of their first child together , a son named Grinnell , who was born April 28 , 1848 . They had four other children : Lilian ( born April 27 , 1850 ) , Edith ( born September 28 , 1853 ) , Bailey ( born May 31 , 1857 ) , and a daughter that died only a few minutes after her birth on October 31 , 1860 . Harriet Jacobs was re @-@ hired by Willis to work for the family . 
 During these last years at Idlewild , Willis continued contributing a weekly letter to the Home Journal . In 1850 he assisted Rufus Wilmot Griswold in preparing an anthology of the works of Poe , who had died mysteriously the year before . Griswold also wrote the first biography of Poe in which he purposely set out to ruin the dead author 's reputation . Willis was one of the most vocal of Poe 's defenders , writing at one point : " The indictment ( for it deserves no other name ) is not true . It is full of cruel misrepresentations . It deepens the shadows unto unnatural darkness , and shuts out the rays of <unk> that ought to relieve them " . 
 Willis was involved in the 1850 divorce suit between the actor Edwin Forrest and his wife Catherine Norton Sinclair Forrest . In January 1849 , Forrest had found a love letter to his wife from fellow actor George W. Jamieson . As a result , he and Catherine separated in April 1849 . He moved to Philadelphia and filed for divorce in February 1850 though the Pennsylvania legislature denied his application . Catharine went to live with the family of Parke Godwin and the separation became a public affair , with newspapers throughout New York reporting on supposed infidelities and other gossip . 
 Willis defended Catharine , who maintained her innocence , in the Home Journal and suggested that Forrest was merely jealous of her intellectual superiority . On June 17 , 1850 , shortly after Forrest had filed for divorce in the New York Supreme Court , Forrest beat Willis with a gutta @-@ percha whip in New York 's Washington Square , shouting " this man is the seducer of my wife " . Willis , who was recovering from a rheumatic fever at the time , was unable to fight back . His wife soon received an anonymous letter with an accusation that Willis was in an adulterous relationship with Catherine Forrest . Willis later sued Forrest for assault and , by March 1852 , was awarded $ 2 @,@ 500 plus court costs . Throughout the Forrest divorce case , which lasted six weeks , several witnesses made additional claims that Catherine Forrest and Nathaniel Parker Willis were having an affair , including a waiter who claimed he had seen the couple " lying on each other " . As the press reported , " thousands and thousands of the anxious public " awaited the court 's verdict ; ultimately , the court sided with Catherine Forrest and Willis 's name was cleared . 
 = = = Ruth Hall = = = 
 Willis arbitrarily refused to print the work of his sister Sara Willis ( " Fanny Fern " ) after 1854 , though she previously had contributed anonymous book reviews to the Home Journal . She had recently been widowed , became destitute , and was publicly denounced by her abusive second husband . Criticizing what he perceived as her restlessness , Willis once made her the subject of his poem " To My Wild Sis " . As Fanny Fern , she had published Fern Leaves , which sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies the year before . Willis , however , did not encourage his sister 's writings . " You overstrain the pathetic , and your humor runs into dreadful vulgarity sometimes ... I am sorry that any editor knows that a sister of mine wrote some of these which you sent me " , he wrote . In 1854 she published Ruth Hall , a Domestic Tale of the Present Time , a barely concealed semi @-@ autobiographical account of her own difficulties in the literary world . Nathaniel Willis was represented as " Hyacinth Ellet " , an effeminate , self @-@ serving editor who schemes to ruin his sister 's prospects as a writer . Willis did not publicly protest but in private he asserted that , despite his fictitious equivalent , he had done his best to support his sister during her difficult times , especially after the death of her first husband . 
 Among his later works , following in his traditional sketches about his life and people he has met , were Hurry @-@ Graphs ( 1851 ) , Out @-@ Doors at Idlewild ( 1854 ) , and <unk> ( 1855 ) . Willis had complained that his magazine writing prevented him from writing a longer work . He finally had the time in 1856 , and he wrote his only novel , Paul Fane , which was published a year later . The character Bosh <unk> , who served as comic relief in the novel , may have been based on painter Chester Harding . His final work was The Convalescent ( 1859 ) , which included a chapter on his time spent with Washington Irving at Sunnyside . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 In July 1860 , Willis took his last major trip . Along with his wife , he stopped in Chicago and Yellow Springs , Ohio , as far west as Madison , Wisconsin , and also took a steamboat down the Mississippi River to St. Louis , Missouri , and returned through Cincinnati , Ohio and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . In 1861 , Willis allowed the Home Journal to break its pledge to avoid taking sides in political discussions when the Confederate States of America was established , calling the move a purposeful act to bring on war . On May 28 , 1861 , Willis was part of a committee of literary figures — including William Cullen Bryant , Charles Anderson Dana , and Horace Greeley — to invite Edward Everett to speak in New York on behalf of maintaining the Union . The Home Journal lost many subscribers during the American Civil War , Morris died in 1864 , and the Willis family had to take in boarders and for a time turned Idlewild into a girls ' school for income . 
 Willis was very sick in these final years : he suffered from violent epileptic seizures and , early in November 1866 , fainted in the streets , prompting Harriet Jacobs to return to help his wife . Willis died on his sixty @-@ first birthday , January 20 , 1867 , and was buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Four days later , the day of his funeral , all bookstores in the city were closed as a token of respect . His pallbearers included Longfellow , James Russell Lowell , Oliver Wendell Holmes , Samuel Gridley Howe , and James Thomas Fields . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Throughout his literary career , Willis was well liked and known for his good nature amongst friends . Well traveled and clever , he had a striking appearance at six feet tall and was typically dressed elegantly . Many , however , remarked that Willis was effeminate , Europeanized , and guilty of " Miss <unk> " . One editor called him " an impersonal passive verb — a pronoun of the feminine gender " . A contemporary caricature depicted him wearing a fashionable beaver hat and tightly closed coat and carrying a cane , reflecting Willis 's wide reputation as a " dandy " . Willis put considerable effort into his appearance and his fashion sense , presenting himself as a member of an upcoming American aristocracy . As Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. once said , Willis was " something between a remembrance of Count D 'Orsay and an anticipation of Oscar Wilde " . Publisher Charles Frederick Briggs once wrote that " Willis was too <unk> " . He described his writings as the " novelty and gossip of the hour " and was not necessarily concerned about facts but with the " material of conversation and speculation , which may be mere rumor , may be the truth " . Willis 's behavior in social groups annoyed fellow poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . " He is too artificial " , Longfellow wrote to his friend George Washington Greene . " And his poetry has now lost one of its greatest charms for me — its sincerity " . E. Burke Fisher , a journalist in Pittsburgh , wrote that " Willis is a kind of national pet and we must regard his faults as we do those of a spoiled stripling , in the hope that he will amend " . 
 Willis built up his reputation in the public at a time when readers were interested in the personal lives of writers . In his writings , he described the " high life " of the " Upper Ten Thousand " , a phrase he coined . His travel writings in particular were popular for this reason as Willis was actually living the life he was describing and recommending to readers . Even so , he manufactured a humble and modest persona , questioned his own literary merit , and purposely used titles , such as Pencillings by the Way and Dashes at Life With Free Pencil , which downplayed their own quality . His informally toned editorials , which covered a variety of topics , were also very successful . Using whimsicality and humor , he was purposely informal to allow his personality to show in his writing . He addressed his readers personally , as if having a private conversation with them . As he once wrote : " We would have you ... indulge us in our innocent egotism as if it were all whispered in your private ear and over our iced Margaux " . When women poets were becoming popular in the 1850s , he emulated their style and focused on sentimental and moral subjects . 
 In the publishing world , Willis was known as a shrewd <unk> and an innovator who focused on appealing to readers ' special interests while still recognizing new talent . In fact , Willis became the standard by which other <unk> were judged . According to writer George William Curtis , " His <unk> [ sic ] and his graceful fluency made him the first of our proper ' <unk> ' " . For a time , it was said that Willis was the " most @-@ talked @-@ about author " in the United States . Poe questioned Willis 's fame , however . " Willis is no genius – a graceful trifler – no more " , he wrote in a letter to James Russell Lowell . " In me , at least , he never excites an emotion . " Minor Southern writer Joseph Beckham Cobb wrote : " No sane person , we are persuaded , can read his poetry " . Future senator Charles Sumner reported : " I find Willis is much laughed at for his sketches " . Even so , most contemporaries recognized how prolific he was as a writer and how much time he put into all of his writings . James Parton said of him : 
 Of all the literary men whom I have ever known , N. P. Willis was the one who took the most pains with his work . It was no very uncommon thing for him to toil over a sentence for an hour ; and I knew him one evening to write and rewrite a sentence for two hours before he had got it to his mind . 
 By 1850 and with the publication of Hurry @-@ Graphs , Willis was becoming a forgotten celebrity . In August 1853 , future President James A. Garfield discussed Willis 's declining popularity in his diary : " Willis is said to be a licentious man , although an unrivaled poet . How strange that such men should go to ruin , when they might soar perpetually in the heaven of heavens " . After Willis 's death , obituaries reported that he had outlived his fame . One remarked , " the man who withdraws from the whirling currents of active life is speedily forgotten " . This obituary also stated that Americans " will ever remember and cherish Nathaniel P. Willis as one worthy to stand with Fenimore Cooper and Washington Irving " . In 1946 , the centennial issue of Town & Country reported that Willis " led a generation of Americans through a gate where weeds gave way to horticulture " . More modern scholars have dismissed Willis 's work as " sentimental prattle " or refer to him only as an obstacle in the progress of his sister as well as Harriet Jacobs . As biographer Thomas N. Baker wrote , Willis is today only referred to as a footnote in relation to other authors . 
 = = Selected list of works = = 
 Prose 
 Sketches ( 1827 ) 
 Pencillings by the Way ( 1835 ) 
 Inklings of Adventure ( 1836 ) 
 À l <unk> ; or , The Tent Pitched ( 1839 ) 
 <unk> of Travel ( 1840 ) 
 The Romance of Travel ( 1840 ) 
 American Scenery ( 2 volumes 1840 ) 
 Canadian Scenery ( 2 volumes 1842 ) 
 Dashes at Life with a Free Pencil ( 1845 ) 
 Rural Letters and Other Records of Thoughts at Leisure ( 1849 ) 
 People I Have Met ( 1850 ) 
 Life Here and There ( 1850 ) 
 Hurry @-@ Graphs ( 1851 ) 
 Summer Cruise in the Mediterranean ( 1853 ) 
 Fun Jottings ; or , Laughs I have taken a Pen to ( 1853 ) 
 Health Trip to the Tropics ( 1854 ) 
 Ephemera ( 1854 ) 
 Famous Persons and Places ( 1854 ) 
 Out @-@ Doors at Idlewild ; or , The Shaping of a Home on the Banks of the Hudson ( 1855 ) 
 The Rag Bag . A Collection of Ephemera ( 1855 ) 
 Paul Fane ; or , Parts of a Life Else Untold . A Novel ( 1857 ) 
 The Convalescent ( 1859 ) 
 Plays 
 Bianca Visconti ; or , The Heart <unk> . A Tragedy in Five Acts ( 1839 ) 
 <unk> ; or , The <unk> Matched ( 1839 ) 
 Poetry 
 Fugitive Poetry ( 1829 ) 
 Melanie and Other Poems ( 1831 ) 
 The Sacred Poems of N. P. Willis ( 1843 ) 
 Poems of Passion ( 1843 ) 
 Lady Jane and Humorous Poems ( 1844 ) 
 The Poems , Sacred , Passionate , and Humorous ( 1868 ) 
 = Bobby Bauer = 
 Robert Theodore " Bobby " Bauer ( February 16 , 1915 – September 16 , 1964 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey right winger who played 10 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Boston Bruins . He was a member of the famed " Kraut Line " with teammates Milt Schmidt and Woody Dumart . The trio led the Bruins to two Stanley Cup championships and became the first line to finish first , second and third in NHL scoring , in 1939 – 40 . Bauer was named to the All @-@ Star Team four times and was a three @-@ time winner of the Lady Byng Trophy , awarded for gentlemanly conduct combined with a high calibre of play . He recorded only 36 penalties in minutes in 327 games . 
 Prior to his NHL career , Bauer won the Memorial Cup with the St. Michael 's Majors in 1934 as junior champions of Canada . He joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1942 and won the Allan Cup with the Ottawa RCAF Flyers as senior champions that year . Bauer turned to coaching following his NHL career and guided the Kitchener @-@ Waterloo Dutchmen to two Allan Cup championships . The Dutchmen were sent to represent Canada at the 1956 Winter Olympics where Bauer coached the team to a bronze medal . He also coached the Canadian entry at the 1960 Winter Olympics that won a silver medal . Bauer assisted his brother David in creating the Canadian national hockey team in the 1960s . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1996 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bauer was born on February 16 , 1915 , in Waterloo , Ontario . He was the second of 11 children to Edgar and Alice Bauer ; His elder brother Frank was later Mayor of Waterloo and he had nine younger siblings : Eugene , Jerome , Alice , David , Raymond , Mary , Rita , Therese and Margaret . Edgar was a Knight of the Order of St. Sylvester , Waterloo city councilor and executive in the Bauer family 's automotive parts business . 
 The Bauer children learned to play hockey in a backyard rink , and Bobby grew up playing youth hockey in Kitchener – Waterloo before moving to Toronto in 1930 where he attended St. Michael 's College and played junior first with the St. Michael 's Buzzers in 1930 – 31 followed by three years with the St. Michael 's Majors . In 1933 – 34 , Bauer recorded 15 points in 13 Memorial Cup playoff games to help the Majors capture the Dominion junior championship . Bauer played his final year of junior in 1934 – 35 with the Kitchener <unk> where he first played with Milt Schmidt and Woody Dumart , who was then a defenceman . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 All three players were signed by the Boston Bruins , and Bauer was assigned to the Boston Cubs of the Canadian @-@ American Hockey League ( CAHL ) for the 1935 – 36 season . He scored 15 goals for the Cubs in 48 games , then was promoted to the Providence Reds of the International @-@ American Hockey League ( IAHL ) in 1936 – 37 . It was with the Reds that Bauer as right wing , Schmidt at centre and Dumart , who moved up to left wing , were first placed together as a line . Owing to their shared German heritage , the trio were initially called the " <unk> " by Providence coach Albert Leduc , though the name was shortened and they were known as the " Kraut Line " for the majority of their careers . Following a season in which Bauer recorded 18 points in 44 games with the Reds , the Bruins recalled him to Boston for the team 's final game of the regular season . He made his NHL debut on March 21 , 1937 , and scored his first goal in a 6 – 1 victory over the Chicago Black Hawks . 
 The Kraut Line earned full @-@ time spots in Boston beginning in 1937 – 38 ; Bauer recorded a team @-@ leading 20 goals in his rookie season as the trio led the Bruins to the team 's first of four consecutive Prince of Wales Trophy wins as the NHL 's best team in the regular season . Following a 31 @-@ point regular season in 1938 – 39 , Bauer added five points in 12 playoff games and was named to the NHL 's second All @-@ Star Team . The Bruins eliminated the New York Rangers , then defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs four games to one to capture Boston 's first Stanley Cup championship in ten years . In 1939 – 40 , Schmidt led the NHL in points with 52 while Dumart and Bauer finished second and third respectively with 43 each . It was the first time in league history that three linemates finished in the top three spots in NHL scoring . Bauer was again named a second team All @-@ Star , and with only two penalties in minutes ( PIM ) , won the Lady Byng Trophy for the first time . 
 A 39 @-@ point season in 1940 – 41 with only two PIM earned Bauer his third consecutive appearance on the All @-@ Star Team and a second Lady Byng Trophy . In the playoffs , the Bruins reached the 1941 Stanley Cup Finals where they defeated the Detroit Red Wings in four straight games . Bauer scored the Stanley Cup winning goal midway through the second period of a 3 – 1 victory in the deciding game . Following the outbreak of the Second World War , all three members of the Kraut Line enlisted with the Canadian military by signing up for home defence . At the same time , anti @-@ German sentiment led to efforts to change the trio 's nickname . They were briefly called the " Buddy Line " and the " Kitchener Kids " , though they were again referred to as the Kraut Line following the war . 
 The trio were called to active duty in January 1942 , forcing them to leave the Bruins midway through the 1941 – 42 season . In their final game with the Bruins , the Kraut Line recorded eight points in a dominating victory over the Montreal Canadiens . Following the contest , players from both teams fêted the trio , hoisting them up on their shoulders and parading them around the ice . Bauer was overwhelmed by the moment : " The ovation , at the height of my youth , sort of grabbed me . " Schmidt , Dumart and Bauer were the first NHL players to join the Royal Canadian Air Force , and while training in Ottawa , they joined the Ottawa RCAF Flyers of the Quebec Senior Hockey League ( QSHL ) . The trio helped the Flyers win the Allan Cup as Canadian senior champions . Bauer was sent to Halifax to continue his training and played with the Dartmouth RCAF team in 1942 – 43 . Bauer , who served as a radio technician , was dispatched to the United Kingdom where he , Schmidt and Dumart were members of a bomber squadron . However , he was returned to Canada in 1944 after being ruled invalid due to a bout of sciatica caused by an old hockey injury . He played with a team in Toronto until the war 's conclusion . 
 Returning to the Bruins for the 1945 – 46 NHL season , Bauer was reunited with his Kraut Line teammates . Unlike many players who had left for the war , he remained in peak form . However , after scoring 22 points that season , Bauer contemplated retirement . He chose to return for one additional season and was named the Bruins captain for 1946 – 47 . Bauer had his best year in the NHL : he recorded a team @-@ leading 30 goals and finished seventh overall in league scoring with 54 points . He was named to a fourth All @-@ Star Team and won the Lady Byng Trophy for the third time . Following the season , he announced his retirement . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Returning to Kitchener , Bauer joined his father @-@ in @-@ law 's hockey equipment business . He also began his coaching career with the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) ' s Guelph Biltmore Mad Hatters and , late in the 1947 – 48 season , joined the Kitchener @-@ Waterloo Dutchmen in the OHA senior division . After recording 15 points in eight games , Bauer scored 38 and 24 points in the following two seasons and helped the Dutchmen reach the OHA finals in three consecutive years between 1948 and 1950 . He again retired as a player in 1950 , but came back in 1951 – 52 for a final season with Kitchener @-@ Waterloo . Late in the season , he also played in one final game with the Bruins . The team was celebrating " Milt Schmidt @-@ Woody Dumart appreciation night " and convinced Bauer to come out of retirement to reunite the Kraut Line for one game on March 18 , 1952 . The trio were presented gifts in honour of their service to the team and sport . In the contest itself , Bauer scored one goal in a 4 – 0 victory over Toronto and assisted ( along with Dumart ) on Schmidt 's 200th career goal – at the time a rare feat ; Schmidt was one of only five active players at that point to have reached the mark . 
 Ending his playing career , Bauer became coach , general manager and president of the Dutchmen in 1952 . He coached the team to two OHA senior championships and Allan Cup victories : 1952 – 53 and 1954 – 55 . As the top senior team in the nation , the Dutchmen were sent to Italy to represent Canada at the 1956 Winter Olympics . Bauer was pleased with the way his team adapted to European rules and the Dutchmen were expected to bring home the gold medal . However , the team was shocked by the American entry , a 4 – 1 loss . Though they still had a chance at gold due to the round robin format of the tournament , the Dutchmen were defeated by the Soviet Union – at the time a relatively unknown and emerging hockey power – by a 2 – 0 score despite outshooting the Soviets 23 – 9 . Canada was relegated to the bronze medal , at the time the worst finish in the nation 's Olympic hockey history . 
 Bauer retired as a coach following the Olympics . However , the Dutchmen , augmented by players loaned from other teams , were again sent to represent Canada at the 1960 Winter Olympics . The team 's coach , Bill Durnan resigned following a six @-@ game losing streak , and after several other candidates were unable to take the necessary time off to coach the squad at the tournament , the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ( CAHA ) convinced Bauer to return . The Canadians lost only one game in the tournament , to the United States . The final game of the tournament had been scheduled between Canada and the Soviet Union as it was expected to be the gold medal match @-@ up . However the Americans won all of their games . Consequently , the match determined the silver medal , which Canada claimed with an 8 – 5 victory . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bauer partnered in a Guelph @-@ based electronics company and resided in Kingston with his wife Marguerite and sons Bobby Jr . , and Bradley . He also partnered with Woody Dumont in a stick manufacturing company and was a director of the Kitchener Rangers hockey club . His brother , Father David Bauer , convinced CAHA officials in 1962 to abandon the practice of sending a club team to represent Canada internationally in favour of building a true Canadian National Team . Bobby assisted his brother 's efforts in creating the team by sharing his coaching knowledge and helping to formulate how the team was to be formed . The first national team played at the 1964 Winter Olympics where it finished a controversial fourth . On September 16 , 1964 , Bauer suffered a heart attack while golfing and died at the age of 49 . He was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame by the veterans committee in 1996 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = North & South ( TV serial ) = 
 North & South is a British television drama serial , produced by the BBC and originally broadcast in four episodes on BBC One in November and December 2004 . It follows the story of Margaret Hale ( Daniela Denby @-@ Ashe ) , a young woman from southern England who has to move to the North after her father decides to leave the clergy . The family struggles to adjust itself to the industrial town 's customs , especially after meeting the Thorntons , a proud family of cotton mill owners who seem to despise their social inferiors . The story explores the issues of class and gender , as Margaret 's sympathy for the town mill workers clashes with her growing attraction to John Thornton ( Richard Armitage ) . 
 The serial is based on the 1855 Victorian novel North and South by Elizabeth Gaskell . It was adapted for television by Sandy Welch and directed by Brian Percival . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Margaret Hale ( Daniela Denby @-@ Ashe ) and her parents Maria ( Lesley Manville ) and Richard ( Tim Pigott @-@ Smith ) move to the ( fictional ) industrial town of Milton , <unk> , in the north of England because her father , a clergyman , decides to leave the Church of England and become a Nonconformist . Thanks to his friend , Mr. Bell ( Brian <unk> ) , he is able to find a house and gains employment as a private tutor . One of his pupils is local mill @-@ owner John Thornton ( Richard Armitage ) , who gets off to a bad start with Margaret when she witnesses him beating a worker whom he has caught smoking in the mill , thus endangering all the workers . Gradually , Margaret gets used to Thornton , but his mother Hannah ( Sinéad Cusack ) and sister Fanny ( Jo Joyner ) disapprove of her , believing her haughty and alien to the customs of the North . In the meantime , Margaret attempts to do charitable work among the working classes , and thus comes into contact with Nicholas Higgins ( Brendan Coyle ) and his daughter , Bessy ( Anna Maxwell Martin ) , who contracted <unk> from exposure to the cotton @-@ fibres in the mills . When Bessy became ill at <unk> 's Mill , her father moved her to Marlborough Mills , Thornton 's mill , because the working environment is better there . In a meeting with fellow mill owners , Thornton says he had a wheel for ventilation installed in all of the rooms of his factory , despite the fact that it costs a great deal of money . The other industrialists had refused to install a wheel because of the expense . 
 Margaret 's mother is falling ill . Mrs Hale desires to see her son Frederick ( Rupert Evans ) before she dies . Frederick , a naval officer was involved in a mutiny and he cannot return to England without risking his life . However , without telling her father , Margaret writes to her brother in Cádiz , Spain , to tell him that their mother is dying . Margaret calls on the Thorntons to borrow a water mattress for her mother and is trapped while mill workers riot during a strike . When the angry mob threatens John 's safety as he confronts them after Margaret 's goading , Margaret defends him from the rioters and is injured by a thrown stone . 
 Margaret recovers and returns home , telling nobody about what had happened at the Mill , mainly to protect the health of her mother . When Thornton proposes to her the next day , she scorns him , thinking he believes himself superior because of the difference in their financial circumstances . He denies this and tells her that he is in love with her , but she insists that her actions were not personal . 
 Meanwhile , Bessy Higgins dies and Thornton stops coming for lessons from Mr. Hale . As a distraction for Mrs. Hale and for herself , Margaret visits the Great Exhibition with her Aunt Shaw ( Jane Booker ) , her cousin Edith and Edith 's husband . Margaret meets Thornton at the exhibition , where he is discussing the machinery with a group of gentlemen , all of whom are listening with great respect and admiration for his simple good sense . Margaret is embarrassed to meet Thornton so soon after her rejection but defends him when Henry Lennox ( John Light ) , Edith 's brother @-@ in @-@ law and an admirer of Margaret , tries to belittle him for being in trade . Henry 's sophistication and reliance on fashionable wit and sarcasm compares unfavourably with Thornton 's honesty when Margaret sees them together . 
 When Margaret returns home , her mother has taken a turn for the worse . Margaret 's brother arrives just in time to see his mother on her death @-@ bed . While Frederick is in the house , Thornton comes to visit his friend Mr. Hale , but he cannot be allowed in , in case he sees Fred . Thornton interprets this as Margaret refusing to see him . The family 's servant , Dixon ( Pauline Quirke ) , sees a former member of Frederick 's crew in Milton town , and it is decided that Frederick must leave at once , before he is discovered and arrested . He and Margaret are seen together at the railway station by Thornton , who thinks Margaret has a lover . 
 Thornton gives employment to Higgins after Bessy 's death , and master and hand get along surprisingly well , despite their differences . They come up with a plan to feed the workers cheaply in a communal kitchen , and Thornton comes to a greater understanding with his workers as they share ideas . However , because of the strike , Thornton 's business is in trouble , and he is forced to close the mill . 
 Margaret 's father dies in Oxford and she leaves the north to stay with relatives in London , but her godfather , Mr Bell , makes over his fortune to her when he finds out that he has a terminal illness and chooses to move to Argentina for the better climate . Margaret becomes the owner of Marlborough Mills and John Thornton 's landlord . Thornton , having discovered the truth about Fred from Mr Higgins , goes south to see Margaret 's home town , and on the way back meets her returning from a visit to the north . She proposes a business deal by which the factory can be reopened ; after this the two share a kiss . Their final scene takes place on the railway station platform with both going " home " to Milton . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniela Denby @-@ Ashe – Margaret Hale 
 Richard Armitage – John Thornton 
 Tim Pigott @-@ Smith – Mr Richard Hale 
 Lesley Manville – Mrs Maria Hale 
 Sinéad Cusack – Mrs Hannah Thornton 
 Jo Joyner – Fanny Thornton 
 Brendan Coyle – Mr Nicholas Higgins 
 Anna Maxwell Martin – Bessy Higgins 
 Kay Lyon – Mary Higgins 
 Pauline Quirke – Dixon 
 Rupert Evans – Frederick Hale 
 Brian <unk> – Mr. Bell 
 John Light – Henry Lennox 
 Emma Ferguson – Edith Shaw Lennox 
 Jane Booker – Aunt Shaw 
 Will Houston – John Boucher 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Sandy Welch started adapting Elizabeth Gaskell 's 1855 North and South in 2001 , making a few changes to emphasise the industrial landscape of the story . Welch 's story , for example , begins and ends with the main character Margaret Hale travelling by train , which is not the starting and ending point of the novel ( although Gaskell describes the Hales travelling from the South to the North by train ) . Welch also made the main characters visit the Great Exhibition of 1851 . These are changes Welch believed Gaskell would have done " if she 'd had the time " , since Gaskell had complained of being under pressure to complete the novel by her editor Charles Dickens . In the summer of 2003 Kate Bartlett was brought to the project as a producer and a ten @-@ week period of pre @-@ production started at the beginning of February . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Daniela Denby @-@ Ashe had not originally auditioned for the role of Margaret Hale but for that of Fanny Thornton , and was not sure she would be participating on the project , but the producers had been looking for the right Margaret for a long time and Denby @-@ Ashe 's " directness , energy and charm " as well as the chemistry she had with would @-@ be co @-@ star Richard Armitage proved decisive . Armitage himself had been the first actor to read for the role of John Thornton and even though his performance had impressed producer Kate Bartlett and casting director Jill Trevellick , they still had to see many other possible Thorntons . Three weeks after casting had begun , Trevellick decided to recapitulate the first auditions , realising that Armitage was " perfect " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place from the end of April 2004 until July 2004 . Gaskell 's fictional town of Milton , <unk> , was loosely based on Manchester , but the producers decided to shoot many of the town scenes in Edinburgh , which maintains more of its visual and architectural heritage from the industrial Victorian era . Keighley in West Yorkshire became one of the main locations , the cotton mill 's exteriors were filmed at Dalton Mill . The scenes inside the mill were shot at <unk> Textile Museum in Rossendale and Queen Street Mill on the outskirts of Burnley , Lancashire . London was another main location , all the interior scenes were shot at the Ealing Studios in west London and the Great Exhibition scene was shot at Alexandra Palace in North London . Other locations were Selkirk , a town in the Scottish Borders , Burnley in Lancashire , and the Bluebell Railway in Sussex , where the final and the beginning scenes were shot . Additional railway sequences were filmed in Yorkshire , using carriages provided by the Vintage Carriages Trust 
 As a costume drama , North & South required substantial work from the art department . In 2005 the serial 's production designer Simon Elliot received a British Academy Television Award nomination for Best Production Design . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Martin Phipps composed the score for North & South . The short piano tune is played throughout the whole series in different rhythms . The music is especially loud and clear whenever there is a turning point in the relationship between Margaret and Thornton . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As the BBC had low expectations for the series , it was not well publicised and went almost unnoticed by critics . Audiences , however , were more receptive ; hours after the first episode aired in November 2004 , the message board of the programme ’ s website crashed because of the number of visitors the site was receiving , forcing host bbc.co.uk to shut it down . This sudden interest on the serial was attributed to Richard Armitage , a relatively unknown actor , whose portrayal of the emotionally restrained John Thornton drew parallels with Colin Firth 's portrayal of Fitzwilliam Darcy on the BBC 's 1995 mini @-@ series Pride and Prejudice , and the reception he later received . Armitage himself claims that the series was a success because of the " industrial landscape and the attention [ that the series gives ] to the working classes and the way they develop " . The reaction to the series was a surprise to the BBC , who then decided to release the DVD on 11 April 2005 . 
 North & South was voted " Best Drama " in the BBC drama website 's annual poll in 2004 . Richard Armitage was voted " Most Desirable Drama Star " and " Best Actor " , Daniela Denby @-@ Ashe was voted " Best Actress " ( Sinead Cusack came in third ) and three different scenes were voted as the year 's " Favourite Moments " , with the final scene winning the number one spot . 
 = Mary Bell ( aviator ) = 
 Mary Teston Luis Bell ( 3 December 1903 – 6 February 1979 ) was an Australian aviator and founding leader of the Women 's Air Training Corps ( WATC ) , a volunteer organisation that provided support to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . She also helped establish the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force ( WAAAF ) , the first and largest women 's wartime service in the country , which grew to number more than 18 @,@ 000 members by 1944 . Born Mary Fernandes in Tasmania , she married RAAF officer John Bell in 1923 and obtained a pilot 's licence in 1927 . Given temporary command of the WAAAF on its formation in 1941 , she was passed over as its inaugural Director in favour of corporate executive Clare Stevenson . Bell refused the post of Deputy Director and resigned , but subsequently rejoined and served until the final months of the war . She and her husband later became farmers . Nicknamed " Paddy " , Mary Bell died in 1979 at the age of seventy @-@ five . 
 = = Early life and WATC = = 
 Born on 3 December 1903 in Launceston , Tasmania , Mary Bell was the daughter of Rowland Walker Luis Fernandes , an English @-@ born clerk , and his wife Emma . She attended Church of England Girls ' Grammar School , Launceston and St Margaret 's School , Devonport , before commencing work in a solicitor 's office at the age of fourteen . She married John Bell ( 1889 – 1973 ) , a Royal Australian Air Force officer and World War I veteran of Gallipoli and the Australian Flying Corps , at St Andrew 's Anglican Church in Brighton , Victoria on 19 March 1923 . They had one daughter . 
 From 1925 until early 1928 , the Bells lived in Britain while John attended RAF Staff College , Andover and acted as RAAF liaison officer to the Royal Air Force . Interested in aviation since her teens , Mary learnt to fly in England and in April 1927 qualified for a Grade ' A ' private pilot 's licence . Returning to Australia , she was the first female to gain a pilot 's licence in Victoria , on 20 March 1928 . The following year , she became the first Australian woman to qualify as a ground engineer . 
 By 1939 , the Bells had moved to Brisbane , where John was Queensland manager for Airlines of Australia Ltd , having left the RAAF in 1929 . Mary became leader of forty or so members of the Women 's National Emergency Legion Air Wing who had volunteered to assist with aircraft maintenance during times of war . Determining that their objectives would not be met in their existing organisation , on 17 July they formed a new paramilitary group , the Women 's Air Training Corps ( WATC ) , and elected Bell its commander . She soon expanded the WATC into a national organisation , with Commandants leading each state 's chapter , and herself as Australian Commandant . Bell wrote to Air Vice Marshal Richard Williams , with whom she was acquainted via her husband and through aviation circles , advocating the establishment of a women 's branch of the RAAF similar to the RAF 's Women 's Auxiliary Air Force ( WAAF ) . Among other things , she pointed out that female volunteers such as hers were already supporting the Air Force in driving , nursing and clerical duties . The WATC was one of several women 's voluntary organisations whose members were keen to support the military , arguing that their personnel provided a ready @-@ made pool of skilled staff for auxiliary services , saving the government time and money training unskilled labour . 
 = = World War II and WAAAF = = 
 Australia having declared war on 3 September 1939 , the RAAF Air Board met in November to discuss Mary Bell 's letter , but postponed taking any further action . Bell continued to lobby , as did various women 's groups seeking to support the war effort and free male staff for overseas postings . In July 1940 , the new Chief of the Air Staff , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , invited her to produce a proposal for a women 's auxiliary , supervised by her husband John , who had rejoined the Air Force at the war 's outbreak and was now a wing commander in the Directorate of Organisation at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . Mary recommended forming the new service under the Air Force Act to permit women to enlist for the duration of the war under conditions similar to RAAF members , rather than enrolling on a short @-@ term contractual basis , a radical idea at the time which would not be put in place until 1943 . She also suggested a volunteer reserve or ' citizen ' force to augment the enlisted women , effectively the existing WATC , though this was seen as placing too much emphasis on her personal command . Various senior Air Force officers , including the recently promoted Air Marshal Williams , and the Director of Personnel Services , Group Captain Joe Hewitt , opposed a women 's service . Burnett , an RAF member who appreciated how the WAAF proved its worth during the Battle of Britain , championed its establishment as the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force ( WAAAF ) . 
 Bell was appointed to the RAAF 's Personnel Branch as Staff Officer ( Administrative ) with the probationary rank of section officer ( acting flight officer ) on 24 February 1941 , in order to " get the organisation going " . Formally established on 25 March , the WAAAF was the first uniformed women 's branch of an armed service in Australia , predating similar organisations in the Army and Navy . Bell led the WAAAF for the first three months of its existence , recruiting approximately two hundred women by June ; of the first six officers she appointed , five were former members of the WATC . On 21 May 1941 , Berlei corporate executive Clare Stevenson was appointed Director WAAAF with Bell as her Deputy Director , effective from 9 June . The Air Member for Personnel , Air Vice Marshal Henry Wrigley , chose Stevenson on the basis of her management background and because she was not a " socialite " . Notwithstanding her aviation experience and familiarity with the RAAF , he considered Bell to be " tangled up with the WATC " , where she " waved the flag and obtained a great deal of publicity for herself " . She may also have alienated Burnett by not including his daughter Sybil @-@ Jean , a founding member of the WAAF , among the initial intake of staff . 
 Bell chose to resign on learning of Stevenson 's appointment , rather than stay on and report to someone from outside the service fraternity ; she later rejoined at Wrigley 's request , on the condition that she received no promotion higher than flight officer . Two of her original officer appointees also resigned when Bell was passed over , later describing her as " a thorough and effective organiser " and the " obvious choice " as Director . After Bell returned to the WAAAF on 5 October 1942 , she served at RAAF Headquarters in various directorates , mainly that of Medical Services . Despite her recommendation in July 1940 that they be enlisted into the WAAAF as permanent staff , women were at first enrolled only for renewable twelve @-@ month contracts ; they did not become part of the Permanent Air Force , with the benefits that entailed , until 1943 . Pay was only ever two @-@ thirds that of male equivalents . The organisation nevertheless grew rapidly , peaking in strength at over 18 @,@ 600 members in October 1944 , or twelve per cent of all RAAF personnel . By the end of the war a total of 27 @,@ 000 women had served in the WAAAF , comprising over thirty @-@ one per cent of ground staff and filling sixty @-@ one trades , all previously occupied by men . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Ranked flight officer , Mary Bell was discharged from the WAAAF at her own request on 11 April 1945 . Her husband John was acting air commodore when he left the RAAF on 15 October that year . The WAAAF , first and largest of Australia 's wartime women 's services , was disbanded on 30 September 1946 . The Bells became farmers , first in Victoria and then in Tasmania , before retiring in 1968 . Survived by her daughter , Mary Bell died in Ulverstone , Tasmania on 6 February 1979 . She was buried at Mersey Vale Memorial Park cemetery in <unk> , near Devonport , beside her husband , who had died in 1973 . 
 = Indicud = 
 Indicud is the third studio album by American hip hop recording artist Kid Cudi . The album was released on April 12 , 2013 , by Republic Records . It was the first album of Cudi 's solo career to not be an installment of his Man on the Moon series . The album 's cover artwork was designed by Kid Cudi himself , who also served as an executive producer of Indicud . It was Cudi 's goal to make more uptempo and positive music with the album . He described it as a completely new format compared to his previous albums . 
 The album 's record production was handled entirely by Cudi as well , with only record producer Hit @-@ Boy co @-@ producing one track , while Cudi 's WZRD bandmate Dot da Genius , provided drums on two . The album features guest appearances from fellow American rappers King Chip , Kendrick Lamar , Too Short , RZA and ASAP Rocky as well as appearances from American singer @-@ songwriters Father John Misty and Michael Bolton along with indie rock band Haim . 
 During the early release of Indicud , it was preceded by four singles – " Just What I Am " featuring King Chip , " King Wizard " , " Immortal " and " Girls " featuring Too Short . Indicud debuted at number 2 in the United States . With sales of 139 @,@ 000 copies and debuted at number 32 on the UK Albums Chart , becoming Cudi 's highest @-@ charting album on the chart , while entering at number 2 on the UK R & B Chart . The album received generally mixed reviews from music critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 After his crossover into rock music with Dot da Genius , on their project WZRD ( 2012 ) , Cudi soon began working on his third solo studio album . The album was initially going to be the third installment to his Man on the Moon series , which he announced when he revealed he would not be releasing the A Man Named Scott mixtape , to focus on his rock project and " <unk> " . Be that as it may , in the summer of 2012 Cudi announced the title of his third studio album when he tweeted : " My new album is entitled <unk> , it will be my version of The Chronic 2001 , some songs i 'll produce , others i 'll feat & / or play songwriter " . On June 8 , 2012 , Cudi announced Indicud , would be a double @-@ disc album , until tweeting on October 28 , 2012 that " Indicud will not be a double disc but will contain a maximum of 17 brand new jams . " Kid Cudi also tweeted : " The overall tone of <unk> is positive and confident , " adding : " The energy of Indicud is its own new thing . New format with some of my favorite musical tricks here and there . The album moves dope " . 
 Before the album 's release , in December 2012 , Cudi dedicated Indicud to the late Ben Breedlove and all his fans who died , continuing : " My journey shall continue in your honor . Never forgotten . " The dedication was ultimately included in the album 's liner notes . The album is upbeat and optimistic , very much unlike his previous studio album Man on the Moon II : The Legend of Mr. Rager ( 2010 ) , which was considered darkly erratic . The positive vibe stems from Cudi 's desire to always change and reinvent : 
 " I always try to push myself to the next level with everything I do . Since I 've been in the business , critics have known that about me . When I started working on Indicud , I just wanted to bring more energy into my sound . Most of my old music was driven towards relaxed , chilled out smoke music . And that was my goal first coming in . Now it 's like , ' What ’ s a side of me that people haven ’ t seen ? ' The only time people have seen me on up @-@ tempos is on remixes or some shit . So I just wanted to take the energy to the next level . That ultimately inspired the subject matter . It was a chain reaction . With the up @-@ tempos came more positive lyrics . It just brightened up the whole shit . " 
 After announcing his departure from GOOD Music , Cudi revealed Indicud would be his last album under the label , adding that only the first 200 @,@ 000 copies printed would have the GOOD Music logo on it ; making them collector 's items . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In April 2012 , in Geneseo , New York , Cudi performed before a sold out crowd and premiered a hip hop song , his first since 2010 . During his set , he performed a new record , tentatively titled " The Leader of the Delinquents " , which he did a cappella . On April 25 , 2012 Cudi was officially back to rapping with the release of " Dennis , Hook Me Up with Some More of That Whiskey ! " . The song , the first ever solely produced by Cudi himself , samples his 2010 song " Ghost ! " . On July 10 , 2012 via his Twitter feed , Cudi announced collaborations on the album thus far , as the album had not yet been completed , to be Pusha T , Jaden Smith and Kendrick Lamar , along with more familiar collaborators Kanye West , King Chip and Cage . He also revealed he was hoping to collaborate with 50 Cent , Lloyd Banks , Diplo and MGMT . In September , he had also expressed interest in working with Harlem @-@ bred rapper ASAP Rocky on Indicud . On October 1 , 2012 Cudi confirmed that production from electronic rock duo Ratatat , with whom he collaborated on " Pursuit of Happiness " and " Alive " from his debut album Man on the Moon : The End of Day ( 2009 ) , would be featured on Indicud . 
 On October 9 and 12 , Cudi released pictures of him and Dot da Genius in the studio working on the album . On November 6 , 2012 , Cudi made it known that he was in the studio that day working with fellow American rapper J. Cole . On November 17 , 2012 , via his Twitter feed , Cudi announced the song he recorded with Kendrick Lamar was produced by himself and is titled " Solo Dolo , Part II " . He also stated his former GOOD Music label @-@ mate Common would be featured on the album , on a song produced by Dot da Genius and Cudi 's mentor 88 @-@ Keys . On February 13 , 2013 , via Twitter , Cudi revealed he previewed the album to friend and fellow American actor , Mark Webber , and asked him to share his thoughts on the album , as a favor to the fans . During his barrage of tweets , Webber gave insight on the album , revealing Too Short and Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's RZA as features , as well as praising Cudi 's production , rapping and singing . Unlike his previous albums , Indicud is primarily produced by Cudi himself . 
 In an interview with Billboard , released March 2013 , Cudi confirmed he was working closely with ASAP Rocky , while also revealing Haim , an all @-@ female indie rock band , would appear on the album on a song produced by high @-@ profile American record producer Hit @-@ Boy and himself . On April 2 , 2013 Hit @-@ Boy , claimed besides Cudi , he was the only other person to provide production on the album . Cudi later confirmed the statement via Twitter . Cudi and Hit @-@ Boy had been working on the aforementioned song since January 2011 . The track is also the first record the two of them ever worked on together . 
 = = Production = = 
 Cudi also incorporated quotes from his favorite movies into the album , wherever he saw fit . The first release with a movie quote was " Immortal " , where Cudi sampled Adam Sandler in his 1995 film Billy Madison : " That ’ s one of my favorite movies , man . From my childhood , straight up . I love Adam Sandler . Throughout the album I wanted to include clips from some of my favorite movies to kind of narrate the album a bit and liven it up and give it some personality . " He declared that throughout the album , people will hear scenes from several different movies : 
 " Yeah , different actors will pop up periodically . That ’ s how I felt when I finished the song . ' Oh my God . It 's so good ! ' [ Laughs ] So there had to be a way that I could express myself . So I had to find some of my favorite quotes from my favorite movies . I put on Billy Madison and just watched that . There were so many lines that I picked that were great . But “ I ’ m the smartest man alive ! ” resonated with me . And Adam Sandler is like a god to me . He ’ s so amazing . I just wanted to pay homage through song and let him know , like , ' You ’ re the shit ! ' " 
 With Indicud , on several tracks Cudi took a backseat in vocals to rather showcase his production skills . " The focus was on producing the record for Kendrick , I wanted to shine as a producer first . I wanted to show that side off more than anything else and that 's why I had my one verse then let Kendrick go ape @-@ sh-- crazy all over the rest of it . " As for the A $ AP Rocky feature on " Brothers , " Cudi explained that he made the decision to go with a minimal hook and let the Harlem rapper dominate the track : " I felt like that was a perfect beat for A $ AP to get on there and speak some truths and talk to the younger generation , because he 's in a place where a lot of kids are up to him and Kendrick . I just wanted to hear him say something a little bit more thoughtful , and he did that — he showed up . I was blown away by his craftsmanship , his professionalism and his overall mojo . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On October 28 , 2012 , after previously announcing hopes of releasing the album in late 2012 , Cudi changed the estimate release date from late 2012 to early 2013 . In late November , Cudi made it known he would be withholding the album 's exact release date , until it was certain , to avoid push backs . On December 18 , 2012 , the same day promotional single " King Wizard " was officially released , Cudi revealed the album would be released in March 2013 . On February 12 , he announced the album 's release date to be April 23 , 2013 . After the album leaked online in its entirety on April 9 , 2013 , Kid Cudi decided to push the album 's release date up to April 16 . 
 In early January , the album was named the ninth most anticipated album of 2013 by Complex and the 14th most anticipated album by XXL . In early 2013 , Cudi covered Complex 's February / March 2013 issue . In January 2013 , Cudi took to Twitter to express his frustrations with record label , Universal Republic , not supporting and promoting his music . After providing facts about singles " Just What I Am " and " King Wizard " , defending their strong online presence and lamenting about not getting radio play , Cudi tweeted , " if things dont change soon , <unk> gonna be some problems . " 
 On March 14 , 2013 Kid Cudi performed at Myspace 's South by Southwest ( SXSW ) secret show in Austin , Texas and after performing his many hits , he previewed a new verse from Indicud . He also revealed that the album would feature 18 tracks , while officially confirming ASAP Rocky and Michael Bolton as featured guests . On March 16 , Cudi announced that he would release the album 's track list and cover art on April 2 . Three days later , Kid Cudi announced via Twitter that the album had officially been completed and turned in to his label , Universal Republic . On March 26 , the album 's cover art and track list was unveiled by Walmart and later Complex . After the album cover 's unveiling , Cudi took to Twitter to explain his decision for the artwork : " The album art represents me . A ball of flames in a rose gold frame . " The cover 's art direction was handled by Cudi himself . In December 2013 , it would be named the sixteenth best album cover of 2013 by Complex . Later that day , Cudi appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and performed the album 's lead singles ; " Just What I Am " and " Immortal " , as well as premiering " Mad Solar " , which he performed a cappella . 
 During late 2013 , Kid Cudi toured in support of Indicud on The Cud Life Tour 2013 . The tour was announced on July 15 , with tickets going on sale the following day . Supporting acts on the tour include Big Sean , Tyler , The Creator and Logic . The tour took place in the United States beginning on August 22 and ran through October 18 , 2013 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 On August 12 , 2012 Kid Cudi released the lead single from Indicud , a song titled " Just What I Am " , featuring his longtime collaborator and friend , fellow Cleveland rapper King Chip . On October 2 , 2012 , " Just What I Am " , was released to iTunes as the first single from the album . The single 's music video , which marked Cudi 's directorial debut , was released November 6 , 2012 , via Kid Cudi 's Vevo . The song has since peaked at number 74 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 On September 29 , 2012 , Cudi released a podcast where he previewed " King Wizard " , a new song he was " very excited about " . On October 3 , 2012 , one day after " Just What I Am " , the album 's lead single was officially released via iTunes , Cudi liberated " King Wizard " as the second offering from Indicud via SoundCloud . Cudi who also produced the track , had teamed up with Samsung Mobile to release the clean version of the newly mastered “ King Wizard ” as a free download . The download was available by heading to Samsung Mobile USA ’ s Facebook page under the “ music ” tab . The explicit version and the music video were officially released via iTunes , on December 18 , 2012 as the album 's second single . 
 On October 29 , Cudi announced he would be releasing the album 's second official single at the end of November . On November 7 , he revealed the upcoming single 's title to be " Immortal " , and that it again was produced by himself like the two previous releases , " Just What I Am " and " King Wizard " . He claimed the song " will make you feel amazing in the heart and soul . " However , on November 30 , he revealed " Immortal " would not be released until 2013 . " Immortal " would be premiered on March 1 , 2013 via SoundCloud . The song was produced by Cudi , with the main sample being a track from one of his favorite bands MGMT 's , " Congratulations " . He reversed the song , sped it up , and produced over it . The song was officially released via iTunes on March 14 , 2013 as the album 's third single . 
 On April 2 , 2013 Cudi released " Girls " for digital download via the iTunes Store , as the album 's fourth single . The song features fellow American rapper Too Short , and was produced by Cudi . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In its first week of release Indicud debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 139 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and debuted at number 32 on the UK Albums Chart , becoming Cudi 's highest @-@ charting album on the chart , while entering at number 2 on the UK R & B Chart . In its second week the album sold 36 @,@ 000 more copies . In its third week the album sold 15 @,@ 000 more copies , bringing its total sales in the United States to 183 @,@ 000 . As of December 19 , 2013 the album has sold 260 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 The album also earned a level of commercial success internationally . In Canada it peaked at number three on the Canadian Albums Chart and peaked at number 32 on the UK Albums Chart . It also peaked at number 23 in Australia , number 32 in Denmark and number 33 in New Zealand . Indicud also charted on the main albums chart in Belgium , France , Germany , Switzerland and Ireland . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Indicud received generally mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 58 , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " , based on 16 reviews . Chris Dart of Exclaim ! said , " It 's also a smart , fun , eclectic record full of psychedelic influences and great , massive choruses . " Steve Jones of USA Today said , " Scott <unk> handles the production of his third album , creating moody , surreal soundscapes to bolster rhymes that run the gamut of emotions . But whether he 's feeling invincible or despondent , you get a true sense of where his head 's at . " David Jeffries of AllMusic stated , " It 's an entertaining , vibrant , and artistically filling album , so consider it a " presents " effort and enjoy the show . " Mosi Reeves of Spin said , " None of the guest actors here distract from Cudi 's signature self @-@ mythologizing and inner turmoil . And most of the time , it 's his inner turmoil that beckons you in , rather than merely pushing you out . " Dan <unk> of XXL stated , " As a whole , Cudi ’ s version of 2001 is an original and bold project [ ... ] This ambitious project does not fall flat , and credit is due to Cudi for continuing to challenge himself post @-@ WZRD , taking on a new skill @-@ set and concept rather than throwing together a collection of identically moody anthems . " 
 Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club stated , " For the first time , Cudi is more interested in throwing an actual party than a pity party , and with his bass @-@ engulfed beats and chewy , sing @-@ along hooks , he ’ s well @-@ suited to the task . In spite of its brighter outlook , though , Indicud is still a Kid Cudi record . " Logan Smithson of PopMatters said , " If you 've heard a Kid Cudi album before , you probably know what you ’ re going to get from Indicud , and for those who have been patiently awaiting his latest release , that 's great news . Indicud features some of Kid Cudi ’ s best songs to date , and is an overall enjoyable listen from start to finish . " Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound stated , " It 's ass @-@ backwards to make other people look the best on your solo album . Still , that might demonstrate the path of Kid Cudi isn 't about being a rapper , a singer , or something in between . The point is , this record just proves that Kid Cudi has a lot of sorting to do , and continuing down the same old path simply won ’ t cut it in the long @-@ run . " Joe Gross of Rolling Stone said , " Someday this Cleveland MC / producer / former weed enthusiast will find the lyrical and vocal charisma to match the <unk> dark , quasi @-@ industrial tenor of his moody beats . But Cudi ’ s pitchy @-@ <unk> voice remains his own worst enemy . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Closing out the year , the album was named to multiple album of the year lists . Complex ranked the album at number 26 , on their list of the 50 best albums of 2013 . They commented saying , " the album 's cinematic feel puts Cudi in the director 's seat as he compiles a diverse ensemble cast of luminaries , ranging from rap legends like RZA to indie rockers like Haim to West Coast <unk> like Kendrick Lamar . The final product is proof Cudi can make a soundscape that others can easily adapt to , not the other way around . " XXL positioned it at number 25 on their list of the best albums of 2013 . In December 2013 , HipHopDX placed it on their list of the top 25 albums of the year saying , " In a manner akin to Robert Johnson selling his soul to the devil to become a magician of a bluesman , Kid Cudi also clearly sold his soul to the demons that once claimed it in order to craft this album . There ’ s no singles here , just an intense and very listenable journey . " The Source ranked it at number 23 on their list , saying " it delivered , sonically and conceptually . The album was an honest representation of the maturation of Cudi ’ s space age sound and middle finger to the world attitude . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Indicud . 
 ( co . ) denotes co @-@ producer . 
 Sample credits 
 " The Resurrection of Scott <unk> " contains a excerpt from the film The Good Son ( 1993 ) . 
 " <unk> " contains an excerpt from the film The Good Son ( 1993 ) . 
 " Young Lady " contains a sample of " Hollywood Forever Cemetery Sings " performed by Father John Misty . 
 " Immortal " contains a sample of " Congratulations " performed by MGMT . The song also contains excerpts from the films Billy Madison ( 1995 ) and The Good Son ( 1993 ) . 
 " Solo Dolo , Part II " contains a sample of " Going the Distance " performed by <unk> Street Band , which was originally composed by Bill Conti . 
 " Girls " contains an interpolation of " Pretty Girls " , written by Carl Brown , Shelly <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Daniel Brattain , Veronica Mendez , Darrell Mitchell , Albert Cota , Chantel <unk> and Michael Monagan . The song also contains a sample of " Bitches ( Reply ) " performed by Dion " DJ Jimi " Norman . 
 " Beez " contains a sample of " Mind Playing Tricks on Me " performed by Geto Boys . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Indicud taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Prado Navarette v. California = 
 Prado Navarette v. California , 572 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2014 ) , was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified when police officers may make arrests or conduct temporary detentions based on information provided by anonymous tips . In 2008 , police in California received a 911 call that a pickup truck was driving recklessly along a rural highway . Officers spotted a truck matching the description provided in the 911 call and followed the truck for five minutes , but did not observe any suspicious behavior . Nevertheless , officers conducted a traffic stop and discovered 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) of marijuana in the truck . At trial , the occupants of the car argued that the traffic stop violated the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution , because the tip was unreliable , and officers did not personally observe criminal activity . Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Clarence Thomas held that the 911 call was reliable , and that officers need not personally observe criminal activity when acting upon information provided by an anonymous 911 call . 
 Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a " scathing " dissenting opinion , in which he argued that the tip was unreliable , and that the majority 's opinion threatened the freedom and liberty of all citizens . Likewise , many commentators have noted Navarette represented a departure from earlier precedent , and that the opinion opened the door for expansive new police powers . Some commentators have also noted that the case leaves open several important questions , including the unanswered question of whether anonymous reports of extremely dangerous behavior require fewer indicia of reliability before police may act upon those reports . Other scholars have argued it was highly unlikely that Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were actually driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol when they were stopped by police . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Fourth Amendment guidelines for traffic stops = = = 
 Although criminal detentions usually require probable cause that the suspect has engaged in criminal activity , an officer may conduct a traffic stop if the officer has a reasonable , articulable suspicion that the driver is engaging in criminal activity . Officers may not rely upon a mere " hunch " , but the level of suspicion required to conduct a traffic stop is “ considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence ” , and less than is necessary for probable cause . However , the Supreme Court of the United States has clarified that the reasonable suspicion required to justify a traffic stop depends upon " both the content of information possessed by police and its degree of reliability " , while taking into account “ the totality of the circumstances — the whole picture . ” 
 = = = Fourth Amendment searches and seizures based on anonymous tips = = = 
 In Illinois v. Gates , the Supreme Court established that courts should apply a " totality of the circumstances " test to determine whether an anonymous tip is sufficiently reliable to provide probable cause to issue an arrest warrant . Although officers in Gates did not personally witness any criminal activity , the Supreme Court held that the anonymous tip in question was reliable , because officers could verify several events predicted by the anonymous tip . Seven years after Gates , the Supreme Court held in Alabama v. White that an anonymous tip was sufficiently reliable to provide reasonable suspicion to justify a temporary detention , because the tip accurately predicted several key details . Although the Court conceded that White was a " close case " , the tip in question " exhibited sufficient indicia of reliability " to justify a temporary detention . The Court explained that if " an informant is shown to be right about some things , he is probably right about other facts that he has alleged , including the claim that the object of the tip is engaged in criminal activity . " 
 However , in Florida v. J.L. , the Supreme Court ruled that police officers did not have reasonable suspicion to detain a suspect based on an anonymous tip “ that a young black male standing at a particular bus stop and wearing a plaid shirt was carrying a gun . ” The Court held that the tip " lacked the moderate indicia of reliability present in White and essential to the Court ’ s decision in that case . The anonymous call concerning J.L. provided no predictive information , and therefore left the police without means to test the informant ’ s knowledge or credibility . ” The Court declined to create a " firearm exception " for anonymous tips , but the court noted in dicta that a tip describing a bomb threat need not bear the indicia of reliability otherwise required of other anonymous tips . The Supreme Court of California would later rely upon this " bomb exception " in People v. Wells , when it ruled that an anonymous tip that accurately described a vehicle “ weaving all over the roadway ” justified a traffic stop . The California court held that “ considerations of public safety and common sense ” permit officers to conduct traffic stops based on anonymous tips " to confirm the officer ’ s reasonable suspicion of intoxicated driving before a serious traffic accident can occur . ” 
 = = = Arrest and Trial of Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette = = = 
 On August 23 , 2008 , a California Highway Patrol ( " CHP " ) dispatcher in Humboldt County , California received a 911 call from an anonymous caller . According to the dispatcher , the caller reported a silver Ford <unk> pickup with the license plate number " <unk> " ran them off the highway . The caller stated that the truck was last seen heading southbound on California State Route 1 . CHP dispatchers relayed the report to officers in the geographic area , and the vehicle was soon spotted traveling southbound at mile marker 66 near Fort Bragg , California . Officers pulled over the vehicle and discovered that Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette were the only occupants . After standing next to the cab of the pickup truck , the officers noticed " a very distinct smell of marijuana coming from the vehicle " . Officers then searched the vehicle and found four large bags containing 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) of marijuana , an unopened box of oven bags , clippers , and fertilizer in the bed of the truck . 
 On August 26 , 2008 , a felony complaint was filed in Mendocino County Superior Court , charging Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette with transportation of marijuana in violation of section <unk> ( a ) of the California Health and Safety Code , and possession of marijuana for sale in violation of section <unk> of the California Health and Safety Code . On June 26 , 2009 , Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette filed a motion to suppress evidence , claiming that the traffic stop violated the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution , because officers " lacked reasonable suspicion of criminal activity " . However , the magistrate who presided over the suppression hearing , and the superior court , both rejected the motion . Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette subsequently pleaded guilty to transporting marijuana , and were sentenced to 90 days in prison and three years of probation . 
 Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette filed an appeal in the California Court of Appeal , but the court affirmed the judgment of the Superior Court . Relying on the " public safety " exception established in People v. Wells , the court held that " ongoing danger to other motorists [ justified ] the stop without direct corroboration of the vehicle 's illegal activity " . The court noted that the vehicle was traveling on an " undivided two @-@ lane road , thus raising the risk of a collision with oncoming traffic , which poses a particular risk to human life and limb . " However , the court also held that the " anonymous tip itself had several indicia of reliability — the content of the tip strongly suggested it came from the victim and the tipster accurately described the appearance , location and direction of the vehicle . " Lorenzo and Jose appealed again to the Supreme Court of California , but the Court declined to review their case . They then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States , which granted their petition for certiorari on October 1 , 2013 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Clarence Thomas held that the 911 call contained sufficient indicia of reliability to justify the traffic stop . Although he acknowledged that this was a " close case " , Justice Thomas concluded that indicia of the 911 caller 's reliability were stronger than those in Florida v. J.L. , where the Court held a " bare @-@ bones " tip was unreliable . Justice Thomas began his opinion by emphasizing that the Supreme Court had " firmly rejected the argument that reasonable cause for an investigative stop can only be based on the officer ’ s personal observation , rather than on information supplied by another person . ” By identifying the make , model , and license plate number of the pickup truck , Justice Thomas argued that " the caller necessarily claimed eyewitness knowledge of the alleged dangerous driving , " and that basis of knowledge supported the tip 's reliability . Furthermore , Justice Thomas concluded that " [ a ] driver ’ s claim that another vehicle ran her off the road , however , necessarily implies that the informant knows the other car was driven dangerously . " Justice Thomas also noted that the calls made through the 911 emergency system are particularly reliable , because calls are recorded and individuals may face prosecution for making false reports . 
 Justice Thomas also clarified that officers need not " rule out the possibility of innocent conduct " before making a traffic stop based on an anonymous tip . In light of the facts described in the 911 call , Justice Thomas argued that the reckless driving described in the 911 call " [ bear ] too great a resemblance to paradigmatic manifestations of drunk driving to be dismissed as an isolated example of recklessness . " He concluded that officers therefore acted reasonably " under these circumstances in stopping a driver whose alleged conduct was a significant indicator of drunk driving " . Justice Thomas noted that many drivers will behave more cautiously when followed by police officers , and he concluded that there was no need to conduct " [ e ] <unk> observation " in this case , because " allowing a drunk driver a second chance for dangerous conduct could have disastrous consequences " . 
 = = = Dissenting opinion of Justice Scalia = = = 
 In his dissenting opinion , Justice Antonin Scalia argued that the majority 's opinion was a " freedom @-@ destroying cocktail . " Although he recognized anonymous tips may sometimes be reliable , he rejected the majority 's conclusion that " anonymous 911 reports of traffic violations are reliable so long as they correctly identify a car and its location . " He wrote , " [ t ] his is not my concept , and I am sure would not be the Framers ’ , of a people secure from unreasonable searches and seizures . " Justice Scalia argued that anonymous tips are inherently unreliable , because anonymous tipsters can " lie with impunity . " While he admitted 911 calls are , in fact , easily traceable , Justice Scalia argued that there was no evidence the 911 caller knew they could be identified when they placed the call . Additionally , Justice Scalia distinguished the tip in this case from the tip in White , where " the reliability of the tip was established by the fact that it predicted the target ’ s behavior in the finest detail — a detail that could be known only by someone familiar with the target ’ s business . " He argued that the general details provided in this case 's 911 call were unreliable , because " everyone in the world who saw the car would have that knowledge , and anyone who wanted the car stopped would have to provide that information . " Likewise , Justice Scalia argued that there was no evidence that the report of being run off the road was actually true . 
 Justice Scalia also criticized the majority 's conclusion that the tip provided reasonable suspicion that Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were driving while drunk , because " the truck might have swerved to avoid an animal , a pothole , or a jaywalking pedestrian .... Or , indeed , he might have intentionally forced the tipster off the road because of some personal animus , or hostility to her ' Make Love , Not War ' bumper sticker . " Furthermore , Justice Scalia argued that one discrete instance of irregular driving does not give rise to the reasonable suspicion of an ongoing threat of an intoxicated driver on the road . Justice Scalia also argued that the anonymous tip 's claims of reckless driving were ultimately discredited by the fact that officers followed Lorenzo and Jose for five minutes , but observed nothing suspicious . He wrote , " I take it as a fundamental premise of our intoxicated @-@ driving laws that a driver soused enough to swerve once can be expected to swerve again — and soon . If he does not , and if the only evidence of his first episode of irregular driving is a mere inference from an uncorroborated , vague , and nameless tip , then the Fourth Amendment requires that he be left alone . " In his concluding remarks , Justice Scalia wrote " [ d ] <unk> driving is a serious matter , but so is the loss of our freedom to come and go as we please without police interference .... After today ’ s opinion all of us on the road , and not just drug dealers , are at risk of having our freedom of movement curtailed on suspicion of drunkenness , based upon a phone tip , true or false , of a single instance of careless driving . " 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 Many federal circuit courts and state supreme courts interpreting Navarette have affirmed the rule that officers need not personally corroborate incriminating details before making an arrest based on information provided by an anonymous tip . However , other courts interpreting Navarette have held that uncorroborated anonymous tips are not sufficient to provide reasonable suspicion of ongoing criminal activity . Additionally , courts in some jurisdictions have held that in order for officers to act upon an anonymous tip , the tip must provide a report of an ongoing crime , rather than a report of an isolated event that occurred in the past . Some courts have also rejected the assertion that the availability of caller information makes 911 calls inherently reliable . However , some courts have agreed with the notion that 911 calls are more reliable because callers may face criminal prosecution for making false reports . Other courts interpreting Navarette have held that the case established that less reliability is required when anonymous tips report " serious crime [ s ] or potential danger " . 
 = = Analysis and commentary = = 
 = = = Immediate reactions = = = 
 After the Court released its opinion , many commentators suggested that Navarette represented a significant expansion of the police 's power to stop drivers on the road . Lyle Denniston , for example , remarked that the Court 's opinion " gave police broad new authority . " In its review of cases from the 2013 term , the Harvard Law Review suggested that " Navarette may add to the police 's already expansive power , " and that the case " heralds unwarranted curtailment of Fourth Amendment protections . " Other commentators remarked that the case " seemed to lower the bar for assessments of anonymous tipsters . " Paul <unk> , attorney for Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette , said that the ruling " makes it easier for anonymous tipsters to call in and sic police on people they don 't like , " while a spokesperson for the California Attorney General 's office said " [ w ] e are pleased with the court 's ruling , which supports the hard work of law enforcement . " 
 = = = Scholarly analysis = = = 
 Scholars have observed that Navarette marked a departure from earlier precedent on the subject of anonymous tips , and some have argued that the case signifies a " dilution " of the Fourth Amendment 's reasonable suspicion standard . One analyst argued that this departure " could encourage passive and sloppy policing , for officers will be tempted to rely on easily acquired anonymous tips rather than engage in arduous collection of evidence . " Commentators have argued that Justice Kennedy 's endorsement of the reliability of anonymous 911 calls signified a departure from earlier decisions that analyzed the reliability of tips under a totality of the circumstances framework . These commentators suggest that this departure " increases the risk of fabricated tips . " Some analysts have also observed that the Court 's opinion left several questions unanswered from earlier anonymous tip cases , including the question of whether there was an exception for dangerous crimes , and that the Court " missed an opportunity to give lower courts some much needed guidance . " One commentator wrote , " [ t ] he time bomb mentioned in J.L. is still ticking " . Another commentator argued that because Lorenzo Prado Navarette 's driving was " irreproachable " for at least five minutes , " the probability that Lorenzo Navarette was legally drunk was surely less than the probability for the average daytime driver of a pickup truck ; indeed , it ostensibly was all but zero . " 
 = 2004 FA Community Shield = 
 The 2004 FA Community Shield was the 82nd FA Charity Shield , an annual English football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup . It was contested on 8 August 2004 by Arsenal , champions of the 2003 – 04 Premier League , and Manchester United , who beat Millwall in the final of the 2003 – 04 FA Cup . Watched by a crowd of 63 @,@ 317 at the Millennium Stadium , Arsenal won the match 3 – 1 . 
 This was Manchester United 's 23rd Community Shield appearance and Arsenal 's 18th . Manchester United were without seven of their first @-@ choice players for the game , which meant David Bellion and Eric Djemba @-@ Djemba came into the starting 11 . Cesc Fàbregas started alongside Gilberto Silva in midfield for Arsenal as captain Patrick Vieira was absent . After a goalless first half , Arsenal took the lead when Gilberto scored in the 50th minute . Striker Alan Smith equalised for Manchester United soon after , but José Antonio Reyes put Arsenal back in front after United 's defenders failed to clear the ball . Mikaël Silvestre scored an own goal 11 minutes before the end that ensured Arsenal 's victory . 
 Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson was complimentary of his opponents afterwards and was pleased there were no new injuries to report . Opposing manager Arsène Wenger praised Fàbregas 's performance and reiterated his desire to keep Vieira at Arsenal , after speculation regarding the player 's impending transfer to Real Madrid . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Community Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 , it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . Wembley Stadium acted as the host of the Shield from 1974 . Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium was hosting the Shield for the fourth time ; it took over as the venue for the event while Wembley Stadium underwent a six @-@ year renovation between 2001 and 2006 . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 2004 FA Community Shield as winners of the Premier League . They finished their league campaign without a single defeat and earned the nickname " The Invincibles " , akin to the Preston North End team that went unbeaten in the inaugural Football League season . The other Community Shield place went to Manchester United who had defeated Millwall 3 – 0 in the 2004 FA Cup Final . This was the fifth meeting between the two clubs in the Community Shield ; Arsenal had won three of those meetings to Manchester United 's two . 
 Meetings between Manchester United and Arsenal were often eventful encounters , as both clubs vied for domestic honours . A goalless draw between the two clubs in September 2003 , in which Ruud van Nistelrooy missed a penalty in stoppage time , resulted in an altercation between both teams . Several Arsenal players were charged and fined accordingly by The Football Association ( FA ) for instigating the brawl ; the club was later fined £ 175 @,@ 000 , the largest ever given to a club by the FA . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson said in his press conference : " The game will be competitive . Prestige comes into it , pride comes into it , so it is always competitive when we play Arsenal . " He wanted to use the game as a means of preparing his team for their UEFA Champions League third qualifying round game against Dinamo București the following Wednesday . Ferguson was concerned about the state of his squad , with several first team players injured . He was irked that senior players Cristiano Ronaldo and Gabriel Heinze were absent , on duty for their respective national teams at the Summer Olympics : " Apparently , it 's supposed to be for amateurs , and money earned is put in trust , but we will be paying their wages while they are away so I don 't know what that 's all about . " 
 When asked about Arsenal 's unbeaten run and whether it would be repeated in English football , Ferguson replied : 
 " That was a one @-@ off . Arsenal accumulated most points last season so they won the title fairly enough , but they didn 't display championship form . They had too many draws . I think they came to a point around January where they realised they could go through the season undefeated , and that was a great driving force for them , but they had to stay undefeated to compensate for the number of draws . It was still an incredible achievement , though . " 
 Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger responded by saying : " Everybody has the freedom to make a judgement . In the last 20 minutes of every game last season , we were never behind . That means we had already done the job before . " He insisted the draws did not reflect on his team 's negative tactics , but " because of other teams coming back into the game " . On the issue of Patrick Vieira 's anticipated move to Real Madrid , Wenger told reporters the player would remain at Arsenal . Wenger acknowledged his team were short on experience as a result of selling players and missing Vieira , Sol Campbell and Thierry Henry , who all were injured . He considered this to be a disadvantage , but argued " ... the younger ones have to be given a chance . They all have to take some responsibility . " 
 Tickets for the game went on general sale on 28 July 2004 . They were advertised on the FA website at a cost of between £ 15 and £ 40 . Sir Geoff Hurst was named as the event 's chief guest . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 For Arsenal , Thierry Henry was declared fit to start and played alongside Dennis Bergkamp up front . 17 @-@ year @-@ old Cesc Fàbregas partnered Gilberto Silva in central midfield , with José Antonio Reyes and Jermaine Pennant providing width on either side . Manchester United were without seven of their first @-@ team players , including Ruud van Nistelrooy , who required surgery on his hernia . Wes Brown and Louis Saha were also ruled out because of injury , so David Bellion and Eric Djemba @-@ Djemba came into the first team . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Arsenal kicked @-@ off the match and within the first two minutes forced Manchester United defender Gary Neville to concede a throw @-@ in . In the fifth minute , Manchester United won a free kick , but nothing came out of it as José Antonio Reyes blocked Paul Scholes 's shot . Good play by Reyes and Henry fashioned a chance for Bergkamp in the ninth minute , but his strike was off target . Two minutes later a shot by Bergkamp from outside the box was saved by Manchester United goalkeeper Tim Howard . Before Henry was about to take a corner for Arsenal in the 16th minute , a cigarette lighter was thrown at him from the section occupied by Manchester United supporters – this resulted in police making two arrests during the game . Quinton Fortune used his pace to get the better of Lauren , but his cross into the Arsenal penalty area was cleared by Pascal Cygan . Arsenal continued to threaten – Henry 's free kick prompted Howard to make a save and tip the ball over the crossbar , and Bergkamp came close to scoring in the 27th minute after clever play to lose his marker John O 'Shea . The football continued to move from one end to the other , with Giggs and Reyes causing problems for their respective defences . In stoppage time at the end of the first half , Henry had his shot saved by Howard , while Scholes was similarly denied by Arsenal goalkeeper Jens Lehmann . 
 Manchester United made a slight change before the second half commenced , with Neville and O 'Shea switching positions , while Arsenal brought Robin van Persie on in place of Henry . Arsenal began the half more strongly – Reyes sprinted past the Manchester United defence and went past Howard in the 48th minute , but his shot hit the side @-@ netting . A minute later Arsenal scored . Bergkamp 's pass put Reyes clear to run down the right @-@ hand side of the pitch . He squared the ball to Gilberto , who side @-@ footed it into the empty goal net . Manchester United responded by making three substitutions – Fortune , Giggs and Roy Keane off for Phil Neville , Diego Forlán and Darren Fletcher . Five minutes after going behind , Alan Smith equalised for Manchester United . A mistake in the Arsenal defence presented him with the chance to hit a half @-@ volley ; the ball dipped over Lehmann in goal . Arsenal retook the lead in the 59th minute – a disjointed move that ended with Reyes shooting the ball low in the bottom left hand corner . Phil Neville was shown the game 's first yellow card in the 62nd minute , after fouling Reyes . Van Persie 's free kick a minute later was deflected for a corner , which came to nothing . Jérémie Aliadière who came on for Bergkamp sustained a knee injury and had to come off after only a few minutes on the field . He was replaced by Gaël Clichy , whose arrival according to journalist Henry Winter " … accelerated Arsenal 's drive further , particularly down the left where he kept combining well with Ashley Cole . " In the 72nd minute , Eric Djemba @-@ Djemba and Cole were each shown a yellow card for clashing with one another . Arsenal scored their third goal of the match 11 minutes before the end . Cole carried the ball into United 's penalty box and his attempted cross hit defender Mikaël Silvestre , who was helpless to prevent the ball going into his own net . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match and aftermath = = 
 Wenger clarified Vieira 's future after the match : " My intention is clear : to keep him [ … ] The challenge in front of us is hugely difficult and we need a complete focus . I 'm not resigned to let the story go on . It has all to be sorted out before the season . " He added that if Vieira chose to leave , the club could sufficiently replace him : " We 've worked very hard in the last five years to get good young players in and you saw that today . " Reyes , who was named man of the match , was frustrated at his missed chance early in the second half , but continued : " I set one up and then scored myself so I was much happier . " Bergkamp was impressed with Fàbregas 's performance in the match : " Normally at 17 , you might be a bit unsure when you step out . But with players like Cesc , the way he has developed in one year is quite amazing . " 
 Ferguson congratulated Arsenal on their win and said of the game : " It was about trying to make sure everyone was fit for Wednesday . I think we have managed to do that . There are no new injuries so far . Hopefully by tomorrow morning it will be a definite . " He believed it was important to substitute Giggs and Keane early in the second half in order for them to recuperate in time for the Dinamo București game . Scholes , however , " … needed a game , which is why I left him on that bit longer . " Ferguson felt Manchester United 's preparations to the new season were hampered because of the injuries : " It 's got a lot to do with summer football . It 's not down to the European Championship , but you do wonder why the Copa América can 't be at the same time . That harmony is never quite right , from Africa to America to Europe . Something should be done about that . " Giggs said Manchester United needed to take the positives out of the match and anticipated Arsenal as their main rivals in the league : " [ They ] know what to do and how to handle the pressure when it comes around . " 
 The two clubs next faced each other in a league fixture at Old Trafford on 23 October 2004 , where Arsenal 's unbeaten league run of 49 matches came to an end as Manchester United beat them 2 – 0 . 
 = Radcliffe , Greater Manchester = 
 Radcliffe is a town in the Metropolitan Borough of Bury , Greater Manchester , England . It lies in the Irwell Valley 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) south @-@ west of Bury and 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) north @-@ northwest of Manchester and is contiguous with Whitefield to the south . The disused Manchester , Bolton & Bury Canal bisects the town . 
 Historically a part of Lancashire , evidence of Mesolithic , Roman and Norman activity has been found in Radcliffe and its surroundings . A Roman road passes through the area , along the border between Radcliffe and Bury . Radcliffe appears in an entry of the Domesday Book as " Radeclive " and in the High Middle Ages formed a small parish and township centred on the Church of St Mary and the manorial Radcliffe Tower , both of which are Grade I listed buildings . 
 Coal lies under the area of mines opened in the Industrial Revolution , providing fuel for the cotton spinning and papermaking industries . By the mid @-@ 19th century , Radcliffe was an important mill town with cotton mills , bleachworks and a road , canal and railway network . 
 With a population of 34 @,@ 239 , falling to 29 @,@ 950 at the Census in 2011 . Radcliffe is predominantly a residential area whose few remaining cotton mills are now occupied by small businesses . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Radcliffe is derived from the Old English words read and <unk> , meaning " the red cliff or bank " , on the River Irwell in the Irwell Valley . The Domesday Book records the name as " Radeclive " . Other archaic spellings include " <unk> " ( recorded in 1227 ) , and " <unk> " ( recorded in 1309 and 1360 ) . The Radcliffe family took its name from the town . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The first human settlements in the area , albeit seasonal , are thought to have been as far back as <unk> during the Mesolithic period . Archaeological excavations in 1949 at Radcliffe E 'es ( a level plain along the north bank of the Irwell , formed by retreating glacial deposits during the previous ice age ) found evidence of pre @-@ historic activity , suggesting a lake village site , but dating techniques of the time were unreliable . Further investigations in 1961 revealed rows of sharpened posts and worked timbers , but no further dating evidence was collected . In 1911 while repairs to the bridge at Radcliffe bridge were underway , a stone axe @-@ hammer was found in the river bed . The 8 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 22 cm ) large tool artefact weighs 4 pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) and is made from polished Quartzite , with a bore to take a shaft . 
 South of the present @-@ day Withins reservoir is a possible location for a <unk> @-@ form Tumulus . The town also has Roman associations ; a Roman road passes through the town , along the border between Radcliffe and Bury on a south @-@ east to north @-@ west route . It allowed easy travel between the Roman forts at Manchester ( Mamucium ) and Ribchester ( Bremetennacum ) . The approximate route was through Higher Lane in nearby Whitefield , through Dales Lane and across the Irwell over Radcliffe E 'es through the site of the former East Lancashire Paper Mill . The route passes up Croft Lane , over Cross Lane and over the route of the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal under the 10 3 / 4 milestone . It then crosses Bury and Bolton Road , and heads through Higher Spen Moor . 
 Other than placenames , little information about the area survives from the Dark Ages . Radcliffe was likely moorland and swamps . 
 Following the 11th century Norman conquest of England , Radcliffe became a parish and township in the hundred of Salford , and county of Lancashire . One of only four parishes from the hundred mentioned in the Domesday Book and held by Edward the Confessor as a Royal Manor , it initially consisted of two hamlets ; Radcliffe , near to the border with Bury and centred on the Medieval Church of St Mary and the manorial Radcliffe Tower , and further to the west Radcliffe Bridge , at a crossing of the Irwell . As a Royal Manor , the hide may originally have been up to four times the size it was when it was recorded in 1212 as being held by William de Radeclive , of the " Radclyffes of the Tower " family . 
 In the 15th century the Pilkington family who , during the Wars of the Roses , supported the House of York , owned much of the land around the parish . Thomas Pilkington was at this time lord of many estates in Lancashire . In 1485 Richard III was killed in the Battle of Bosworth . The Duke of Richmond , representing the House of Lancaster , was crowned Henry VII . Sir William Stanley may have placed the crown upon his head . As a reward for the support of his family , on 27 October 1485 Henry made Thomas Stanley the Earl of Derby . Thomas Pilkington was attainted , and in February 1489 Earl Thomas was given many confiscated estates including those of Pilkington , which included the township of Pilkington , and Bury . During the English Civil War Radcliffe , along with nearby Bolton , fought on the side of the Parliamentarians against the Royalist Bury . 
 In 1561 after about 400 years rule by the Radclyffes , Robert Assheton ( Lord of the Manor of Middleton ) bought the manor of Radcliffe for 2 @,@ 000 Marks . From 1765 the Assheton estates were divided between the two daughters of the late Ralph Assheton , one of whom married Thomas Egerton , 1st Earl of Wilton . The manor of Radcliffe appears to have been included in her share , and thereafter was included in the Wilton estates . 
 = = = Textiles and the Industrial Revolution = = = 
 The first documented reference to industry in Radcliffe is after 1680 , in the Radcliffe parish registers , which make increasing mention of occupations such as woollen <unk> ( weaving ) , linen <unk> , and <unk> ( bleacher ) . These were cottage industries which worked alongside local agriculture . In 1780 Robert Peel built the first factory in the town , several hundred yards upstream from Radcliffe Bridge ( at the end of Peel Street ) . With a weir and goit providing motive power for a water wheel , the factory was built for throstle spinning and the weaving of cotton — a relatively new introduction to Britain . The water wheel proved to be insufficient , and so around 1804 the goit was extended . The weir ( known as Rectory Weir ) was made from timber . Conditions were poor ; the mill employed child labour bought from workhouses in Birmingham and London . Children were boarded on an upper floor of the building , and bound until they reached the age of 21 . They were unpaid , and were kept locked up each night . Shifts were typically 10 – 10 @.@ 5 hours in length , and children returning from a day shift would sleep in the same bed as children leaving for a night shift . Peel himself admitted that conditions at the mill were " very bad " . In 1784 an outbreak of typhoid prompted Lord Grey de Wilton to inform the magistrates of the Salford Hundred ; keen to prevent the spread of the disease to neighbouring towns and villages , they sent doctors to assess the situation . Their recommendations included leaving the windows of the mill open at night , fumigation of rooms with tobacco ( as this was thought to discourage disease ) , regular cleaning of rooms and toilets and occasional bathing of children . The report forced the magistrates , led by Thomas Butterworth Bayley , to abandon the practice of binding parish apprentices to any mill not adhering to these conditions . The report also prompted Peel to introduce an Act of Parliament to improve factory hygiene , which later became the Factory Act of 1802 . Over time , conditions at the mill improved ; in the mid @-@ 1790s the physician John Aikin , a critic of the factory system , praised working conditions at the mill , and in 1823 inspections by local magistrates of conditions in mills across the county revealed that unlike many others , the factory at Radcliffe was adhering to all requirements of the Factory Acts . 
 The underlying coal measures throughout the parish were a valuable source of fuel . Radcliffe already had an established textile industry before the arrival of steam power . The first recorded instance of coal getting in the North West of England was in 1246 , when Adam de <unk> was fined for digging de <unk> on common land in the Radcliffe area . Coal outcroppings were not uncommon ; as recently as 1936 members of the public were seen carrying away large pieces of coal from a seam revealed by the landslip caused when the Manchester , Bolton & Bury Canal breached at Ladyshore . Mining was initially limited to bell pits until the arrival of steam engines , which along with improved ventilation , made possible much deeper pits . The earliest known local use of such an engine was in 1792 at Black Cat Colliery . The parish of Radcliffe was once home to as many as 50 pits , but with the exceptions of Outwood Colliery and Ladyshore Colliery , all were either exhausted or closed by the end of the 19th century . During the 1926 General Strike many striking miners illegally took coal from exposed seams around the Coney Green area of the town , to sell to local housewives . In the 1950s to the north of the town the National Coal Board did some open cast mining near Radcliffe Moor Road , but the last legal instance of coal mining in Radcliffe was between 1931 and 1949 , close to Bury and Bolton Road . 
 The transformation of the area from an industry based upon water power , to one based upon steam power , may not have been without problems . A story in W. Nicholl 's History and Traditions of Radcliffe ( 1900 ) tells of a " great crowd " of protesters from Bury who marched on Bealey 's Works , demanding that work be halted . James Booth ordered the gates closed , gave the ringleaders £ 5 , and promised to halt work the next day . The crowd then marched on other businesses within the town before heading along the canal to Bolton , at which point they were apparently turned back by news of approaching soldiers . 
 There were many smaller textile concerns in the parish . Thomas Howarth owned a cottage in Stand Lane from where he sent yarn to be dyed and sized . He made his own warps which were weaved in the town . He would then travel to Preston and Kendal where drapers would purchase his products . His nephews founded A. & J. Hoyle 's Mill in Irwell Street , which employed power weaving to produce their specialities in <unk> and shirting . The mill closed in 1968 . Messrs Stott & Pickstone 's Top Shop on Stand Lane was the first company to employ powered looms and spinning around 1844 . Many of their employees would eventually leave to start their own businesses , such as Spider Mill , built by Robert and William Fletcher , and John Pickstone . This mill closed around 1930 . 
 Radcliffe was at one time home to around 60 textile mills and 15 spinning mills , along with 18 bleachworks of which the Bealey family were prominent owners . However , the textile industry was not the town 's major employer ; other industries such as mining and paper making were also important sources of employment . 
 Mount Sion Mill along Sion Street was founded in the early 19th century and during the First World War manufactured guncotton . A weir was constructed along with a goit , used to turn a water wheel which powered a beam engine to pump water to the reservoirs above . 
 Radcliffe became well known for its paper industry ; its mills included the East Lancashire Paper Mill and Radcliffe Paper Mill . The former was founded by the Seddon family on 29 March 1860 , along the banks of the Irwell . Its construction provided much @-@ needed employment : in the 1860s living standards within the town were poor , and local mills often operated on " short time " . A reduction in the demand for coal had placed many colliers out of work , and the Lancashire Cotton Famine was starving Lancashire of raw materials , especially cotton . Soup kitchens were opened by local benefactors , and many local residents were on poor relief . The mill began producing low grade paper and newsprint , moving on to other products including high quality printing and writing papers . Radcliffe Paper Mill was formed during the First World War , when it took over from a paper mill and a pipe plant . It originally produced paper suitable for roofing felt , to cater for a national shortage . After World War II the mill employed over 600 people and produced 70 @,@ 000 tons of paper annually . British Plaster Board Industries ( <unk> ) took over the company in 1961 . 
 Other industries in the town included brick making and chimney pot manufacture . Raw materials were sourced from local collieries . In Mill Street carts , waggons , and bicycles were manufactured from 1855 , and elsewhere motor vehicles were also produced until the late 1950s . John Cockerill moved to the town from Haslingden before leaving for continental Europe to become the founder of Cockerill @-@ Sambre . James Cockerill , employed Radcliffe man William Yates as his manager . Several foundries and machine manufacturers were located around the town , including Dobson and Barlow at Bradley Fold , and Wolstenholme 's along Bridgewater Street . Munitions , aircraft and tank components were manufactured during the Second World War . Chemicals were manufactured by companies such as Bealey 's and J. & W. Whewell . 
 = = = Post @-@ industrial history = = = 
 From the 1950s Radcliffe 's textile industry went into terminal decline , and although its paper industry survived to the end of the 20th century , both the town 's largest paper mills have now been closed and demolished . One of the larger mills in Radcliffe was the Pioneer Mill , built between 1905 and 1906 , and which ceased weaving in July 1980 — the last mill in Radcliffe to use cotton . The building is now occupied by several different businesses . 
 Although the town retains much of its existing Victorian and Edwardian housing stock , new estates have been built on former brownfield land including that of the Radcliffe Paper Mill Company . Since deindustrialisation the local population has continued to grow . Radcliffe 's housing stock of 23 @,@ 790 properties is a mixture of mainly semi @-@ detached and terraced housing , with smaller percentages of detached housing and flats . In 1974 the town became a part of the Metropolitan Borough of Bury , and as a result has been described as losing its independence , and to some extent its identity . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Following the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , Radcliffe formed part of the Bury Poor Law Union , an inter @-@ parish unit established to provide social security . Radcliffe 's first local authority was an early form of local government in England . In July 1866 the Radcliffe Local Board of Health was established . With reference to the Local Government Act 1858 , it was a regulatory body consisting of 12 members , responsible for standards of hygiene and sanitation in the township . Richard Bealey J.P. was chairman of the local board until April 1876 In the same year , the parish was extended to include parts of the former township of Pilkington , formerly in the parish of Prestwich @-@ cum @-@ Oldham . 
 Radcliffe became a part of the Municipal Borough of Bury in 1876 , but following the Local Government Act 1894 it left the district ( by then the County Borough of Bury ) , becoming an urban district within the administrative county of Lancashire . The district boundary was extended to include the Stand Lane district The extension made the area covered by Radcliffe Urban District 3 @,@ 084 acres ( 12 @.@ 48 km2 ; 4 @.@ 819 sq mi ) . Radcliffe Urban District was governed by a council of 24 members , made from six councillors from each of the four wards , Radcliffe Hall , Radcliffe Bridge , Black Lane , and Stand Lane . <unk> Allen J.P. was the first chairman of the new council . A town hall was built in 1911 , replacing an earlier building on the junction of Water Street and Spring Lane . It formed the public administrative centre for the district with a large council chamber on the first floor , with public gallery , and four committee rooms . 
 The Lancashire ( Southern Areas ) Review Order of 1933 extended the district to include the township of Ainsworth , and a portion of the township of Outwood . This increased the area covered by Radcliffe District to 4 @,@ 915 acres ( 19 @.@ 89 km2 ) . A new ward was created for Ainsworth , comprising the former township and a portion of the Black Lane ward . Three councillors were added to the council , and the total number of electors became 15 @,@ 009 . On 21 September 1935 the urban district received a charter as a municipal borough , which gave it borough status , and elevated it to the Municipal Borough of Radcliffe . 
 Under the Local Government Act 1972 the town 's urban district status was abolished , and Radcliffe has , since 1 April 1974 , formed an unparished area of the Metropolitan Borough of Bury , a local government district of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . 
 For electoral purposes , Radcliffe is now divided into three wards ; Radcliffe North , Radcliffe East , and Radcliffe West . It is in the Bury South constituency and is represented in the House of Commons by Labour Party member Ivan Lewis . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 33 ′ 41 ″ N 2 ° 19 ′ 36 ″ W ( 53 @.@ 5615 ° , − 2 @.@ 3268 ° ) and 170 miles ( 274 km ) northwest of central London , Radcliffe lies in the Irwell Valley on the course of the River Irwell . The larger towns of Bury and Bolton lie to the northeast and northwest . For the purposes of the Office for National Statistics , Radcliffe forms a northerly part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , with Manchester city centre 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) to the south @-@ southeast . 
 Radcliffe 's position on the River Irwell has proved important in its history and development as the river provided a source of water for local industry . Radcliffe E 'es , a level plain formed along the north bank of the Irwell during the previous ice age , is now derelict and the planned location of a new school . From a highpoint of 500 feet ( 152 m ) above sea level in the northwest of Radcliffe , the surface gradually descends , particularly in the south and east , being the lowest along the River Irwell . The geology is represented by coal measure . 
 Radcliffe is surrounded by open space and rural land , much of which is visible from the town centre . To the east of the town the River Roch flows under Blackford Bridge , and joins the Irwell shortly thereafter , along which several weirs and <unk> were built as it passes through the town . Flowing from east to west the river divides the town on the north and south sides of the valley respectively . The town centre sits on the north side of the valley . Two road bridges cross the river : one in the former hamlet of Radcliffe Bridge , and another newer bridge built as part of the A665 Pilkington Bypass . Another bridge crosses the river along the eastern border with Bury . Various smaller pedestrian footbridges and two railway viaducts ( one disused ) also exist . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the Office for National Statistics , at the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , Radcliffe had a population of 34 @,@ 239 . The population density in 2001 was 9 @,@ 132 inhabitants per square mile ( 3 @,@ 526 / km2 ) , with a 100 to 94 @.@ 9 female – male ratio . Of those over 16 years old , 28 @.@ 6 % were single ( never married ) and 42 @.@ 8 % married . Radcliffe 's 14 @,@ 036 households included 28 @.@ 1 % one @-@ person , 39 @.@ 0 % married couples living together , 9 @.@ 2 % were co @-@ habiting couples , and 12 @.@ 3 % single parents with their children . The figures for married couples households was below the borough ( 48 @.@ 5 % ) and national average ( 47 @.@ 3 % ) , and single parent households were slightly above the average for the whole of Bury ( 11 @.@ 6 % ) and England ( 10 @.@ 5 % ) . Of those aged 16 – 74 , 31 @.@ 1 % had no academic qualifications , slightly higher than averages of Bury ( 29 @.@ 2 % ) and England ( 28 @.@ 9 % ) . 
 The residential areas of Radcliffe both to the north and the south of the town centre operate as suburbs of Bury and Manchester , such that their populations are not necessarily linked to the town . The socio @-@ demographic characteristics of the town 's population includes a mix of working and suburban middle classes , the layout of which are both linked to neighbouring towns . 
 Radcliffe is within the Manchester Larger Urban Zone , and within the Manchester Travel to Work Area . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Radcliffe 's first market was built by the Earl of Wilton and opened in 1851 . The town was home to twelve Co @-@ op stores , the largest of which was on Stand Lane . The four storey structure , built in 1877 , had shops and offices on the ground floor , and a large area for public meetings on the second floor . The building was truncated to two stories in June 1971 , and eventually demolished . Two more Co @-@ op stores were located on Bury Street and Cross Lane . The current market hall , built in 1937 on a different site to the old market , suffered a devastating fire in 1980 but was later restored . Radcliffe was once served by several banks including the Lancashire and Yorkshire Bank , the Manchester and Liverpool District Bank , the Union Bank of Manchester , and Parr 's Bank ltd . Today both the Royal Bank of Scotland and Halifax bank have branches in the town . 
 Radcliffe has two weekly newspapers , the Radcliffe Times , based at the Bury Times offices , in Bury , and the Salford @-@ based The Advertiser , which also covers the neighbouring areas of Prestwich and Whitefield . 
 The construction in the 1980s of the A665 Pilkington Way Bypass relieved traffic congestion along the traditional route through the town , Blackburn Street . A new bridge across the Irwell was constructed for the road , and part of Blackburn Street was pedestrianised . The road has attracted developments along former industrial land to the west of the town , including a large Asda supermarket , although it has exacerbated the decline of the retail outlets in the town centre . The bypass has created problems for cyclists and pedestrians who appear reluctant to cross the road and visit the town centre . One solution presently under consideration would involve a partial reopening of the pedestrianised section of Blackburn Street to traffic . 
 The closure of the East Lancashire and Radcliffe Paper Mills , both of which employed thousands of people , has left a large gap in the town 's local economy . Along with the decline of local industry the town 's shopping centre has suffered a severe loss of trade and is now barely viable as a retail outlet . Radcliffe 's market hall compares poorly with the neighbouring Bury Market . Amongst other shops , the town 's central shopping precinct retains a Boots . A <unk> Mill store now occupies the former site of the town 's Asda supermarket . 
 " Re @-@ inventing Radcliffe " is the name given on a report of a proposed improvement scheme . The report envisages several initiatives , and includes the creation of new housing both to the north and south of the town . Existing industry to the west of the town and along Milltown Street would be retained and improved , along with sections of the former Radcliffe Paper Mill and Pioneer Mill . The market would be redeveloped along with the Kwik Save site and bus station , and the town could become a centre for the arts . To improve transport links , new crossings of the Irwell and canal are proposed , along with a new school to replace the two closed secondary schools . Finally , the report suggests improving the image of Radcliffe within the Bury area . 
 " Newlands " is a regeneration programme run by the Forestry Commission . One site under consideration for regeneration is the former waste tip of Radcliffe E 'es . 
 = = = Population and employment change = = = 
 In 1921 2 @,@ 394 men and 3 @,@ 680 women were employed in the textile industry . By 1951 these figures had fallen respectively to 981 and 1 @,@ 852 . A more drastic fall is evident in the numbers of people employed in the mining and quarrying industries ; in 1921 591 people were employed in both , but in 1951 this had dropped to only 57 , reflecting the number of mines in and around Radcliffe that had by that time been completely exhausted . 
 By 2001 , from a working population of 15 @,@ 972 between the ages of 16 – 74 only six people were employed in mining . 3 @,@ 011 people were employed in manufacturing , 103 in public utilities , and 985 in construction . 3 @,@ 371 people worked in wholesale and retailing ; repair of motor vehicles , 682 in hotels and catering , and 1 @,@ 185 in transport ; storage and communication . 642 people worked in financial intermediation , 1 @,@ 711 in real estate , 694 in public administration and defence , 987 in education , 1 @,@ 876 in health and social work , and 657 in other work . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Radcliffe Tower is all that remains of an early 15th @-@ century stone @-@ built manor house . The structure is a Grade I listed building and protected as a Scheduled Monument . The construction of a nearby tithe barn is not documented , but it was probably built between 1600 and 1720 . It was used for storage of the local tithes ( a tenth of a farm 's produce ) . Along with Radcliffe Tower , the Parish Church of St Mary is a Grade I listed building . The town also has two Grade II * listed buildings ; Dearden Fold Farmhouse , completed during the 16th century , and Radcliffe Cenotaph , built in 1922 to commemorate the First World War . Outwood Viaduct , and Radcliffe 's most visible landmark , St Thomas ' Church , are Grade II listed buildings . St Thomas ' took nine years to complete . The first stone was laid by Viscount Grey de Wilton ( grandson of the Countess Grosvenor ) on 21 July 1862 , and it was consecrated in 1864 by the first Bishop of Manchester , James Prince Lee . Construction of the tower began in 1870 and the building was completed in 1871 . The building cost £ 7 @,@ 273 , ( £ 610 thousand today ) and the tower cost £ 1 @,@ 800 ( £ 150 thousand today ) . The first vicar was the Reverend Robert Fletcher . 
 Radcliffe 's first public ornament was a drinking fountain located at the bottom of Radcliffe New Road . It was presented to the town by a Mrs Noah Rostron in memory of her husband , and erected in August 1896 . The fountain no longer exists at this location . 
 Built in 1911 the town hall was on the junction of Water Street and Spring Lane . For many years after the town lost its urban district status , the building was unoccupied . It was converted to private accommodation in 1999 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Manchester to Blackburn packhorse route passed through the town ( hence the name Blackburn Street ) . The bridge across the Irwell was likely first erected during the late Medieval period at the site of a ford . An Act of Parliament in 1754 authorised the first turnpike through the hamlet of Radcliffe Bridge , and included Manchester to Bury via <unk> , and from Prestwich to Radcliffe . An Act of 1821 created a turnpike from Bury to Radcliffe , Stoneclough and Bolton . An Act of 1836 created a turnpike from Starling Lane to Ainsworth , and Radcliffe to Bury and Manchester Road ( near Fletcher Fold ) . A turnpike from Whitefield to Radcliffe Bridge via Stand Lane was created in 1857 with toll houses at Besses o ' th ' Barn , Stand Lane , the junction of <unk> Lane and Manchester Road , on Bolton Road near Countess Lane , and on Radcliffe Moor Road at Bradley Fold . Radcliffe New Road was created in an Act of 1860 which enabled the construction of a toll road between Radcliffe and Whitefield . To prevent damage to the road surfaces , weighing machines were used at various strategic positions including at the bridge end of <unk> Lane , at <unk> turning , and on Ainsworth Road . 
 During the Industrial Revolution , as local cottage industries were gradually supplanted by the factory system the roads became inadequate for use . A convoy of horse @-@ drawn lorries carrying salt between Bealey 's Bleach Works and Northwich would take up to two weeks to make a return journey . These problems gave rise to the construction of the Manchester , Bolton & Bury Canal , which reached the town in 1796 and which was navigable throughout in 1808 . For 38 years the canal was the town 's main route for trade and transport , with a wharf near Hampson Street . The proprietors later converted into a railway company and built a line between Salford and Bolton , which opened in 1838 . A branch from this line was to have been built to Bury , along the line of the canal , but due to technical constraints this did not happen . Radcliffe 's closest railway connection therefore remained several miles distant at Stoneclough . 
 The opening of the Manchester , Bury and Rossendale Railway ( later known as the East Lancashire Railway ( ELR ) ) in 1846 brought the town a direct connection to Manchester and Bury . Two stations served the town , Radcliffe Bridge station , and Withins Lane station ( although this closed in 1851 after only a few years of operation ) . Ringley Road station was located to the south of the parish , close to the civil parish of Pilkington . The line crossed the Irwell over Outwood Viaduct , an impressive structure which remains to this day . 
 The Liverpool and Bury Railway ( L & BR ) opened on 28 November 1848 , with a station to the north of the town , called Black Lane station . On 18 July 1872 the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway ( L & YR ) , which had amalgamated with the ELR some years previously , gained an Act of Parliament to construct a railway between Manchester and Bury , via Whitefield and Prestwich . This opened in 1879 with a new station , known as Radcliffe New Station , with a link to the L & BR line at Bradley Fold ( near the present day Chatsworth Road ) , and a new station along Ainsworth Road , Ainsworth Road Halt . The new L & YR route joined the existing ELR route near Withins Lane ( North Junction ) , whereon they shared the connection to Bury . The L & YR gained a further Act of 1877 to construct a link between North Junction and Coney Green Farm ( West Junction ) . The <unk> & R line was electrified in 1916 for which a substation was constructed , between the canal and the West Fork . 
 The town also had an extensive tram network . The first tram ran from Black Lane ( latterly Ainsworth Road ) in 1905 , with a terminus next to St Andrew 's Church on Black Lane Bridge . In 1907 a branch was built to connect to the Bury to Bolton part of the network . A large bus station is located between Dale Street and the river . Officially abandoned in 1961 , the canal is currently undergoing restoration on the Salford arm , although a rebuilt bridge along Water Street presents a barrier to its full restoration . 
 Public transport in Radcliffe is now coordinated by the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive ( GMPTE ) , a county @-@ wide public body with direct operational responsibilities such as supporting ( and in some cases running ) local bus services , and managing integrated ticketing in Greater Manchester . 
 The town is now served only by a single light rail system and regular bus services . The Metrolink opened on 6 April 1992 along the L & YR line between Manchester and Bury / Bury and Altrincham ( Manchester also servers as a change point for the rest of the Metrolink system as it expands to cover a greater portion of the region , including Oldham ) . Trams leave from the town 's station every six minutes between 7 : 15 am and 6 : 30 pm , and every 12 minutes at other times of the day . Radcliffe Bridge station closed on 5 July 1958 , and has since been replaced by the path of the A665 Pilkington Way ( the new road has been built below the level of the old station ) . The path of the ELR line is still quite visible from aerial photography , with Outwood Viaduct fully restored , and the route of the line southwest of the town converted for use as a nature trail forming part of the Irwell Sculpture Trail . 
 = = Education = = 
 One of the earliest schools in the parish was the Close Wesleyan Day School , a Dame school opened around 1840 . St Thomas 's day school was opened on 4 March 1861 , and housed over 500 children . Due to overcrowding and the risk of subsidence caused by local mining activity , the school was rebuilt on a new site along School Street , provided by the Earl of Wilton . It was opened in October 1877 by Lady Wilton . On the opposite side of the town St John 's school started life in 1860 as an institute along Irwell Street , and by 1864 contained 120 children . The buildings were enlarged in 1869 . In 1897 eight teachers and a monitor taught 358 children . In 1899 the school leaving age was twelve , and many of the senior class were " half @-@ timers " who would spend half the day at school , and the other half at work . This system was abolished in 1919 . Regular epidemics of scarlet fever , chicken pox , mumps , and especially measles , meant that in 1897 and 1903 the school was temporarily closed . St John 's School and the nearby church were demolished in the 1970s . Radcliffe also had a technical school on Whittaker Street . Formally opened by Lord Stanley on 7 November 1896 , it adjoined the public baths on Whittaker Street . The building is now used as council offices . 
 Radcliffe County Secondary School was founded in 1933 on the former Peel Park Ground near School Street , but Radcliffe 's first secondary school ( apart from an endowed grammar school in nearby Stand ) was held at the New Jerusalem schoolroom from the early 1860s . Radcliffe East , latterly known as Coney Green County Comprehensive School , was built in 1975 on the site of the former railway goods yard alongside Radcliffe East Fork . Part of the school , known as " Phase One " , opened in September 1975 , with 150 first @-@ year pupils , and 70 second @-@ year pupils ( from Radcliffe County Secondary School ) . The remainder , known as " Phase Two " , opened two years later . 
 Radcliffe has ten primary schools , but no secondary schools . A new school was proposed to replace the former Coney Green and Radcliffe High schools , but recent developments make the construction of this school uncertain . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 In Romano – British times , Radcliffe was in the Diocese of York ; in Saxon times in the Diocese of Lindesfarne , then of York ; in Norman times in the Diocese of Lichfield ; after 1540 in the Diocese of Chester and since 1847 in the Diocese of Manchester . 
 Based on the subdivisions of the dioceses , before 1535 Radcliffe ancient parish was in Manchester and Blackburn Rural Deanery . Between this date and 1850 the ancient parish was placed in Manchester Rural Deanery . From 1850 to 1851 it was placed in Bury Rural Deanery ; from 1851 to 1872 it was in Prestwich Rural Deanery ; from 1872 to 1912 , it was placed in Prestwich and Middleton Rural Deanery ; and since 1872 it has been in Radcliffe and Prestwich Rural Deanery . 
 = = = Church of England = = = 
 Radcliffe was an ancient parish which in its early history had duties which combined both ecclesiastical and civil matters . In 1821 Radcliffe St. Thomas ecclesiastical parish was created from the ancient parish , and it was re @-@ founded in 1839 . In 1873 further parts of the ancient parish were taken to form Bury St. Peter 's ecclesiastical parish . In 1878 parts of the ancient parish as well as part of Radcliffe St. Thomas were taken to form Radcliffe St. Andrew , Black Lane ecclesiastical parish . The Parish Church of St Mary was built during the 14th century , and the tower added in the 15th century . In 1966 it was designated a Grade I listed building by English Heritage under its former name of the Church of St Mary and St Bartholomew . In 1991 some local parishes were merged , and the church adopted its present name . 
 Radcliffe is also served by the Parish of St Thomas and St John . St Thomas ' is visible on the horizon for many miles . The original church was built in 1819 by Countess Grosvenor and is visible above in the image of Radcliffe Bridge . The building was later considered too small , and in 1862 was demolished and replaced with the present structure ( see landmarks ) . The Church of St John was consecrated on 19 February 1866 at the bottom of Radcliffe New Road . Built at a cost of about £ 4 @,@ 000 ( £ 330 thousand today ) the site was donated to the church by the Earl of Derby , who in 1897 also made a grant of land for the site of the Mission Church at <unk> . The parishes of St John and St Philip were merged with St Thomas ' in 1975 – 76 . Radcliffe is also home to the Church of St Andrew on Ainsworth Road , which was consecrated in 1877 . 
 = = = Other faiths = = = 
 Radcliffe was also home to many smaller churches . The main Roman Catholic church , St. Mary & St. Philip Neri , on Spring Lane , was built in 1894 . Other churches included Stand Independent , a Quaker church on Foundry Street , Water Lane Congregational , and several Wesleyan churches , including one on <unk> Street , which in March 2008 was destroyed by fire . The church was built in 1892 . The United Reformed Church has two congregations within the town , one on Lord Street , and the other on Stand Lane . The church was originally formed from a Congregational school in 1848 . A Methodist New Connexion church has existed along Smyrna Street since 1844 . Other faiths are also catered for , with a mosque on <unk> Street , and a centre for Swedenborgianism on Radcliffe New Road . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Radcliffe has a rich history of sport , including football , rugby , cricket and swimming , but entertainment in Radcliffe once included bear @-@ baiting , bull @-@ baiting , and cock @-@ fighting . Cock fights were prevalent in the town and took place in local " hush @-@ shops " , generally viewed by invitation only . Bull and bear baiting was held in the Radcliffe Bridge area of the parish . In Nicholls ' History and Traditions of Radcliffe ( 1900 ) the author describes the contents of the diary of a Lord Kenyon , who wrote " W.M. <unk> . James , and Thomas Radcliffe , were fined for causing a <unk> to be <unk> upon Saturday being the 18th of March 1587 – 8 , at the Bull @-@ <unk> neere the <unk> in Manchester . " Trained dogs were used to attack a bull , which was donated by the Earl of Wilton . Such entertainment took place where the bridge now stands , along the banks of the river near the ford . Such spectacles were eventually outlawed by Act of Parliament , and the last bull bait in the town was held on 26 September 1838 . Horse racing replaced the sport the following year , with a course alongside the river . During the first year of racing the main spectator stand collapsed , injuring many spectators . In 1876 events were moved to a new course approximately one mile in circumference at Radcliffe Moor , upon which site the town 's cricket club now stands . 
 The town is home to Central Lancashire Cricket League side Radcliffe Cricket Club . For many years Sir Frank Worrell played for the club , and a street near the cricket ground was named in his honour . Sir Garfield Sobers joined the club in 1958 at the age of 21 . The town also has two Football teams , Radcliffe Town , and Radcliffe Borough . Former players include Paul Gascoigne and Matt Derbyshire . 
 Radcliffe was also home to Nellie Halstead , who in her time was known as " Britain ’ s greatest woman athlete " . A multiple world record holder , she represented Great Britain at the 1932 Olympic Games in Los Angeles . 
 = = Public services = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The Rivers Pollution Prevention Act 1876 posed a problem for the local authorities ; disposal of sewage was generally an expensive proposition , and efforts to resolve the practical problems involved were often unsatisfactory . After initial experiments , in 1894 contracts were let for work . Chairman of the Local Board Samuel Walker Esq cut the first sod on 23 April 1894 , and the works were completed in the following year . 
 The town was provided with electricity by a coal @-@ fired power station along the south bank of the river , to the west of the town . Authorised by the Radcliffe Electric Lighting Order of 1894 , and inaugurated on 5 October 1904 , Radcliffe Power Station was opened by the Earl of Derby on 9 October 1905 . It originally had two 1 @,@ 500 kW turbo sets made by British Thomson @-@ Houston , and was the first power station in the country to transmit electricity over bare electrical conductors . 
 In 1921 the Radcliffe and Little Lever Joint Gas Board purchased the Radcliffe & Pilkington Gas Company . Constituted in 1921 by an Act of Parliament , the board consisted of six members of the Radcliffe Council and one member of the Little Lever Council . The area supplied included all the districts of Radcliffe and Little Lever , and also Prestwich , Whitefield , Unsworth , Outwood , and Ainsworth . In 1935 the company supplied 263 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 7 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 m3 ) of gas to 16 @,@ 748 consumers , and provided gas for public street lighting . Water supplies were provided both by upland watersheds and by the Bury & District Joint Water Board , of which Radcliffe was a constituent authority . 
 By 1935 a fire brigade and ambulances were available to protect the town during emergencies . The <unk> system of fire alarms was used and consisted of 16 alarm boxes spread throughout the district . Three motor ambulances and a motorised utility van were kept at the fire station , operated by permanent staff . 
 = = = Modern services = = = 
 The North West Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport , and the statutory emergency fire and rescue service is now provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service . 
 Home Office policing in Radcliffe is provided by the Greater Manchester Police . The force 's " ( N ) Division " has a police station in Radcliffe , along Railway Street . Waste management is coordinated by the local authority via the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . Radcliffe 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is United Utilities . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Born in Radcliffe , Private First World War veteran James Hutchinson was a recipient of the Victoria Cross . Radcliffe was also the birthplace of Canadian author Donald Jack and also the home of Olympic Medal @-@ winning cyclist Harry Hill who took bronze at the 1936 Summer Olympics . Nellie Halstead was a runner who represented Great Britain in both the 1932 Summer Olympics and 1936 Summer Olympics . Radcliffe was also the birthplace of Oscar @-@ winning film director Danny Boyle and the three times World Champion snooker player , John Spencer . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Radcliffe 's wealth as a mill town gave rise to many outlets for the entertainment of its population . These included cinemas and public houses . Several cinemas were built in the town , including the Picturedrome in Water Street , and an Odeon cinema , built in 1937 along Dale Street . Whittaker Street public baths were built in 1898 and demolished in 1971 . Radcliffe Pool ( as of 2015 due to storm damage the main building has been condemned , with temporary facilities under construction at a local school ) now provides swimming facilities for the local population . A public library was opened in 1907 on a site donated by Andrew Carnegie , who also contributed £ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 480 thousand today ) towards the cost of the building . Two branch libraries were opened in Ainsworth between 1933 and 1935 . A museum was located in the upper rooms of Close House before it was demolished in March 1969 . 
 Radcliffe Brass Band has performed in the town since 1914 , when it accompanied one of the Whit Walks that used to take place on Whit Friday . Popular as these were , support later dwindled to a point where they were abandoned around 1977 . <unk> processions were once popular , held on the first Saturday of September , finishing on the following Sunday at the Parish Church . 
 The town has several parks , including Coronation Park near Radcliffe Bridge and Close Park near Radcliffe Tower . Much of the land for Coronation Park was in 1900 donated by the Earl of Derby . Close House and the grounds around it were formerly the home of the Bealey family , and were donated by the <unk> ' Association . The town is also along the route of the Irwell Sculpture Trail . 
 = Burmese Indians = 
 Burmese Indians ( Burmese : <unk> ; <unk> : <unk> la : lu <unk> : ) are a group of people of Indian origin who live in Burma . While Indians have lived in Burma for many centuries , most of the ancestors of the current Burmese Indian community emigrated to Burma from the start of British rule in the mid @-@ 19th century to the separation of British Burma from British India in 1937 . During British times , ethnic Indians formed the backbone of the government and economy serving as soldiers , civil servants , merchants and moneylenders . A series of anti @-@ Indian riots beginning in 1930 and mass emigration during the Japanese occupation of Burma followed by the forced expulsion of 1962 left ethnic Indians with a much reduced role in Burma . 
 Ethnic Indians today account for approximately 2 % ( about 950 @,@ 000 ) of the population of Burma and are concentrated largely in the two major cities ( Yangon and Mandalay ) and old colonial towns ( <unk> U Lwin and Kalaw ) . They are largely barred from the civil service and military and are disenfranchised by being labeled as ' foreigners ' and ' non @-@ citizens ' of Burma . Amongst the well @-@ known Burmese Indians is S. N. Goenka , a leading practitioner and teacher of <unk> meditation and Helen , a well @-@ known Bollywood film actress who is also of Anglo @-@ Burmese descent . 
 = = History = = 
 The term " Burmese Indian " refers to a broad range of ethnic groups from India , most notably from present @-@ day South Asian countries such as Bangladesh , India and also Pakistan . Indians have a long history in Burma with over 2000 years of active engagement in politics , religion , culture , arts and cuisine . Within Burma , they are often referred to as ka @-@ la or ka @-@ <unk> ( a term generally used for dark @-@ skinned foreigners from India , Africa and the west ) , a term that is considered derogatory or Kala <unk> . Its root is believed to be ku la meaning either " to cross over ( the Bay of Bengal ) " or " person " depending on the way it is pronounced . An alternative explanation is that the word is derived from “ Ku lar ” , meaning the people who adhere to a caste system . 
 The majority of Indians arrived in Burma whilst it was part of British India . Starting with the annexation of <unk> and Western Burma after the First Anglo @-@ Burmese War , a steady stream of Indians moved to Burma as civil servants , engineers , river pilots , soldiers , indentured labourers and traders . Following the annexation of Upper Burma in 1885 , numerous infrastructure projects started by the British colonial government and increases in rice cultivation in the delta region caused an unprecedented economical boom in Burma that drew many Indians , particularly from southern India , to the Irrawaddy Delta region . 
 = = = Anti @-@ Indian sentiments = = = 
 After the First World War , anti @-@ Indian sentiments began to rise for a number of reasons . The number of ethnic Indians was growing rapidly ( almost half of Yangon 's population was Indian by the Second World War ) . Indians played a prominent role in the British administration and became the target of Burmese nationalists . Racial animosity toward Indians because of their skin @-@ color and appearance also played a role . Meanwhile , the price of rice plummeted during the economic depression of the 1930s and the Chettiar from South India , who were prominent moneylenders in the rice belt , began to foreclose on land held by native Burmese . 
 In May 1930 , a British firm of stevedores at the port of Rangoon employed Burmese workers in an attempt to break a strike organized by its Indian workers . When , on May 26 , the strike ended and the Indians returned to work , clashes developed between the returning Indian workers and the Burmese workers who had replaced them . The clashes soon escalated into large @-@ scale anti @-@ Hindu and anti @-@ Muslim riots in the city . Over two hundred Indians were killed and their bodies flung into the river . Authorities ordered the police to fire upon any assembly of five or more who refused to lay down their arms , under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code . Within two days the riot spread throughout the country to locations such as Maymyo . 
 = = = The Second World War and after = = = 
 At the start of World War II , almost half of Rangoon 's ( Yangon ) population was Indian , and about 16 % of the population of Burma was ethnically Indian . As a consequence of the Japanese invasion of 1942 , half a million members of the Indian community fled Burma overland into Assam , largely on foot . The refugees suffered terribly and thousands died . Some of the Indian community remained in Burma during the war , others returned after the war , although many never did . After Independence , Burmese law treated a large percentage of the Indian community as " resident aliens " . Though many had long ties to Burma or were born there , they were not considered citizens under the 1982 Burma citizenship law which restricted citizenship for groups immigrating before 1823 . 
 After he seized power through a military coup in 1962 , General Ne Win ordered a large @-@ scale expulsion of Indians . Although many Indians had been living in Burma for generations and had integrated into Burmese society , they became a target for discrimination and oppression by the junta . This , along with a wholesale nationalization of private ventures in 1964 , led to the emigration of over 300 @,@ 000 ethnic Indians from Burma . Indian @-@ owned businesses were nationalized and their owners were given 175 kyat for their trip to India . This caused a significant deterioration in Indian @-@ Burmese relations and the Indian government arranged ferries and aircraft to lift Burmese of Indian ethnicity out of Burma . 
 = = Culture = = 
 India has been particularly influential in Burmese culture as the cradle of Buddhism , and ancient Hindu traditions can still be seen in Brahmans presiding over important ceremonies such as weddings and ear @-@ piercings but most notably in <unk> , the Burmese New Year festival . The Burmese poetry tradition of <unk> ( notably the <unk> ) also has Indian origins . Traditions of kingship including coronation ceremonies and formal royal titles as well as those of lawmaking were also Hindu in origin . Many Burmese dishes and breads came as a result of Indian influence , prominently reflected in the Burmese version of Indian biryani . 
 Burmese Indians came from various groups from different parts of India , including Tamils , Telugus , Hindi speakers , Bengali , Gujarati , Oriya , and Punjabis . Today they form approximately 2 % ( about 950 @,@ 000 ) of the population , according to the CIA World Factbook 2006 , although exact figures do not exist due to uncertainties over census results and methods in Myanmar . Disaffected young Indians often flee the cities and join ethnic resistance movements . The All Burma Muslim Union whose members consist largely of Muslims of Indian origin is routinely labeled by the government as " Muslim terrorist insurgents " . In actuality it operates alongside the Karen National Union and , despite a swelling of its ranks following anti @-@ Muslim riots in the eighties , remains a very minor force . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Burmese Indians practise Hinduism , Islam , Sikhism , Buddhism and Christianity . Burmese Muslims , some of them of mixed blood born of Burmese mothers and some of them with full Burmese blood , call themselves Bama <unk> ( <unk> ္ ) ; the majority are Sunni with small numbers of <unk> . The Burmese call them <unk> . 
 The constitution grants limited rights to freedom of religion ; however , some articles in the constitution , as well as other laws and policies , restrict those rights . In practice the government enforced those restrictions . " Muslims continue to experience the most severe forms of legal , economic , religious , educational , and social restrictions and discrimination " . The military dictatorship rejects or ignores their requests when they want to build mosques in the country or to go abroad for religious ceremonies . Although there is freedom of religion in Burma , Muslims decided not to hold Eid al @-@ Adha in 2012 due to Rakhine @-@ Rohingya strikes in Rakhine State . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Burmese Indians are from an array of ethnic backgrounds . There are Tamils from Tamil Nadu , Telugus from Andhra Pradesh and Marwaris from the Marwar region of India 's Rajasthan state as well as Bengalis hailing from the Indian state of West Bengal as well as the present @-@ day independent nation of Bangladesh . Prior to the expulsion of Indians , there were also Urdu @-@ speaking Pashtuns from North India , <unk> from Kerala , <unk> , Punjabis from the state of Punjab who are mostly Sikhs and two groups of Gujaratis , both Gujarati @-@ speaking Parsis and Gujaratis proper who are mostly Hindus or Muslims by faith hailing from the state of Gujarat . All can and were able to communicate in Burmese due to years of assimilation and lack of education in languages other than English . Other languages used by Burmese Indians include Tamil , Telugu and small pockets of Malayalam speakers . 
 = = Economic role = = 
 Historically , Burmese Indians have made their livelihoods as merchants , traders and shopkeepers as well as manual labourers such as coolies , dockers , municipal workers , rickshaw men , pony cart drivers , <unk> and <unk> . They were also heavily represented in certain professions such as civil servants , university lecturers , pharmacists , opticians , lawyers and doctors . They dominated several types of businesses such as auto parts and electrical goods , <unk> and hardware , printing and bookbinding , books and stationery , paper and printing ink , tailoring and dry @-@ cleaning , English tuition , and money lending . They traded in textiles , gold and jewellery , where the market was traditionally dominated by Burmese women . The <unk> of Burma functioned as moneylenders and have been thought crucial in the growth in agricultural output of Burma during the colonial era . Today , many Indians live in central Rangoon on both sides of the Su Lei Paya Road and are largely involved in businesses , including restaurants , jewellery shops and money exchanges . 
 = = Notable Burmese Indians and Others = = 
 Karim Ghani was born in <unk> , <unk> , a politician in South @-@ East Asia of Indian origin . Before the Second World War Karim Ghani was a parliamentary secretary in Burma under Dr. Ba Maw . 
 Ba Than Haq - Professor of Geology and Minister of Mines . Of mixed Afghan and Danu descent . 
 Bahadur Shah II or Bahadur Shah Zafar , the last Mughal Emperor was exiled to Rangoon after the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . He , along with his wife Zeenat Mahal and granddaughter <unk> Zamani Begum , is buried at the Mazar ( mausoleum ) at No. 6 Theatre Road in Yangon . 
 T. S. S. Rajan - Indian freedom @-@ fighter and Minister of Health in Madras Presidency from 1937 to 1940 . 
 S. N. Goenka - eminent <unk> Buddhist meditation teacher ( born 1924 ) 
 <unk> Verma ( Freedom Fighter in Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose army in Myanmar , social worker and leader of repatriated Indian Burmese in Bihar & UP . He pioneered the repatriation of Indian Burmese in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh who were migrated from these areas to Myanmar at the time of British era and started migrating into India at the time of unrest during General Nevin regime in 1969 . He dedicated his most of life to address their problems and find the solutions with the help of various Indian Government Ministries and Authorities . 
 H. N. <unk> aka <unk> Ba Tin - Communist leader and founding member from the 1940s to the 1960s killed in an internal purge in 1967 . He was an ethnic Bengali . 
 Helen of Bollywood . Born Helen <unk> Richardson Khan in Rangoon on July 14 , 1938 , she fled to India during World War II and became famous for playing the vamp in Indian cinema . 
 Dr. Maung Di - Department chair and dean of Rangoon Arts and Science University ( now Yangon University ) , Deputy Education Minister . Son of the Dean of Islamic Religious College in <unk> . 
 U Razak ( 20 January 1898 – 19 July 1947 ; Arabic : Abdul Razak ) was a Burmese politician who was a respected educationalist . He is a Tamil Muslim ( <unk> ) . While his brothers and sisters chose to be Buddhists , he maintained the Muslim name Razak , in honor of his father . Although nominally Muslim , Razak was a secularist who deeply loved Burma and encouraged unity in diversity . Razak initiated calls for unity between Burmese Muslims and Buddhists . He was a Muslim , but maintained ties to Buddhism , educating himself on Pali , the sacred script of Theravada Buddhism , and helped found the Mandalay College ( modern Mandalay University ) . Razak fathered three children . He was a minister at Aung San 's pre @-@ independence interim government and was assassinated , along with Aung San and other members , on 19 July 1947 . July 19 is celebrated in Myanmar today as Martyrs ' Day . U Razak was Minister of Education and National Planning , and was chairman of the Burma Muslim Congress . 
 Dr. B.S. Joshi - ( 4 / 3 / 1912 @-@ 15 / 10 / 2009 ) Surgeon Par Excellence @-@ Civil Surgeon Burma Medical Services . Graduated Medical College Rangoon with Honours receiving the Bishop <unk> Medal ( 1936 ) . There has been only 1 recipient up to date . Married Dr. Ratna Sundari Misra D / o Dr. <unk> Misra and she was one of the only female doctors in Burma . Together they had hospitals sanctioned and constructed throughout the districts of Burma . Both Dr. B.S. Joshi and his wife were committed doctors and dedicated to the people of Burma . Besides his duties as a surgeon general to the Union of Burma he was also District Health Officer , Municipal Health Officer of every district with extensive experience in Public Health Work . In the beginning of his career , he was a teacher of clinical surgery in Rangoon General Hospital . Then Assistant Surgeon <unk> / Officer in charge of Hospitals in <unk> , Mandalay and Moulmein and later Chief Medical Officer <unk> and finally Rangoon as surgeon of Rangoon Hospital . Later surgeon general in Lashio , <unk> . Mergui , <unk> , Moulmein and was also in charge of 13 hospitals in the Northern Shan States with headquarters at Lashio . Dr. B.S. Joshi was a loyal friend to both General Ne Win and U Nu , a leading Nationalist and political figure of the Union of Burma . 
 S. <unk> aka <unk> Win - Communist trade union leader killed in the 1950s 
 Dr. Nath aka Tun Maung - Communist leader and founding member killed in the 1960s 
 Captain <unk> Kyaw <unk> - <unk> after failed attempt of coup d 'état 
 Saya Rajan aka Aung <unk> - Communist trade union leader captured in the 1950s 
 M. A. Rashid - Government Minister in the 1950s 
 <unk> Tha Khin ( Shan Indian ) - Government Minister in the 1950s 
 U Balwant Singh -A Jat Sikh from Burma sent to the United States by Burmese <unk> ( U NU ) to work at the United Nations during the term of U Thant ( Sec General of UN whose father was Indian also ) . 
 Dr Ram Bax Singh - A Jat Sikh Served as the Port Health director for Port of Rangoon till early 1960 . 
 Dr Santosh <unk> ( <unk> Mann ) - Municipal Health Minister during the 1960s 
 Chaudhry Charan Das - Originally hailing from Gujranwala ( now in Pakistan ) , Chaudhary Charan Das moved to Burma in the early 1900s to establish a soap factory in Mandalay ( Burma ) under the banner S. Sagar & Co . Decades later during Japanese invasion the family then returned and settled in Rawalpindi . During India @-@ Pakistan partition in 1947 , the family eventually settled in Kapurthala ( India ) where Chaudhary Charan Das 's eldest son Dr. Shanti Sagar Verma soon established himself as a very prominent and successful doctor and where he opened one of the first private multi @-@ speciality hospitals in the city . 
 <unk> <unk> One of the famous high school English teachers in Myanmar . 
 U <unk> Nyunt ( <unk> Nyunt Mathematics ) - A Mathematics tuition teacher who have taught over 50 @,@ 000 students . 
 Bhanumati Devi - Oriya film and theater actress who was born in Burma . 
 U. A. Khader - U. A. Khader ( <unk> ) is a noted Malayalee novelist and literary personality . He has written about fifty works in Malayalam , which include novels , novellas , short @-@ stories , travelogues and non @-@ fiction . 
 Alan Basil de <unk> - ( 1929 – 2000 ) was the fourth Archbishop of Delhi . He was born in Maymyo of mixed Burmese , Irish and French ancestry . 
 Daw Tint Tint @ Usha wife of former President of India , K. R. Narayanan . Usha Narayanan ( 1923 – 2008 ) worked on several social welfare programs for women and children in India and had completed her Masters in Social Work from Delhi School of Social Work . She also translated and published several Burmese short stories ; a collection of translated stories by Thein Pe <unk> , titled Sweet and Sour , appeared in 1998 . She is the only woman of foreign origin to have become the First Lady . 
 = Vilna offensive = 
 The Vilna offensive was a campaign of the Polish – Soviet War of 1919 – 1921 . The Polish army launched an offensive on April 16 , 1919 , to take Vilnius ( Polish : Wilno ) from the Red Army . After three days of street fighting from April 19 – 21 , the city was captured by Polish forces , causing the Red Army to retreat . During the offensive , the Poles also succeeded in securing the nearby cities of Lida , Pinsk , Navahrudak , and <unk> . 
 The Red Army launched a series of counterattacks in late April , all of which ended in failure . The Soviets briefly recaptured the city a year later , in spring 1920 , when the Polish army was retreating along the entire front . In the aftermath , the Vilna offensive would cause much turmoil on the political scene in Poland and abroad . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Soviet Russia , while at the time publicly supporting Polish and Lithuanian independence , sponsored communist agitators working against the government of the Second Polish Republic , and considered that its eastern borders should approximate those of the defunct Congress Poland . Poles and Lithuanians , on the other hand , inspired by memories of the greatness of the erstwhile Grand Duchy of Lithuania , part of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , saw their borders as lying much farther east . The leader of the Polish forces , Józef Piłsudski , discerned an opportunity for regaining territories that were once the part of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , and since then were part of the Prussian Empire , shaken by the 1917 Revolution and the ongoing Russian Civil War . 
 In the first weeks of 1919 , following the retreat of the German Ober @-@ Ost forces under Max Hoffmann , Vilnius found itself in a power vacuum . It promptly became the scene of struggles among competing political groups and experienced several internal revolutions . 
 On January 1 , Polish officers , led by generals Władysław <unk> and Stefan <unk> , attempted to take control of the city by establishing a Samoobrona ( " Self @-@ Defense " ) provisional government . Their aim was to defeat the Communist " Workers ' Council " , a rival faction within Vilnius plotting to seize the city . Samoobrona rule of Vilnius did not last long . Four days later January 5 , 1919 , the Polish forces were forced to make a hasty retreat when the Russian Western Army marched in from Smolensk to support the local communists as part of the Soviet westward offensive . 
 Vilnius , the historical capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , became part of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic and was soon proclaimed capital of the Lithuanian – Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic ( Lit @-@ Bel ) on February 27 , 1919 . The Lit @-@ Bel became the 8th government to control Vilnius in two years . During the month and a half that the Lit @-@ Bel controlled the city , the new communist government turned Vilnius into a social experiment , testing various applications of left @-@ leaning governmental systems on the city 's inhabitants . 
 Józef Piłsudski , Polish commander @-@ in @-@ chief , determined that regaining control of Vilnius , whose population consisted mostly of Poles and Jews , should be a priority of the renascent Polish state . He had been working on plans to take control of Vilnius since at least March ; he gave preliminary orders to prepare a push in that direction — and counter an expected Soviet westward push — on March 26 . One of Piłsudski 's objectives was to take control of Vilnius before Western diplomats at the Paris Peace Conference could rule on whom the city , demanded by various factions , should be given to . The action was not discussed with Polish politicians or the government , who at that time were more concerned with the situation on the southern Polish – Ukrainian front . By early April , when members of the Kresy Defence Committee ( Komitet Obrony <unk> ) Michał Pius Römer , Aleksander <unk> , Witold <unk> , and Kazimierz <unk> met with <unk> , stressing the plight of occupied Vilnius and its inhabitants ' need for self @-@ government , Piłsudski was ready to move . 
 = = The Offensive = = 
 = = = Diversionary attacks = = = 
 Piłsudski arrived at the front near Lida on 15 April , bringing reinforcements from Warsaw . His plan called for exploitation of the gap in the Soviet lines between Vilnius and Lida by an advance towards Vilnius using the road and railway . Amidst diversionary attacks , designed to draw Russian attention away from the main Polish thrust towards Vilnius , the main Polish attack began at dawn on 16 April . The forces moving on Vilnius included the cavalry group of Colonel Wladyslaw Belina @-@ <unk> , composed of 800 men in nine cavalry squadrons and a battery of horse artillery ; and infantry under General Edward Rydz @-@ Śmigły , composed of 2 @,@ 500 men in three battalions of the Polish 1st Legions Infantry Division and two batteries of heavy artillery . 
 Soviet forces in the area were composed of the Western Rifle Division , a unit which had many pro @-@ communist Polish volunteers , and other units of the Western Army . The Soviet garrison of Vilnius numbered about 2 @,@ 000 newly trained troops . Soviet forces in the area around Vilnius are estimated at 7 @,@ 000 infantry , a few hundred cavalry , and 10 artillery pieces . These forces were to be engaged and thus prevented from coming to the aid of the Vilnius garrison . 
 The diversionary attacks went well , with Soviet forces acting under the impression that the Poles had targets other than Vilnius . Despite their diversionary intent , these attacks succeeded in their own right , with Generał Józef Adam <unk> taking Lida in two days despite unexpectedly strong resistance , and Generał Stefan <unk> taking <unk> in three days and <unk> in four . 
 = = = Assault on Vilnius = = = 
 On 18 April , Colonel Belina decided to use the element of surprise and move into Vilnius without waiting for the slower infantry units . Polish forces left the village of <unk> in early morning . At 03 : 30 on 19 April , Maj. <unk> took <unk> near Vilnius . Belina 's cavalry bypassed Vilnius and attacked from behind , taking the train station on the night of 18 to 19 April ; on 19 April , cavalry under lieutenant Gustaw <unk> @-@ <unk> — future Polish general — charged into the suburbs , spreading panic among the confused garrison . He seized the train station and sent a train down the line to collect infantry . In this surprise raid about 400 prisoners , 13 trains , and various military supplies were captured . Piłsudski would declare Belina 's cavalry action the " most exquisite military action carried out by Polish cavalry in this war " . 
 Cavalrymen fought for control of the center of Vilnius and took Cathedral Square , the castle complex on the hillside , and the enemy quarters on the southern riverbank . They also captured hundreds of Bolshevik soldiers and officials , but their numbers were too small compared to the enemy forces , who had begun to reorganize , particularly in the north and west of the town , and prepare a counterattack . Belina sent a message reporting that " enemy is resisting with extreme strength " and asking for immediate reinforcements . At around 8 : 00 in the evening the train he had sent in the morning returned with the first infantry reinforcements . The Polish troops were also supported by the city 's predominantly Polish population which formed a militia to aid them . By the evening of 19 April half of Vilnius was under Polish control , however , the Red Army troops and supporters were putting up a stubborn and coordinated defence . Only upon the arrival of the main force of Polish infantry under Generał Śmigły on 21 April did the Poles gain the upper hand , attacking those parts of the town still held by the Red Army . The Polish infantry was able to reinforce the cavalry in the city center , and during the night , with help of local guides , Polish forces crossed the river and took one of the bridges . On April 20 , the bridges were in the hands of the Poles , and more of the city fell under their control . During the afternoon of that day , after a three @-@ day @-@ long urban battle , the city was in Polish hands . Piłsudski arrived in Vilnius on the same day . 
 = = = Jewish deaths = = = 
 Reports also have been circulated about pogroms in Vilna . They are absolutely false . Nothing of the sort has happened there . That is a sample of the exaggeration German agents are giving to the situation to poison public opinion against us in America . 
 – Ignacy Jan Paderewski , Prime Minister of Poland , 1919 
 As the Polish troops entered the city , the first pogrom in modern Vilnius started , as noted by the Timothy D. Snyder , citing Michał Pius Römer . Dozens of people connected with the Lit @-@ Bel were arrested , and some were executed ; Norman Davies cites a death toll for all – Jews and non @-@ Jews , under Polish rule – as 65 . Jews constituted close to one @-@ half of Vilnius 's population , according to the German census of 1916 , and many victims of fighting and subsequent repression in Vilnius were Jews . Henry Morgenthau , Sr. counted 65 , Joseph W. <unk> counted over a hundred . 
 There was a common belief among the Poles that most Jews were Bolsheviks and Communists , in league with the enemy of the Polish state , Soviet Russia . The Polish army stated that any Jews it killed were militants and collaborators engaged in actions against the Polish army . Having been fired at from Jewish homes , Polish soldiers took this as an excuse to break into many Jewish homes and stores , beating the Jews and robbing them , desecrating synagogues , arresting hundreds , depriving them of food and drink for days and deporting them from the city ; such abuses were , however , not supported by – and even specifically forbidden by – the Polish high command . 
 The US Army representative on the scene , Colonel Wiliam F. Godson , agreed with the version of events presented by the Polish general staff . In his reports , Godson wrote that " Jews constituted at least 80 % of every Bolshevik organization " and that , unlike the " harmless Polish Jews " ( who really " had become Poles " ) , the " <unk> or Russian Jews " are " extremely dangerous " , making the " Jewish question the most important one [ for the country ] " . Neglecting the plight of the Jews , Godson had only noted in his report the instances of Bolsheviks executing and mutilating civilians and Polish prisoners of war . The Nobel Prize @-@ winning author Władysław Reymont , in an article published by Gazeta <unk> , the main organ of the openly antisemitic National Democratic Party , also denied that pogroms had taken place . Henry Morgenthau , Sr. of the Anglo @-@ American Investigating Commission in his report acquitted the Polish side of having organized pogroms , noting the wartime confusion and the fact that some Jews had indeed shot at the Polish forces . The report was , however , highly critical of the activities of the Polish Army in Vilnius , noting that 65 Jews with no proven connections to the Bolsheviks had been killed , and that many arrests , robberies and <unk> had occurred , while soldiers guilty of these acts had not been punished . 
 = = = Soviet counteroffensive = = = 
 The Polish victory infuriated the Soviets , leading to dozens of arrests and several executions among those connected to the Lit @-@ Bel . ; the former Lit @-@ Bel leaders began accusing one another of culpability for the loss of their capital . Lenin considered the city vital to his plans , and ordered its immediate recapture , with the Red Army attempting several counteroffensives in April 1919 . 
 Near the end of the month about 12 @,@ 000 infantry , 3 @,@ 000 cavalry , 210 heavy machine guns and 44 guns were assembled by Soviet forces in the area of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Polish forces in the area under general Stanisław <unk> numbered 11 @,@ 000 ; Rydz @-@ <unk> had 8 infantry battalions , 18 cavalry squadrons and 18 guns in Vilnius itself . Rydz @-@ Śmigły decided to engage enemy forces before they combined their strengths . On the night of April 28 – 29 , general Stefan <unk> @-@ Biernacki took <unk> , capturing one of the Soviet formations . Simultaneously , Soviet forces attacked near <unk> – <unk> , south of Vilnius . Polish defenses and counterattacks managed to halt Soviet movements towards Vilnius , pushing them back towards <unk> – <unk> . In retaliation , Soviet forces launched yet another counterattack , this one from north of Vilnius . The results were significantly better than those of the previous offensive , with Soviet forces breaking through Polish defenses in the area . However , Red Army forces halted their movements short of Vilnius , not wishing to attack a hostile city during the night . Polish forces took advantage of the opportunity to strengthen their defenses . Shortly afterwards , Polish forces counterattacked , pushing the Red Army back towards <unk> and <unk> . Polish forces pursued and took those two settlements , as well as <unk> and <unk> . By mid @-@ May Polish forces had reached the line of <unk> lake – <unk> – <unk> – <unk> , leaving Vilnius well behind the frontline . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Because of the successful surprise attack , the Polish army in Vilnius managed to appropriate sizable stocks of supplies and take hundreds of prisoners . When Piłsudski entered the city , a victory parade was held in his honour . The city 's Polish citizens on the whole were delighted ; their politicians envisaged a separate Lithuanian state closely allied with Poland . Representatives from the city were immediately sent to the Paris Peace Conference , and the Stefan Batory University in Vilnius , which had been closed in 1832 following the November 1830 Uprising , was reopened . 
 Acting in accordance with his vision of a Polish @-@ led " Międzymorze " federation of East @-@ Central European states , Piłsudski on April 22 , 1919 , issued a bilingual statement , in Polish and Lithuanian , of his political intentions — the " Proclamation to the inhabitants of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania " , pledging to provide " elections [ which will ] take place on the basis of secret , universal and direct voting , without distinction between the sexes " and to " create an opportunity for settling your nationality problems and religious affairs in a manner that you yourself will determine , without any kind of force or pressure from Poland . " Piłsudski 's proclamation was aimed at showing good will both to Lithuanians and international diplomats ; the latter succeeded as the proclamation dealt a blow to the image of ' Polish conquest ' and replaced it with the image of ' Poland fighting with Bolsheviks dictatorship and liberating other nations ' ; however the Lithuanians who demanded exclusive control over the city were much less convinced . Piłsudski 's words also caused significant controversy on the Polish political scene ; as they had not been discussed with the Sejm and caused much anger among Piłsudski 's National @-@ Democratic opponents ; Polish People 's Party " Piast " deputies demanded incorporation of the Vilnius Region into Poland and even accused Piłsudski of treason . However , Piłsudski 's supporters in the Polish Socialist Party managed to deflect those attacks . 
 The Lithuanian government in Kaunas , which viewed the city as the historic capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , saw the Polish incursion as an occupation . The Lithuanian government demanded Vilnius back . Relations between the Polish and Lithuanian governments , unable to reach a compromise over Vilnius , continued to worsen , destroying the prospects for Piłsudski 's plan of the Międzymorze federation and leading to open hostilities in the ensuing Polish – Lithuanian War . In 1920 , the Soviets recaptured Vilnius , followed by the Poles ' establishment of the short @-@ lived Republic of Central Lithuania . 
 The Polish capture of Vilnius set the stage for further escalation of Polish conflicts with Soviet Russia and Lithuania . In coming months , Polish forces would push steadily eastward , launching Operation Minsk in August . 
 = Delhi Daredevils in 2012 = 
 The Delhi Daredevils ( DD ) is a franchise cricket team based in Delhi , India , which plays in the Indian Premier League ( IPL ) . The team competed in the 2012 IPL and finished at the third place , thus qualified for the 2012 Champions League Twenty20 ( CLT20 ) . It topped the league and the group stage in the IPL and the CLT20 respectively ; however , it failed to win any match in the playoffs . 
 After finishing last in the previous season , the Daredevils added players such as <unk> Jayawardene , Andre Russell , Kevin Pietersen and Ross Taylor to the squad . Eric Simons succeeded Greg Shipperd as the head coach and T. A. Sekhar took the mentorship . The team won 11 of the 16 matches played in the league stage of the IPL and topped the point table . However , it lost both its two matches in the playoffs and finished at the third place . In the CLT20 , they won two of its four group stage matches , while the other two were abandoned due to rain . It topped its group and reached the semi @-@ final , where it lost to the Highveld Lions . <unk> Morkel was the highest wicket @-@ taker in the IPL , whereas skipper Virender Sehwag became the first batsman to score five consecutive fifties in the league . After the CLT20 , the team released fourteen of its players , including Robin Bist , Aaron Finch and Venugopal Rao , signing Jesse Ryder , Johan Botha and Jeevan Mendis . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Delhi Daredevils is a franchise cricket team based in Delhi , India which plays in the IPL . It is owned by the GMR Group , which bought it for US $ 84 million . It reached the IPL playoffs in the 2008 and the 2009 seasons , while topping the league stage in 2009 . It had a " shocking performance " in the 2011 season , finishing at the last position . In the 2012 IPL auction , the team purchased <unk> Jayawardene for $ 1 @.@ 4 million , Andre Russell for $ 450 @,@ 000 and Doug Bracewell for $ 50 @,@ 000 . It got Kevin Pietersen and Ross Taylor from the Deccan Chargers and the Rajasthan Royals respectively in a transfer window , and it gave Andrew McDonald to the Royal Challengers Bangalore . It also released Ashok <unk> and James Hopes to the Pune Warriors India . It signed Pawan Negi , Manpreet Juneja and <unk> <unk> , dropping out Robert <unk> , <unk> Sriram , Vivek Yadav , Rajesh Pawar and Matthew Wade . Glenn Maxwell and <unk> <unk> were signed as the replacements for withdrawn players Travis Birt and Colin Ingram . 
 Before the season , Daredevils ' head coach Greg Shipperd was replaced by Eric Simons , who was the previous assistant coach of the team and the then bowling coach of the India . T. A. Sekhar became the team mentor for the second time , after working with the Mumbai Indians in the previous two seasons . The theme song was also changed from <unk> Front Foot pe to Munday Dilli ke . 
 In her preview of the Daredevils for ESPNcricinfo , Sharda Ugra termed the buying of Pietersen and Jayawardene as the " repair work for the new season . " She termed the team 's middle order as a " perfect mixture : batsmen of calibre combining with the game 's leading entertainers , " and identified Virender Sehwag and Jayawardene as the key players . 
