 On October 6 , a cannon that was dubbed the " Old Sow " arrived from Ticonderoga . Put in position the next day , it started lobbing shells at the fort . Montgomery then began planning the placement of a second battery . While he first wanted to place one to the northwest of the fort , his staff convinced him instead to place on the eastern shore of the Richelieu , where it would command the shipyard and the Royal Savage . This battery , whose construction was complicated by an armed row galley sent from the fort to oppose the works , was completed on October 13 , and opened fire the next day . One day after that , the Royal Savage lay in ruins before the fort . Its commander had , in anticipation of her destruction , ordered her to be anchored where her supplies and armaments might be recovered . 
 = = Fort Chambly taken = = 
 James Livingston had advanced to Montgomery the idea of taking Fort Chambly , near where his militia was encamped . One of Livingston 's captains , Jeremy Duggan , had , on September 13 , floated two nine @-@ pound guns past St. Jean , and these guns were put to use to that end . Chambly , which was garrisoned by only 82 men , mostly from the 7th Foot , was surrendered on October 18 by its commander , Major Joseph Stopford , after two days of bombardment . Most seriously , Stopford failed to destroy supplies that were vitally useful to the Americans , primarily gunpowder , but also winter provisions . Six tons of powder , 6 @,@ 500 musket cartridges , 125 muskets , 80 barrels of flour and 272 barrels of foodstuff were captured . 
 Timothy Bedel negotiated a cease @-@ fire with Major Preston so that the prisoners captured at Chambly could be floated up the river past St. Jean . The loss of Chambly had a dispiriting effect at St. Jean ; some of the militia wanted to surrender , but Preston would not allow it . Following Chambly 's capitulation , Montgomery renewed his intention to construct a battery northwest of St. Jean . This time , his staff raised no objections , and by the end of October guns that were emplaced there opened fire on the fort . 
 = = Carleton tries to help = = 
 In Montreal , Carleton was finally prodded to move . Under constant criticism for failure to act sooner , and mistrustful of his militia forces , he developed a plan of attack . He sent word to Colonel Allan Maclean at Quebec to bring more of his Royal Highland Emigrants and some militia forces to Sorel , from where they would move up the Richelieu toward St. Jean , while Carleton would lead a force across the Saint Lawrence at Longueuil . 
 Maclean raised a force of about 180 Emigrants , and a number of militia . By the time he reached Sorel on October 14 , he had raised , in addition to the Emigrants , about 400 militia men , sometimes using threatening tactics to gain recruits . His and Carleton 's hopes were dashed on October 30 , when Carleton 's attempted landing at Longueuil of a force numbering about 1 @,@ 000 ( mostly militia , with some Emigrants and Indian support ) was repulsed by the Americans . A few of his boats were landed , but most were driven off by Seth Warner 's use of field artillery that had been captured at Chambly . 
 Maclean attempted to press forward , but his militia forces began to desert him , and the forces under Brown and Livingston were growing in number . He retreated back to Sorel , and made his way back to Quebec . 
 = = Surrender = = 
 In late October , the American troop strength surged again with the arrival of 500 men from New York and Connecticut , including Brigadier General David Wooster . This news , combined with the new battery trained on the fort , news of the failed relief expedition , and dwindling supplies , made the situation in the fort quite grim . 
 On November 1 , Montgomery sent a truce flag , carried by a prisoner captured during Carleton 's aborted relief attempt , into the fort . The man delivered a letter , in which Montgomery , pointing out that relief was unlikely to come , offered to negotiate a surrender . Preston , not entirely trusting the man 's report , sent out one of his captains to confer with Montgomery . The counteroffer , which Montgomery rejected , owing to the lateness of the season , was to hold a truce for four days , after which the garrison would surrender if no relief came . Montgomery let the captain examine another prisoner from Carleton 's expedition , who confirmed what the first one had reported . Montgomery then repeated his demand for an immediate surrender , terms for which were drawn up the next day . 
 Preston 's troops marched out of the fort and surrendered their weapons on November 3 , with the regulars in full dress uniform . He surrendered 536 officers and soldiers , 79 Canadien and 8 English volunteers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the news of St. Jean 's surrender , Carleton immediately began preparing to leave Montreal . He left Montreal on November 11 , two days before American troops entered the city without opposition . Narrowly escaping capture when his fleet was forced to surrender after being threatened by batteries at Sorel , he made his way to Quebec to prepare that city 's defenses . 
 Casualties on both sides during the siege were relatively light , but the Continental Army suffered a significant reduction in force due to illness throughout the siege . Furthermore , the long siege meant that the Continental Army had to move on Quebec City with winter setting in , and with many enlistments nearing expiration at year 's end . Richard Montgomery was promoted to Major General on December 9 , 1775 , as a result of his successful capture of Saint Jean and Montreal . He never found out ; the news did not reach the American camp outside Quebec before he died in the December 31 Battle of Quebec . 
 In 1776 , the British reoccupied the fort following the Continental Army 's abandonment of it during its retreat to Fort Ticonderoga . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The British ( and then Canadian ) military occupied the Fort Saint @-@ Jean site until 1995 , using it since 1952 as the campus of the Royal Military College , which still occupies part of the site . The site now includes a museum devoted to the 350 @-@ year military history of Fort Saint @-@ Jean . 
 Siege of Fort St. Jean is mentioned in a Fort Saint @-@ Jean plaque erected in 1926 by Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada at the Royal Military College Saint @-@ Jean . " Constructed in 1743 by M. de <unk> under orders from Governor la Galissonnière . This post was for all the military expeditions towards Lake Champlain . In August 31 , 1760 , Commandant de Roquemaure had it blown up in accordance with orders from the Governor de Vaudreuil in order to prevent its falling into the hands of the English . Rebuilt by Governor Carleton , in 1773 . During the same year , under the command of Major Charles Preston of the 26th Regiment , it withstood a 45 day siege by the American troops commanded by General Montgomery . " 
 = Atomic theory = 
 In chemistry and physics , atomic theory is a scientific theory of the nature of matter , which states that matter is composed of discrete units called atoms . It began as a philosophical concept in ancient Greece and entered the scientific mainstream in the early 19th century when discoveries in the field of chemistry showed that matter did indeed behave as if it were made up of atoms . 
 The word atom comes from the Ancient Greek adjective <unk> , meaning " uncuttable " . 19th century chemists began using the term in connection with the growing number of irreducible chemical elements . While seemingly apropos , around the turn of the 20th century , through various experiments with electromagnetism and radioactivity , physicists discovered that the so @-@ called " uncuttable atom " was actually a conglomerate of various subatomic particles ( chiefly , electrons , protons and neutrons ) which can exist separately from each other . In fact , in certain extreme environments , such as neutron stars , extreme temperature and pressure prevents atoms from existing at all . Since atoms were found to be divisible , physicists later invented the term " elementary particles " to describe the " uncuttable " , though not indestructible , parts of an atom . The field of science which studies subatomic particles is particle physics , and it is in this field that physicists hope to discover the true fundamental nature of matter . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Philosophical atomism = = = 
 The idea that matter is made up of discrete units is a very old one , appearing in many ancient cultures such as Greece and India . However , these ideas were founded in philosophical and theological reasoning rather than evidence and experimentation . Because of this , they could not convince everybody , so atomism was but one of a number of competing theories on the nature of matter . It was not until the 19th century that the idea was embraced and refined by scientists , as the blossoming science of chemistry produced discoveries that could easily be explained using the concept of atoms . 
 = = = Dalton = = = 
 Near the end of the 18th century , two laws about chemical reactions emerged without referring to the notion of an atomic theory . The first was the law of conservation of mass , formulated by Antoine Lavoisier in 1789 , which states that the total mass in a chemical reaction remains constant ( that is , the reactants have the same mass as the products ) . The second was the law of definite proportions . First proven by the French chemist Joseph Louis Proust in 1799 , this law states that if a compound is broken down into its constituent elements , then the masses of the constituents will always have the same proportions , regardless of the quantity or source of the original substance . 
 John Dalton studied and expanded upon this previous work and developed the law of multiple proportions : if two elements can be combined to form a number of possible compounds , then the ratios of the masses of the second element which combine with a fixed mass of the first element will be ratios of small whole numbers . For example : Proust had studied tin oxides and found that their masses were either 88 @.@ 1 % tin and 11 @.@ 9 % oxygen or 78 @.@ 7 % tin and 21 @.@ 3 % oxygen ( these were tin ( II ) oxide and tin dioxide respectively ) . Dalton noted from these percentages that 100g of tin will combine either with <unk> or 27g of oxygen ; 13 @.@ 5 and 27 form a ratio of 1 : 2 . Dalton found that an atomic theory of matter could elegantly explain this common pattern in chemistry . In the case of Proust 's tin oxides , one tin atom will combine with either one or two oxygen atoms . 
 Dalton also believed atomic theory could explain why water absorbed different gases in different proportions - for example , he found that water absorbed carbon dioxide far better than it absorbed nitrogen . Dalton hypothesized this was due to the differences in mass and complexity of the gases ' respective particles . Indeed , carbon dioxide molecules ( CO2 ) are heavier and larger than nitrogen molecules ( N2 ) . 
 Dalton proposed that each chemical element is composed of atoms of a single , unique type , and though they cannot be altered or destroyed by chemical means , they can combine to form more complex structures ( chemical compounds ) . This marked the first truly scientific theory of the atom , since Dalton reached his conclusions by experimentation and examination of the results in an empirical fashion . 
 In 1803 Dalton orally presented his first list of relative atomic weights for a number of substances . This paper was published in 1805 , but he did not discuss there exactly how he obtained these figures . The method was first revealed in 1807 by his acquaintance Thomas Thomson , in the third edition of Thomson 's textbook , A System of Chemistry . Finally , Dalton published a full account in his own textbook , A New System of Chemical Philosophy , 1808 and 1810 . 
 Dalton estimated the atomic weights according to the mass ratios in which they combined , with the hydrogen atom taken as unity . However , Dalton did not conceive that with some elements atoms exist in molecules — e.g. pure oxygen exists as O2 . He also mistakenly believed that the simplest compound between any two elements is always one atom of each ( so he thought water was HO , not H2O ) . This , in addition to the crudity of his equipment , flawed his results . For instance , in 1803 he believed that oxygen atoms were 5 @.@ 5 times heavier than hydrogen atoms , because in water he measured 5 @.@ 5 grams of oxygen for every 1 gram of hydrogen and believed the formula for water was HO . Adopting better data , in 1806 he concluded that the atomic weight of oxygen must actually be 7 rather than 5 @.@ 5 , and he retained this weight for the rest of his life . Others at this time had already concluded that the oxygen atom must weigh 8 relative to hydrogen equals 1 , if one assumes Dalton 's formula for the water molecule ( HO ) , or 16 if one assumes the modern water formula ( H2O ) . 
 = = = Avogadro = = = 
 The flaw in Dalton 's theory was corrected in principle in 1811 by Amedeo Avogadro . Avogadro had proposed that equal volumes of any two gases , at equal temperature and pressure , contain equal numbers of molecules ( in other words , the mass of a gas 's particles does not affect the volume that it occupies ) . Avogadro 's law allowed him to deduce the diatomic nature of numerous gases by studying the volumes at which they reacted . For instance : since two liters of hydrogen will react with just one liter of oxygen to produce two liters of water vapor ( at constant pressure and temperature ) , it meant a single oxygen molecule splits in two in order to form two particles of water . Thus , Avogadro was able to offer more accurate estimates of the atomic mass of oxygen and various other elements , and made a clear distinction between molecules and atoms . 
 = = = Brownian Motion = = = 
 In 1827 , the British botanist Robert Brown observed that dust particles inside pollen grains floating in water constantly <unk> about for no apparent reason . In 1905 , Albert Einstein theorized that this Brownian motion was caused by the water molecules continuously knocking the grains about , and developed a hypothetical mathematical model to describe it . This model was validated experimentally in 1908 by French physicist Jean Perrin , thus providing additional validation for particle theory ( and by extension atomic theory ) . 
 = = = Discovery of subatomic particles = = = 
 Atoms were thought to be the smallest possible division of matter until 1897 when J.J. Thomson discovered the electron through his work on cathode rays . 
 A Crookes tube is a sealed glass container in which two electrodes are separated by a vacuum . When a voltage is applied across the electrodes , cathode rays are generated , creating a glowing patch where they strike the glass at the opposite end of the tube . Through experimentation , Thomson discovered that the rays could be deflected by an electric field ( in addition to magnetic fields , which was already known ) . He concluded that these rays , rather than being a form of light , were composed of very light negatively charged particles he called " corpuscles " ( they would later be renamed electrons by other scientists ) . He measured the mass @-@ to @-@ charge ratio and discovered it was 1800 times smaller than that of hydrogen , the smallest atom . These corpuscles were a particle unlike any other previously known . 
 Thomson suggested that atoms were divisible , and that the corpuscles were their building blocks . To explain the overall neutral charge of the atom , he proposed that the corpuscles were distributed in a uniform sea of positive charge ; this was the plum pudding model as the electrons were embedded in the positive charge like plums in a plum pudding ( although in Thomson 's model they were not stationary ) . 
 = = = Discovery of the nucleus = = = 
 Thomson 's plum pudding model was disproved in 1909 by one of his former students , Ernest Rutherford , who discovered that most of the mass and positive charge of an atom is concentrated in a very small fraction of its volume , which he assumed to be at the very center . 
 In the Geiger – Marsden experiment , Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden ( colleagues of Rutherford working at his behest ) shot alpha particles at thin sheets of metal and measured their deflection through the use of a fluorescent screen . Given the very small mass of the electrons , the high momentum of the alpha particles , and the low concentration of the positive charge of the plum pudding model , the experimenters expected all the alpha particles to pass through the metal foil without significant deflection . To their astonishment , a small fraction of the alpha particles experienced heavy deflection . Rutherford concluded that the positive charge of the atom must be concentrated in a very tiny volume to produce an electric field sufficiently intense to deflect the alpha particles so strongly . 
 This led Rutherford to propose a planetary model in which a cloud of electrons surrounded a small , compact nucleus of positive charge . Only such a concentration of charge could produce the electric field strong enough to cause the heavy deflection . 
 = = = First steps toward a quantum physical model of the atom = = = 
 The planetary model of the atom had two significant shortcomings . The first is that , unlike planets orbiting a sun , electrons are charged particles . An accelerating electric charge is known to emit electromagnetic waves according to the Larmor formula in classical electromagnetism . An orbiting charge should steadily lose energy and spiral toward the nucleus , colliding with it in a small fraction of a second . The second problem was that the planetary model could not explain the highly peaked emission and absorption spectra of atoms that were observed . 
 Quantum theory revolutionized physics at the beginning of the 20th century , when Max Planck and Albert Einstein postulated that light energy is emitted or absorbed in discrete amounts known as quanta ( singular , quantum ) . In 1913 , Niels Bohr incorporated this idea into his Bohr model of the atom , in which an electron could only orbit the nucleus in particular circular orbits with fixed angular momentum and energy , its distance from the nucleus ( i.e. , their radii ) being proportional to its energy . Under this model an electron could not spiral into the nucleus because it could not lose energy in a continuous manner ; instead , it could only make instantaneous " quantum leaps " between the fixed energy levels . When this occurred , light was emitted or absorbed at a frequency proportional to the change in energy ( hence the absorption and emission of light in discrete spectra ) . 
 Bohr 's model was not perfect . It could only predict the spectral lines of hydrogen ; it couldn 't predict those of multielectron atoms . Worse still , as spectrographic technology improved , additional spectral lines in hydrogen were observed which Bohr 's model couldn 't explain . In 1916 , Arnold Sommerfeld added elliptical orbits to the Bohr model to explain the extra emission lines , but this made the model very difficult to use , and it still couldn 't explain more complex atoms . 
 = = = Discovery of isotopes = = = 
 While experimenting with the products of radioactive decay , in 1913 radiochemist Frederick Soddy discovered that there appeared to be more than one element at each position on the periodic table . The term isotope was coined by Margaret Todd as a suitable name for these elements . 
 That same year , J.J. Thomson conducted an experiment in which he channeled a stream of neon ions through magnetic and electric fields , striking a photographic plate at the other end . He observed two glowing patches on the plate , which suggested two different deflection trajectories . Thomson concluded this was because some of the neon ions had a different mass . The nature of this differing mass would later be explained by the discovery of neutrons in 1932 . 
 = = = Discovery of nuclear particles = = = 
 In 1917 Rutherford bombarded nitrogen gas with alpha particles and observed hydrogen nuclei being emitted from the gas ( Rutherford recognized these , because he had previously obtained them bombarding hydrogen with alpha particles , and observing hydrogen nuclei in the products ) . Rutherford concluded that the hydrogen nuclei emerged from the nuclei of the nitrogen atoms themselves ( in effect , he had split a nitrogen ) . 
 From his own work and the work of his students Bohr and Henry Moseley , Rutherford knew that the positive charge of any atom could always be equated to that of an integer number of hydrogen nuclei . This , coupled with the atomic mass of many elements being roughly equivalent to an integer number of hydrogen atoms - then assumed to be the lightest particles - led him to conclude that hydrogen nuclei were singular particles and a basic constituent of all atomic nuclei . He named such particles protons . Further experimentation by Rutherford found that the nuclear mass of most atoms exceeded that of the protons it possessed ; he speculated that this surplus mass was composed of hitherto unknown neutrally charged particles , which were tentatively dubbed " neutrons " . 
 In 1928 , Walter Bothe observed that beryllium emitted a highly penetrating , electrically neutral radiation when bombarded with alpha particles . It was later discovered that this radiation could knock hydrogen atoms out of paraffin wax . Initially it was thought to be high @-@ energy gamma radiation , since gamma radiation had a similar effect on electrons in metals , but James Chadwick found that the ionization effect was too strong for it to be due to electromagnetic radiation , so long as energy and momentum were conserved in the interaction . In 1932 , Chadwick exposed various elements , such as hydrogen and nitrogen , to the mysterious " beryllium radiation " , and by measuring the energies of the recoiling charged particles , he deduced that the radiation was actually composed of electrically neutral particles which could not be massless like the gamma ray , but instead were required to have a mass similar to that of a proton . Chadwick now claimed these particles as Rutherford 's neutrons . For his discovery of the neutron , Chadwick received the Nobel Prize in 1935 . 
 = = = Quantum physical models of the atom = = = 
 In 1924 , Louis de Broglie proposed that all moving particles — particularly subatomic particles such as electrons — exhibit a degree of wave @-@ like behavior . Erwin Schrödinger , fascinated by this idea , explored whether or not the movement of an electron in an atom could be better explained as a wave rather than as a particle . Schrödinger 's equation , published in 1926 , describes an electron as a wavefunction instead of as a point particle . This approach elegantly predicted many of the spectral phenomena that Bohr 's model failed to explain . Although this concept was mathematically convenient , it was difficult to visualize , and faced opposition . One of its critics , Max Born , proposed instead that Schrödinger 's wavefunction described not the electron but rather all its possible states , and thus could be used to calculate the probability of finding an electron at any given location around the nucleus . This reconciled the two opposing theories of particle versus wave electrons and the idea of wave – particle duality was introduced . This theory stated that the electron may exhibit the properties of both a wave and a particle . For example , it can be refracted like a wave , and has mass like a particle . 
 A consequence of describing electrons as waveforms is that it is mathematically impossible to simultaneously derive the position and momentum of an electron . This became known as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle after the theoretical physicist Werner Heisenberg , who first described it and published it in 1927 . This invalidated Bohr 's model , with its neat , clearly defined circular orbits . The modern model of the atom describes the positions of electrons in an atom in terms of probabilities . An electron can potentially be found at any distance from the nucleus , but , depending on its energy level , exists more frequently in certain regions around the nucleus than others ; this pattern is referred to as its atomic orbital . The orbitals come in a variety of shapes @-@ sphere , dumbbell , torus , <unk> the nucleus in the middle . 
 = White Horse Prophecy = 
 The White Horse Prophecy is a statement purported to have been made in 1843 by Joseph Smith , Jr . , founder of the Latter Day Saint movement , regarding the future of the Latter Day Saints ( Mormons ) and the United States of America . The Latter Day Saints , according to the prophecy , would " go to the Rocky Mountains and ... be a great and mighty people " , identified figuratively with the White Horse described in the Book of Revelation . The prophecy further predicts that the United States Constitution will one day " hang like a thread " and will be saved " by the efforts of the White Horse " . 
 Some have speculated , on the basis of the White Horse Prophecy , that Mormons expect the United States to eventually become a theocracy dominated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . The authenticity of the prophecy as a whole , which was not made public until long after Smith 's death , is debated , and the leadership of the LDS Church has stated that " the so @-@ called ' White Horse Prophecy ' ... is not embraced as Church doctrine . " However , the belief that members of the LDS Church will one day need to take action to save the imperiled U.S. Constitution has been attributed to Smith in several sources and has been discussed in an approving fashion by Brigham Young and other LDS leaders . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Latter Day Saint movement founder Joseph Smith went to Washington , D.C. in November 1839 in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain help for his persecuted followers . Pat Bagley of the Salt Lake Tribune writes that from then on , Smith and his followers " considered themselves the last Real Americans " and " the legitimate heirs of the pilgrims and Founding Fathers " , who would be called upon one day to save the U.S. Constitution . Smith is believed to have then said , in 1840 , that when the Constitution hung by a thread , Latter Day Saint elders would step in on the white horse to save the country . 
 According to a diary entry made by John Roberts of Paradise , Utah in 1902 , Joseph Smith gave the White Horse Prophecy in early May 1843 , during the period in which the Latter Day Saints were headquartered in Nauvoo , Illinois . Smith is recorded as saying that the Mormons " will go to the Rocky Mountains and will be a great and mighty people established there , which I will call the White Horse of peace and safety . " Adding that " I shall never go there " and predicting continued persecution by enemies of the church , Smith reportedly said that " You will see the Constitution of the United States almost destroyed . It will hang like a thread as fine as a silk fiber .... I love the Constitution ; it was made by the inspiration of God ; and it will be preserved and saved by the efforts of the White Horse , and by the Red Horse who will combine in its defense . " Smith additionally said , according to the diary , that the Mormons would send missionaries to " gather the honest in heart from among the Pale Horse , or people of the United States , to stand by the Constitution of the United States as it was given by the inspiration of God . " Roberts ' account quotes Smith as predicting numerous wars involving Great Britain , France , Russia , China , and other countries , and saying that the European nobility " knows that [ Mormonism ] is true , but it has not pomp enough , and grandeur and influence for them to yet embrace it . " He is also reported to have said that a temple which the Latter Day Saints had planned to build in Jackson County , Missouri " will be built in this generation . " 
 In 1844 , Joseph Smith rejected the platforms of the major candidates for President of the United States and decided to conduct his own third @-@ party campaign for the Presidency — an effort which was cut short by his death on June 27 of that year . Following a succession crisis in which Brigham Young was accepted as Smith 's successor by the majority of the Latter Day Saints , the Mormon migration to the Intermountain West began under Young 's direction in February 1846 . 
 = = Authenticity = = 
 The authenticity of the White Horse Prophecy is debated . It was never made public during Smith 's lifetime , but was recorded many years after his death by one of his associates , Edwin Rushton . Although some elements of the statement were confirmed by contemporary LDS Church leaders as having been taught by Smith , the prophecy as a whole has never been officially acknowledged or accepted , and it has been repudiated by the LDS Church since 1918 . The prophecy 's authenticity , on the other hand , has been defended by LDS scholar Duane Crowther , and Mormon fundamentalist Ogden Kraut . 
 In 1918 , LDS president Joseph F. Smith dismissed the White Horse Prophecy as a " ridiculous story ... and a lot of trash that has been circulated about ... by two of our brethren who put together some broken sentences from [ Joseph Smith ] that they may have heard from time to time " . In his 1966 book Mormon Doctrine , LDS theologian ( and , later , apostle ) Bruce R. McConkie wrote that " From time to time , accounts of various supposed visions , revelations , and prophecies are spread forth by and among the Latter @-@ day Saints , who should know better than to believe or spread such false information . One of these false and deceptive documents that has cropped up again and again for over a century is the so @-@ called White Horse Prophecy . " 
 In early 2010 , the LDS Church issued a statement saying that " the so @-@ called ' White Horse Prophecy ' is based on accounts that have not been substantiated by historical research and is not embraced as Church doctrine . " Also in 2010 , LDS historian Don L. Penrod examined significant differences in two early handwritten accounts of the prophecy , noted some words and phrases which were not characteristic of Joseph Smith 's speaking style or current in his time , and speculated that Rushton had " in his elderly years recorded some things that [ Smith ] actually said , mixing in words of his own creation " — commenting additionally that " memories of words and events , especially many years later , are often faulty . " 
 = = United States Constitution = = 
 Though there are doubts about the authenticity of the White Horse Prophecy as a whole , several sources attribute to Smith the idea that the United States Constitution would one day hang by a thread , and LDS Church leaders have issued similar warnings with regard to the Constitution . 
 = = = Brigham Young = = = 
 In 1855 , Brigham Young reportedly wrote that " when the Constitution of the United States hangs , as it were , upon a single thread , they will have to call for the ' Mormon ' Elders to save it from utter destruction ; and they will step forth and do it . " 
 = = = Orson Hyde = = = 
 In 1858 , Orson Hyde ( another contemporary of Smith ) wrote that Smith believed " the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow ; and ... if the Constitution be saved at all , it will be by the elders of [ the LDS ] Church " . 
 = = = Charles W. Nibley = = = 
 In 1922 , the LDS Church 's fifth presiding bishop , Charles W. Nibley , stated that " the day would come when there would be so much of disorder , of secret combinations taking the law into their own hands , tramping upon Constitutional rights and the liberties of the people , that the Constitution would hang as by a thread . Yes , but it will still hang , and there will be enough of good people , many who may not belong to our Church at all , people who have respect for law and for order , and for Constitutional rights , who will rally around with us and save the Constitution . " 
 = = = Melvin J. Ballard = = = 
 In 1928 , the LDS apostle Melvin J. Ballard remarked that " the prophet Joseph Smith said the time will come when , through secret organizations taking the law into their own hands ... the Constitution of the United States would be so torn and rent asunder , and life and property and peace and security would be held of so little value , that the Constitution would , as it were , hang by a thread . This Constitution will be preserved , but it will be preserved very largely in consequence of what the Lord has revealed and what [ the Mormons ] , through listening to the Lord and being obedient , will help to bring about , to stabilize and give permanency and effect to the Constitution itself . That also is our mission . " 
 = = = J. Reuben Clark = = = 
 In 1942 , J. Reuben Clark — an LDS apostle and a member of the church 's First Presidency — said that " You and I have heard all our lives that the time may come when the Constitution may hang by a thread .... I do know that whether it shall live or die is now in the balance . " Regarding the Constitution , Clark went on to cite its " free institutions " , separation of powers , and the Bill of Rights . He added that " if we are to live as a Church , and progress , and have the right to worship ... we must have the great guarantees that are set up by our Constitution . " 
 = = = Ezra Taft Benson = = = 
 In a 1986 Brigham Young University speech , LDS president Ezra Taft Benson stated : " I have faith that the Constitution will be saved as prophesied by Joseph Smith . But it will not be saved in Washington . It will be saved by the citizens of this nation who love and cherish freedom . It will be saved by enlightened members of this Church – men and women who will subscribe to and abide by the principles of the Constitution . " 
 = = = Dallin H. Oaks = = = 
 In 2010 , Elder Dallin H. Oaks spoke at a Constitution Day Celebration , warning about the importance of preserving the U.S. Constitution . To this end , he claimed that " all citizens — whatever their religious or philosophical persuasion " should maintain several responsibilities regarding the Constitution : understand it , support the law , practice civic virtue , maintain civility in political discourse , and promote patriotism . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Questions regarding LDS attitudes towards the United States government — whether considered on their own or as component parts of the White Horse Prophecy — have arisen from time to time as prominent members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints have become involved in American politics . The White Horse Prophecy has been characterized as " effectively plac [ ing ] believers on perpetual Red Alert for the Constitution 's possible demise " and as admonishing Mormons to " come to the rescue and restore the true Constitution by any means necessary " . 
 Writers such as Richard Abanes and Elaine Wolff have speculated , on the basis of the prophecy , that Mormons expect the U.S. to eventually become a " Mormon @-@ ruled theocracy divinely ordained to ' not only direct the political affairs of the Mormon community , but eventually those of the United States and ultimately the world ' " , and that " a Mormon , if he were elected president , would take his orders from Salt Lake City . " In addition to many LDS members of the Republican Party , some LDS Democrats have also been inspired to run for office by the White Horse Prophecy . 
 = = = George Romney = = = 
 In 1967 , U.S. presidential candidate George W. Romney said the following regarding the White Horse Prophecy : " I have always felt that they meant that sometime the question of whether we are going to proceed on the basis of the Constitution would arise and at this point government leaders who were Mormons would be involved in answering that question . " 
 = = = Mitt Romney = = = 
 In 2007 , U.S. presidential candidate Mitt Romney told the Salt Lake Tribune that " I haven 't heard my name associated with [ the White Horse Prophecy ] or anything of that nature . That 's not official church doctrine .... I don 't put that at the heart of my religious belief . " 
 = = = Glenn Beck = = = 
 Conservative media figure Glenn Beck ( who joined the LDS Church in 1999 ) has alleged that President Barack Obama " is going to bring us to the verge of shredding the Constitution , of massive socialism . " On November 14 , 2008 — following Obama 's election — Beck appeared on Bill O 'Reilly 's show The O 'Reilly Factor and said that " we are at the place where the Constitution hangs in the balance , I feel the Constitution is hanging in the balance right now , hanging by a thread unless the good Americans wake up . " Earlier in November , while interviewing U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah ( also a Mormon ) , Beck remarked : " I heard Barack Obama talk about the Constitution and I thought , we are at the point or we are very near the point where our Constitution is hanging by a thread . " Hatch appeared on Beck 's Fox News show in January 2009 , and Beck prompted him by declaring " I believe our Constitution hangs by a thread . " 
 LDS blogger and religious commentator Joanna Brooks has said that " it is likely that Beck owes his brand of Founding Father – worship to Mormonism .... Many Mormons also believe that Joseph Smith prophesied in 1843 that the US Constitution would one day ' hang by a thread ' and be saved by faithful Mormons " . Washington Post journalist Dana Milbank has described Beck 's views as essentially " White Horse Prophecy meets horsemen of the apocalypse " — though Milbank has also observed that the White Horse Prophecy is " actually a fairly benign prophecy . They 're talking about restoring law and order and peace and tranquility . It doesn 't sound like a violent thing . " 
 = = = Rex Rammell = = = 
 In 2009 , Idaho gubernatorial candidate Rex Rammell announced plans to hold a series of meetings with believing Mormon men , which were to include discussion of the White Horse Prophecy . In response , LDS Church officials issued a statement saying the church is " politically neutral " and hoping that " the campaign practices of political candidates would not suggest that their candidacy is supported by or connected to the church . " Rammell later retracted his original plan to limit his meetings only to LDS men , apologizing to " all those citizens who are not members of the LDS faith , who have expressed a sincere interest in attending my meetings and discussing this prophecy and how we can step forward and save the United States Constitution " . 
 = Entertainment Software Rating Board = 
 The Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) is a self @-@ regulatory organization that assigns age and content ratings , enforces industry @-@ adopted advertising guidelines , and ensures responsible online privacy principles for computer and video games in the United States , nearly all of Canada , and Mexico . The ESRB was established in 1994 by the Entertainment Software Association ( formerly the Interactive Digital Software Association ) , in response to criticism of violent content found in video games such as Night Trap , Mortal Kombat , and other controversial video games with excessively violent or sexual content . 
 The board assigns ratings to games based on their content , using judgment similar to the motion picture rating systems used in many countries , using a combination of six age @-@ based levels intended to aid consumers in determining a game 's content and suitability , along with a system of " content descriptors " which detail specific types of content present in a particular game . The ESRB also maintains a code of ethics for the advertising and promotion of video games — ensuring that marketing materials for games display their ESRB ratings information , and are targeted to appropriate audiences , and an online privacy certification program . In 2011 , the ESRB began a program for rating mobile apps in partnership with CTIA . The ESRB is also a member of the International Age Rating Coalition . 
 The ESRB ratings system is effectively a de facto standard because of the collective leverage of the Board and the video game industry : major console manufacturers will not license games for their systems unless they carry ESRB ratings , most retail stores enforce ESRB ratings , and also do not carry any games which are not rated by the organization . The ESRB rating system is primarily enforced on a voluntary basis by the video game and retail industry , and is not enforced under federal laws in any of the countries where it is actively used — however , in some parts of Canada , provincial laws require retailers to enforce the ESRB ratings system , with enforcement of these laws handled by regional film ratings boards . 
 Due to the level of consumer and retail awareness of the ratings system , along with the organization 's efforts to ensure that retailers comply with the ratings system and that publishers comply with its marketing code , the ESRB has considered its system to be effective , and was praised by the Federal Trade Commission for being the " strongest " self @-@ regulatory organization in the entertainment sector . Despite its positive reception , the ESRB has still faced criticism from politicians and other watchdog groups for the structure of its operations , particularly in the wake of a 2005 incident that surrounded the organization 's handling of " hidden " , objectionable content in a game which could be accessed using a user @-@ created modification . Critics of the ESRB has asserted that the organization has a conflict of interest because of its ties to the video game industry , and that the ESRB does not rate certain games , such as the Grand Theft Auto series , harshly enough for their violent or sexual content in order to protect their commercial viability . Contrarily , other critics have argued that , at the same time , the ESRB rates certain games too strongly for their content , and that its influence has stifled the viability of adult @-@ oriented video games due to the board 's restrictions on how they are marketed and sold . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Video games with objectionable content date back as far as 1976 ; the arcade game Death Race , an adaptation of the film Death Race 2000 , required users to run over " gremlins " with a vehicle and avoid the gravestones they leave behind . Although its graphics were relatively primitive , the game 's overall theme and the sound effects made when gremlins were killed were considered disturbing by players , prompting media attention . A developer known as Mystique became known for making sexually explicit adult video games for the Atari 2600 console , but garnered the most attention with its controversial 1982 game Custer 's Revenge , which infamously featured a crude simulation of the rape of a Native American woman . Atari received numerous complaints about the game , and responded by trying to sue the game 's makers . 
 A 1983 industry crash , caused by the market being overrun with low @-@ quality products , prompted a higher degree of regulation by future console manufacturers : when the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) was launched in the United States in 1985 , Nintendo of America instituted requirements and restrictions on third @-@ party developers , including the requirement for all games to be licensed by the company . The console itself also included a lockout chip to enforce this requirement and prevent the console from loading unlicensed games . Such leverage on developers has since become a standard practice among console makers , although Nintendo of America also had stringent content policies , frequently censoring blood , sexual content , and references to religion , tobacco and alcohol from games released on its consoles in the United States . 
 When asked in 1987 about the suitability of a film @-@ like rating system for video games , a representative of the Software Publishers Association said that " Adult computer software is nothing to worry about . It 's not an issue that the government wants to spend any time with ... They just got done with a big witchhunt in the music recording industry , and they got absolutely nowhere " . The association did recommend voluntary warnings for games like Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the Lounge Lizards ( 1987 ) . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Video games ' progression into the 1990s brought dramatic increases in graphics and sound capabilities , and the ability to use full @-@ motion video ( FMV ) content in games . In the United States Senate , Democratic Senators Joe Lieberman of Connecticut and Herb Kohl of Wisconsin led hearings on video game violence and the corruption of society which began in 1992 . Two games of this era were specifically cited in the hearings for their content ; the fighting game Mortal Kombat featured realistic , digitized sprites of live @-@ action actors , blood , and the ability to use violent " fatality " moves to finish opponents , while Night Trap featured 90 minutes of FMV content , with scenes that were considered to be sexually suggestive and exploitive . Both Nintendo and Sega had differing views on objectionable content in video games ; a port of Mortal Kombat for the Super NES was censored to remove the game 's overly violent content , whereas the port for Sega consoles retained much of this content , which helped increase sales . 
 Sega had implemented its own voluntary ratings system , the Videogame Rating Council ( VRC ) , largely to rate games released for its own consoles . Mortal Kombat and Night Trap were rated " MA @-@ 13 " and " MA @-@ 17 " on Sega 's scale respectively . During the hearings , Howard Lincoln and Bill White ( chairmen of Nintendo and Sega 's U.S. divisions respectively ) attacked each other 's stances on objectionable content in video games ; Lincoln condemned Sega for even releasing Night Trap and felt it " simply has no place in our society " , while White argued that Sega was more responsible to consumers because they actually had a rating system in place , rather than a blanket presumption that all its games would be suitable for general audiences . Fragmentation would also develop in the classification of games ; The 3DO Company formed their own age @-@ based rating system , the 3DO Rating System , for games released on its 3DO Interactive Multiplayer , and the Recreational Software Advisory Council ( <unk> ) was formed for rating PC games , which used a system consisting of ratings in certain classes of objectionable content , but not ages . However , Lieberman did not believe that these systems were sufficient , and in February 1994 , threatened to propose the creation of a federal commission for regulating and rating video games . 
 With the threat of federal regulations , a group of major video game developers and publishers , including Acclaim Entertainment and Electronic Arts along with Nintendo and Sega , formed a political trade group known as the Interactive Digital Software Association in April 1994 , with a goal to create a self @-@ regulatory framework for assessing and rating video games . While Sega had proposed that the industry use its VRC rating system , Nintendo representatives objected to the idea because they did not want to associate themselves with the work of their main competitor ; instead , a vendor @-@ neutral rating system known as the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) was developed . The formation of the ESRB was officially announced to Congress on July 29 , 1994 . The ESRB was officially launched on September 16 , 1994 ; its system consisted of five age @-@ based ratings ; " Early Childhood " , " Kids to Adults " ( later renamed " Everyone " in 1998 ) , " Teen " , " Mature " , and " Adults Only " . The ESRB would also use " descriptors " with brief explanations of the content contained in a game . 
 = = = Expansion and recent developments = = = 
 Alongside its efforts to classify video games , the ESRB also formed a division known as Entertainment Software Rating Board Interactive ( ESRBi ) , which rated internet content using a similar system to its video game ratings . ESRBi also notably partnered with the internet service provider America Online to integrate these ratings into its existing parental controls . ESRBi was discontinued in 2003 . 
 In 2002 , Dr. Arthur <unk> , the original president of the ESRB , stepped down so he could focus on academics . In November 2002 , he was formally replaced by Patrica Vance , who formerly worked for The Princeton Review and The Walt Disney Company . In March 2005 , the ESRB introduced a new rating , " Everyone 10 + " , designating games with content of a relatively higher impact than those of games rated " Everyone " , but still not high enough to garner a " Teen " rating . 
 In response to the growth of smartphone use , in November 2011 , CTIA , a group of major U.S. companies representing the wireless industry , and ESRB announced the co @-@ development of a free , voluntary ratings process for mobile application stores . The system uses ESRB 's icons and content descriptors , along with three additional icons ( " Shares Info , " " Shares Location , " and " Users Interact " ) to inform users of an app 's behavior in regards to data collection and interactions with others . Verizon Wireless and T @-@ Mobile US were among the first to implement the system for their own application storefronts , and Microsoft 's Windows Phone Marketplace already supported ESRB ratings upon its introduction . ESRB president Patricia Vance explained that the partnership was intended to help broaden the ESRB 's reach into the mobile market , and that " consumers , especially parents , benefit from having a consistently applied set of ratings for games rather than a fragmented array of different systems . " 
 In November 2012 , the ESRB and other video game ratings boards , including PEGI , established a consortium known as the International Age Rating Coalition , which sought to design an online , questionnaire @-@ based rating process for digitally @-@ distributed video games that could generate ratings for multiple video game ratings organizations at once . The resulting ratings information is tied to a unique code , which can then be used for online storefronts to display the corresponding rating for the user 's region . On March 17 , 2015 , Google announced that Play Store would adopt and display ESRB ratings for apps in North America through the IARC system . Windows Store also implemented IARC in January 2016 . Apple 's App Store still uses its own generic age rating system and does not use the ESRB system . 
 = = Rating process = = 
 To obtain a rating for a game , a publisher submits a detailed questionnaire and a DVD containing footage of the most graphic and extreme content found in the game to the ESRB , including content related to the game 's context , storyline , reward system , unlockable and otherwise " hidden " content , and other elements that may affect its rating . They may also provide printed copies of the game 's script and lyrics from songs in the game . The footage is reviewed by a team of at least three raters , who discuss what the most appropriate and " helpful " rating for the game would be , based on the footage and details provided . Raters represent various demographics , including parents , along with casual and " hardcore " gamers . Raters were formerly hired on a part @-@ time basis , but in 2007 , ESRB transitioned to a team of seven full @-@ time raters , who all live in the New York City area . 
 If a publisher does not agree with the rating that they were assigned , they may edit the game and submit the revised version for a new rating ; for example , an initial cut of The Punisher was given an AO rating due to the extremely violent nature of certain scenes contained within the game . To lessen their impact , the developer changed these scenes to be rendered in black and white : the revised cut of the game was re @-@ submitted , and received the M rating . There is also an appeals process , but it has never been used . 
 When the game is ready for release , the publisher sends copies of the final version of the game to the ESRB , who reviews the game 's packaging , and a random number of games they receive are play tested for more thorough review . Penalties apply to publishers who misrepresent the content of their games , including the potential for fines up to US $ 1 million and a product recall , if deemed necessary . The ESRB typically posts rating information for new titles on its website 30 days after the rating process is complete ; in 2008 , after a number of incidents where this practice inadvertently leaked information about upcoming , unannounced games , the ESRB began to allow publishers to place embargoes on the release of ratings information until a game is officially announced . 
 In April 2011 , the ESRB introduced a streamlined , automated process for assigning ratings for console downloadable games as a way to address the rapidly growing volume of digitally @-@ delivered games . Rather than having raters review each product , publishers of these games complete a series of multiple @-@ choice questions that address content across relevant categories , including violence , sexual content , language , etc . The responses automatically determine the game 's rating category and content descriptors . Games rated via this process may be tested post @-@ release to ensure that content was properly disclosed . The survey @-@ based method is also used in the ESRB / CTIA and IARC rating programs for mobile apps . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 ESRB ratings are primarily identified through icons , which are displayed on the packaging and promotional materials for a game . Each icon contains a stylized alphabetical letter representing the rating . In addition to the main age @-@ based , ratings , ESRB ratings also incorporate one or more of 30 " content descriptors " which provide detailed information about the specific types and levels of objectionable content contained in a game , including categories covering different levels of violence , language , sexual content , nudity , use of alcoholic beverages or other drugs , crude and mature humor , or gambling . The full label , containing both the descriptors and rating , are typically displayed on the back of a game 's packaging . Games which incorporate online elements must display the additional disclaimer " Online Interactions Not Rated by the ESRB " , indicating that the rating only applies to the game itself , and not user @-@ generated content or communications ( such as chat ) that may be available within . 
 The appearance of the ratings icons themselves have been updated several times ; originally carrying a stylized , pixelated look , they were first updated in 1999 to carry a cleaner appearance . In 2013 , the rating icons were streamlined , with the textual name of the rating becoming black text on white , the " content rated by " tagline removed entirely , and trademark symbols moved to the bottom @-@ right corner . The changes were intended to increase their clarity at smaller sizes ( such as on mobile devices ) , reflecting the growth in the digital distribution of video games . 
 = = Enforcement = = 
 The ESRB rating system is enforced on a self @-@ regulatory basis by the video game and retail industries ; many American retailers refuse the sale of " Mature " -rated games to those under 17 years of age as verified by photo identification , and refuse to stock video games that have not been rated by the organization , or are rated " Adults Only " . As of May 2015 , the live streaming website Twitch.tv explicitly bans the streaming of games rated " Adults Only " . 
 In the United States , while there have been attempts at the state and federal level to introduce laws requiring retailers to enforce the ESRB ratings system , the Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association that laws restricting the sale of video games to minors were unconstitutional , as the medium is considered a protected form of expression under the First Amendment . The case involved a 2005 California law sponsored by Leland Yee which attempted to ban the sale of " violent video games " to those under 18 , defined using a variation of the Miller test that was separate from the ESRB rating . The law was not Yee 's first attempt to regulate video game sales in California ; in 2004 , he attempted to pass a law which would have required retailers to present M @-@ rated games on separate shelves from lower @-@ rated games , of at least 5 feet ( 60 in ) from the ground . The bill was passed after it was modified to only require retailers to educate customers on the ESRB system . 
 In Canada , ESRB ratings are enforced under provincial laws by film ratings boards in Manitoba , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Ontario , and Saskatchewan . As in the U.S. , most retailers voluntarily enforce the ratings regardless . Prior to the implementation of the Film Classification Act , 2005 , which gave it the power to enforce ESRB ratings , the Ontario Film Review Board had used its own powers to classify the M @-@ rated Manhunt as a film and give it a " Restricted " rating , legally barring its sale to those under 18 . 
 In May 2013 , the ESRB reprimanded a distributor of the online game <unk> for using its trademarked " Adults Only " icon in its advertising without authorization or having actually been issued the rating by the board . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The ESRB enforces guidelines that have been adopted by the video game industry in order to ensure responsible advertising and marketing practices . These include ensuring that game packaging , advertisements , and trailers properly display rating information , restricting where advertising materials for games rated " Teen " or higher can appear , forbidding publishers from " <unk> [ ing ] or exploiting " a game 's rating in advertising , and requiring online marketing of games rated " Mature " or higher to be restricted to users who are appropriately aged . This allows the ESRB to restrict video game advertising " to consumers for whom the product is not rated as appropriate . " The board also forbids ratings from other organizations from being shown alongside ESRB ratings on publishers ' websites or social media outlets . A group of online gaming publications known as the ESRB Website Council operates under a similar code of conduct , which requires them to display ESRB ratings information for games that they cover , and implement systems to restrict access to audiovisual content depicting M or AO @-@ rated games to users who are appropriately aged . 
 In March 2013 , the ESRB eased certain restrictions on the promotion of M @-@ rated games . Firstly , trailers for games that are or are anticipated to be rated " Mature " can be cleared by the ESRB as being appropriate for " general " audiences — similarly to the " green band " ratings issued by the MPAA for film trailers . Secondly , the board began to allow , on a case @-@ by @-@ basis depending on the target demographic of the game , M @-@ rated games to be cross @-@ promoted in the marketing materials of games with lower ratings . 
 = = Online privacy = = 
 In addition to its video game ratings operation , the ESRB also offers an online privacy program which helps websites adopt privacy policies and data usage practices which comply with relevant laws and best practices for the collection and use of personal information , and provides " Privacy Certified " seals indicating certification under the ESRB 's privacy guidelines . In June 2013 , the service was extended to mobile apps , with a particular emphasis on helping application developers comply with the then @-@ upcoming changes to the Children 's Online Privacy Protection Act . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The ESRB has considered its system to be effective , due in part to initiatives by the Board to promote enforcement and consumer awareness of the system , and efforts by retailers to prevent the sale of M @-@ rated games to minors . The Federal Trade Commission has also praised the organization ; in 2008 , the FTC released the result of an investigation finding that only 20 % of underaged mystery shoppers were able to successfully purchase an M @-@ rated video game from a selection of retailers — a 22 percent reduction from 2007 . By 2011 , these numbers had dropped further to only 13 % . In its 2009 Report to Congress , the FTC recognized the ESRB for having " the strongest self @-@ regulatory code " of all entertainment sectors because of its enforcement of advertising and marketing guidelines . 
 = = = Ratings accuracy = = = 
 The ESRB has often been accused of not rating certain games , such as Manhunt and the Grand Theft Auto series , harshly enough for violence and other related themes , and for lacking transparency in certain aspects of the ratings process . Critics have argued that some games only received the M rating rather than the stricter AO rating because of the commercial effects of such a rating ; console manufacturers and most retailers refuse to distribute AO @-@ rated games , dramatically affecting their commercial availability . An ESRB representative stated that the Board uses the AO rating when warranted , even due to violence , and that in most occasions , publishers would edit the game to meet the M rating to ensure wide commercial availability instead of keeping the AO rating . The film classification boards of the Canadian provinces of British Columbia and Ontario respectively classified the M @-@ rated games Soldier of Fortune and Manhunt as films due to concerns over the nature of their content , and gave them " Restricted " ratings , legally restricting their sale to adults . 
 There has been a correlation between the M rating and sales ; a 2007 study by Electronic Entertainment Design and Research found that M @-@ rated games " have both the highest average Metacritic scores and the highest average gross sales in the United States " , and NPD Group found that 7 of the top 20 video games of 2010 ( including the # 1 game , Call of Duty : Black Ops ) were M @-@ rated , even though only 5 % of games released that year carried the rating . 
 In 2005 , the National Institute on Media and the Family gave the Board an " F " rating for " Ratings Accuracy " on a <unk> report card , arguing that M @-@ rated games were progressively becoming more explicit , that the AO rating was seldom @-@ used because the organization is controlled by the video game industry and that " study after study shows that ratings would be stricter if parents were doing the job . It took explicit porn to get Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas an AO rating , even though the original version , still rated M , rewards players whose on @-@ screen persona had sex with prostitutes and then killed them . We have been calling for AO ratings for the Grand Theft Auto series for years — now it is clear why the ESRB has ignored our request . " The ESRB disputed these claims , arguing that the organization " relies on flawed research and ignores any and all conflicting evidence " , was " imposing its own narrow values and morality on the rest of the country , regardless that it has little evidence to show that parents agree with their point of view " , and did not reply to the ESRB 's request for comments following its report card in 2004 . The board also pointed out that the <unk> 's study used data from <unk> , a for @-@ profit competitor to the ESRB . 
 On the other hand , some have felt that the " Mature " rating is too broad ; video game journalist Ben Kuchera noted that Halo 3 — a sci @-@ fi first @-@ person shooter whose level of violence was , in his opinion , comparable to a Star Wars film , had received an M rating for " Blood and Gore , " " Mild Language " and " Violence " . He argued that " having a game like Halo 3 share the same rating as Saints Row IV , which carries the ' Blood , ' Intense Violence , ' ' Partial Nudity , ' ' Sexual Content , ' ' Strong Language ' and ' Use of Drugs ' descriptors was always silly , and it weakened the thrust of the ratings system . " Likewise , he felt that the tone and content of the PG @-@ 13 rated film The Dark Knight was relatively harsher to children than that of the Saints Row series due to the latter 's light @-@ hearted tone , but still noted that " as parents we know what 's right and what isn 't for our kids , and being aware of the content they consume is a large part of our job as parents . " Halo 5 : Guardians , the most recent installment in the franchise , received a " Teen " rating instead of " Mature " . Microsoft Xbox division executive Aaron Greenberg argued that consumers had been " surprised " by the M rating on previous installments " given the style of the game and the lack of real graphic violence and things like that " , but that the " Teen " rating would theoretically enable the game to reach a broader audience of younger players . 
 = = = Adults Only rating = = = 
 The " Adults Only " ( AO ) rating has attracted a negative stigma among the video game industry — one which has been criticized for stifling the ability for developers to have creative freedom in their portrayal of certain themes in a game , at the risk of being commercially unviable due to publishers ' objections to AO @-@ rated content : AO @-@ rated games cannot be published for major video game console platforms , and most retailers do not stock AO @-@ rated games . ESRB President Patricia Vance argued that applying self @-@ censorship to ensure marketability was a compromise that is " true in every entertainment medium " , but still believed that the idea of the AO rating eventually becoming acceptable would be a good thing for the ESRB system . The stigma is primarily affected by a perception by the industry and other activists that video games are generally considered children 's products ; for example , the existence of a Wii version of Manhunt 2 was condemned by Hillary Clinton over fears that children could use the game 's motion controls to " act out each of the many graphic torture scenes and murders [ in the game ] . " 
 Attitudes towards AO @-@ rated games have also been influenced by the types of games that have received the rating ; Peter Payne , head of Peach Princess , a publisher of English translations of Japanese eroge visual novels , believed that the " Adults Only " rating had acquired a " smutty " and " tasteless " reputation since the majority of AO @-@ rated titles were either niche pornographic titles such as eroge games , or low @-@ brow adult titles such as Riana Rouge ( which Polygon described as a game which had the quality of an adult movie , and " [ aimed ] to do nothing more than tell low @-@ brow jokes and show nude women prancing around " ) and Lula 3D ( whose packaging touted " Bouncin ' Boobs Technology " as a selling point ) . 
 By contrast , the ESRB has only officially given out the AO rating for extreme violence three times : Thrill Kill , a fighting game with heavy sexual overtones , received an AO rating with content descriptors for " Animated Violence " and " Animated Blood and Gore " . After acquiring its developer Virgin Entertainment , Electronic Arts pulled Thrill Kill prior to its release due to objections over the game 's content . Manhunt 2 also received an AO rating for its extreme violence ; while the uncut version would be released exclusively for PCs , the console versions were edited to meet the M rating criteria . In January 2015 , Hatred , a controversial game whose plot centers around a character indiscriminately murdering everyone he encounters , received the rating for its extreme violence and harsh language ; one of the game 's developers disputed the rating , arguing that " its violence isn 't really that bad and this harsh language isn 't overused " , but also acknowledged the rarity of their situation . 
 = = = Hidden content = = = 
 In 2005 , members of the mod community discovered that the PC version of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas could be modified to unlock an incomplete sex minigame known as " Hot Coffee " , which Rockstar North had decided to leave out of the final game . The discovery of the minigame caused California State Assemblyman Leland Yee to rebuke both Rockstar and the ESRB , arguing that the ESRB was not doing its job properly . US Senators Hillary Clinton and Joe Lieberman also expressed their disapproval . Rockstar initially claimed that the minigame was created by the mod community and was not a part of the original game . This was disproven when it was discovered that a third @-@ party cheat device could be used to unlock the " Hot Coffee " scenes in console versions of the game . Following an investigation , the ESRB changed its rating from M to AO , setting a precedent that games can be re @-@ rated due to the presence of pertinent content that exists on the game 's disc , even if that content is programmed to not be playable without modification or unauthorized use of a third @-@ party cheat device . Following the release of a version excluding the content , the rating was reverted to M. 
 In May 2006 , The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion had its rating changed from T to M due to " more detailed depictions of blood and gore than were considered in the original rating " , along with a third @-@ party mod for the PC version allowing the use of topless female characters . The game 's publisher , Bethesda Softworks , decided not to re @-@ edit the game or contest the new rating , but noted that Oblivion 's content was " not typical " of games with the M rating , and that the game " does not present the central themes of violence that are common to those products . " 
 In the wake of these two incidents , the ESRB addressed hidden content with changes to its ratings policies in June 2006 ; publishers must disclose information surrounding all unlockable or otherwise " hidden " content in the game as part of the ratings process , and publishers can be fined up to US $ 1 million if they are found to have misrepresented the content of their game after further reviews . In response to the aftermath of Hot Coffee and the resulting policy changes , ESRB President Patricia Vance stated that in her opinion , " there is no other industry self @-@ regulatory system willing or capable of imposing such swift and sweeping sanctions on its own members , which in this particular case resulted in the removal of a top @-@ selling product from the market and a major loss of sales . " However , several U.S. politicians , including Senator Sam Brownback , California Senator Leland Yee , and Michigan Senator Fred Upton ( who was a major critic against Rockstar during the controversy ) , still felt that the ESRB had " lost " its trust of consumers , believing that video game developers were taking advantage of the board 's conflict of interest with the industry to incorporate objectionable content into their products without the ESRB 's full knowledge . 
 In late 2006 , both Upton and Brownback tabled bills to place governmental oversight on aspects of the ESRB rating process , and make it illegal for publishers to misrepresent the playable content of a video game to a ratings board ; Upton proposed a bill known as the Video Game Decency Act , explaining that that developers had " done an end @-@ run around the process to deliver violent and pornographic material to our kids " , and that the bill would " [ go ] hand in hand with the mission of the industry ’ s own ratings system . " Brownback proposed a bill known as the Truth in Video Game Rating Act , which would have also forced the ESRB to have full , hands @-@ on access to games instead of just video footage , and have initiated a government study on the " effectiveness " of the organization and the possibility of forming a ratings organization independent from the video game industry . 
 = Butters ' Bottom Bitch = 
 " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " is the ninth episode of the thirteenth season of the American animated television series South Park . The 190th overall episode of the series , it originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on October 14 , 2009 . In the episode , Butters pays a girl $ 5 to give him his first kiss , which prompts Butters to start his own " kissing company " and eventually become a pimp . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker . " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " received particular attention for a scene in which Butters visited an ACORN office seeking benefits for his prostitutes , a reference to the real @-@ life 2009 scandal . The episode received generally positive reviews and was seen by 2 @.@ 56 million overall households , according to Nielsen Media Research . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tired of being the only boy in his class to have never kissed a girl ( Butters actually had been kissed by Rebecca in Season 3 's " Hooked on Monkey <unk> " ) , Butters purchases his first kiss from Sally , who gives away kisses for $ 5 . Having won the respect of his classmates , he devises a plan to advertise Sally 's services to other unpopular boys at the school . Sally gives Butters a 40 percent cut for his advertising and managing services , and Butters soon turns the venture into a full @-@ fledged " kissing company " by recruiting more girls to fill in during times in which Sally is busy . Upon learning about Butters ' business , Kyle tells him that he is " nothing but a common pimp " . Oblivious to what the word means , Butters attends a pimp convention where he seeks advice from more @-@ experienced pimps , including one called Keyshawn . Afterward , he starts to mimic the pimp jargon , such as referring to Sally as his " bottom bitch " , and incorporating " Do you know what I am saying ? " into his conversations . 
 To combat the apparent rise in prostitution , Sergeant Yates of the Park County Police goes undercover as a female prostitute named " Yolanda " . During stings , to the bewilderment of the police , the poorly disguised Yates waits until he is done engaging in actual sex acts with his male patrons before making an arrest . After he engages in group sex with numerous members of the fraternity house Alpha Tau Omega and doing business for Keyshawn , Yates ' fellow officers begin to openly suggest to Yates that he is getting too carried away with his duties . 
 Meanwhile , Butters ' reputation as the respectful " new pimp " spreads throughout the county , prompting actual adult prostitutes to seek employment with him . Repulsed at what Butters is doing , Stan and Kyle try to persuade him to stop , but Butters ignores them , paying Clyde to keep Stan away from him , and brushing off Kyle 's protests in an almost threatening manner . As his workforce expands , Butters starts offering health care and other benefits to his employees , attracting more and more adults . To this end , he visits the local ACORN office to apply for low @-@ income housing benefits , seek mortgage loans , and inquire about the tax @-@ status of his business . Butters is initially refused until he identifies the boss as a client of some of the real prostitutes working for Butters . 
 Sergeant Yates , still undercover , seeks employment with Butters . But Yolanda 's pimp , Keyshawn , soon appears outside and begs for " Yolanda " back , asking for her hand in marriage . Butters insists that he cannot force " Yolanda " to work for him , claiming it would interfere with the " true love " Keyshawn and " Yolanda " share . " Yolanda " accepts the proposal , and Butters decides to quit his job as a pimp . To the delight of his employees , he encourages them to function under the self @-@ management of the company so they can keep whatever they earn for themselves . While " Yolanda " and Keyshawn are shown celebrating their first anniversary together in a small chalet in the mountains in Switzerland , Yates suddenly decides to spring his sting operation . Revealing his true identity , he pulls out his gun and badge and informs Keyshawn that he is under arrest . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker . It first aired on October 14 , 2009 in the United States on Comedy Central . The scene in which Butters visits the ACORN office seeking benefits for his prostitutes is a reference to the real @-@ life 2009 scandal in which activist James O 'Keefe secretly filmed himself posing as a pimp during meetings with ACORN employees . The scene generated the greatest amount of media attention for " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " after its original broadcast . The pimp convention includes references to Pimps Up , Ho 's Down , an HBO documentary about the pimping lifestyle , featuring real @-@ life pimps . The scene in which the lieutenant calls his john a " nasty fucker " during sex , mirrored a scene from the documentary , Hookers at the Point . 
 The song that plays during the lieutenant 's stripper scene at the fraternity party is " Fuck the Pain Away " , by Peaches . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on October 14 , 2009 , " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " was watched by 2 @.@ 56 million overall households , according to Nielsen ratings . It received a 1 @.@ 7 rating / 3 share , and a 1 @.@ 3 rating / 4 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . In a surprise , South Park was outperformed in the 18 to 49 age group by the Bravo reality television series Top Chef , which was seen by 2 @.@ 67 million viewers . " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " also tied for the evening in the 18 – 49 rating with the Syfy reality television series Ghost Hunters ( 2 @.@ 9 million household viewers ) and only slightly outperformed the Discovery Channel popular science television program Mythbusters ( 2 @.@ 69 million household viewers ) , which surprised TV by the Number 's Robert Seidman . " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " was also outperformed by the Spike TV mixed martial arts competition series The Ultimate Fighter , which was watched by 2 @.@ 82 million household viewers and had the highest cable ratings for the night in the 18 to 49 age group . 
 " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " received generally positive reviews . Ramsey Isler of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 rating . He said although it started slow , " once this episode found its legs , it was non @-@ stop funny . " Isler praised the South Park writers for coming up with a surprisingly funny plot , and said it ranked among Butters ' best moments in the series . Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine said it was good to see an episode focused strictly on comedy , after a string of episodes focusing on social satire . Delgado said the premise of the episode was absurd and over @-@ the @-@ top , but appreciated that South Park was continuing to push boundaries by mocking such issues as prostitution . 
 The A.V. Club writer Josh Modell said the episode " was pretty damn funny , but I 'm predisposed to Butters in general as well as the wide world of pimping . " Wired writer Chris Kohler said the topical and timely jokes in " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " , such as the satire on ACORN , were a strong example of what kept South Park funny and relevant . Not all reviews were positive . Sean O 'Neal , also of The A.V. Club , gave the episode a C grade , and said " It was basically one note held for the run of the ep , in service of a simple little story without many surprises . " O 'Neal said the subplot involving the police was " similarly repetitious " , but he liked how the two plots came together to resolve each other . 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's thirteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on March 16 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , a collection of deleted scenes , and a special mini @-@ feature Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , which discussed the process behind animating the show with Inside Xbox host Major Nelson . 
 = Achtung Baby = 
 Achtung Baby ( pronunciation : / <unk> <unk> / ) is the seventh studio album by Irish rock band U2 . It was produced by Daniel Lanois and Brian Eno , and was released on 18 November 1991 on Island Records . Stung by criticism of their 1988 release , Rattle and Hum , U2 shifted their musical direction to incorporate influences from alternative rock , industrial music , and electronic dance music into their sound . Thematically , Achtung Baby is darker , more introspective , and at times more flippant than their previous work . The album and the subsequent multimedia @-@ intensive Zoo TV Tour were central to the group 's 1990s reinvention , by which they abandoned their earnest public image for a more lighthearted and self @-@ deprecating one . 
 Seeking inspiration from German reunification , U2 began recording Achtung Baby at Berlin 's Hansa Studios in October 1990 . The sessions were fraught with conflict , as the band argued over their musical direction and the quality of their material . After tensions and slow progress nearly prompted the group to disband , they made a breakthrough with the improvised writing of the song " One " . Morale and productivity improved during subsequent recording sessions in Dublin , where the album was completed in 1991 . To confound the public 's expectations of the band and their music , U2 chose the record 's facetious title and colourful multi @-@ image sleeve . 
 Achtung Baby is one of U2 's most successful records ; it received favourable reviews and debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 Top Albums , while topping the charts in many other countries . Five songs were released as commercial singles , all of which were chart successes , including " One " , " Mysterious Ways " , and " The Fly " . The album has sold 18 million copies worldwide and won a Grammy Award in 1993 for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . Achtung Baby has since been acclaimed by writers and music critics as one of the greatest albums of all time . The record was reissued in October 2011 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of its original release . 
 = = Background = = 
 After U2 's 1987 album The Joshua Tree and the supporting Joshua Tree Tour brought them critical acclaim and commercial success , their 1988 album and film Rattle and Hum precipitated a critical backlash . Although the record sold 14 million copies and performed well on music charts , critics were dismissive of it and the film , labelling the band 's exploration of early American music as " pretentious " and " misguided and bombastic " . U2 's high exposure and their reputation for being overly serious led to accusations of grandiosity and self @-@ righteousness . 
 Despite their commercial popularity , the group were dissatisfied creatively ; lead vocalist Bono believed they were musically unprepared for their success , while drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. said , " We were the biggest , but we weren 't the best . " By the band 's 1989 Lovetown Tour , they had become bored with playing their greatest hits . U2 believe that audiences misunderstood the group 's collaboration with blues musician B.B. King on Rattle and Hum and the Lovetown Tour , and they described it as " an excursion down a dead @-@ end street " . Bono said that , in retrospect , listening to black music enabled the group to create a work such as Achtung Baby , while their experiences with folk music helped him to develop as a lyricist . Towards the end of the Lovetown Tour , Bono announced on @-@ stage that it was " the end of something for U2 " , and that " we have to go away and ... dream it all up again " . Following the tour , the group began their longest break from public performances and album releases . 
 Reacting to their own sense of musical stagnation and to their critics , U2 searched for new musical ground . They wrote " God Part II " from Rattle and Hum after realising they had excessively pursued nostalgia in their songwriting . The song had a more contemporary feel that Bono said was closer to Achtung Baby 's direction . Further indications of change were two recordings they made in 1990 : the first was a cover version of " Night and Day " for the first Red Hot + Blue release , in which U2 used electronic dance beats and hip hop elements for the first time ; the second indication of change was contributions made by Bono and guitarist the Edge to the original score of A Clockwork Orange 's theatrical adaptation . Much of the material they wrote was experimental , and according to Bono , " <unk> [ ed ] the ground for Achtung Baby " . Ideas deemed inappropriate for the play were put aside for the band 's use . During this period , Bono and the Edge began increasingly writing songs together without Mullen or bassist Adam Clayton . 
 In mid @-@ 1990 , Bono reviewed material he had written in Australia on the Lovetown Tour , and the group recorded demos at STS Studios in Dublin . The demos later evolved into the songs " Who 's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses " , " Until the End of the World " , " Even Better Than the Real Thing " , and " Mysterious Ways " . After their time at STS Studios , Bono and the Edge were tasked with continuing to work on lyrics and melodies until the group reconvened . Going into the album sessions , U2 wanted the record to completely deviate from their past work , but they were unsure how to achieve this . The emergence of the Madchester scene in the UK left them confused about how they would fit into any particular musical scene . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 U2 hired Daniel Lanois and Brian Eno to produce the album , based on the duo 's prior work with the band on The Unforgettable Fire and The Joshua Tree . Lanois was principal producer , with Mark " Flood " Ellis as engineer . Eno took on an assisting role , working with the group in the studio for a week at a time to review their songs before leaving for a month or two . Eno said his role was " to come in and erase anything that sounded too much like U2 " . By distancing himself from the work , he believed he provided the band with a fresh perspective on their material each time he rejoined them . As he explained , " I would deliberately not listen to the stuff in between visits , so I could go in cold " . Since U2 wanted the record to be harder @-@ hitting and live @-@ sounding , Lanois " push [ ed ] the performance aspect very hard , often to the point of recklessness " . The Lanois – Eno team used lateral thinking and a philosophical approach — popularised by Eno 's Oblique Strategies — that contrasted with the direct and retro style of Rattle and Hum producer Jimmy Iovine . 
 = = = Berlin sessions = = = 
 The band believed that " domesticity [ w ] as the enemy of rock ' n ' roll " and that to work on the album , they needed to remove themselves from their normal family @-@ oriented routines . With a " New Europe " emerging at the end of the Cold War , they chose Berlin , in the centre of the reuniting continent , as a source of inspiration for a more European musical aesthetic . They chose to record at Hansa Studios in West Berlin , near the recently opened Berlin Wall . Several acclaimed records were made at Hansa , including two from David Bowie 's " Berlin Trilogy " with Eno , and Iggy Pop 's The Idiot . U2 arrived on 3 October 1990 on the last flight into East Berlin on the eve of German reunification . While looking for public celebrations , they mistakenly ended up joining an anti @-@ unification protest by Communists . Expecting to be inspired in Berlin , they instead found the city to be depressing and gloomy . The collapse of the Berlin Wall had resulted in a state of malaise in Germany . The band found their East Berlin hotel to be dismal and the winter inhospitable , while Hansa Studios ' location in an SS ballroom added to the " bad vibe " . Complicating matters , the studios had been neglected for years , forcing Eno and Lanois to import recording equipment . 
 Morale worsened once the sessions commenced , as the band worked long days but could not agree on a musical direction . The Edge had been listening to electronic dance music and to industrial bands like Einstürzende Neubauten , Nine Inch Nails , the Young Gods , and KMFDM . He and Bono advocated new musical directions along these lines . In contrast , Mullen was listening to classic rock acts such as Blind Faith , Cream , and Jimi Hendrix , and he was learning how to " play around the beat " . Like Clayton , he was more comfortable with a sound similar to U2 's previous work and was resistant to the proposed innovations . Further , the Edge 's interest in dance club mixes and drum machines made Mullen feel that his contributions as a drummer were being diminished . Lanois was expecting the " textural and emotional and cinematic U2 " of The Unforgettable Fire and The Joshua Tree , and he did not understand the " throwaway , trashy kinds of things " on which Bono and the Edge were working . Compounding the divisions between the two camps was a change in the band 's longstanding songwriting relationship ; Bono and the Edge were working more closely together , writing material in isolation from the rest of the group . 
 U2 found that they were neither prepared nor well @-@ rehearsed , and that their ideas were not evolving into completed songs . The group were unable to reach consensus during their disagreements and felt that they were not making progress . Bono and Lanois , in particular , had an argument that almost came to blows during the writing of " Mysterious Ways " . During one tense session , Clayton removed his bass guitar and held it out to Bono , saying , " You tell me what to play and I 'll play it . You want to play it yourself ? Go ahead . " With a sense of going nowhere , the band considered breaking up . Eno visited for a few days , and understanding their attempts to deconstruct the band , he assured them that their progress was better than they thought . By adding unusual effects and sounds , he showed that the Edge 's pursuit for new sonic territory was not incompatible with Mullen 's and Lanois ' " desire to hold on to solid song structures " . Ultimately , a breakthrough was achieved with the writing of the song " One " ; while working on " Sick Puppy " — an early version of " Mysterious Ways " — The Edge played two separate chord progressions sequentially on guitar at Lanois ' encouragement , and finding inspiration , the group quickly improvised a new song that became " One " . It provided reassurance and validated their long @-@ standing " blank page approach " to writing and recording together . 
 U2 returned to Dublin for Christmas , where they discussed their future together and all recommitted to the group . Listening to the tapes , they agreed their material sounded better than they originally thought . They briefly returned to Berlin in January 1991 to finish their work at Hansa . Reflecting on their time in Berlin , Clayton called the sessions a " baptism of fire " and said , " It was something we had to go through to realize what we were trying to get to was not something you could find physically , outside of ourselves , in some other city — that there was not magic to it and that we actually had to put the work in and figure out the ideas and hone those ideas down . " Although just two songs were delivered during their two months in Berlin , The Edge said that in retrospect , working there had been more productive and inspirational than the output had suggested . The band had been removed from a familiar environment , providing what they described as a certain " texture and cinematic location " , and many of their incomplete ideas would be revisited in the subsequent Dublin sessions with success . 
 = = = Dublin sessions = = = 
 In February 1991 , U2 moved the album 's recording sessions to the seaside manor Elsinore in the Dublin suburb of Dalkey , renting the house for ₤ 10 @,@ 000 per month . The band nicknamed the house " Dog Town " for the " tackiness " of its exterior dog kennels , and the location was credited as such in the album notes . Lanois ' strategy to record in houses , mansions , or castles was something he believed brought atmosphere to the recordings . Dublin audio services company Big Bear Sound installed a recording studio in the house , with the recording room in a converted garage diagonally beneath the control room . Video cameras and TV monitors were used to monitor and communicate between the spaces . With Elsinore located within walking distance of Bono 's and the Edge 's homes , the sessions there were more relaxed and productive . The band struggled with one particular song — later released as the B @-@ side " Lady With the Spinning Head " — but three separate tracks , " The Fly " , " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " and " Zoo Station " , were derived from it . During the writing of " The Fly " , Bono created a persona based on an oversized pair of black sunglasses that he wore to lighten the mood in the studio . The character , also named " The Fly " , evolved into a leather @-@ clad egomaniac meant to parody rock stardom . Bono assumed this alter ego for the band 's subsequent public appearances and live performances on the Zoo TV Tour . 
 In April , tapes from the earlier Berlin sessions were stolen after the band reportedly left them in a hotel room , and they were subsequently leaked before the album was finished . The tapes ' demos were bootlegged into a three @-@ disc collection dubbed the " Salomé sessions " , named for a song that was prominently featured in the collection but did not make the album 's final cut . The release is considered the most famous bootleg of U2 material . Bono dismissed the leaked demos as " <unk> " , and the Edge likened the situation to " being violated " . The leak shook U2 's confidence and soured their collective mood for a few weeks . 
 Staffing schedules led to the band having a surplus of engineers at one point , and as a result , they split recording between Elsinore and the Edge 's home studio to increase productivity . Engineer Robbie Adams said the approach raised morale and activity levels : " There was always something different to listen to , always something exciting happening . " To record all of the band 's material and test different arrangements , the engineers utilised a technique they called " <unk> " , which allowed them to achieve more than 48 tracks of audio by using a 24 @-@ track analogue recording , a DAT machine , and a synchroniser . The focus on capturing the band 's material and encouraging the best performances meant that little attention was paid to combating audio spill . In the June 1991 issue of U2 's fan magazine Propaganda , Lanois said that he believed some of the in @-@ progress songs would become worldwide hits , despite lyrics and vocal takes being unfinished . 
 During the Dublin sessions , Eno was sent tapes of the previous two months ' work , which he called a " total disaster " . Joining U2 in the studio , he stripped away what he thought to be excessive overdubbing . The group believes his intervention saved the album . Eno theorised that the band was too close to their music , explaining , " if you know a piece of music terribly well and the mix changes and the bass guitar goes very quiet , you still hear the bass . You 're so accustomed to it being there that you compensate and remake it in your mind . " Eno also assisted them through a crisis point one month before the recording deadline ; he recalled that " everything seemed like a mess " , and he insisted the band take a two @-@ week holiday . The break gave them a clearer perspective and added decisiveness . 
 After work at Elsinore finished in July , the sessions moved to Windmill Lane Studios where Eno , Flood , Lanois , and previous U2 producer Steve Lillywhite mixed the tracks . Each producer created his own mixes of the songs , and the band either picked the version they preferred or requested that certain aspects of each be combined . Additional recording and mixing continued at a frenetic pace until the 21 September deadline , including last @-@ minute changes to " The Fly " , " One " , and " Mysterious Ways " . The Edge estimated that half of the sessions ' work was done in the last three weeks to finalise songs . The final night was spent devising a running order for the record . The following day , the Edge travelled to Los Angeles with the album 's tapes for mastering . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 U2 is credited with composing the music for all of Achtung Baby 's tracks , despite periods of separated songwriting . They wrote the music primarily through jam sessions , a common practice for them . The album represents a deviation from the sound of their past work ; the songs are less anthemic in nature , and their musical style demonstrates a more European aesthetic , introducing influences from alternative rock , industrial music , and electronic dance music . The band referred to the album 's musical departure as " the sound of four men chopping down The Joshua Tree " . Accordingly , the distorted introduction to the opening track " Zoo Station " was intended to make listeners think the record was broken or was mistakenly not the new U2 album . Author Susan Fast said that with the group 's use of technology in the song 's opening , " there can be no mistake that U2 has embraced sound resources new to them " . 
 For the album , the Edge often eschewed his normally minimalistic approach to guitar playing and his trademark chiming , delay @-@ heavy sound , in favour of a style that incorporated more solos , dissonance , and feedback . Industrial influences and guitar effects , particularly distortion , contributed to a " metallic " style and " harder textures " . Music journalist Bill Wyman said the Edge 's guitar playing on the closing track " Love Is Blindness " sounded like a " dentist 's drill " . The Edge achieved breakthroughs in the writing of songs such as " Even Better Than the Real Thing " and " Mysterious Ways " by toying with various effects pedals . 
 The rhythm section is more pronounced in the mix on Achtung Baby , and hip hop @-@ inspired electronic dance beats are featured on many of the album 's tracks , most prominently " The Fly " . Elysa Gardner of Rolling Stone compared the layering of dance beats into guitar @-@ heavy mixes to songs by British bands Happy Mondays and Jesus Jones . " Mysterious Ways " combines a funky guitar riff with a danceable , conga @-@ laden beat , for what Bono called " U2 at our funkiest ... Sly and The Family Stone meets Madchester baggy . " Amidst layers of distorted guitars , " The Fly " and " Zoo Station " feature industrial @-@ influenced percussion — the timbre of Mullen 's drums exhibits a " cold , processed sound , something like beating on a tin can " , according to author Albin Zak . 
 Whereas Bono exhibited a full @-@ throated vocal delivery on the group 's previous releases , for Achtung Baby he extended his range into a lower register and used what Fast described as " breathy and subdued colors " . On many tracks , including " The Fly " and " Zoo Station " , he sang as a character ; one technique used is what Fast called " double voice " , in which the vocals are doubled but sung in two different octaves . This octave differentiation was sometimes done with vocals simultaneously , while at other times , it distinguishes voices between the verses and choruses . According to Fast , the technique introduces " a contrasting lyrical idea and vocal character to deliver it " , leading to both literal and ironic interpretations of Bono 's vocals . For several tracks , his vocals were treated with processing . These techniques were used to give his voice a different emotional feel and distinguish it from his past vocals . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 As is often the case on U2 albums , Bono is credited as the sole lyricist . In contrast to U2 's previous records , whose lyrics were politically and socially charged , Achtung Baby is more personal and introspective , examining love , sexuality , spirituality , faith , and betrayal . The lyrics are darker in tone , describing troubled personal relationships and exuding feelings of confusion , loneliness , and inadequacy . Central to these themes was the Edge 's separation from his wife ( the mother of his three children ) , which occurred halfway through the album 's recording . The pain not only focused him on the record and led him to advocate more personal themes , but it also affected Bono 's lyrical contributions . Bono found inspiration from his own personal life , citing the births of his two daughters in 1989 and 1991 as major influences . This is reflected in " Zoo Station " , which opens the album as a statement of intent with lyrics suggesting new anticipations and appetites . 
 Of the album 's personal nature , Bono said that there were a lot of " blood and guts " in it . His lyrics to the ballad " One " were inspired by the band members ' struggling relationships and the German reunification . The Edge described the song on one level as a " bitter , twisted , vitriolic conversation between two people who 've been through some nasty , heavy stuff " . Similarly , " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " describes a strained relationship and unease over obligations , and on " Acrobat " , Bono sings about weakness , hypocrisy , and inadequacy . The torch songs of Roy Orbison , Scott Walker , and Jacques Brel were major influences , evidenced by tracks such as : " Who 's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses " , a description of a couple 's argument ; " So Cruel " , about unrequited love , obsession , and possessiveness ; and the closing track , " Love Is Blindness " , a bleak account of a failing romance . 
 U2 biographer Bill Flanagan credits Bono 's habit of keeping his lyrics " in flux until the last minute " with providing a narrative coherence to the album . Flanagan interpreted Achtung Baby as using the moon as a metaphor for a dark woman seducing the singer away from his virtuous love , the sun ; he is tempted away from domestic life by an exciting nightlife and tests how far he can go before returning home . For Flanagan , " Tryin ' to Throw Your Arms Around the World " on the album 's latter third describes the character stumbling home in a drunken state , and the final three songs — " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " , " Acrobat " , and " Love Is Blindness " — are about how the couple deal with the suffering they have forced on each other . 
 Despite the record 's darker themes , many lyrics are more flippant and sexual than those from the band 's previous work . This reflects the group 's revisiting some of the Dadaist characters and stage antics they dabbled with in the late 1970s as teenagers but abandoned for more literal themes in the 1980s . While the band had previously been opposed to materialism , they examined and flirted with this value on the album and the Zoo TV Tour . The title and lyrics of " Even Better Than the Real Thing " are " reflective of the times [ the band ] were living in , when people were no longer looking for the truth , [ they ] were all looking for instant gratification " . " <unk> " and " throwaway " were among the band 's buzzwords during recording , leading to many tracks in this vein . The chorus of " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " features the pop lyrical cliché " baby , baby , baby " , juxtaposed against the dark lyrics in the verses . Bono wrote the lyrics to " The Fly " in character as the song 's eponymous persona by composing a sequence of aphorisms . He called the song " like a crank call from Hell ... but [ the caller ] likes it there " . 
 Religious imagery is present throughout the record . " Until the End of the World " is an imagined conversation between Jesus Christ and his betrayer , Judas Iscariot . On " Acrobat " , Bono sings about feelings of spiritual alienation in the line " I 'd break bread and wine / If there was a church I could receive in " . In many tracks , Bono 's lyrics about women carry religious connotations , describing them as spirits , life , light , and idols to be worshipped . Religious interpretations of the album are the subject of the book Meditations on Love in the Shadow of the Fall . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The sleeve artwork for Achtung Baby was designed by Steve Averill , who had created the majority of U2 's album covers , along with Shaughn McGrath . To parallel the band 's change in musical direction , Averill and McGrath devised sleeve concepts that used multiple color images to contrast with the seriousness of the individual , mostly monochromatic images from previous U2 album sleeves . Rough sketches and designs were created early during the recording sessions , and some experimental designs were conceived to closely resemble , as Averill put it , " dance @-@ music oriented sleeves . We just did them to show how extreme we could go and then everyone came back to levels that they were happy with . But if we hadn 't gone to these extremes it may not have been the cover it is now . " 
 An initial photo shoot with the band 's long @-@ time photographer Anton Corbijn was done near U2 's Berlin hotel in late 1990 . Most of the photos were black @-@ and @-@ white , and the group felt they were not indicative of the spirit of the new album . They re @-@ commissioned Corbijn for an additional two @-@ week photo shoot in Tenerife in February 1991 , for which they dressed up and mingled with the crowds of the annual Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife , presenting a more playful side of themselves . It was during the group 's time in Tenerife and during a four @-@ day shoot in Morocco in July that they were photographed in drag . Additional photos were taken in Dublin in June , including a shot of a naked Clayton . The images were intended to confound expectations of U2 , and their full colour contrasted with the monochromatic imagery on past sleeves . 
 Several photographs were considered as candidates for a single cover image , including shots of : a cow on an Irish farm in County Kildare ; the nude Clayton ; and the band driving a Trabant , an East German automobile they became fond of as a symbol for a changing Europe . Ultimately , a multiple image scheme was used , as U2 , Corbijn , Averill , and the producers thought that " the sense of flux expressed by both the music and the band 's playing with alter egos was best articulated by the lack of a single viewpoint " . The resulting front sleeve is a 4 × 4 squared montage . A mix of Corbijn 's original images from Berlin and the later photo shoots was used , as the band wanted to balance the " colder European feel of the mainly black @-@ and @-@ white Berlin images with the much warmer exotic climates of Santa Cruz and Morocco " . Some photographs were used because they were striking on their own , while others were used because of their ambiguity . Images of the band with Trabants , several of which were painted bright colours , appear on the sleeve and throughout the album booklet . These vehicles were later incorporated into the Zoo TV Tour set design as part of the lighting system . The nude photo of Clayton was placed on the rear cover of the record . On the US compact disc and cassette sleeves , Clayton 's genitals are censored with a black " X " or a four @-@ leaf clover , while vinyl editions feature the photo uncensored . The label of the physical CD and vinyl record features an image of a " babyface " graffitied by artist Charlie Whisker onto an external wall of Windmill Lane Studios . The babyface image was later adopted as a logo for Zoo TV Tour memorabilia and was incorporated into the Zooropa album cover . In 2003 , music television network VH1 ranked Achtung Baby 's sleeve at number 39 on its list of the " 50 Greatest Album Covers " . Bono has called the sleeve his favourite U2 cover artwork . 
 The German word " Achtung " ( IPA : [ <unk> ] ) in the album title translates into English as " attention " or " watch out " . U2 's sound engineer Joe O 'Herlihy used the phrase " <unk> baby " during recording , reportedly taking it from the Mel Brooks film The Producers . The title was selected in August 1991 near the end of the album sessions . According to Bono , it was an ideal title , as it was attention @-@ grabbing , referenced Germany , and hinted at either romance or birth , both of which were themes on the album . The band was determined not to highlight the seriousness of the lyrics and instead sought to " erect a mask " , a concept that was further developed on the Zoo TV Tour , particularly through characters such as " The Fly " . Of the title , Bono said in 1992 , " It 's a con , in a way . We call it Achtung Baby , grinning up our sleeves in all the photography . But it 's probably the heaviest record we 've ever made ... It tells you a lot about packaging , because the press would have killed us if we 'd called it anything else . " 
 U2 had considered several other album titles , including Man ( in contrast to the group 's debut , Boy ) , 69 , Zoo Station , and Adam , the latter of which would have been paired with the nude photo of Clayton . Other possible titles included Fear of Women and Cruise Down Main Street , the latter a reference to the Rolling Stones ' record Exile on Main St. and the cruise missiles launched on Baghdad during the Gulf War . Most of the proposed titles were rejected out of the belief that people would see them as pretentious and " another Big Statement from U2 " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 As early as December 1990 , the music press reported that U2 would be recording a dance @-@ oriented album and that it would be released in mid @-@ 1991 . In August 1991 , sound collage artists <unk> released an EP entitled U2 that parodied U2 's song " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " . Island Records objected to the release , believing consumers would confuse the EP for a new U2 record . Island successfully sued for copyright infringement but were criticised in the music press , as were U2 , although they were not involved in the litigation . Uncut 's Stephen Dalton believes that the negative headlines were tempered by the success of Achtung Baby 's first single , " The Fly " , released on 21 October 1991 a month before the album . Sounding nothing like U2 's typical style , it was selected as the lead single to announce the group 's new musical direction . It became their second song to top the UK Singles Chart , while reaching number one on the singles charts in Ireland and Australia . The single was less successful in the US , peaking at number 61 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 Island Records and U2 refused to make advance copies of the album available to the press until just a few days before the release date , preferring that fans to listen to the record before reading reviews . The decision came amid rumours of tensions within the band , and journalist David Browne compared it to the Hollywood practice of withholding pre @-@ release copies of films from reviewers whenever they receive poor word @-@ of @-@ mouth press . Achtung Baby was released on 18 November 1991 in the UK and 19 November in the US on compact disc , tape cassette , and vinyl record , with an initial shipment of 1 @.@ 4 million copies . The album was the first release by a major act to use two so @-@ called " eco @-@ friendly " packages — the cardboard Digipak , and the shrinkwrapped jewel case without the long cardboard attachment . Island encouraged record stores to order the jewel case packaging by offering a four @-@ percent discount . 
 Achtung Baby was U2 's first album in three years and their first comprising entirely new material in over four years . The group maintained a low profile after the record 's release , avoiding interviews and allowing critics and the public to make their own assessments . Instead of participating in an article with Rolling Stone magazine , U2 asked Eno to write one for them . The marketing plan for the album focused on retail and press promotions . In addition to television and radio advertisements being produced , posters featuring the sleeve 's 16 images were distributed to record stores and through alternative newspapers in major cities . Compared to the large hype of other 1991 year @-@ end releases , the marketing for Achtung Baby was relatively understated , as Island general manager Andy Allen explained : " U2 will not come out with that kind of fanfare in terms of outside media . We feel the fan base itself creates that kind of excitement . " 
 " Mysterious Ways " was released as the second single five days after the release of Achtung Baby . On the US Billboard charts , the song topped the Modern Rock Tracks and Album Rock Tracks charts , and it reached number nine on the Hot 100 . Elsewhere , it reached number one in Canada and number three in Australia . In addition to the success of the first two singles , the album performed well commercially ; in the US , Achtung Baby debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 Top Albums on 7 December 1991 . It fell to number three the following week , but spent its first 13 weeks on the chart within the top ten . In total , it spent 100 weeks on the Billboard 200 Top Albums . It sold 295 @,@ 000 copies in the US in its first week , and on 21 January 1992 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it double @-@ platinum . Achtung Baby peaked at number two on the UK Albums Chart , spending 87 weeks on the chart . In other regions , it topped the RPM 100 in Canada , the ARIA Albums Chart in Australia , and the RIANZ Top 40 Albums in New Zealand . The record sold seven million copies in its first three months on sale . 
 Three additional commercial singles were released in 1992 . " One " , released in March at the beginning of the Zoo TV Tour , reached number seven in the UK and number ten in the US charts . Like its predecessor , it topped the Modern Rock Tracks chart , and the singles charts in Canada and Ireland . The song has since become regarded as one of the greatest of all time , ranking highly on many critics ' lists . The fourth single from Achtung Baby , " Even Better Than the Real Thing " , was released in June . The album version of the song peaked at number 12 on the UK Singles Chart , while reaching number one on the US Album Rock Tracks chart . A " Perfecto " remix of the song by DJ Paul Oakenfold performed better in the UK than the album version did , peaking at number eight . " Who 's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses " followed in August 1992 as the fifth and final single . It peaked at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart , and number two on the US Album Rock Tracks chart . All five commercial singles charted within the top 20 in Ireland , Australia , Canada , and UK . Promotional singles for " Until the End of the World " , " Salomé " , and " Zoo Station " were also released . By the end of 1992 , Achtung Baby had sold 10 million copies worldwide . 
 In October 1992 , U2 released Achtung Baby : The Videos , the Cameos , and a Whole Lot of Interference from Zoo TV , a VHS and LaserDisc compilation of nine music videos from the album . Running for 65 minutes , it was produced by Ned O 'Hanlon and released by Island and PolyGram . It included three music videos each for " One " and " Even Better than the Real Thing " , along with videos for " The Fly " , " Mysterious Ways " , and " Until the End of the World " . Interspersed between the music videos were clips of so @-@ called " interference " , comprising documentary footage , media clips , and other video similar to what was displayed at Zoo TV Tour concerts . The release was certified platinum in the US , and gold in Canada . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Achtung Baby received favourable reviews from critics . Elysa Gardner of Rolling Stone said U2 had " proven that the same penchant for epic musical and verbal gestures that leads many artists to self @-@ parody can , in more inspired hands , fuel the unforgettable fire that defines great rock & roll . " The review said that the album , like its predecessor Rattle and Hum , was an attempt by the band to " broaden its musical palette , but this time its ambitions are realized " . Bill Wyman from Entertainment Weekly called it a " <unk> produced and surprisingly unpretentious return by one of the most impressive bands in the world " . Steve Morse of The Boston Globe echoed these sentiments , stating that the album " not only reinvigorates their sound , but drops any self @-@ righteousness . The songs focus on personal relationships , not on saving the world . " Morse commended the album 's " clanging , knob @-@ twisting sound effects " and the Edge 's " metallic , head @-@ snapping guitar " . In the Los Angeles Times , Robert Hilburn stated , " the arty , guitar @-@ driven textures are among the band 's most confident and vigorous ever " . He said the album is a difficult one for listeners because of the dark , introspective nature of the songs , which contrasts with the group 's uplifting songs of the past . Jon Pareles of The New York Times lauded the record not only for featuring " noisy , vertiginous arrangements " , but also for the group 's ability to " maintain its pop skills " . The review concluded , " Stripped @-@ down and defying its old formulas , U2 has given itself a fighting chance for the 1990s . " 
 Q 's Mat Snow called Achtung Baby U2 's " heaviest album to date . And best . " Snow praised the band and its production team for making " music of drama , depth , intensity and , believe it , funkiness " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune felt the record " shows the band in a grittier light : disrupting , rather than fulfilling , expectations " . He praised Lanois ' production and said that due to the Edge 's guitar playing , " U2 sounds <unk> than it has since its 1980 debut , Boy " . Kot concluded his review by calling the album " a magnificent search for transcendence made all the more moving for its flaws " . Niall Stokes of Hot Press wrote , " Ostensibly decadent , sensual and dark , it is a record of , and for , these times . " The New Zealand Herald found it " pretty damn good " and its sound " subdued , tightly controlled , [ and ] introverted " . However , it said that too many " downbeat moments where songs seem to be going nowhere " prevented it from being a " truly wondrous affair " . In Spin , Jim Greer was more critical of the album , calling it an " ambitious failure " ; the review welcomed its experimentation but judged that when the group " strays from familiar territory , the results are hit @-@ and @-@ miss " . Village Voice critic Robert Christgau rated it a dud , and in 1994 , he reflected on this sentiment : " After many , many tries , Achtung Baby still sounded like a damnably diffuse U2 album to me , and I put it in the hall unable to describe a single song . " In a retrospective review for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the band 's musical transformation as " thorough " , " effective " , and " endlessly inventive " . Erlewine concluded that few artists at that stage in their career could have " recorded an album as adventurous or fulfilled their ambitions quite as successfully as U2 [ did ] " . 
 The success of Achtung Baby and the Zoo TV Tour re @-@ established U2 as one of the most popular and critically acclaimed musical acts in the world . The group nearly swept Rolling Stone 's 1992 end @-@ of @-@ year readers ' polls , winning honours for " Best Single " ( " One " ) , " Artist of the Year " , " Best Album " , " Best Songwriter " ( Bono ) , " Best Album Cover " , and " Comeback of the Year " , among others . Critics at several newspapers , such as The Washington Post , The Boston Globe , and Chicago Sun @-@ Times , ranked the album among the year 's best . The album placed fourth on the " Best Albums " list from The Village Voice 's 1991 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . At the 35th Annual Grammy Awards , Achtung Baby won the award for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , and it earned Lanois and Eno the award for Producer of the Year ( Non @-@ Classical ) . The record was also nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year , and was shortlisted for the 1992 Mercury Music Prize . 
 = = Zoo TV Tour = = 
 Following the release of Achtung Baby , U2 staged a worldwide concert tour , titled the Zoo TV Tour . Like Achtung Baby , the tour was intended to deviate from the band 's past . In contrast to the austere stage setups of previous U2 tours , Zoo TV was an elaborately staged multimedia event . It satirised television and the viewing public 's over @-@ stimulation by attempting to instill " sensory overload " in its audience . The stage featured large video screens that showed visual effects , random video clips from pop culture , and flashing text phrases . Live satellite link @-@ ups , channel surfing , crank calls , and video confessionals were incorporated into the shows . 
 Whereas the group were known for their earnest live act in the 1980s , their Zoo TV performances were intentionally ironic and self @-@ deprecating ; on stage , Bono portrayed several characters he conceived , including " The Fly " , " Mirror Ball Man " , and " MacPhisto " . The majority of the album 's songs were played at each show , and the set lists began with up to eight consecutive Achtung Baby songs as a further sign that they were no longer the U2 of the 1980s . 
 The tour began in February 1992 and comprised 157 shows over almost two years . During a six @-@ month break , the band recorded the album Zooropa , which was released in July 1993 . It was inspired by Zoo TV and expanded on its themes of technology and media oversaturation . By the time the tour concluded in December 1993 , U2 had played to approximately 5 @.@ 3 million fans . In 2002 , Q magazine said the Zoo TV Tour was " still the most spectacular rock tour staged by any band " . The tour 's 27 November 1993 concert in Sydney was filmed and commercially released as Zoo TV : Live from Sydney by PolyGram in May 1994 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Achtung Baby is certified 8 × platinum in the US by the RIAA , and according to Nielsen Soundscan , the album has sold 5 @.@ 5 million copies in the country , as of March 2009 . The record has been certified 5 × platinum in Australia , 4 × platinum in the UK , and diamond in Canada , the highest certification award . Overall , 18 million copies have been sold worldwide . It is U2 's second @-@ highest @-@ selling record after The Joshua Tree , which has sold 25 million copies . For the band , Achtung Baby was a watershed that secured their creative future , and its success led to the group 's continued musical experimentation during the 1990s . Zooropa , released in 1993 , was a further departure for the band , incorporating additional dance music influences and electronic effects into their sound . In 1995 , U2 and Brian Eno collaborated on the experimental / ambient album Original Soundtracks 1 under the pseudonym " Passengers " . For Pop in 1997 , the group 's experiences with dance club culture and their usage of tape loops , programming , rhythm sequencing , and sampling resulted in their most dance @-@ oriented album . 
 The record is highly regarded among the members of U2 . Mullen said , " I thought it was a great record . I was very proud of it . Its success was by no means preordained . It was a real break from what we had done before and we didn 't know if our fans would like it or not . " Bono called the album a " pivot point " in the band 's career , saying , " Making Achtung Baby is the reason we 're still here now . " Clayton concurred , saying , " If we hadn 't done something we were excited about , that made us apprehensive and challenged everything we stood for , then there would really have been no reason to carry on ... If it hadn 't been a great record by our standards , the existence of the band would have been threatened . " The group 's reinvention occurred at the peak of the alternative rock movement , when the genre was achieving widespread mainstream popularity . Bill Flanagan pointed out that many of U2 's 1980s contemporaries struggled commercially with albums released after the turn of the decade . He argued that U2 , however , were able to take advantage of the alternative rock movement and ensure a successful future by " set [ ting ] themselves up as the first of the new groups rather than the last of the old " . Toby Creswell echoed these sentiments in his 2006 music reference book 1001 Songs , writing that the album helped U2 avoid " becoming parodies of themselves and being swept aside by the grunge and techno revolutions " . A 2010 retrospective by Spin said that " U2 became the emblematic band of the alternative @-@ rock era with Achtung Baby . " 
 Achtung Baby has been acclaimed by writers and music critics as one of the greatest albums of all time ; according to Acclaimed Music , it is the 80th @-@ highest @-@ ranked record on critics ' lists . In 1997 , The Guardian collated worldwide data from a range of renowned critics , artists , and radio DJs , who placed the record at number 71 on a list of the " 100 Best Albums Ever " . In 2003 , the National Association of Recording Merchandisers ranked it at number 45 on its " Definitive 200 " list , while USA Today featured it on their list of the top 40 albums of all time . Three years later , the album appeared on a number of rankings , including Hot Press 's " 100 Greatest Albums Ever " at number 21 , Time 's list of " The All @-@ Time 100 Albums " , and the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . VH1 ranked it 65th on the " 100 Greatest Albums of Rock & Roll " episode of its series The Greatest . Rolling Stone placed the record at number 63 on its 2012 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , calling it " a prescient mix of sleek rock and pulsing Euro grooves " and stating that " the emotional turmoil made U2 sound more human than ever " . Entertainment Weekly 's 2013 list of the " All @-@ Time Greatest " albums ranked the record 23rd , stating that instead of " coast [ ing ] forever on the cinematic storytelling they mastered on the excellently righteous The Joshua Tree " , the group " ripped up the rule book " with Achtung Baby . The record topped Spin 's list of the 125 most influential albums from 1985 to 2010 ; the author said , " Unlike Radiohead with OK Computer and Kid A , U2 took their post @-@ industrial , trad @-@ rock disillusionment not as a symbol of overall cultural malaise , but as a challenge to buck up and transcend ... Struggling to simultaneously embrace and blow up the world , they were never more inspirational . " 
 = = 20th anniversary releases = = 
 The 20th anniversary of Achtung Baby was marked by several releases in 2011 . At the band 's request , a documentary film about the album entitled From the Sky Down was produced . It was directed by Davis Guggenheim , who previously collaborated with the Edge for the documentary It Might Get Loud in 2008 . From the Sky Down documents the album 's difficult recording period , the band members ' relationships , and U2 's creative process . Archival footage and stills from the recording sessions appear in the film , along with unreleased scenes from Rattle and Hum . For the documentary , the band were filmed during a return visit to Hansa Studios and during rehearsals for the Glastonbury Festival 2011 . The film premiered at the 2011 Toronto International Film Festival , and in October , it was broadcast on multiple television networks worldwide . 
 On 31 October 2011 , Achtung Baby was reissued in five formats . In addition to a single @-@ disc release of the album , a deluxe edition includes a bonus disc of remixes and B @-@ sides from the album 's five singles , and a vinyl edition includes the album on two LPs with two additional LPs of remixes . The 10 @-@ disc " Super Deluxe " and " Über Deluxe " editions include : the Zooropa album ; three additional CDs with remixes , B @-@ sides , and outtakes from Achtung Baby and Zooropa ; a " kindergarten " disc with nascent versions of the album 's 12 songs ; and four DVDs containing From the Sky Down , Zoo TV : Live from Sydney , music videos , and documentaries . The " Über Deluxe " edition also contains the album on double vinyl , five 7 @-@ inch vinyl singles , and additional memorabilia , including a replica of Bono 's " Fly " sunglasses . The media initially announced that the reissue was a remastered release . However , the initial press release by U2 made no mention of " remastering " , and the band 's website later removed any mention of the reissue being a remaster . The Edge confirmed that the audio was " polish [ ed ] " , but that it was not fully remastered because the original recordings did not require it . " Blow Your House Down " , an outtake included in the deluxe editions , was released as a promotional single in October 2011 . 
 Q commissioned an Achtung Baby tribute album , entitled AHK @-@ toong BAY @-@ bi Covered , that was included in the magazine 's December 2011 issue . It features performances by Jack White , Depeche Mode , Damien Rice , Gavin Friday , Glasvegas , The Fray , Patti Smith , The Killers , Snow Patrol , Nine Inch Nails , and Garbage . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Bono , all music composed by U2 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charting = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Central Coast Mariners FC = 
 Central Coast Mariners Football Club is an Australian professional soccer club based in Gosford , on the Central Coast of New South Wales . It competes in the A @-@ League , under licence from Football Federation Australia ( FFA ) . The Mariners was founded in 2004 as one of the eight original A @-@ League teams . It was the first professional sports club from the Gosford region to compete in a national competition . Despite being considered one of the smallest @-@ market clubs in the league , Central Coast Mariners has claimed one A @-@ League Championship from four Grand Final appearances and topped the table to win the A @-@ League Premiership twice . The club has also appeared in the AFC Champions League four times . 
 The club plays matches at Central Coast Stadium , a 20 @,@ 059 @-@ seat stadium in Gosford ; its purpose @-@ built training facility , Mariners Centre of Excellence , is located in the suburb of Tuggerah . The facility is also home to a youth team that competes in the National Youth League . The English Football League One 's Sheffield United has invested in the Central Coast @-@ based club , and the Mariners has affiliation agreements with several international clubs . 
 The Mariners ' main supporters ' group is known as the Yellow Army , for the colour of the club 's home kit . The club shares a rivalry with Newcastle Jets , known as the F3 Derby , after the previous name of the motorway that connects the cities of the teams . Matt Simon is the Mariners ' all @-@ time leading goalscorer as of December 2014 , with 45 goals in all competitions . The team record for matches played is held by John Hutchinson , who has appeared in 263 games for the Mariners . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Central Coast Mariners ' bid for a franchise in the Football Federation Australia 's new A @-@ League competition was aimed at filling the one spot for a regional team that was designated by the FFA . Media speculation prior to the announcement of the franchises in the new league suggested that the Mariners ' bid may be favourable due to its new blood . Backing from former Australian international player and club technical director Alex Tobin , as well as Clean Up Australia personality Ian Kiernan — who would act as inaugural club chairman — also strengthened its proposal . As the only regional bidder , Central Coast was expected to make it into the league by default . Following a reported signed deal with the FFA , the club signed former Northern Spirit coach Lawrie McKinna as manager and Ian Ferguson , a former Rangers and Northern Spirit player , as coach . To aid the FFA 's goals of building the profile of the sport , the Mariners created formal links with local state league team Central Coast United . On 1 November 2004 , after much expectation , the club was announced as one of eight teams to become part of FFA 's domestic competition , the A @-@ League . The decision made Central Coast Mariners the first Gosford @-@ based professional sports team to play in a national competition . 
 At the time of the formation of the new league in 2004 , the club was owned by Spirits Sports and Leisure Group . The club announced its search for a star player under the league 's allowance for one star player outside of the $ 1 @.@ 5 million salary cap , insisting that the player should not look at the position as a retirement fund . Coach Lawrie McKinna sought interest from Australia national football team players Ante <unk> and Simon Colosimo , and announced that he may sign more than the three under @-@ 20 players required by league rules . Early concerns for the club focussed on concerns over financial stability , but after forming a partnership with technology company Toshiba and a cash injection from local businessman John Singleton , the club 's financial worries were eased . McKinna was keen to sign local player Damien Brown of Bateau Bay , formerly of the Newcastle Jets . In a decision which prompted the player to declare that he was " over the moon " , Brown became the first player to sign with the club . Club chairman Lyall Gorman was pleased that a local had become a " foundation player " and part of Brown 's role would be to assist with selection of younger players from the local area . By early December 2004 , the club had created a steady foundation of player signings and began negotiations with former Perth Glory striker Nik Mrdja , signing him later in the month as its star attacker . <unk> was one of the most prominent players in the last season of the National Soccer League , scoring the final goal to secure Perth Glory 's finals win . The club 's management was reluctant to sign a star player outside of the $ 1 @.@ 5 million salary cap , stipulating that they " would have to contribute on the pitch and get people to come to the ground . " 
 = = = Lawrie McKinna era = = = 
 The Mariners ' inaugural season was considered a resounding success by many ; the team reached the 2006 A @-@ League Grand Final after finishing third during the regular season . Central Coast was defeated by Sydney FC 1 – 0 in front of a crowd of 41 @,@ 689 — a competition record at the time . The Mariners also won the 2005 Pre @-@ Season Cup , defeating Perth Glory in the final 1 – 0 . Before the 2006 – 07 A @-@ League season , the Mariners secured the services of then @-@ Australian international Tony Vidmar from NAC Breda for two years . This was the club 's first marquee signing , following the lead of Sydney FC ( Dwight Yorke ) and Adelaide United ( Qu <unk> ) . Central Coast again reached the grand final in the 2006 Pre @-@ Season Cup , losing to Adelaide United 5 – 4 on penalties after the score was tied 1 – 1 after extra time . The Mariners then participated in the 2006 – 07 A @-@ League season , but was unable to gain a spot in the final series , finishing sixth after the regular season . 
 Club captain Noel Spencer was released by the Mariners , then signed to participate in the Asian Champions League by Sydney FC after the 2006 – 07 season , and Alex Wilkinson was appointed the new captain . Only 22 years of age at the time , Wilkinson had played every possible competitive match for the Mariners up to his appointment . In February 2008 , Central Coast Mariners signed an arrangement with English Football League Championship side Sheffield United . The partnership was one of several connections the Mariners made with foreign clubs ; other partner clubs included Ferencváros of Hungary , Chengdu Blades of China and São Paulo of Brazil . The agreement benefits the club by providing an opportunity for the youth programme and senior side to draw from the roster of Sheffield United through transfers . The teams also formed a property development joint venture , in the hopes that Central Coast could use its share of income to expand and bolster their Mariners Youth Academy . 
 The 2007 – 08 season saw Central Coast win its first premiership on goal difference ahead of Newcastle , following a final round that began with Central Coast and three other clubs level on 31 points . The final series began with a 2 – 0 loss to Newcastle in the first leg of its major semi @-@ final , but the Mariners forced the tie to extra time by holding a 2 – 0 lead in the second leg after 90 minutes . A 94th @-@ minute goal by <unk> <unk> , who had scored earlier to level the tie , gave Central Coast a 3 – 2 win on aggregate , putting the Mariners through to the 2008 A @-@ League Grand Final . In a rematch with Newcastle , the Jets defeated Central Coast 1 – 0 in the Grand Final , which ended in controversy due to an uncalled handball against Newcastle in Central Coast Mariners penalty box during the closing seconds of the match . If called , the foul would have given Central Coast a penalty kick and a chance to equalise . As Mariners players disputed referee Mark Shield 's decision , goalkeeper Danny Vuković struck Shield on the arm , resulting in an immediate sending off and later suspension . Vuković was suspended from both domestic and international competition for nine months , with an additional six @-@ months ' suspended ban ; the latter period was reduced to three months on appeal . Despite further appeals , the ban was eventually confirmed by FIFA in June , to include banning the young keeper from competing at the 2008 Olympic Games . The ban lasted into October ; in response , Central Coast signed former Manchester United and Australian international keeper Mark Bosnich on a seven @-@ week contract . 
 Before the 2008 – 09 season , Central Coast was predicted to be among the A @-@ League leaders , but had a run of three losses in a row to end the regular season . Even with the losing streak , the club narrowly qualified for the finals , finishing in fourth , two points ahead of Sydney F.C. and Wellington Phoenix . Central Coast lost 4 – 1 on aggregate in their minor semi @-@ final against Queensland Roar , ending the team 's season . 
 = = = Graham Arnold and Phil Moss era = = = 
 In February 2010 , following the club 's 2009 – 10 season , McKinna chose to move into a new role , becoming Central Coast 's Football and Commercial Operations Manager . Socceroos assistant manager Graham Arnold was appointed as the club 's new manager , becoming its second manager . In the lead @-@ up to the 2010 – 11 season , numerous transfers resulted in changes to the club 's squad . The Mariners announced the signing of 2005 Under 20 's World Cup winner Patricio Pérez of Argentina in June 2010 , followed by Dutch defender Patrick <unk> . In July 2010 , it was announced that the Mariners ' women 's team would not compete in the 2010 – 11 W @-@ League competition . The club stated that financial reasons were behind the decision , after Football NSW withdrew its funding . 
 In spite of relatively low expectations in the lead up to the season , the 2010 – 11 season was more successful for the club than 2009 – 10 ; the A @-@ League and youth league teams both finished second in their respective leagues in the regular season . The senior team was then defeated by the premiers , Brisbane Roar , 4 – 2 on aggregate over two legs in the major semi @-@ final , before defeating Gold Coast United 1 – 0 in the Preliminary Final to qualify for the 2011 A @-@ League Grand Final against Brisbane . By reaching the Grand Final , the club also qualified for the 2012 AFC Champions League . In a championship match that the A @-@ League 's website called " classic " , Central Coast was defeated 4 – 2 in a penalty shootout after leading 2 – 0 with three minutes remaining in extra time to finish runners @-@ up for the third time . 
 The 2011 – 12 season was similarly successful , as the club won the premiership for the second time in its history with 51 points , two more than second @-@ place Brisbane . The club failed to qualify for a second successive Grand Final , though , losing 5 – 2 on aggregate to Brisbane in the major semi @-@ final and 5 – 3 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw with Perth Glory in the Grand Final Qualifier . 
 On 21 April 2013 , after three losses in Grand Finals , Central Coast won its first A @-@ League title , defeating first @-@ year side Western Sydney Wanderers 2 – 0 in the Grand Final at Allianz Stadium . Arnold re @-@ signed with the club for a further two seasons on 30 August 2013 , but on 14 November it was confirmed that he had signed a two @-@ year contract to become manager of J. League Division 1 side <unk> Sendai , starting in January 2014 . Former assistant manager Phil Moss was named the new head coach . Mariners general manager Peter Turnbull left the club as well , and New Zealand international Michael McGlinchey moved to the J. League to play for Arnold 's new side . Central Coast finished the 2013 – 14 A @-@ League regular season in third place , behind runner @-@ up Western Sydney on goal difference . In the semi @-@ final , the Mariners ' championship hopes ended with a 2 – 0 loss to Western Sydney ; the game came three days after the team was eliminated from the 2014 AFC Champions League after losing to Japanese club <unk> Hiroshima 1 – 0 to finish last in their group . 
 In what was Moss 's first pre @-@ season as coach , he did little to change what Arnold had built at the club . The only major changes in the side were with the addition of Senegalese international Malick <unk> and Hungarian <unk> <unk> , and Marcos Flores leaving the club , with Mile <unk> retiring . Mariners began the season on a high , progressing to the semi @-@ finals of the 2014 FFA Cup and defeating local rivals Newcastle Jets 1 – 0 at home in the opening round of the A @-@ League . However the season soon turned with the team failing to secure a win for the remainder of the year . After their elimination from the 2015 AFC Champions League qualifying play @-@ off by Chinese side Guangzhou R & F and a continued poor league record after a short mid @-@ season break , the club stood down Moss as head coach . The decision was made on 6 March 2015 , with Mariners appointing technical director Tony Walmsley in an interim capacity and captain John Hutchinson in a dual player @-@ coach role , until the end of the season . Portuguese player Fábio Ferreira also joined the team at the tail end of the season . On 15 April Walmsley was announced as Mariners ' permanent technical director and head coach for the 2015 – 16 season . The announcement came despite a disappointing end to the season in which the club finished the league in eighth position . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 The home jersey worn by the Mariners is mostly yellow with sleeves that are navy blue . The away uniform is a mostly plain navy blue jersey with yellow as a secondary colour . In the 2011 – 12 season , the club had its kits manufactured by Hummel , as the A @-@ League 's Reebok deal had expired at the conclusion of the 2010 – 11 season . In September 2012 it was announced that the Mariners had signed a two @-@ year deal with Kappa for them to be the official apparel supplier . The team logo is a yellow football at the centre of a blue curling wave , which symbolises the beaches of the Central Coast . 
 Since 2012 , the Mariners have worn special pink kits for one match in October to raise money and awareness for Pink Ribbon Day , part of National Breast Cancer Awareness Month . The Mariners club collected donations at the ground , as well as auctioning the match @-@ worn kits on online auction site eBay with proceeds going to the charity . 
 = = Sponsorship = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Central Coast Mariners plays home games at Central Coast Stadium , Gosford . It is located in Grahame Park , between the Gosford Central Business District and the Brisbane Water foreshore . It is constructed to make the most of its location , being open at the southern end , giving filtered views of Brisbane Water through a row of large palm trees . It is within walking distance of Gosford railway station and is adjacent to the Central Coast Leagues Club . 
 While the stadium has a capacity of 20 @,@ 059 , the highest attendance for a Mariners game is 19 @,@ 238 against Newcastle Jets in round 19 of the 2007 – 08 season . Difficulties in drawing spectators led the Mariners to schedule matches in the 2013 – 14 and 2014 – 15 seasons away from Central Coast Stadium , at North Sydney Oval and Brookvale Oval . The club 's goal was to play closer to its fan base in north Sydney , which majority owner Michael Charlesworth estimated to be about 20 % of its total supporters . Following attendances at North Sydney Oval that were similar to those at Central Coast Stadium , Football Federation Australia CEO David Gallop suggested in December 2014 that it would be unlikely that the club would be permitted to continue playing in north Sydney . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 The active supporters ' group for the Mariners is called the Yellow Army , who sit in bay 16 of Central Coast Stadium during home games . In addition to the Yellow Army , there is a Central Coast Mariners Official Supporters Club , which was established during 2013 . The Central Coast region has about 300 @,@ 000 residents , which gives the Mariners the A @-@ League 's smallest local fan base . Accordingly , the Mariners acquired a small @-@ market image among commentators . 
 The Mariners developed a strong rivalry with Newcastle Jets throughout their first season , often referred to as the F3 Derby . The naming is a title previously used for the Sydney – Newcastle Freeway , the major motorway which joins the two clubs ' cities . The rivalry 's origins date back to before the teams played against each other in the A @-@ League . A May 2005 Oceania Club Championship qualification match , which went to a penalty shootout that the Mariners won , helped create hostility between the sides . In the game , a tackle by Central Coast 's Mrdja broke one of Newcastle player Andrew Durante 's legs , causing him to miss the following A @-@ League season ; Mrdja offered no apology for the tackle , upsetting Jets players . Fans of the clubs battled verbally before and after one 2011 derby match , leading the Newcastle Herald 's Josh Leeson to call their actions " immature and laughable . " In more recent seasons , the F3 Derby has gained less attention in the press than the derbies in Melbourne and Sydney , but Central Coast player Nicholas Fitzgerald maintains that " the players and fans still take it very seriously . " 
 Central Coast also have a rivalry with Sydney FC . Like Newcastle , Sydney FC is close in proximity to Central Coast . In 2006 , the Central Coast Express Advocate 's Richard Noone called the Central Coast – Sydney rivalry " Arguably A @-@ League 's fiercest " . 
 = = = Notable Supporters = = = 
 Julie Goodwin 
 = = Affiliated clubs = = 
 Through an investment in the Mariners by Sheffield United the club has the following international affiliations : 
 Sheffield United 
 São Paulo 
 Ferencváros 
 In addition , the club has a player development partnership with the following international clubs : 
 Everton 
 The club also has formal relationships with the following organisations in Australia : 
 Northbridge ( as North Shore Mariners Academy ) 
 Western NSW Football ( as Western NSW Mariners FC ) 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 13 July <unk> : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Academy = = = 
 = = Club officials = = 
 = = = Management = = = 
 = = = Technical staff = = = 
 = = = Managers = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 John Hutchinson currently holds the team record for number of total games played with 268 matches in all competitions . Former captain Alex Wilkinson has the second most appearances for the club with 203 matches . Adam Kwasnik is the third most capped player with 158 appearances . As of 2014 , Central Coast 's all @-@ time highest goalscorers in all competitions is Matt Simon with 45 goals , one more than Adam Kwasnik . Daniel McBreen has scored the third most goals for the club with 29 . Central Coast 's highest attendance at its home stadium , Central Coast Stadium , is 19 @,@ 238 against Newcastle Jets in their round 19 match of the 2007 – 08 season . This was the second highest crowd at the ground for any sport since the first match at Central Coast Stadium in February 2000 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 A @-@ League Premiership 
 Premiers ( 2 ) : 2007 – 08 , 2011 – 12 
 Runners @-@ Up ( 2 ) : 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 A @-@ League Championship 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 2013 
 Runners @-@ Up ( 3 ) : 2006 , 2008 , 2011 
 A @-@ League Pre @-@ Season Challenge Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2005 
 Runners @-@ Up ( 1 ) : 2006 
 = East Coker ( poem ) = 
 East Coker is the second poem of T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets . It was started as a way for Eliot to get back into writing poetry and was modelled after Burnt Norton . It was finished during early 1940 and printed for the Easter edition of the 1940 New English Weekly . The title refers to a small community that was directly connected to Eliot 's ancestry and was home to a church that was later to house Eliot 's ashes . 
 The poem discusses time and disorder within nature that is the result of humanity following only science and not the divine . Leaders are described as materialistic and unable to understand reality . The only way for mankind to find salvation is through pursuing the divine by looking inwards and realizing that humanity is interconnected . Only then can people understand the universe . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1939 <unk> Eliot thought that he would be unable to continue writing poetry . In an attempt to see if he could still , he started copying aspects of Burnt Norton and substituted another place : East Coker , a place that Eliot visited in 1937 with the St Michael 's Church , where his ashes were later kept . The place held a particular importance to Eliot and his family because Andrew Eliott , Eliot 's ancestor , left the town to travel to America in 1669 . A plaque dedicated to Eliot and his ashes reads " In my beginning is my end . Of your kindness , pray for the soul of Thomas Stearns Eliot , poet . In my end is my beginning . " 
 He managed to complete two sections by February 1940 , but finished the rest during that month . John Davy Hayward , Herbert Read and others helped review and edit it . East Coker was published in the March 1940 New English Weekly for its Easter edition . It was later reprinted May and June , and it was published on its own by Faber and Faber in September . With the completion of the poem , Eliot began creating the Four Quartets as a series of four poems based on the same theme with Burnt Norton as the first in the series and East Coker as the second . 
 = = Poem = = 
 East Coker is described as a poem of late summer , earth , and faith . As in the other poems of the Four Quartets , each of the five sections holds a theme that is common to each of the poems : time , experience , purgation , prayer , and wholeness . The time theme is stated in the first section as ' In my beginning is my end ' which , given proper attention , might prove to lead into the eternal moment . 
 The second section discusses disorder within nature , which is opposite to the discussion of order within nature found in the second section of Burnt Norton . Also , rational knowledge itself is described as being inadequate for explaining reality . Those who pursue only reason and science are ignorant . Even our progress is not progress as we continue to repeat the same errors as the past . 
 The third section discusses the rulers of secular society and their flaws . The fourth , which is a formal section , deploys a series of Baroque paradoxes in the context of the Good Friday mass . This past manner is regarded ironically by the poet in the fifth section as he looks back on his period of experimentation in ' the years of l <unk> deux <unk> ' as ' largely wasted ' . He welcomes approaching old age as a new opportunity to find renewal , although it might only be a rediscovery of ' what has been lost and found and lost again ' . 
 Despite the poem 's doubt and darkness , a note of hope is struck by the first line of the fifth section , ' So here I am in the middle way ' . This refers to the first line of Dante 's Inferno , ' Midway in our life 's journey , I went astray ' . Although the descent is predicated on going astray , so also is persevering beyond it into the light . 
 = = Themes = = 
 East Coker gives a message of hope that the English communities would survive through World War II . In a letter dated 9 February 1940 , Eliot stated , " We can have very little hope of contributing to any immediate social change ; and we are more disposed to see our hope in modest and local beginnings , than in transforming the whole world at once ... We must keep alive aspirations which can remain valid throughout the longest and darkest period of universal calamity and degradation . " The poem also relied on the war as a way to connect to Eliot 's idea that there was a united humanity . In particular , Stephen Spender claimed that " the war modified [ Eliot 's ] attitude by convincing him that there was a Western cause to be positively defended . And after the war there was a Germany to be brought back within the Western tradition " . 
 The poem served as a sort of opposite to the popular idea that The Waste Land served as an expression of disillusionment after World War I , even though Eliot never accepted this interpretation . World War II itself has a direct mention in only a few of Eliot 's writings . However , World War II does affect the poem , especially with the disruption caused by the war being reflected within the poem as a disruption of nature and heaven . The poem describes society in ways similar to The Waste Land , especially with its emphasis on death and dying . The place is connected to where Eliot 's family originates , and , as such , is also the place where his family will symbolically end . In the second part of the poem , nature is experiencing disorder , and it is suggested that humans too may burn , and also that reason , knowledge , and science cannot save people . The errors of our past become the reasons for war and conflict and we need to become humble in order to escape the destruction . However , darkness consumes the rulers of the world and society . This is , in part , due to Adam 's fall , and the resulting concept of original sin . Christ is our savior and we need to seek redemption to overcome our human failings . Eliot states that he has been involved with fighting for humanity and trying to help mankind learn what is important . Only through Christ is man able to be redeemed . 
 In a twist from expectation , Eliot 's poem suggests that old men should go out and explore . He warns that people should trade wisdom for pointless experience and argues that men should explore human experience itself . This concept is hinted of in The Waste Land and draws from the ideas within Dante 's <unk> . Dante argues that old men are supposed to return to God and describes the process in a way similar to the travels of Odysseus . Unlike Homer 's hero , Dante argues that men should not travel in the material world but in the spiritual world . Both Dante and Eliot put forth a similar view to St. Augustine when they focus on internal travels . Through these travels , mankind is able to have faith in salvation and able to see that there is more to the world than darkness . Eliot explains within the poem that we are all interconnected through time and that we must realize this . Only through this realization is mankind able to understand the truth of the universe . This , in turn , would allow humanity to break free from the burden of time . As Russel Kirk explains : " That end , for those who apprehend a reality superior to ' birth , copulation , and death ' — a reality transcending the rhythms of physical nature — is to know God and enjoy Him forever . " 
 Family and family history also plays an important role in the poem . Eliot found information on his family from Sketch of the Eliot Family , which described how Eliot 's family lived in East Coker for 200 years . When Andrew Eliott left , he disrupted the family history . Similarly , Eliot broke from his own family when he travelled away from his family , a family that he saw was declining . Within the poem , Eliot emphasizes the need for a journey and the need for inward change . 
 = = Source = = 
 According to Eliot the poetic aspects of the poem are grounded in the tradition of John Cleveland , Edward <unk> , William Blake , and William Butler Yeats 's early work . Additionally , many of the images are connected to the poetry of Stéphane Mallarmé . In terms of theology , Eliot is orthodox in his theory and relies primarily on the writings of St Augustine . There are some additional influences from the works of Thomas Browne and Saint John of the Cross . In applying these views upon society , Eliot was heavily influenced by the writings of Christopher Dawson and Dawson 's reliance on understanding God as the first step to a better society . 
 Besides the many literary sources , Eliot also draws on his personal feelings and experience , especially on the great stress that he felt while composing the poem . Similarly , Eliot used the image of pilgrims coming to America and the stories of them that were common throughout his childhood . In particular , his mother wrote poems about the pilgrims arriving to New England , and Eliot found information related to his family 's history in a book called Sketch of the Eliot Family . The location , East Coker , was where Andrew Eliott , T. S. Eliot 's ancestor , left when joining the pilgrimage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 East Coker sold almost 12 @,@ 000 copies during its initial publication . Eliot 's response was to claim that its popularity proved that it was a bad poem . Regardless of the truthfulness of the statement , he enjoyed the fact that the poem could inspire people during the war . Eliot 's friend , Emily Hale , liked the poem so much that she read the poem to her Smith College students " as if it were a love @-@ letter from God " . Early reviews focused on discussing the poem in terms of its content and not its style . In the Southern Review , James Johnson Sweeney , Spring 1941 , and <unk> Bradford , Winter 1944 , discussed paraphrases of the poems and the sources of various passages . However , Andrews <unk> , Spring 1941 , stated that Burnt Norton was a better poem than East Coker and that " ' Burnt Norton ' is a poem of suggestion , ' East Coker ' a poem of argument and explanation " . Another American critic , Delmore Schwartz did not appreciate the tone within East Coker , especially that expressed in the fifth section . 
 = Sienna Guillory = 
 Sienna Tiggy Guillory ( / <unk> / ; born 16 March 1975 ) is an English actress , and former model . She is known for playing the title role in the TV miniseries , Helen of Troy , as elf princess Arya <unk> in fantasy @-@ adventure film , Eragon , and for her portrayal of Jill Valentine in the science fiction action horror film Resident Evil : Apocalypse . She resumed her role as Jill Valentine for a cameo appearance in the 2010 action @-@ horror film Resident Evil : Afterlife , and in Resident Evil : Retribution , released on 14 September 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Kettering , Northamptonshire , England , Guillory is the daughter of the American folk guitarist Isaac Guillory and his first wife , English model Tina Thompson , whom he married in 1973 . Isaac Guillory was of Jewish heritage and born at the Guantanamo naval base in Cuba , the son of an American sailor and his Turkish wife . 
 Her parents moved to Fulham , London when Guillory was two , then later to Norfolk when she was 11 . At the age of ten , she went to stay with cousins in Mexico to learn Spanish . 
 She has a half @-@ brother named Jace , whom her father had adopted and with whom she shares the same mother . Her parents divorced in 1990 when she was 14 , and in 1993 , her father married Vickie McMillan , which resulted in a much younger half @-@ sister and half @-@ brother , Ellie and Jacob . Guillory attended Gresham 's School in Holt , Norfolk , where she took part in numerous school productions . 
 Guillory has been an equestrian since the age of two . At 14 , she was given a horse , which she named The Night Porter , or " <unk> " , after the film The Night Porter ; Guillory was a fan of its leading actress Charlotte Rampling . 
 In December 2000 , Guillory 's father died of cancer at the age of 53 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Modelling = = = 
 In 1997 , Guillory accompanied a ballerina friend to the London modelling agency Select and was soon signed . She modelled solely to support her acting career . As a model , she worked in campaigns for Armani , Dolce & Gabbana , Burberry , and Paul Smith and appeared on the covers of several fashion magazines . In 1999 , she became the face of the Hugo Boss fragrance campaign , succeeding model Karen Ferrari and continuing the campaign for three years . After modelling for a few years , Guillory returned her focus to acting in 2000 . She is signed to Independent Models in London . 
 = = = Acting = = = 
 Guillory explained that she " became an actor because I wanted to know what it was like to be other people . Because possibly I don 't like myself " , and later said " I hate acting , really hate it . I kind of fell into it sideways ... I started acting because I got offered a job when I was 16 , and they wanted to pay me £ 8 @,@ 000 , and we 'd always lived on Family Support ... " She went on to say that her frustration with later film roles left her bitter , but after seeing Helen Mirren onstage she was inspired again . 
 In 1993 , Guillory made her screen debut in a TV adaptation of Jilly Cooper 's novel , Riders , for which the casting directors needed a young actress who was able to ride a horse . Her performance landed her in another small role in the miniseries The Buccaneers , opposite Mira Sorvino . 
 Before becoming a model to support her acting career , Guillory waited tables at a club . In an interview in 2000 , she said about the experience " Supporting my acting habit with waitressing was probably the most useful thing I 've done . " During her time as a model , she studied acting at the New World School of the Arts and the Paris Conservatoire , also taking small television and film roles in The Future Lasts a Long Time ( 1996 ) , The Rules of Engagement ( 1999 ) , Star ! Star ! ( 1999 ) , Kiss Kiss ( Bang Bang ) ( 2000 ) , The 3 Kings ( 2000 ) , and Two Days , Nine Lives ( 2000 ) . During this time , Guillory decided to go on with her acting career because " I was so scared of going to university and being with people my own age again , having been with that tiny little sect of girls in Norfolk whose daddies were farmers and politicians , who didn 't trust me and didn 't know where I was coming from " . 
 She returned to film with a more substantial role in the thriller <unk> ( 2000 ) . Guillory went on to appear in the BBC production Take a Girl Like You , a television adaptation of Kingsley Amis 's novel of the same name . She portrayed Jenny Bunn , the story 's virginal heroine , and gained critical attention for her part in the period piece . Guillory was pleased to have played a more innocent character , saying " I 've played floozies , psychopaths , assassins , crackheads ... It 's nice to do something with a lighter touch . " The production did not fare well in the ratings . 
 In 2001 , Guillory continued with other roles in predominantly British films , including Oblivious , Late Night Shopping ( with husband Enzo Cilenti ) , The Last Minute , and Superstition . 2002 saw Guillory appear in The Time Machine , alongside Guy Pearce and Jeremy Irons . She was pleased to take on a larger scale film , after having worked on low @-@ budget independent films , and compared the experience with " finding an unicorn in your sock drawer " . She played Emma , the fiancée of Pearce 's character , who was killed early in the film and whose death set off its main events . 
 In 2003 , after a friend had received a script for The Principles of Lust , Guillory claims she " read it and couldn 't put it down , and begged to read for the part " . She was impressed by director Penny Woolcock 's unconventional style of shooting , without rehearsing the actors , using raw takes and improvisational performances . For the role of Juliette , Guillory performed nude in the film 's sex scenes which were filmed during the first week of filming , making her somewhat nervous . She later went on to say that it was one of her favorite acting experiences . Afterwards , Guillory had a small role in the romantic comedy Love Actually before taking the starring role in the television miniseries Helen of Troy . The series was mostly based on Homer 's epic poem Iliad and focuses on the mythological life of Helen . Helen of Troy was nominated for best miniseries at the Satellite Awards . 
 In May 2004 , Guillory starred in a new stage production of The Shape of Things at the New Ambassadors Theatre in London , with husband Cilenti . 2004 also saw Guillory in her first big Hollywood role . She was cast as Jill Valentine , one of the lead characters in the video game adaptation sequel Resident Evil : Apocalypse . The film makers had searched widely for an actress to portray the video game character and found her in Guillory , who had to " please not only the movie @-@ going audience but also the gamers " . She was , however , " a dead ringer for Jill Valentine " . Guillory was reported to have studied the original character 's movements by watching playthroughs of the video game Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis . Before getting the script for the film , she had not been familiar with the video games or seen Resident Evil . She said about her role : 
 Resident Evil : Apocalypse , although it was not well received by critics , grossed $ 23 @,@ 036 @,@ 273 on its opening weekend ( 10 – 12 September 2004 ) and took a total of $ 51 @,@ 201 @,@ 453 in the United States and $ 129 @,@ 394 @,@ 835 worldwide . 
 After the success of Resident Evil : Apocalypse , Guillory went on to appear in other film and television roles , including Beauty ( 2004 ) , Marple : A Murder Is Announced ( 2005 ) , In the Bathroom ( 2005 ) , The Virgin Queen ( 2005 ) , Silence Becomes You ( 2005 ) , and Rabbit Fever ( 2006 ) . 
 In 2006 , Guillory was a lead in the ensemble cast of the fantasy Eragon , the film adaptation of the novel by Christopher Paolini ; the role had reunited her with The Time Machine co @-@ star Jeremy Irons . She portrayed Arya <unk> , an elf princess . She had not read the novels before filming , but after accepting the role she soon became a fan of Paolini 's work . Although Arya is a key character in the film , Guillory had little screen time and went on to say jokingly : " I 've been trying to explain to friends who 've seen the trailer [ ... ] I 'm like , " [ ... ] but that 's my whole part ! " " Eragon was not well received by the critics , but was nominated as Best Fantasy Film at the 2006 Saturn Awards . The film went on to gross approximately $ 75 million in the US and $ 173 @.@ 9 million elsewhere , totalling $ 249 million worldwide . Guillory was also invited to reprise her role as Jill Valentine in Resident Evil : Extinction , the sequel to Resident Evil : Apocalypse , but could not accept due to scheduling conflicts with Eragon . 
 In 2007 , she starred in the Spanish production El Corazón de la tierra , or The Heart of the Earth , and later in the year finished filming the horror / thriller Victims and the fantasy novel adaptation Inkheart . In Inkheart , she plays Resa , the wife of Brendan Fraser 's character and the mother of Eliza Bennett 's . Inkheart sees Guillory acting alongside Helen Mirren , a friend of the Guillory family who was a role model when she first had aspirations towards acting . 
 Guillory will be a lead in the forthcoming television series The Oaks , expected to begin airing in 2008 . She joins Bahar <unk> , Matt <unk> , Romy Rosemont , Jeremy Renner , Michael <unk> and Shannon Lucio in the series which follows the intertwining stories of three families — a young couple in 1968 that have lost a child , a family of four in 1998 , and a pregnant couple in 2008 — who are haunted by the same spirit in their house . The television series began filming on 5 November 2007 on location in Pasadena , California . Guillory will play Jessica , the 2008 couple 's neighbour , a woman who has Asperger syndrome who went to school with the husband ( and father @-@ to @-@ be ) and shares a secret with him . 
 In May 2010 , Shock Till You <unk> confirmed the return of Jill Valentine in the Resident Evil film franchise 's fourth instalment , Resident Evil : Afterlife , with Guillory reprising the role . On 31 May , Jovovich also confirmed that Guillory would return as Jill . Guillory reappears in the film in a mid @-@ end credit scene . She returned to a starring role in the following film , Resident Evil : Retribution as the main antagonist of the film . 
 In 2015 she joined the main cast as scientist Natalie <unk> in the new thriller series Fortitude , commissioned by Sky Atlantic and set in the fictional Arctic Norwegian oil settlement of the same name . She will return to the role for the show 's second series in 2016 . 
 In January 2016 she also joined the cast of Sky One 's new series , Stan Lee 's Lucky Man , playing the character Eve . 
 = = Media = = 
 In 2001 , readers of Esquire UK voted Guillory " Britain 's Most Eligible Woman " and featured her in a pictorial in the magazine . Guillory was photographed for the cover and shoot by photographer Jonathan Glynn Smith . In 2002 , she was number 89 on Maxim 's list of " The 100 Sexiest Women " , and in 2007 Guillory was voted number 54 at <unk> 's Top 99 Countdown . 
 Guillory has also been quoted as disliking the Hollywood culture , saying she does not wish to be part of it : 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2000 , Guillory began dating English actor Enzo Cilenti , and they married in 2002 . The couple appeared in the 2001 film Late Night Shopping , and have continued to appear together in various works . In August 2004 , Guillory and Cilenti cycled five stages of the Tour de France to raise money for charity . 
 In February 2011 , Guillory gave birth to their twin daughters , Valentina and Lucia , named after Guillory 's grandmother and great aunt , who were also twin sisters . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = 1992 European Community Monitor Mission helicopter downing = 
 The 1992 European Community Monitor Mission helicopter downing was an incident that occurred on 7 January 1992 , during the Croatian War of Independence , in which a European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) helicopter carrying five European Community ( EC ) observers was downed by a Yugoslav Air Force Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 21 , in the air space above the village of Podrute , near Novi Marof , Croatia . An Italian and a French officer and three Italian non @-@ commissioned officers were killed . Another ECMM helicopter flying in formation with the attacked helicopter made an emergency landing . The second helicopter carried a crew and a visiting diplomat , all of whom survived . The incident was condemned by the United Nations Security Council and the EC . As a result of the incident , the Yugoslav authorities suspended the head of the air force , and the Yugoslav defense minister , General Veljko Kadijević , resigned his post . The events followed the end of the first stage of the war in Croatia and closely preceded the country 's international recognition . 
 The MiG @-@ 21 pilot , Lieutenant Emir Šišić , disappeared after the incident . He was tried in absentia together with his superiors by Croatian authorities , convicted , and sentenced to extended imprisonment . Šišić was subsequently arrested in Hungary in 2001 and extradited to Italy , where he was tried , convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison . In 2006 , he was turned over to Serbia for the remainder of the sentence , but released in 2008 . Two other Yugoslav officers were tried in absentia in Italy and convicted in 2013 , while Serbia was ordered to pay monetary damages to the victims ' families . The victims were posthumously decorated by Italy and France , respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centered on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . 
 Following the Pakrac clash between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March 1991 , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA stepped in , increasingly supporting the Croatian Serb insurgents . In early April , the leaders of the Croatian Serb revolt declared their intention to integrate the area under their control , known as SAO Krajina , with Serbia . 
 In May , the Croatian government responded by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde - ZNG ) , but its development was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . 
 The Brioni Agreement established an observer mission which was eventually called the European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) . The mission was tasked with monitoring the disengagement of belligerents in the Ten @-@ Day War in neighbouring Slovenia , and the withdrawal of the JNA from Slovenia . However , on 16 August , an ECMM helicopter was hit by Croatian Serb gunfire in western Slavonia , injuring one of the pilots . This caused the ECMM 's scope of work to be formally expanded to include Croatia on 1 September . 
 On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia , and a month later the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska - HV ) . The fiercest fighting of the war occurred around this time , when the 1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia culminated in the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . In November , Croatia , Serbia and the JNA agreed upon the Vance plan entailing a ceasefire , protection of civilians in specific areas designated as United Nations Protected Areas , and the presence of UN peacekeepers in Croatia . The ceasefire came into effect on 3 January 1992 . In December 1991 , the European Community ( EC ) announced its decision to grant formal diplomatic recognition to Croatia as of 15 January 1992 . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On 7 January 1992 , a pair of Italian Army Agusta @-@ Bell AB @-@ <unk> <unk> helicopters operated by ECMM observers entered Croatian air space from Hungary . The helicopters were white @-@ painted and unarmed . They were flying from the Yugoslav capital of Belgrade to Zagreb via Kaposvár , Hungary . Authorities in Belgrade claim the helicopters were authorised to fly to Hungary , but that the pilots were warned they were not allowed to fly to Zagreb because no flights in Croatian airspace were permitted . The EC dismissed those claims , saying that the flight was approved in advance by Yugoslav air controllers . The approval was forwarded to the Yugoslav Air Force operations centre , but the order was never forwarded to the 5th Aviation Corps in Bihać , Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 After the two helicopters were spotted by a Yugoslav Air Force tracking radar near Bihać , a pair of Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 21s , which were on standby at the Željava Air Base near Bihać , were ordered to take off and intercept the aircraft . The MiG @-@ 21s , assigned to the 125th Squadron of the 117th Fighter Aviation Regiment , were piloted by Lieutenant Emir Šišić and Captain <unk> Borović . However , Borović declared that his aircraft had a problem with its engine , and Šišić took off alone . Šišić was guided to the incoming helicopters at an altitude of 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 feet ) , and then ordered to make a full circle with his jet . As he turned around , he spotted the helicopters flying below his plane , at an altitude of 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 feet ) . Šišić requested further orders and was told to shoot the helicopters down . The order was issued by the duty officer at the Željava Air Base , Lieutenant Colonel <unk> Opačić . 
 Šišić pursued the helicopters , firing aircraft gun in front of the helicopters , but his aircraft was not armed with tracer ammunition and the helicopter pilots were not able to observe that they were fired upon . Flying at a speed of 1 @,@ 000 kilometres per hour ( 540 knots ) , he switched to missiles and registered that the missile seekers had acquired the targets . Šišić fired two infrared homing R @-@ 60 missiles . One of the missiles flew between the two helicopters , while the other struck the engine of the lead helicopter . The helicopter was shot down near the village of Podrute , located in an area administered by the city of Novi Marof , north of Zagreb . The second helicopter had to crash @-@ land to evade the attack . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Five ECMM observers were killed in the attack , including four Italians and one Frenchman . The victims were Lieutenant Colonel Enzo Venturini , helicopter pilot , Staff Sergeant Marco Matta , co @-@ pilot , Sergeant Major Fiorenzo <unk> , Sergeant Major Silvano Natale , and Ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line Lieutenant Jean @-@ Loup <unk> . The Italian personnel were drawn from the 5th Army Aviation Regiment Rigel . The second helicopter carried a diplomat and three Italian ECMM observers , none of whom were harmed . The crash site was toured by the police , ECMM staff and journalists , and EC representatives visited Belgrade to receive a report on the incident from Yugoslav authorities . The action of the Yugoslav Air Force was condemned by the Conference on Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe , the United Nations Security Council , and the EC Council of Ministers . The Italian ambassador to Yugoslavia was recalled to Rome for consultations . Subsequently , Italy cancelled an air traffic agreement with Yugoslavia , causing Jat Airways to cancel Belgrade – Rome flights . In addition , ECMM operations were suspended for several days . 
 Yugoslav Ministry of Defence announced that it had initiated criminal proceedings against an officer , with four other officers facing military disciplinary action . The commander of the Yugoslav Air Force , Colonel General <unk> <unk> was suspended . The federal defense minister , General Veljko Kadijević officially apologized for the incident and resigned his post . Šišić was court @-@ martialled in Belgrade in 1992 , and acquitted based on claims that he shot at a ZNG helicopter illegally escorting the two ECMM helicopters . In a 2008 interview , Šišić claimed that the ECMM helicopter crashed after being hit by a fireball caused by the exploding third helicopter . His account is contradicted by crash scene eyewitnesses , as well as Željava Air Base radar data , both of which indicate that only two aircraft were flying to Zagreb . 
 Šišić and Opačić were tried in absentia in Croatia , and both were convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison . Borović , who defected to Croatia a month after the attack , testified against Šišić . Šišić was arrested by Hungarian police at the <unk> – <unk> border crossing on 9 May 2001 . His extradition was requested by both Croatia and Italy . He was ultimately extradited to Italy in June 2002 , where he was subsequently tried , convicted , and sentenced to 15 years in prison for five counts of homicide and causing an aircraft disaster . In 2006 , he was transferred to Serbia for the remainder of the prison term . He was released by Serbian authorities in 2008 . 
 In 2013 , the Appeals Court in Rome tried Opačić , General Ljubomir Bajić , commander of the 5th Aviation Corps , and Colonel Božidar Martinović , head of the Yugoslav Air Defence operational centre in Belgrade in absentia for the attack . Opačić and Bajić were convicted and each sentenced to 28 years in prison , while Martinović was acquitted . The court also ordered Serbia to pay compensation to families of those killed in the attack , in the provisional amount of 950 @,@ 000 Euros . In a 2008 interview , Šišić said he regretted the deaths of the crew but felt no remorse for his actions . 
 On 25 May 1993 , Italy posthumously decorated the four Italian ECMM observers killed in the attack with the Gold Medal of Military Valor , and the surviving three Italians aboard the second helicopter with the Silver Medal of Military Valor . <unk> was posthumously promoted to lieutenant commander effective 7 January 1992 , and attributed Mort pour la France on 14 April of the same year . He was decorated as the Chevalier of the Legion of Honour . The incident is commemorated annually in Podrute and the ceremonies held there are regularly attended by representatives of the Croatian government and military , representatives of Italian and French Armed Forces , along with European Union , French and Italian diplomats . 
 = Vincent Valentine = 
 Vincent Valentine ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a player character in Square 's ( now Square Enix ) 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII . Designed by Tetsuya Nomura , he also appears in various titles from the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , a metaseries set in the Final Fantasy VII continuity . Specifically , he is the protagonist in the 2006 third @-@ person shooter Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII and its mobile phone tie @-@ in Dirge of Cerberus : Lost Episode . Vincent is voiced in Japanese by Shōgo Suzuki and in English by Steven Blum . 
 In the backstory to Final Fantasy VII , Vincent is a Turk who is assigned to guard the scientist Lucrecia Crescent , with whom he falls in love . After a series of scientific experiments involving the cells of the extraterrestrial lifeform Jenova , Crescent gives birth to the game 's antagonist , Sephiroth . Soon thereafter , Vincent himself became subject to experiments performed by Crescent 's boss , Professor Hojo , resulting in genetic modification that means he will not age . If the player unlocks Vincent , he will join Cloud Strife 's group to stop Sephiroth , as well as to seek revenge on Hojo . 
 Due to time constraints , Vincent was originally not intended to be playable in Final Fantasy VII ; however , he was ultimately made an optional character . Despite his optional status and lack of concrete detail as to his background , he proved very popular with both fans and critics , and his history was developed greatly in other installments of the Compilation , primarily Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children and Dirge of Cerberus . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Players can unlock Vincent by the halfway point of Final Fantasy VII , when Cloud Strife and his allies find him sleeping in a coffin in the basement of Shinra Mansion in Nibelheim . Cloud mentions his quest to stop the game 's antagonist , Sephiroth , who Vincent recognizes as the son of Lucrecia Crescent . Vincent joins the group when he learns that they may eventually meet up with Hojo , against whom Vincent has an unexplained vendetta . Later , Vincent finds Lucrecia inside a cave , and his backstory is partly revealed . Vincent was a member of the Turks , an elite group of Shinra agents . While serving as Lucrecia 's guard , he fell in love with her , but she ultimately decided to remain faithful to Hojo , who persuaded her to use her unborn baby in his experiments . When protesting about the nature of these experiments , Vincent was shot by Hojo , who subsequently began to experiment on him as well . This resulted in him not aging and having the ability to transform in various demons . Not being able to protect Lucrecia , Vincent felt a strong guilt which led him to his isolation . Overcome by guilt , Lucrecia sealed herself away in Mako crystals . Upon entering the cave in the game , Lucrecia revives and asks Vincent if Sephiroth is still alive , but Vincent lies and tells her that he is dead . 
 = = = Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 In Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , which is set six years prior to Final Fantasy VII , Vincent is seen in his Turk attire having a conversation with Veld , leader of the Turks . He subsequently helps Veld obtain some Materia needed for a mission . In the film Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , set two years after Final Fantasy VII , Vincent rescues Cloud from Kadaj and his gang . He reveals to Cloud Kadaj 's intentions to merge with the remaining Jenova cells so as to bring about Sephiroth 's rebirth . Vincent later helps Cloud and his Final Fantasy VII allies defeat the summon creature Bahamut SIN . In the On the Way to a Smile novella " Case of Nanaki " , set between the original game and Advent Children , Vincent encounters his former comrade , Red XIII ( Nanaki ) , who is fearful that he will soon be alone due to his lifespan being much longer than humans . Vincent explains to Red that he is immortal and promises to meet with him every year to prevent his loneliness . 
 In Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , which takes place one year after Advent Children , Vincent is seen working with Reeve Tuesti and the World Regenesis Organization to eliminate an organization called Deepground , who have targeted Vincent because he carries " Protomateria " inside his body , implanted by Lucrecia after he was shot by Hojo . The purpose of the Protomateria was to enable Vincent to control the Chaos gene , with which he was injected by Lucrecia to save his life . The Protomateria is eventually ripped from his body by Rosso the Crimson , leading to Vincent being unable to control Chaos . Eventually he confronts the Deepground leader , Weiss the Immaculate , who is possessed by the digitalized mind of Hojo . Hojo reveals that his plan is to awaken Omega WEAPON , who will absorb the Lifestream and leave the Planet , resulting in the death of all living things . After Omega 's awakening , the renegade Deepground member , <unk> , returns the Protomateria to Vincent , and he is once again able to control Chaos , ultimately destroying both Hojo and Omega . The mobile game Dirge of Cerberus Lost Episode : Final Fantasy VII takes place during Dirge of Cerberus and also features Vincent as the protagonist . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Outside the Final Fantasy VII series , Vincent appears in the fighting game Ehrgeiz as an unlockable character , with his Turk uniform as an alternate costume . Like the other Final Fantasy VII characters in the game , Vincent does not serve a role in the main storyline . Although he was meant to appear in Kingdom Hearts , his design was instead used as the basis for Cloud 's redesign . Vincent 's popularity has seen merchandise related to the character , including the release of action figures . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Character designer Tetsuya Nomura has explained that Vincent 's character shifted from that of horror researcher , to detective , to chemist , and finally to the figure of a former Turk with a tragic past . Director Yoshinori Kitase was in charge of the cutscene in which Vincent joins the party , while scenario writer Kazushige Nojima wrote his backstory . Nojima had a great deal of trouble with Vincent 's dialogue , as he very rarely speaks . In the original script of the game , Vincent was introduced in a similar fashion , but was a handsome , sarcastic personality . He would join Cloud 's group after learning they were in pursuit of Hojo , but he had no knowledge of the results of the experimentation to which he was subjected . Additionally , he would be also privy to more information regarding Shinra 's involvement with the creation of Sephiroth , and it is he who would explain to Cloud the story of Sephiroth 's origins . When the game was still in development , Nomura and his staff considering removing Vincent and Yuffie Kisaragi altogether , as they did not have enough time to work them into the story properly . As a result , Vincent and Yuffie ultimately appeared as optional characters in the game . 
 Vincent 's Japanese voice actor , Shōgo Suzuki , explained that he tries " to hold back as much emotion as possible when playing Vincent , " noting that Vincent is " a bit of a loner " and " appears cold on the surface . " Nomura wanted Cloud and Vincent 's voices to contrast with each other due to their similarities in terms of personality . He felt Vincent was older and more mature than Cloud , and as a result he cast Suzuki , who has a very low voice . 
 Vincent is shown as a tall , lean young man with long black hair and a ragged red cloak and mantle over black underclothes . He wears a metallic , golden gauntlet on his left forearm . Vincent 's cloak covers the lower half of his face and is held closed by a series of buckles . His eyes are naturally red . His crimson cloak was added to symbolize the idea of Vincent carrying a heavy weight connected to death . While other characters were given simple costumes in Advent Children , Vincent was given something more complex . Nomura felt that changing his design to something complicated would " conflict with his personality , " which is relatively straightforward , and he was thus given attire consisting of " various , complex parts . " His cloak was difficult to animate due to it being very organic ; the overall complexity of Vincent 's design led to his scenes being " especially hard to create . " These scenes were constantly being adjusted so as " to convey [ their ] elusive nature of seemingly having shape , but not . " These adjustments concluded six months before the films completion . 
 Vincent was chosen as the protagonist of Dirge of Cerberus due to his strong connections to the setting of Final Fantasy VII and the room available for expanding on his background . Due to the staff 's desire to make Dirge a shooter , Vincent was also chosen because of his weaponry , while his transformations into different type of beasts in the original Final Fantasy VII was something the staff wanted to work into the gameplay . For the game , Nomura redesigned Vincent 's gun in the same way that Cloud 's Buster Sword was redesigned for Advent Children , so as to demonstrate that Vincent is the protagonist of the game . The gun was named Cerberus in reference to the multi @-@ headed hound with the same name from Greek and Roman mythology ; the gun has three barrels as Cerberus has three heads . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character has received primarily positive reviews by video games publications . In GameSpot 's article " The History of Final Fantasy " , Vincent was comically referred to as the Final Fantasy VII character who female players found to be " the most alluring undead man they 've ever met . " GameSpot writer Greg Mueller regarded Vincent as one of " the more interesting characters from Final Fantasy VII , " and liked how Dirge of Cerberus was focused on him and explained his origins more clearly . His character design and abilities have been praised by GameSpy 's Justin Speer , who felt that with such traits he " capably steps into a leading role " of Dirge of Cerberus . IGN 's Jeremy Dunham had a similar opinion , noting that Vincent " is exposed pretty convincingly here . " 
 On the other hand , Eurogamer 's Rob Fahey criticized Vincent as not being familiar enough to players , even to those who played the original Final Fantasy VII , to warrant his role as protagonist in Dirge of Cerberus . However , Fahey still recognized him as very popular character , commenting that he is one of the most common characters from Final Fantasy VII to be featured in fan fiction and fan art . Although RPGamer 's Michael " <unk> " Beckett said that Vincent was one of the " less well @-@ developed " characters from Final Fantasy VII , he found his development in Dirge of Cerberus to be satisfying . According to GamesRadar , Dirge of Cerberus focused on developing Vincent due to his lack of backstory in Final Fantasy VII , and regarded the mobile phone spin @-@ off as " Vincent fanservice instead of FFVII canon . " 
 In IGN 's 2008 list top ten Final Fantasy VII characters , Vincent was given an honorable mention by Dave Smith . He received praise for his " striking " character design , as well as the fact that " FFVII 's 3D engine made his shape @-@ shifting Limit Breaks some surprisingly scary stuff . " He has been held as an example of the recurring character categories of " The <unk> Quiet Guy " by 1UP.com and " The Brooding Pretty Boy " by GamesRadar . In 2013 , Vincent was included among the ten most notable vampire characters in video games by Gergo Vas of Kotaku . That same year , Gus Turner Complex ranked Vincent as the 13th greatest Final Fantasy character of all time . 
 = Sino @-@ Tibetan relations during the Ming dynasty = 
 The exact nature of relations between Tibet and the Ming dynasty of China ( 1368 – 1644 ) is unclear . Analysis of the relationship is further complicated by modern political conflicts and the application of Westphalian sovereignty to a time when the concept did not exist . Some Mainland Chinese scholars , such as Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain , assert that the Ming dynasty had unquestioned sovereignty over Tibet , pointing to the Ming court 's issuing of various titles to Tibetan leaders , Tibetans ' full acceptance of these titles , and a renewal process for successors of these titles that involved traveling to the Ming capital . Scholars within China also argue that Tibet has been an integral part of China since the 13th century and that it was thus a part of the Ming Empire . But most scholars outside China , such as Turrell V. Wylie , Melvin C. Goldstein , and Helmut Hoffman , say that the relationship was one of suzerainty , that Ming titles were only nominal , that Tibet remained an independent region outside Ming control , and that it simply paid tribute until the Jiajing Emperor ( 1521 – 1566 ) , who ceased relations with Tibet . 
 Some scholars note that Tibetan leaders during the Ming frequently engaged in civil war and conducted their own foreign diplomacy with neighboring states such as Nepal . Some scholars underscore the commercial aspect of the Ming @-@ Tibetan relationship , noting the Ming dynasty 's shortage of horses for warfare and thus the importance of the horse trade with Tibet . Others argue that the significant religious nature of the relationship of the Ming court with Tibetan lamas is underrepresented in modern scholarship . In hopes of reviving the unique relationship of the earlier Mongol leader Kublai Khan ( r . 1260 – 1294 ) and his spiritual superior Drogön Chögyal Phagpa ( 1235 – 1280 ) of the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism , the Yongle Emperor ( r . 1402 – 1424 ) made a concerted effort to build a secular and religious alliance with Deshin Shekpa ( 1384 – 1415 ) , the Karmapa of the Karma Kagyu school . However , the Yongle Emperor 's attempts were unsuccessful . 
 The Ming initiated sporadic armed intervention in Tibet during the 14th century , but did not garrison permanent troops there . At times the Tibetans also used armed resistance against Ming forays . The Wanli Emperor ( r . 1572 – 1620 ) made attempts to reestablish Sino @-@ Tibetan relations after the Mongol @-@ Tibetan alliance initiated in 1578 , which affected the foreign policy of the subsequent Qing dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) of China in their support for the Dalai Lama of the Gelug school . By the late 16th century , the Mongols were successful armed protectors of the Gelug Dalai Lama , after increasing their presence in the Amdo region . This culminated in Güshi Khan 's ( 1582 – 1655 ) conquest of Tibet from 1637 – 1642 and the establishment of the Ganden Phodrang regime by the 5th Dalai Lama with his help . 
 = = Background on Yuan rule over Tibet = = 
 = = = Mongol Empire = = = 
 Tibet was once a strong power contemporaneous with Tang China ( 618 – 907 ) . Until the Tibetan Empire 's collapse in the 9th century , it was the Tang 's major rival in dominating Inner Asia . The Yarlung rulers of Tibet also signed various peace treaties with the Tang , culminating in a treaty in 821 that fixed the borders between Tibet and China . 
 During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period of China ( 907 – 960 ) , while the fractured political realm of China saw no threat in a Tibet which was in just as much political disarray , there was little in the way of Sino @-@ Tibetan relations . Few documents involving Sino @-@ Tibetan contacts survive from the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . The Song were far more concerned with countering northern enemy states of the Khitan @-@ ruled Liao dynasty ( 907 – 1125 ) and Jurchen @-@ ruled Jin dynasty ( 1115 – 1234 ) . 
 In 1207 , the Mongol ruler Genghis Khan ( r . 1206 – 1227 ) conquered and subjugated the ethnic Tangut state of the Western Xia ( 1038 – 1227 ) . In the same year , he established diplomatic relations with Tibet by sending envoys there . The conquest of the Western Xia alarmed Tibetan rulers , who decided to pay tribute to the Mongols . However , when they ceased to pay tribute after Genghis Khan 's death , his successor Ögedei Khan ( r . 1229 – 1241 ) launched an invasion into Tibet . 
 The Mongol prince Godan , a grandson of Genghis Khan , raided as far as Lhasa . During his attack in 1240 , Prince Godan summoned Sakya Pandita ( 1182 – 1251 ) , leader of the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism , to his court in what is now Gansu in Western China . With Sakya Pandita 's submission to Godan in 1247 , Tibet was officially incorporated into the Mongol Empire during the regency of <unk> Khatun ( 1241 – 1246 ) . Michael C. van Walt van Praag writes that Godan granted Sakya Pandita temporal authority over a still politically fragmented Tibet , stating that " this investiture had little real impact " but it was significant in that it established the unique " Priest @-@ Patron " relationship between the Mongols and the Sakya lamas . 
 Starting in 1236 , the Mongol prince Kublai , who later ruled as Khagan from 1260 – 1294 , was granted a large appanage in North China by his superior , Ögedei Khan . Karma <unk> , 2nd Karmapa Lama ( 1203 – 1283 ) — the head lama of the Karma Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism — rejected Kublai 's invitation , so instead Kublai invited Drogön Chögyal Phagpa ( 1235 – 1280 ) , successor and nephew of Sakya Pandita , who came to his court in 1253 . Kublai instituted a unique relationship with the Phagpa lama , which recognized Kublai as a superior sovereign in political affairs and the Phagpa lama as the senior instructor to Kublai in religious affairs . Kublai also made Drogön Chögyal Phagpa the director of the government agency known as the Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs and the ruling priest @-@ king of Tibet , which comprised thirteen different states ruled by <unk> . 
 Kublai Khan did not conquer the Song dynasty in South China until 1279 , so Tibet was a component of the early Mongol Empire before it was combined into one of its descendant empires with the whole of China under the Yuan dynasty ( 1271 – 1368 ) . Van Praag writes that this conquest " marked the end of independent China , " which was then incorporated into the Yuan dynasty that ruled China , Tibet , Mongolia , Korea , parts of Siberia and Upper Burma . Morris Rossabi , a professor of Asian history at Queens College , City University of New York , writes that " Khubilai wished to be perceived both as the legitimate Khan of Khans of the Mongols and as the Emperor of China . Though he had , by the early 1260s , become closely identified with China , he still , for a time , claimed universal rule " , and yet " despite his successes in China and Korea , Khubilai was unable to have himself accepted as the Great Khan " . Thus , with such limited acceptance of his position as Great Khan , Kublai Khan increasingly became identified with China and sought support as Emperor of China . 
 = = = Overthrow of the Sakya and Yuan = = = 
 In 1358 , the Sakya viceregal regime installed by the Mongols in Tibet was overthrown in a rebellion by the Phagmodru <unk> Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen ( 1302 – 1364 ) . The Mongol Yuan court was forced to accept him as the new viceroy , and Changchub Gyaltsen and his successors , the Phagmodrupa Dynasty , gained de facto rule over Tibet . 
 In 1368 , a Han Chinese revolt known as the Red Turban Rebellion toppled the Mongol Yuan dynasty in China . Zhu Yuanzhang then established the Ming dynasty , ruling as the Hongwu Emperor ( r . 1368 – 1398 ) . It is not clear how much the early Ming court understood the civil war going on in Tibet between rival religious sects , but the first emperor was anxious to avoid the same trouble that Tibet had caused for the Tang dynasty . Instead of recognizing the Phagmodru ruler , the Hongwu Emperor sided with the Karmapa of the nearer Kham region and southeastern Tibet , sending envoys out in the winter of 1372 – 1373 to ask the Yuan officeholders to renew their titles for the new Ming court . 
 As evident in his imperial edicts , the Hongwu Emperor was well aware of the Buddhist link between Tibet and China and wanted to foster it . <unk> Dorje , 4th Karmapa Lama ( 1340 – 1383 ) rejected the Hongwu Emperor 's invitation , although he did send some disciples as envoys to the court in Nanjing . The Hongwu Emperor also entrusted his guru <unk> , one of many Buddhist monks at court , to head a religious mission into Tibet in 1378 – 1382 in order to obtain Buddhist texts . 
 However , the early Ming government enacted a law , later rescinded , which forbade Han Chinese to learn the tenets of Tibetan Buddhism . There is little detailed evidence of Chinese — especially lay Chinese — studying Tibetan Buddhism until the Republican era ( 1912 – 1949 ) . Despite these missions on behalf of the Hongwu Emperor , Morris Rossabi writes that the Yongle Emperor ( r . 1402 – 1424 ) " was the first Ming ruler actively to seek an extension of relations with Tibet . " 
 = = <unk> in the Mingshi of Ming claims over Tibet = = 
 According to the official Twenty @-@ Four Histories , the History of Ming compiled in 1739 by the subsequent Qing dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) , the Ming dynasty established the " É @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> Army @-@ Civilian Marshal Office " ( Chinese : <unk> ) in western Tibet and installed the " Ü @-@ Tsang Itinerant High Commandery " and " Amdo @-@ Kham Itinerant High Commandery " to administer Kham . The Mingshi states that administrative offices were set up under these high commanderies , including one Itinerant Commandery , three Pacification Commissioner 's Offices , six Expedition Commissioner 's Offices , four Wanhu offices ( <unk> , in command of 10 @,@ 000 households each ) and seventeen <unk> offices ( <unk> , each in command of 1 @,@ 000 households ) . 
 The Ming court appointed three Princes of Dharma ( <unk> ) and five Princes ( 王 ) , and granted many other titles , such as Grand State Tutors ( <unk> ) and State Tutors ( <unk> ) , to the important schools of Tibetan Buddhism , including the Karma Kagyu , Sakya , and Gelug . According to Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain , leading officials of these organs were all appointed by the central government and were subject to the rule of law . Yet Van Praag describes the distinct and long @-@ lasting Tibetan law code established by the Phagmodru ruler Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen as one of many reforms to revive old Imperial Tibetan traditions . 
 The late Turrell V. Wylie , a former professor of the University of Washington , and Li Tieh @-@ <unk> argue that the reliability of the heavily censored History of Ming as a credible source on Sino @-@ Tibetan relations is questionable , in the light of modern scholarship . Other historians also assert that these Ming titles were nominal and did not actually confer the authority that the earlier Yuan titles had . Van Praag writes that the " numerous economically motivated Tibetan missions to the Ming Court are referred to as ' tributary missions ' in the Ming Shih . " Van Praag writes that these " tributary missions " were simply prompted by China 's need for horses from Tibet , since a viable horse market in Mongol lands was closed as a result of incessant conflict . Morris Rossabi also writes that " Tibet , which had extensive contacts with China during the Yuan , scarcely had diplomatic relations with the Ming . " 
 = = Modern scholarly debates on Tibet @-@ Ming relations = = 
 = = = Inheritance , <unk> , and titles = = = 
 = = = = Transition from Yuan to Ming = = = = 
 Historians disagree on what the relationship was between the Ming court and Tibet and whether or not Ming China had sovereignty over Tibet . Van Praag writes that Chinese court historians viewed Tibet as an independent foreign tributary and had little interest in Tibet besides a lama @-@ patron relationship . The historian <unk> W. D. <unk> supports van Praag 's position . However , Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain state that these assertions by van Praag and <unk> are " fallacies " . 
 Wang and Nyima argue that the Ming emperor sent edicts to Tibet twice in the second year of the Ming dynasty , and demonstrated that he viewed Tibet as a significant region to pacify by urging various Tibetan tribes to submit to the authority of the Ming court . They note that at the same time , the Mongol Prince <unk> , who had inherited his position as ruler of areas of Tibet , went to Nanjing in 1371 to pay tribute and show his allegiance to the Ming court , bringing with him the seal of authority issued by the Yuan court . They also state that since successors of lamas granted the title of " prince " had to travel to the Ming court to renew this title , and since lamas called themselves princes , the Ming court therefore had " full sovereignty over Tibet . " They state that the Ming dynasty , by issuing imperial edicts to invite ex @-@ Yuan officials to the court for official positions in the early years of its founding , won submission from ex @-@ Yuan religious and administrative leaders in the Tibetan areas , and thereby incorporated Tibetan areas into the rule of the Ming court . Thus , they conclude , the Ming court won the power to rule Tibetan areas formerly under the rule of the Yuan dynasty . 
 Journalist and author Thomas Laird , in his book The Story of Tibet : Conversations with the Dalai Lama , writes that Wang and Nyima present the government viewpoint of the People 's Republic of China in their Historical Status of China 's Tibet , and fail to realize that China was " absorbed into a larger , non @-@ Chinese political unit " during the Mongol Yuan dynasty , which Wang and Nyima paint as a characteristic Chinese dynasty succeeded by the Ming . Laird asserts that the ruling Mongol khans never administered Tibet as part of China and instead ruled them as separate territories , comparing the Mongols with the British who colonized India and New Zealand , yet stating this does not make India part of New Zealand as a consequence . Of later Mongol and Tibetan accounts interpreting the Mongol conquest of Tibet , Laird asserts that " they , like all non @-@ Chinese historical narratives , never portray the Mongol subjugation of Tibet as a Chinese one . " 
 The Columbia Encyclopedia distinguishes between the Yuan dynasty and the other Mongol Empire khanates of Ilkhanate , Chagatai Khanate and the Golden Horde . It describes the Yuan dynasty as " A Mongol dynasty of China that ruled from 1271 to 1368 , and a division of the great empire conquered by the Mongols . Founded by Kublai Khan , who adopted the Chinese dynastic name of <unk> in 1271 . " The Encyclopedia Americana describes the Yuan dynasty as " the line of Mongol rulers in China " and adds that the Mongols " proclaimed a Chinese @-@ style <unk> dynasty at Khanbaliq ( Beijing ) . " The Metropolitan Museum of Art writes that the Mongol rulers of the Yuan dynasty " adopted Chinese political and cultural models ; ruling from their capitals in Dadu , they assumed the role of Chinese emperors , " although Tibetologist Thomas Laird dismissed the Yuan dynasty as a non @-@ Chinese polity and plays down its Chinese characteristics . The Metropolitan Museum of Art also noted that in spite of the gradual assimilation of Yuan monarchs , the Mongol rulers largely ignored the literati and imposed harsh policies discriminating against southern Chinese . In his Kublai Khan : His Life and Times , Rossabi explains that Kublai " created government institutions that either resembled or were the same as the traditional Chinese ones " , and he " wished to signal to the Chinese that he intended to adopt the trappings and style of a Chinese ruler " . 
 Nevertheless , the ethno @-@ geographic caste hierarchy favoring the Mongols and other ethnicities were accorded higher status than the Han Chinese majority . Although Han Chinese who were recruited as advisers were often actually more influential than high officials , their status was not as well defined . Kublai also abolished the imperial examinations of China 's civil service legacy , which was not reinstated until <unk> <unk> Khan 's reign ( 1311 – 1320 ) . Rossabi writes that Kublai recognized that in order to rule China , " he had to employ Chinese advisors and officials , yet he could not rely totally on Chinese advisers because he had to maintain a delicate balancing act between ruling the sedentary civilization of China and preserving the cultural identity and values of the Mongols . " And " in governing China , he was concerned with the interests of his Chinese subjects , but also with exploiting the resources of the empire for his own aggrandizement . His motivations and objectives alternated from one to the other throughout his reign , " according to Rossabi . Van Praag writes in The Status of Tibet that the Tibetans and Mongols , on the other hand , upheld a dual system of rule and an interdependent relationship that legitimated the succession of Mongol khans as universal Buddhist rulers , or chakravartin . Van Praag writes that " Tibet remained a unique part of the Empire and was never fully integrated into it , " citing examples such as a licensed border market that existed between China and Tibet during the Yuan . 
 The early Ming Emperors from Hongwu to Zhengde continued Yuan practices such as hereditary military institutions , demanding Korean concubines and eunuchs , having Muslim eunuchs , wearing Mongol style clothing and Mongol hats , engaging in archery and horseback riding , having Mongols serve in the Ming military , patronizing Tibetan Buddhism , with the early Ming Emperors seeking to project themselves as " universal rulers " to various peoples such as Central Asian Muslims , Tibetans , and Mongols , modeled after the Mongol Khagan , however , this history of Ming universalism has been obscured and denied by historians who covered it up and presented the Ming as <unk> seeking to expunge Mongol influence and presenting while they presented the Qing and Yuan as " universal " rulers in contrast to the Ming . 
 = = = = Ming practices of giving titles to Tibetans = = = = 
 The official position of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People 's Republic of China is that the Ming implemented a policy of managing Tibet according to conventions and customs , granting titles and setting up administrative organs over Tibet . The State Council Information Office of the People 's Republic states that the Ming dynasty 's Ü @-@ Tsang Commanding Office governed most areas of Tibet . It also states that while the Ming abolished the policy council set up by the Mongol Yuan to manage local affairs in Tibet and the Mongol system of Imperial Tutors to govern religious affairs , the Ming adopted a policy of bestowing titles upon religious leaders who had submitted to the Ming dynasty . For example , an edict of the Hongwu Emperor in 1373 appointed the Tibetan leader <unk> as the General of the Ngari Military and Civil Wanhu Office , stating : 
 I , the sovereign of the Empire , courteously treat people from all corners of the Empire who love righteousness and pledge allegiance to the Court and assign them official posts . I have learned with great pleasure that you , <unk> @-@ kun @-@ <unk> , who live in the Western Region , inspired by my power and reputation , are loyal to the Court and capable of safeguarding the territory in your charge . The <unk> @-@ ris Military and Civil Wanhu Office has just been established . I , therefore , appoint you head of the office with the title of General <unk> , believing that you are most qualified for the post . I expect you to be even more conscientious in your work than in the past , to comply with discipline and to care for your men so that security and peace in your region can be guaranteed . 
 Chen <unk> , Professor of History and Director of the History Studies Institute under the China Tibetology Research Center in Beijing , writes that the Ming court conferred new official positions on ex @-@ Yuan Tibetan leaders of the <unk> Kargyu and granted them lower @-@ ranking positions . Of the county ( <unk> or dzong ) leaders of <unk> Zong and <unk> Zong , Chen states that when " the Emperor learned the actual situation of the <unk> Kargyu , the Ming court then appointed the main Zong leaders to be senior officers of the Senior Command of <unk> and <unk> . " The official posts that the Ming court established in Tibet , such as senior and junior commanders , offices of <unk> ( in charge of 1 @,@ 000 households ) , and offices of Wanhu ( in charge of 10 @,@ 000 households ) , were all hereditary positions according to Chen , but he asserts that " the succession of some important posts still had to be approved by the emperor , " while old imperial mandates had to be returned to the Ming court for renewal . 
 According to Tibetologist John Powers , Tibetan sources counter this narrative of titles granted by the Chinese to Tibetans with various titles which the Tibetans gave to the Chinese emperors and their officials . Tribute missions from Tibetan monasteries to the Chinese court brought back not only titles , but large , commercially valuable gifts which could subsequently be sold . The Ming emperors sent invitations to ruling lamas , but the lamas sent subordinates rather than coming themselves , and no Tibetan ruler ever explicitly accepted the role of being a vassal of the Ming . 
 Hans Bielenstein writes that as far back as the Han dynasty ( 202 BCE – 220 CE ) , the Han Chinese government " maintained the fiction " that the foreign officials administering the various " Dependent States " and oasis city @-@ states of the Western Regions ( composed of the Tarim Basin and oasis of Turpan ) were true Han representatives due to the Han government 's conferral of Chinese seals and seal cords to them . 
 = = = = Changchub Gyaltsen = = = = 
 Wang and Nyima state that after the official title " Education Minister " was granted to Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen ( 1302 – 1364 ) by the Yuan court , this title appeared frequently with his name in various Tibetan texts , while his Tibetan title " <unk> " ( sic properly <unk> @-@ <unk> or desi ) is seldom mentioned . Wang and Nyima take this to mean that " even in the later period of the Yuan dynasty , the Yuan imperial court and the Phagmodrupa Dynasty maintained a Central @-@ local government relation . " The Tai <unk> is even supposed to have written in his will : " In the past I received loving care from the emperor in the east . If the emperor continues to care for us , please follow his edicts and the imperial envoy should be well received . " 
 However , Lok @-@ Ham Chan , a professor of history at the University of Washington , writes that Changchub Gyaltsen 's aims were to recreate the old Tibetan Kingdom that existed during the Chinese Tang dynasty , to build " nationalist sentiment " amongst Tibetans , and to " remove all traces of Mongol suzerainty . " Georges Dreyfus , a professor of religion at Williams College , writes that it was Changchub Gyaltsen who adopted the old administrative system of Songtsän Gampo ( c . 605 – 649 ) — the first leader of the Tibetan Empire to establish Tibet as a strong power — by reinstating its legal code of punishments and administrative units . For example , instead of the 13 governorships established by the Mongol Sakya viceroy , Changchub Gyaltsen divided Central Tibet into districts ( dzong ) with district heads ( dzong <unk> ) who had to conform to old rituals and wear clothing styles of old Imperial Tibet . Van Praag asserts that Changchub Gyaltsen 's ambitions were to " restore to Tibet the glories of its Imperial Age " by reinstating secular administration , promoting " national culture and traditions , " and installing a law code that survived into the 20th century . 
 According to Chen , the Ming officer of <unk> ( modern day <unk> ) informed the Hongwu Emperor that the general situation in <unk> and <unk> " was under control , " and so he suggested to the emperor that he offer the second Phagmodru ruler , <unk> Shakya Gyaltsen , an official title . According to the Records of the Founding Emperor , the Hongwu Emperor issued an edict granting the title " Initiation State Master " to <unk> Gyaincain , while the latter sent envoys to the Ming court to hand over his jade seal of authority along with tribute of colored silk and satin , statues of the Buddha , Buddhist scriptures , and sarira . 
 Dreyfus writes that after the Phagmodrupa lost its centralizing power over Tibet in 1434 , several attempts by other families to establish hegemonies failed over the next two centuries until 1642 with the 5th Dalai Lama 's effective hegemony over Tibet . 
 = = = = Je Tsongkhapa = = = = 
 The Ming dynasty granted titles to lamas of schools such as the Karmapa Kargyu , but the latter had previously declined Mongol invitations to receive titles . When the Ming Yongle Emperor invited Je Tsongkhapa ( 1357 – 1419 ) , founder of the Gelug school , to come to the Ming court and pay tribute , the latter declined . Wang and Nyima write that this was due to old age and physical weakness , and also because of efforts being made to build three major monasteries . Chen <unk> states that Tsongkhapa wrote a letter to decline the Emperor 's invitation , and in this reply , Tsongkhapa wrote : 
 It is not that I don 't know it is the edict of the Great <unk> of the world for the sake of Buddhist doctrine , or that I do not obey the edict of Your Majesty . I am seriously ill whenever I meet the public , so I cannot embark on a journey in compliance with the imperial edict . I wish that Your Majesty might be merciful , and not be displeased ; it will really be a great mercy . 
 A. Tom Grunfeld says that Tsongkhapa claimed ill health in his refusal to appear at the Ming court , while Rossabi adds that Tsongkhapa cited the " length and <unk> of the journey " to China as another reason not to make an appearance . This first request by the Ming was made in 1407 , but the Ming court sent another embassy in 1413 , this one led by the eunuch Hou Xian ( <unk> ; fl . 1403 – 1427 ) , which was again refused by Tsongkhapa . Rossabi writes that Tsongkhapa did not want to entirely alienate the Ming court , so he sent his disciple <unk> <unk> <unk> to Nanjing in 1414 on his behalf , and upon his arrival in 1415 the Yongle Emperor bestowed upon him the title of " State Teacher " — the same title earlier awarded the Phagmodrupa ruler of Tibet . The Xuande Emperor ( r . 1425 – 1435 ) even granted this disciple <unk> <unk> <unk> the title of a " King " ( 王 ) . This title does not appear to have held any practical meaning , or to have given its holder any power , at Tsongkhapa 's Ganden Monastery . Wylie notes that this — like the Karma Kargyu — cannot be seen as a reappointment of Mongol Yuan offices , since the Gelug school was created after the fall of the Yuan dynasty . 
 = = = = Implications on the question of rule = = = = 
 Dawa Norbu argues that modern Chinese Communist historians tend to be in favor of the view that the Ming simply reappointed old Yuan dynasty officials in Tibet and perpetuated their rule of Tibet in this manner . Norbu writes that , although this would have been true for the eastern Tibetan regions of Amdo and Kham 's " tribute @-@ cum @-@ trade " relations with the Ming , it was untrue if applied to the western Tibetan regions of Ü @-@ Tsang and Ngari . After the Phagmodrupa Changchub Gyaltsen , these were ruled by " three successive nationalistic regimes , " which Norbu writes " Communist historians prefer to ignore . " 
 Laird writes that the Ming appointed titles to eastern Tibetan princes , and that " these alliances with eastern Tibetan principalities are the evidence China now produces for its assertion that the Ming ruled Tibet , " despite the fact that the Ming did not send an army to replace the Mongols after they left Tibet . <unk> Yung @-@ chin states that the furthest western extent of the Ming dynasty 's territory was Gansu , Sichuan , and Yunnan while " the Ming did not possess Tibet . " 
 Shih @-@ Shan Henry Tsai writes that the Yongle Emperor sent his eunuch Yang <unk> into Tibet in 1413 to gain the allegiance of various Tibetan princes , while the Yongle Emperor paid a small fortune in return gifts for tributes in order to maintain the loyalty of neighboring vassal states such as Nepal and Tibet . However , Van Praag states that Tibetan rulers upheld their own separate relations with the kingdoms of Nepal and Kashmir , and at times " engaged in armed confrontation with them . " 
 Even though the Gelug exchanged gifts with and sent missions to the Ming court up until the 1430s , the Gelug was not mentioned in the Mingshi or the Mingshi Lu . On this , historian Li Tieh @-@ <unk> says of Tsongkhapa 's refusal of Ming invitations to visit the Yongle Emperor 's court : 
 In China not only the emperor could do no wrong , but also his prestige and dignity had to be upheld at any cost . Had the fact been made known to the public that Ch 'eng @-@ tsu 's repeated invitations extended to Tsong @-@ ka @-@ pa were declined , the Emperor 's prestige and dignity would have been considered as lowered to a contemptible degree , especially at a time when his policy to show high favours toward lamas was by no means popular and had already caused resentment among the people . This explains why no mention of Tsong @-@ k 'a @-@ pa and the Yellow Sect was made in the Ming Shih and Ming Shih lu . 
 Wylie asserts that this type of censorship of the History of Ming distorts the true picture of the history of Sino @-@ Tibetan relations , while the Ming court granted titles to various lamas regardless of their sectarian affiliations in an ongoing civil war in Tibet between competing Buddhist factions . Wylie argues that Ming titles of " King " granted indiscriminately to various Tibetan lamas or even their disciples should not be viewed as <unk> to earlier Yuan dynasty offices , since the viceregal Sakya regime established by the Mongols in Tibet was overthrown by the Phagmodru <unk> before the Ming existed . 
 Helmut Hoffman states that the Ming upheld the facade of rule over Tibet through periodic missions of " tribute emissaries " to the Ming court and by granting nominal titles to ruling lamas , but did not actually interfere in Tibetan governance . Melvyn C. Goldstein writes that the Ming had no real administrative authority over Tibet , as the various titles given to Tibetan leaders did not confer authority as the earlier Mongol Yuan titles had . He asserts that " by conferring titles on Tibetans already in power , the Ming emperors merely recognized political reality . " Hugh Edward Richardson writes that the Ming dynasty exercised no authority over the succession of Tibetan ruling families , the Phagmodru ( 1354 – 1435 ) , Rinpungpa ( 1435 – 1565 ) , and Tsangpa ( 1565 – 1642 ) . 
 = = = Religious significance = = = 
 In his usurpation of the throne from the Jianwen Emperor ( r . 1398 – 1402 ) , the Yongle Emperor was aided by the Buddhist monk Yao <unk> , and like his father , the Hongwu Emperor , the Yongle Emperor was " well @-@ disposed towards Buddhism " , claims Rossabi . On March 10 , 1403 , the Yongle Emperor invited Deshin Shekpa , 5th Karmapa Lama ( 1384 – 1415 ) , to his court , even though the fourth Karmapa had rejected the invitation of the Hongwu Emperor . A Tibetan translation in the 16th century preserves the letter of the Yongle Emperor , which the Association for Asian Studies notes is polite and complimentary towards the Karmapa . The letter of invitation reads , 
 My father and both parents of the queen are now dead . You are my only hope , essence of <unk> . Please come quickly . I am sending as offering a large ingot of silver , one hundred fifty silver coins , twenty rolls of silk , a block of sandalwood , one hundred fifty bricks of tea and ten pounds of incense . " 
 In order to seek out the Karmapa , the Yongle Emperor dispatched his eunuch Hou Xian and the Buddhist monk Zhi Guang ( d . 1435 ) to Tibet . Traveling to Lhasa either through Qinghai or via the Silk Road to Khotan , Hou Xian and Zhi Guang did not return to Nanjing until 1407 . 
 During his travels beginning in 1403 , Deshin Shekpa was induced by further exhortations by the Ming court to visit Nanjing by April 10 , 1407 . Norbu writes that the Yongle Emperor , following the tradition of Mongol emperors and their reverence for the Sakya lamas , showed an enormous amount of deference towards Deshin Shekpa . The Yongle Emperor came out of the palace in Nanjing to greet the Karmapa and did not require him to kowtow like a tributary vassal . According to Karma <unk> , the emperor gave the Karmapa the place of honor at his left , and on a higher throne than his own . Rossabi and others describe a similar arrangement made by Kublai Khan and the Sakya Phagpa lama , writing that Kublai would " sit on a lower platform than the Tibetan cleric " when receiving religious instructions from him . 
 Throughout the following month , the Yongle Emperor and his court showered the Karmapa with presents . At <unk> Temple in Nanjing , he presided over the religious ceremonies for the Yongle Emperor 's deceased parents , while twenty @-@ two days of his stay were marked by religious miracles that were recorded in five languages on a gigantic scroll that bore the Emperor 's seal . During his stay in Nanjing , Deshin Shekpa was bestowed the title " Great Treasure Prince of Dharma " by the Yongle Emperor . Elliot Sperling asserts that the Yongle Emperor , in bestowing Deshin Shekpa with the title of " King " and praising his mystical abilities and miracles , was trying to build an alliance with the Karmapa as the Mongols had with the Sakya lamas , but Deshin Shekpa rejected the Yongle Emperor 's offer . In fact , this was the same title that Kublai Khan had offered the Sakya Phagpa lama , but Deshin Shekpa persuaded the Yongle Emperor to grant the title to religious leaders of other Tibetan Buddhist sects . 
 Tibetan sources say Deshin Shekpa also persuaded the Yongle Emperor not to impose his military might on Tibet as the Mongols had previously done . <unk> writes that before the Karmapa returned to Tibet , the Yongle Emperor began planning to send a military force into Tibet to forcibly give the Karmapa authority over all the Tibetan Buddhist schools but Deshin Shekpa dissuaded him . However , Hok @-@ Lam Chan states that " there is little evidence that this was ever the emperor 's intention " and that evidence indicates that Deshin <unk> was invited strictly for religious purposes . 
 Marsha Weidner states that Deshin Shekpa 's miracles " testified to the power of both the emperor and his guru and served as a legitimizing tool for the emperor 's problematic succession to the throne , " referring to the Yongle Emperor 's conflict with the previous Jianwen Emperor . Tsai writes that Deshin Shekpa aided the legitimacy of the Yongle Emperor 's rule by providing him with portents and omens which demonstrated Heaven 's favor of the Yongle Emperor on the Ming throne . 
 With the example of the Ming court 's relationship with the fifth Karmapa and other Tibetan leaders , Norbu states that Chinese Communist historians have failed to realize the significance of the religious aspect of the Ming @-@ Tibetan relationship . He writes that the meetings of lamas with the Emperor of China were exchanges of tribute between " the patron and the priest " and were not merely instances of a political subordinate paying tribute to a superior . He also notes that the items of tribute were Buddhist artifacts which symbolized " the religious nature of the relationship . " Josef Kolmaš writes that the Ming dynasty did not exercise any direct political control over Tibet , content with their tribute relations that were " almost entirely of a religious character . " Patricia Ann Berger writes that the Yongle Emperor 's courting and granting of titles to lamas was his attempt to " resurrect the relationship between China and Tibet established earlier by the Yuan dynastic founder Khubilai Khan and his guru Phagpa . " She also writes that the later Qing emperors and their Mongol associates viewed the Yongle Emperor 's relationship with Tibet as " part of a chain of reincarnation that saw this Han Chinese emperor as yet another emanation of Manjusri . " 
 The Information Office of the State Council of the PRC preserves an edict of the Zhengtong Emperor ( r . 1435 – 1449 ) addressed to the Karmapa in 1445 , written after the latter 's agent had brought holy relics to the Ming court . Zhengtong had the following message delivered to the Great Treasure Prince of Dharma , the Karmapa : 
 Out of compassion , Buddha taught people to be good and persuaded them to embrace his doctrines . You , who live in the remote Western Region , have inherited the true Buddhist doctrines . I am deeply impressed not only by the compassion with which you preach among the people in your region for their enlightenment , but also by your respect for the wishes of Heaven and your devotion to the Court . I am very pleased that you have sent <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ ma and other Tibetan monks here bringing with them statues of Buddha , horses and other specialties as tributes to the court . 
 Despite this glowing message by the Emperor , Chan writes that a year later in 1446 , the Ming court cut off all relations with the Karmapa hierarchs . Until then , the court was unaware that Deshin Shekpa had died in 1415 . The Ming court had believed that the representatives of the Karma Kagyu who continued to visit the Ming capital were sent by the Karmapa . 
 = = = Tribute and exchanging tea for horses = = = 
 Tsai writes that shortly after the visit by Deshin Shekpa , the Yongle Emperor ordered the construction of a road and of trading posts in the upper reaches of the Yangzi and Mekong Rivers in order to facilitate trade with Tibet in tea , horses , and salt . The trade route passed through Sichuan and crossed Shangri @-@ La County in Yunnan . Wang and Nyima assert that this " tribute @-@ related trade " of the Ming exchanging Chinese tea for Tibetan horses — while granting Tibetan envoys and Tibetan merchants explicit permission to trade with Han Chinese merchants — " furthered the rule of the Ming dynasty court over Tibet " . Rossabi and Sperling note that this trade in Tibetan horses for Chinese tea existed long before the Ming . Peter C. Perdue says that Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) , realizing that China could not produce enough militarily capable steeds , had also aimed to obtain horses from Inner Asia in exchange for Chinese tea . The Chinese needed horses not only for cavalry but also as draft animals for the army 's supply wagons . The Tibetans required Chinese tea not only as a common beverage but also as a religious ceremonial supplement . The Ming government imposed a monopoly on tea production and attempted to regulate this trade with state @-@ supervised markets , but these collapsed in 1449 due to military failures and internal ecological and commercial pressures on the tea @-@ producing regions . 
 Van Praag states that the Ming court established diplomatic delegations with Tibet merely to secure urgently needed horses . Wang and Nyima argue that these were not diplomatic delegations at all , that Tibetan areas were ruled by the Ming since Tibetan leaders were granted positions as Ming officials , that horses were collected from Tibet as a mandatory " corvée " tax , and therefore Tibetans were " undertaking domestic affairs , not foreign diplomacy " . Sperling writes that the Ming simultaneously bought horses in the Kham region while fighting Tibetan tribes in Amdo and receiving Tibetan embassies in Nanjing . He also argues that the embassies of Tibetan lamas visiting the Ming court were for the most part efforts to promote commercial transactions between the lamas ' large , wealthy entourage and Ming Chinese merchants and officials . Kolmaš writes that while the Ming maintained a laissez @-@ faire policy towards Tibet and limited the numbers of the Tibetan retinues , the Tibetans sought to maintain a tributary relationship with the Ming because imperial patronage provided them with wealth and power . Laird writes that Tibetans eagerly sought Ming court invitations since the gifts the Tibetans received for bringing tribute were much greater in value than the latter . As for the Yongle Emperor 's gifts to his Tibetan and Nepalese vassals such as silver wares , Buddha relics , utensils for Buddhist temples and religious ceremonies , and gowns and robes for monks , Tsai writes " in his effort to draw neighboring states to the Ming orbit so that he could bask in glory , the Yongle Emperor was quite willing to pay a small price " . The Information Office of the State Council of the PRC lists the Tibetan tribute items as oxen , horses , camels , sheep , fur products , medical herbs , Tibetan <unk> , thangkas ( painted scrolls ) , and handicrafts ; while the Ming awarded Tibetan tribute @-@ bearers an equal value of gold , silver , satin and brocade , bolts of cloth , grains , and tea leaves . Silk workshops during the Ming also catered specifically to the Tibetan market with silk clothes and furnishings featuring Tibetan Buddhist iconography . 
 While the Ming dynasty traded horses with Tibet , it upheld a policy of outlawing border markets in the north , which Laird sees as an effort to punish the Mongols for their raids and to " drive them from the frontiers of China . " However , after Altan Khan ( 1507 – 1582 ) — leader of the Tümed Mongols who overthrew the Oirat Mongol confederation 's hegemony over the steppes — made peace with the Ming dynasty in 1571 , he persuaded the Ming to reopen their border markets in 1573 . This provided the Chinese with a new supply of horses that the Mongols had in excess ; it was also a relief to the Ming , since they were unable to stop the Mongols from periodic raiding . Laird says that despite the fact that later Mongols believed Altan forced the Ming to view him as an equal , Chinese historians argue that he was simply a loyal Chinese citizen . By 1578 , Altan Khan formed a formidable Mongol @-@ Tibetan alliance with the Gelug that the Ming viewed from afar without intervention . 
 = = = Armed intervention and border stability = = = 
 Patricia Ebrey writes that Tibet , like Joseon Korea and other neighboring states to the Ming , settled for its tributary status while there were no troops or governors of Ming China stationed in its territory . Laird writes that " after the Mongol troops left Tibet , no Ming troops replaced them . " Wang and Nyima state that , despite the fact that the Ming refrained from sending troops to subdue Tibet and refrained from garrisoning Ming troops there , these measures were unnecessary so long as the Ming court upheld close ties with Tibetan vassals and their forces . However , there were instances in the 14th century when the Hongwu Emperor did use military force to quell unrest in Tibet . John D. Langlois writes that there was unrest in Tibet and western Sichuan , which the Marquis Mu Ying ( <unk> ) was commissioned to quell in November 1378 after he established a <unk> garrison in Gansu . Langlois notes that by October 1379 , Mu Ying had allegedly captured 30 @,@ 000 Tibetan prisoners and 200 @,@ 000 domesticated animals . Yet invasion went both ways ; the Ming general Qu Neng , under the command of Lan Yu , was ordered to repel a Tibetan assault into Sichuan in 1390 . 
 One of the Ming Princes was noted for delinquent behavior . Zhu Shuang <unk> ( Prince Min of Qin <unk> ) while he was high on drugs , had some Tibetan boys castrated and Tibetan women seized after a war against minority Tibetan peoples and as a result was reprimanded after he died from overdose . 
 Discussions of strategy in the mid Ming dynasty focused primarily on recovery of the Ordos region , which the Mongols used as a rallying base to stage raids into Ming China . Norbu states that the Ming dynasty , preoccupied with the Mongol threat to the north , could not spare additional armed forces to enforce or back up their claim of sovereignty over Tibet ; instead , they relied on " Confucian instruments of tribute relations " of heaping unlimited number of titles and gifts on Tibetan lamas through acts of diplomacy . Sperling states that the delicate relationship between the Ming and Tibet was " the last time a united China had to deal with an independent Tibet , " that there was a potential for armed conflict at their borders , and that the ultimate goal of Ming foreign policy with Tibet was not subjugation but " avoidance of any kind of Tibetan threat . " P. Christiaan Klieger argues that the Ming court 's patronage of high Tibetan lamas " was designed to help stabilize border regions and protect trade routes . " 
 Historians Luciano <unk> and Sato Hisashi argue that the Ming upheld a " divide @-@ and @-@ rule " policy towards a weak and politically fragmented Tibet after the Sakya regime had fallen . Chan writes that this was perhaps the calculated strategy of the Yongle Emperor , as exclusive patronage to one Tibetan sect would have given it too much regional power . Sperling finds no textual evidence in either Chinese or Tibetan sources to support this thesis of <unk> and Hisashi . Norbu asserts that their thesis is largely based on the list of Ming titles conferred on Tibetan lamas rather than " comparative analysis of developments in China and Tibet . " Rossabi states that this theory " attributes too much influence to the Chinese , " pointing out that Tibet was already politically divided when the Ming dynasty began . Rossabi also discounts the " divide @-@ and @-@ rule " theory on the grounds of the Yongle Emperor 's failed attempt to build a strong relationship with the fifth Karmapa — one which he hoped would parallel Kublai Khan 's earlier relationship with the Sakya Phagpa lama . Instead , the Yongle Emperor followed the Karmapa 's advice of giving patronage to many different Tibetan lamas . 
 The Association for Asian Studies states that there is no known written evidence to suggest that later leaders of the Gelug — Gendün <unk> ( 1391 – 1474 ) and Gendün Gyatso ( 1475 – 1571 ) — had any contacts with Ming China . These two religious leaders were preoccupied with an overriding concern for dealing with the powerful secular Rinpungpa princes , who were patrons and protectors of the Karma Kargyu lamas . The Rinpungpa leaders were relatives of the Phagmodrupa , yet their authority shifted over time from simple governors to rulers in their own right over large areas of Ü @-@ Tsang . The prince of Rinbung occupied Lhasa in 1498 and excluded the Gelug from attending New Years ceremonies and prayers , the most important event in the Gelug . While the task of New Years prayers in Lhasa was granted to the Karmapa and others , Gendün Gyatso traveled in exile looking for allies . However , it was not until 1518 that the secular Phagmodru ruler captured Lhasa from the Rinbung , and thereafter the Gelug was given rights to conduct the New Years prayer . When the <unk> Kagyu abbot of Drigung Monastery threatened Lhasa in 1537 , Gendün Gyatso was forced to abandon the Drepung Monastery , although he eventually returned . 
 The Zhengde Emperor ( r . 1505 – 1521 ) , who enjoyed the company of lamas at court despite protests from the censorate , had heard tales of a " living Buddha " which he desired to host at the Ming capital ; this was none other than the <unk> @-@ supported <unk> Dorje , 8th Karmapa Lama then occupying Lhasa . Zhengde 's top advisors made every attempt to dissuade him from inviting this lama to court , arguing that Tibetan Buddhism was wildly heterodox and unorthodox . Despite protests by the Grand Secretary Liang Chu , in 1515 the Zhengde Emperor sent his eunuch official Liu Yun of the Palace Chancellery on a mission to invite this Karmapa to Beijing . Liu commanded a fleet of hundreds of ships requisitioned along the Yangtze , consuming 2 @,@ 835 g ( 100 oz ) of silver a day in food expenses while stationed for a year in Chengdu of Sichuan . After <unk> necessary gifts for the mission , he departed with a cavalry force of about 1 @,@ 000 troops . When the request was delivered , the Karmapa lama refused to leave Tibet despite the Ming force brought to coerce him . The Karmapa launched a surprise ambush on Liu Yun 's camp , seizing all the goods and valuables while killing or wounding half of Liu Yun 's entire escort . After this fiasco , Liu fled for his life , but only returned to Chengdu several years later to find that the Zhengde Emperor had died . 
 = = = Tibetans as a " national minority " = = = 
 Elliot Sperling , a specialist of Indian studies and the director of the Tibetan Studies program at Indiana University ’ s Department of Central Eurasia Studies , writes that " the idea that Tibet became part of China in the 13th century is a very recent construction . " He writes that Chinese writers of the early 20th century were of the view that Tibet was not annexed by China until the Manchu Qing dynasty invasion during the 18th century . He also states that Chinese writers of the early 20th century described Tibet as a feudal dependency of China , not an integral part of it . Sperling states that this is because " Tibet was ruled as such , within the empires of the Mongols and the Manchus " and also that " China 's intervening Ming dynasty ... had no control over Tibet . " He writes that the Ming relationship with Tibet is problematic for China ’ s insistence of its unbroken sovereignty over Tibet since the 13th century . As for the Tibetan view that Tibet was never subject to the rule of the Yuan or Qing emperors of China , Sperling also discounts this by stating that Tibet was " subject to rules , laws and decisions made by the Yuan and Qing rulers " and that even Tibetans described themselves as subjects of these emperors . 
 Josef Kolmaš , a sinologist , Tibetologist , and Professor of Oriental Studies at the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic , writes that it was during the Qing dynasty " that developments took place on the basis of which Tibet came to be considered an organic part of China , both practically and theoretically subject to the Chinese central government . " Yet he states that this was a radical change in regards to all previous eras of Sino @-@ Tibetan relations . 
 P. Christiaan Klieger , an anthropologist and scholar of the California Academy of Sciences in San Francisco , writes that the vice royalty of the Sakya regime installed by the Mongols established a patron and priest relationship between Tibetans and Mongol converts to Tibetan Buddhism . According to him , the Tibetan lamas and Mongol khans upheld a " mutual role of religious prelate and secular patron , " respectively . He adds that " Although agreements were made between Tibetan leaders and Mongol khans , Ming and Qing emperors , it was the Republic of China and its Communist successors that assumed the former imperial tributaries and subject states as integral parts of the Chinese nation @-@ state . " 
 Marina Illich , a scholar of Indo @-@ Tibetan Buddhism , while discussing the life of the Gelug lama <unk> <unk> Dorje ( 1717 – 1786 ) , mentions the limitations of both Western and Chinese modern scholarship in their interpretation of Tibetan sources . As for the limitations imposed on scholars by the central government of the People 's Republic of China on issues regarding the history of Tibet , Illich writes : 
 PRC scholars ... work under the strict supervision of censor bureaus and must adhere to historiographic guidelines issued by the state [ and ] have little choice but to frame their discussion of eighteenth @-@ century Tibetan history in the anachronistic terms of contemporary People 's Republic of China ( P.R.C. ) state discourse ... Bound by Party directives , these scholars have little choice but to portray Tibet as a trans @-@ historically inalienable part of China in a way that profoundly obscures questions of Tibetan agency . 
 China Daily , a CCP @-@ controlled news organization since 1981 , states in a 2008 article that although there were dynastic changes after Tibet was incorporated into the territory of Yuan dynasty 's China in the 13th century , " Tibet has remained under the jurisdiction of the central government of China . " It also states that the Ming dynasty " inherited the right to rule Tibet " from the Yuan dynasty , and repeats the claims in the Mingshi about the Ming establishing two itinerant high commands over Tibet . China Daily states that the Ming handled Tibet 's civil administration , appointed all leading officials of these administrative organs , and punished Tibetans who broke the law . The party @-@ controlled People 's Daily , the state @-@ controlled Xinhua News Agency , and the state @-@ controlled national television network China Central Television posted the same article that China Daily had , the only difference being their headlines and some additional text . 
 = = Mongol @-@ Tibetan alliance = = 
 = = = Altan Khan and the Dalai Lama = = = 
 During the reign of the Jiajing Emperor ( r . 1521 – 1567 ) , the native Chinese ideology of Daoism was fully sponsored at the Ming court , while Tibetan Vajrayana and even Chinese Buddhism were ignored or suppressed . Even the History of Ming states that the Tibetan lamas discontinued their trips to Ming China and its court at this point . Grand Secretary Yang Tinghe under Jiajing was determined to break the eunuch influence at court which typified the Zhengde era , an example being the costly escort of the eunuch Liu Yun as described above in his failed mission to Tibet . The court eunuchs were in favor of expanding and building new commercial ties with foreign countries such as Portugal , which Zhengde deemed permissible since he had an affinity for foreign and exotic people . 
 With the death of Zhengde and ascension of Jiajing , the politics at court shifted in favor of the Neo @-@ Confucian establishment which not only rejected the Portuguese embassy of Fernão Pires de Andrade ( d . 1523 ) , but had a predisposed animosity towards Tibetan Buddhism and lamas . Evelyn S. Rawski , a professor in the Department of History of the University of Pittsburgh , writes that the Ming 's unique relationship with Tibetan prelates essentially ended with Jiajing 's reign while Ming influence in the Amdo region was supplanted by the Mongols . 
 The Chinese Ming dynasty also deliberately helped to propagate Tibetan Buddhism instead of Chinese Buddhism among the Mongols . The Ming assisted Altan Khan , King of the Tümed Mongols , when he requested aid in propagating Lamaism . 
 Meanwhile , the <unk> Mongols began moving into the <unk> region ( modern Qinghai ) , raiding the Ming Chinese frontier and even as far as the suburbs of Beijing under Altan Khan ( 1507 – 1582 ) . Klieger writes that Altan Khan 's presence in the west effectively reduced Ming influence and contact with Tibet . After Altan Khan made peace with the Ming dynasty in 1571 , he invited the third hierarch of the Gelug — Sönam Gyatso ( 1543 – 1588 ) — to meet him in Amdo ( modern Qinghai ) in 1578 , where he accidentally bestowed him and his two predecessors with the title of Dalai Lama — " Ocean Teacher " . The full title was " Dalai Lama Vajradhara " , " Vajradhara " meaning " Holder of the Thunderbolt " in Sanskrit . Victoria <unk> notes that Vajradhara is considered by Buddhists to be the primordial Buddha of limitless and all @-@ pervasive beneficial qualities , a being that " represents the ultimate aspect of enlightenment . " Goldstein writes that Sönam Gyatso also enhanced Altan Khan 's standing by granting him the title " king of religion , majestic purity " . Rawski writes that the Dalai Lama officially recognized Altan Khan as the " Protector of the Faith " . 
 Laird writes that Altan Khan abolished the native Mongol practices of shamanism and blood sacrifice , while the Mongol princes and subjects were coerced by Altan to convert to Gelug Buddhism — or face execution if they persisted in their shamanistic ways . Committed to their religious leader , Mongol princes began requesting the Dalai Lama to bestow titles on them , which demonstrated " the unique fusion of religious and political power " wielded by the Dalai Lama , as Laird writes . Kolmaš states that the spiritual and secular Mongol @-@ Tibetan alliance of the 13th century was renewed by this alliance constructed by Altan Khan and Sönam Gyatso . Van Praag writes that this restored the original Mongol patronage of a Tibetan lama and " to this day , Mongolians are among the most devout followers of the Gelugpa and the Dalai Lama . " Angela F. Howard writes that this unique relationship not only provided the Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama with religious and political authority in Tibet , but that Altan Khan gained " enormous power among the entire Mongol population . " 
 Rawski writes that Altan Khan 's conversion to the Gelug " can be interpreted as an attempt to expand his authority in his conflict with his nominal superior , <unk> Khan . " To further cement the Mongol @-@ Tibetan alliance , the great @-@ grandson of Altan Khan — the 4th Dalai Lama ( 1589 – 1616 ) — was made the fourth Dalai Lama . In 1642 , the 5th Dalai Lama ( 1617 – 1682 ) became the first to wield effective political control over Tibet . 
 = = = Contact with the Ming dynasty = = = 
 Sonam Gyatso , after being granted the grandiose title by Altan Khan , departed for Tibet . Before he left , he sent a letter and gifts to the Ming Chinese official Zhang Juzheng ( 1525 – 1582 ) , which arrived on March 12 , 1579 . Sometime in August or September of that year , Sonam Gyatso 's representative stationed with Altan Khan received a return letter and gift from the Wanli Emperor ( r . 1572 – 1620 ) , who also conferred upon Sonam Gyatso a title ; this was the first official contact between a Dalai Lama and a government of China . However , Laird states that when Wanli invited him to Beijing , the Dalai Lama declined the offer due to a prior commitment , even though he was only 400 km ( 250 mi ) from Beijing . Laird adds that " the power of the Ming emperor did not reach very far at the time . " Although not recorded in any official Chinese records , Sonam Gyatso 's biography states that Wanli again conferred titles on Sonam Gyatso in 1588 , and invited him to Beijing for a second time , but Sonam Gyatso was unable to visit China as he died the same year in Mongolia working with Altan Khan 's son to further the spread of Buddhism . 
 Of the third Dalai Lama , China Daily states that the " Ming dynasty showed him special favor by allowing him to pay tribute . " China Daily then says that Sonam Gyatso was granted the title <unk> or Vajradhara Dalai Lama in 1587 [ sic ! ] , but China Daily does not mention who granted him the title . Without mentioning the role of the Mongols , China Daily states that it was the successive Qing dynasty which established the title of Dalai Lama and his power in Tibet : " In 1653 , the Qing emperor granted an honorific title to the fifth Dalai Lama and then did the same for the fifth Panchen Lama in 1713 , officially establishing the titles of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen <unk> , and their political and religious status in Tibet . " 
 Chen states that the fourth Dalai Lama Yonten Gyatso was granted the title " Master of Vajradhara " and an official seal by the Wanli Emperor in 1616 . This was noted in the Biography of the Fourth Dalai Lama , which stated that one <unk> <unk> delivered the seal of the Emperor to the Dalai Lama . The Wanli Emperor had invited Yonten Gyatso to Beijing in 1616 , but just like his predecessor he died before being able to make the journey . 
 Kolmaš writes that , as the Mongol presence in Tibet increased , culminating in the conquest of Tibet by a Mongol leader in 1642 , the Ming emperors " viewed with apparent unconcern these developments in Tibet . " He adds that the Ming court 's lack of concern for Tibet was one of the reasons why the Mongols pounced on the chance to reclaim their old vassal of Tibet and " fill once more the political vacuum in that country . " On the mass Mongol conversion to Tibetan Buddhism under Altan Khan , Laird writes that " the Chinese watched these developments with interest , though few Chinese ever became devout Tibetan Buddhists . " 
 = = = Civil war and Güshi Khan 's conquest = = = 
 In 1565 , the powerful Rinbung princes were overthrown by one of their own ministers , Karma <unk> who styled himself as the Tsangpa , " the one of Tsang " , and established his base of power at Shigatse . The second successor of this first Tsang king , Karma <unk> Namgyal , took control of the whole of Central Tibet ( Ü @-@ Tsang ) , reigning from 1611 – 1621 . Despite this , the leaders of Lhasa still claimed their allegiance to the Phagmodru as well as the Gelug , while the Ü @-@ Tsang king allied with the Karmapa . Tensions rose between the nationalistic Ü @-@ Tsang ruler and the Mongols who safeguarded their Mongol Dalai Lama in Lhasa . The fourth Dalai Lama refused to give an audience to the Ü @-@ Tsang king , which sparked a conflict as the latter began assaulting Gelug monasteries . Chen writes of the speculation over the fourth Dalai Lama 's mysterious death and the plot of the Ü @-@ Tsang king to have him murdered for " cursing " him with illness , although Chen writes that the murder was most likely the result of a feudal power struggle . In 1618 , only two years after Yonten Gyatso died , the Gelug and the Karma Kargyu went to war , the Karma Kargyu supported by the secular Ü @-@ Tsang king . The Ü @-@ Tsang ruler had a large number of Gelugpa lamas killed , occupied their monasteries at Drepung and Sera , and outlawed any attempts to find another Dalai Lama . In 1621 , the Ü @-@ Tsang king died and was succeeded by his young son Karma <unk> , an event which stymied the war effort as the latter accepted the six @-@ year @-@ old Lozang Gyatso as the new Dalai Lama . Despite the new Dalai Lama 's diplomatic efforts to maintain friendly relations with the new Ü @-@ Tsang ruler , Sonam <unk> ( 1595 – 1657 ) , the Dalai Lama 's chief steward and treasurer at Drepung , made efforts to overthrow the Ü @-@ Tsang king , which led to another conflict . In 1633 , the Gelugpas and several thousand Mongol adherents defeated the Ü @-@ Tsang king 's troops near Lhasa before a peaceful negotiation was settled . Goldstein writes that in this the " Mongols were again playing a significant role in Tibetan affairs , this time as the military arm of the Dalai Lama . " 
 When an ally of the Ü @-@ Tsang ruler threatened destruction of the Gelugpas again , the fifth Dalai Lama Lozang Gyatso pleaded for help from the Mongol prince Güshi Khan ( 1582 – 1655 ) , leader of the <unk> ( <unk> ) tribe of the Oirat Mongols , who was then on a pilgrimage to Lhasa . Güshi Khan accepted his role as protector , and from 1637 – 1640 he not only defeated the Gelugpas ' enemies in the Amdo and Kham regions , but also resettled his entire tribe into Amdo . Sonam <unk> urged Güshi Khan to assault the Ü @-@ Tsang king 's <unk> of Shigatse , which Güshi Khan agreed upon , enlisting the aid of Gelug monks and supporters . In 1642 , after a year 's siege of Shigatse , the Ü @-@ Tsang forces surrendered . Güshi Khan then captured and summarily executed Karma <unk> , the ruler of Ü @-@ Tsang , King of Tibet . 
 Soon after the victory in Ü @-@ Tsang , Güshi Khan organized a welcoming ceremony for Lozang Gyatso once he arrived a day 's ride from Shigatse , presenting his conquest of Tibet as a gift to the Dalai Lama . In a second ceremony held within the main hall of the Shigatse fortress , Güshi Khan enthroned the Dalai Lama as the ruler of Tibet , but conferred the actual governing authority to the regent Sonam <unk> . Although Güshi Khan had granted the Dalai Lama " supreme authority " as Goldstein writes , the title of ' King of Tibet ' was conferred upon Güshi Khan , spending his summers in pastures north of Lhasa and occupying Lhasa each winter . Van Praag writes that at this point Güshi Khan maintained control over the armed forces , but accepted his inferior status towards the Dalai Lama . Rawski writes that the Dalai Lama shared power with his regent and Güshi Khan during his early secular and religious reign . However , Rawski states that he eventually " expanded his own authority by presenting himself as Avalokiteśvara through the performance of rituals , " by building the Potala Palace and other structures on traditional religious sites , and by emphasizing lineage reincarnation through written biographies . Goldstein states that the government of Güshi Khan and the Dalai Lama persecuted the Karma Kagyu sect , confiscated their wealth and property , and even converted their monasteries into Gelug monasteries . Rawski writes that this Mongol patronage allowed the Gelugpas to dominate the rival religious sects in Tibet . 
 Meanwhile , the Chinese Ming dynasty fell to the rebellion of Li Zicheng ( 1606 – 1645 ) in 1644 , yet his short @-@ lived Shun dynasty was crushed by the Manchu invasion and the Han Chinese general Wu Sangui ( 1612 – 1678 ) . China Daily states that when the following Qing dynasty replaced the Ming dynasty , it merely " strengthened administration of Tibet . " However , Kolmaš states that the Dalai Lama was very observant of what was going on in China and accepted a Manchu invitation in 1640 to send envoys to their capital at Mukden in 1642 , before the Ming collapsed . Dawa Norbu , William Rockhill , and George N. Patterson write that when the Shunzhi Emperor ( r . 1644 – 1661 ) of the subsequent Qing dynasty invited the fifth Dalai Lama Lozang Gyatso to Beijing in 1652 , Shunzhi treated the Dalai Lama as an independent sovereign of Tibet . Patterson writes that this was an effort of Shunzhi to secure an alliance with Tibet that would ultimately lead to the establishment of Manchu rule over Mongolia . In this meeting with the Qing emperor , Goldstein asserts that the Dalai Lama was not someone to be trifled with due to his alliance with Mongol tribes , some of which were declared enemies of the Qing . Van Praag states that Tibet and the Dalai Lama 's power was recognized by the " Manchu Emperor , the Mongolian Khans and Princes , and the rulers of Ladakh , Nepal , India , Bhutan , and Sikkim . " 
 When the Dzungar Mongols attempted to spread their territory from what is now Xinjiang into Tibet , the Kangxi Emperor ( r . 1661 – 1722 ) responded to Tibetan pleas for aid with his own expedition to Tibet , occupying Lhasa in 1720 . By 1751 , during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor ( r . 1735 – 1796 ) , a protectorate and permanent Qing dynasty garrison was established in Tibet . As of 1751 , Albert Kolb writes that " Chinese claims to suzerainty over Tibet date from this time . " 
 = = Administrative offices and officials ' titles of the Ming = = 
 = Klipspringer = 
 The klipspringer ( pronounced / <unk> ( r ) / ) ( Oreotragus oreotragus ) is a small antelope found in eastern and southern Africa . The sole member of its genus , the klipspringer was first described by German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1783 . The klipspringer is a small , sturdy antelope ; it reaches 43 – 60 centimetres ( 17 – 24 in ) at the shoulder and weighs from 8 to 18 kilograms ( 18 to 40 lb ) . The coat of the klipspringer , yellowish gray to reddish brown , acts as an efficient camouflage in its rocky habitat . Unlike most other antelopes , the klipspringer has a thick and coarse coat with hollow , brittle hairs . The horns , short and spiky , present only on males , typically measure 7 @.@ 5 – 9 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) 
 Typically nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) , the klipspringer rests during the middle of the day and late at night . A gregarious animal , the klipspringer is monogamous to a much greater extent than other antelopes ; individuals of opposite sexes exhibit long @-@ term to lifelong pair bonding . The mates tend to stay as close as within 5 metres ( 16 ft ) of each other at most times . Males form territories , 7 @.@ 5 – 49 hectares ( 19 – 121 acres ) , in which they stay with their partners and offspring . Primarily a browser , the klipspringer prefers young plants , fruits and flowers . Gestation lasts around six months , following which a single calf is born ; births peak from spring to early summer . The calf leaves its mother when it turns a year old . 
 The klipspringer inhabits places characterised by rocky terrain and sparse vegetation . Its range extends from northeastern Sudan , Eritrea , northern Somalia and Ethiopia in the east to South Africa in the south , and along coastal Angola and Namibia . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the klipspringer as Least Concern . There are no major threats to the survival of the klipspringer , as its habitat is inaccessible and unfavourable for hunting . Significant numbers occur on private farmlands . As of 2008 , nearly 25 % of the populations occur in protected areas throughout its range . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the klipspringer is Oreotragus oreotragus . It is the sole member of the genus Oreotragus and classified under the family Bovidae . The species was first described by German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1783 . The vernacular name " klipspringer " ( pronounced / <unk> ( r ) / ) is a compound of the Afrikaans words <unk> ( " rock " ) and springer ( " leaper " ) . Another name for this antelope is " <unk> " . 
 A 2012 phylogenetic study showed that the klipspringer is closely related to Kirk 's dik @-@ dik ( Madoqua kirkii ) and the suni ( Neotragus moschatus ) . The klipspringer evolved nearly 14 million years ago . The cladogram below is based on this study . 
 As many as 11 subspecies have been identified , though zoologists Colin Groves and Peter Grubb treat a few of them as independent species in a 2011 publication : 
 = = Description = = 
 The klipspringer is a small , sturdy antelope reaching 43 – 60 centimetres ( 17 – 24 in ) at the shoulder . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 75 and 115 centimetres ( 30 and 45 in ) . It weighs from 8 to 18 kilograms ( 18 to 40 lb ) . The klipspringer is sexually dimorphic ; females are slightly larger and heavier than the males . The tail measures 6 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 1 in ) . Prominent facial features include the brown forehead , short ears marked with black , prominent preorbital glands near the eyes , and white lips and chin . The horns , short and spiky , present only on males , typically measure 7 @.@ 5 – 9 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) ; the maximum recorded horn length is 15 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 The coat of the klipspringer , yellowish gray to reddish brown , acts as an efficient camouflage in its rocky habitat ; the underbelly is white . Unlike most other antelopes , the klipspringer has a thick and coarse coat with hollow , brittle hairs . The incisors might even get damaged by the hairs while grooming . However , the coat is a significant adaptation that saves the animal during steep falls and provides effective insulation in the extreme climates characteristic of its mountain habitat . A study showed that ticks occur in larger numbers on the underbelly , where the hair is less coarse . The hair often turns erect , especially if the animal is ill or if its temperature increases . Another feature unique to the klipspringer is its gait ; it walks on the tips of its cylindrical , blunt hooves . This enhances the grip on the ground , enabling the animal to deftly climb and jump over rocky surfaces . 
 The subspecies vary in coat colour – from golden yellow in the Cape klipspringer , Ethiopian klipspringer , golden klipspringer and Transvaal klipspringer to ochre or rufous in the Maasai klipspringer , Stevenson 's klipspringer and Zambian klipspringer . Cape klipspringer populations tend to have the largest males , while Maasai klipspringer exhibit the largest females . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Typically nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) , the klipspringer rests during the midday and at late night ; the animal tends to be more active on moonlit nights . It basks in the morning sunlight to warm itself . A gregarious animal , the klipspringer , like the dik @-@ <unk> and the oribi , exhibits monogamy to a much greater extent than other antelopes ; individuals of opposite sexes form pairs that might last until one dies . The mates tend to stay as close as within 5 metres ( 16 ft ) of each other at most times ; for instance , they take turns at keeping a lookout for predators while the other feeds , and face any danger together . The klipspringer will hop a few metres away from the danger . Other social groups include small family herds of 8 or more members or solitary individuals . Klipspringer greet one another by rubbing cheeks at social meetings . 
 Males form territories , 7 @.@ 5 – 49 hectares ( 19 – 121 acres ) large ( the size depends on rainfall patterns ) , in which they stay with their partners and offspring . Males are generally more vigilant than females . Klipspringer form large dung heaps , nearly 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) across and 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) deep , at the borders of territories ; another form of marking is the secretion of a thick , black substance , measuring 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) across , from the preorbital glands onto vegetation and rocks in the territories . A study revealed that the tick Ixodes <unk> detects and aggregates on twigs marked by the klipspringer . Another study showed that plants near the borders with neighbouring territories are particularly preferred for marking . The main vocalisation is a shrill whistle , given out be the klipspringer pair in a duet , as a means of communication or anti @-@ predator response . Predators include the baboon , black @-@ backed jackal , caracal , eagle , leopard , martial eagle , serval , spotted hyaena and Verreaux 's eagle . Birds such as familiar chats , pale @-@ winged starlings , red @-@ winged starlings and yellow @-@ bellied bulbuls have been observed feeding on ectoparasites of klipspringer . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Primarily a browser , the klipspringer prefers young plants , fruits and flowers . Grasses , eaten mainly in the wet season , form a minor portion of the diet . Some plants , such as <unk> , may be preferred seasonally . Klipspringer depend mainly on succulent plants , and not on water bodies , to meet their water requirement . They can stand on their hindlegs to reach tall branches up to 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) above the ground ; some individuals in Namibia were observed climbing <unk> albida trees up to a height of 5 @.@ 4 metres ( 18 ft ) . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The klipspringer is a seasonal breeder ; the time when mating occurs varies geographically . Females become sexually mature by the time they are a year old ; males take slightly longer to mature . Mating behaviour has not been extensively observed . Gestation lasts around six months , following which a single calf , weighing slightly more than 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , is born ; births peak from spring to early summer . Births take place in dense vegetation . The newborn is carefully hidden for up to three months to protect it from the view of predators ; the mother suckles it three to four times a day , the visits gradually lengthen as the offspring grows . Males are protective of their offspring , keeping a watch for other males and predators . The calf is weaned at four to five months , and leaves its mother when it turns a year old . The klipspringer lives for around 15 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The klipspringer inhabits places characterised by rocky terrain and sparse vegetation . It migrates to lowlands at times of food scarcity . The klipspringer occurs at altitudes as high as 4 @,@ 500 metres ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) on Mount Kilimanjaro . The klipspringer can occur at high population densities in favourable habitats extending over a large area ; 10 to 14 individuals occur per square kilometre in the Simien Mountains National Park , Ethiopia . However , the habitat is typically rocky over long stretches and grassy terrain is discontinuous ; consequently the population density is typically between 0 @.@ 01 and 0 @.@ 1 individual per square kilometre . 
 The antelope occurs in significant numbers across eastern and southern Africa ; its range extends from northeastern Sudan , Eritrea , northern Somalia and Ethiopia in the east to South Africa in the south , and along coastal Angola and Namibia . Smaller populations occur in the northern and western highlands of Central African Republic , southeastern Democratic Republic of Congo , Jos Plateau and east of <unk> Gumti National Park in Nigeria . It is feared to be extinct in Burundi . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the klipspringer as Least Concern . The klipspringer is hunted for its meat , leather and hair . However , there are no major threats to the survival of the klipspringer , as its habitat is inaccessible and unfavourable for hunting . Moreover , the antelope does not have to compete with livestock , that do not frequent montane areas . However , populations at lower altitudes are more vulnerable to elimination . 
 In 1999 , Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated the total population of klipspringer at 42 @,@ 000 . Significant numbers occur on private farmlands . As of 2008 , nearly 25 % of the populations occur in protected areas such as the Simien and Bale Mountains National Parks ( Ethiopia ) ; Tsavo East and West National Parks ( Kenya ) ; North and South Luangwa National Parks ( Zambia ) ; Nyika National Park ( Malawi ) ; Namib @-@ Naukluft National Park ( Namibia ) ; and Matobo National Park ( Zimbabwe ) . 
 = Woodstock Mural = 
 Woodstock Mural is a mural designed by artist Mike Lawrence , painted on the west side of the New Seasons Market store in the Woodstock neighborhood of Portland , Oregon , in the United States . The painting has three sections , each representing a theme : commerce , education , and the outdoors . It depicts figures adorned with symbolism related to characters in Greek mythology , including Hermes , Athena , and Demeter , along with local businesses and local landmarks such as the neighborhood farmers ' market , Grand Central Bakery , Portland Fish Market , Woodstock Park , and the Woodstock Library . 
 The Woodstock Neighborhood Association ( WNA ) originally made plans for a mural on the exterior wall of Lutz Tavern . Following an outreach effort to identify an artist , Lawrence and WNA met for a brainstorming session , during which they agreed on theme 's for the proposed public artwork . Even after some funding was secured , efforts stalled . The association later proposed a mural for the nearby Red Fox Vintage building . 
 The original mural was completed on the Red Fox Vintage building by Heidi Schultz in November 2013 . However , shortly after its completion , New Seasons announced the construction of a new grocery store next to the mural . The company offered to reproduce the painting on the east side of an adjacent building or the west side of the planned building . Dan Cohen and his assistant were hired to reproduce the mural , which was completed in October 2015 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Woodstock Mural was designed by artist Mike Lawrence as a work divided into three sections . According to the Regional Arts & Culture Council ( RACC ) , each section includes a central figure adorned with symbolism associated with Greek mythology , representing one of three themes : commerce , education , and the outdoors . The Portland Tribune described the mural as " rich in latent symbolism with more mysterious content " , referring to the mythological symbolism in particular . The original painting measured 54 feet ( 16 m ) x 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . In 2015 , the mural was reproduced on another wall following construction of an adjacent new building housing a New Seasons Market ; the new building hid the original mural . The " imposing " reproduction , as described by The Bee , a community newspaper , measures 52 feet ( 16 m ) x 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . 
 Commerce , represented on the left side , is depicted by a shopkeeper wearing a hat with the wings of Hermes , the Greek god of commerce ( or , according to some sources , Mercury , the Roman god of commerce ) . The business owner is bearded and wears a crocus flower in his apron . He has a tattoo of the caduceus , the staff carried by Hermes Trismegistus in Egyptian mythology and Hermes in Greek mythology . In his store is a shelf with other symbolic items that represent local businesses . 
 The center section is devoted to education and depicts Athena , the Greek goddess of wisdom , in the form of a girl in the Woodstock Library . She is adorned with an owl on her shoulder and an olive branch necklace . She holds a tiger lily in her hand . Woodstock School 's Mandarin Immersion Program is honored with an arc of Chinese characters above the girl 's head , written on a chalkboard . The Mandarin Chinese text translates to " A nice place to live " or " It 's a great place to live " , which is Woodstock 's motto . According to The Bee , the central section also represents other neighborhood schools and the neighborhood 's close proximity to Reed College . 
 The mural 's right section depicts Demeter , the Greek goddess of the harvest , in the form of an Asian female urban farmer at the neighborhood farmers ' market . She wears poppies in her headdress , giving the appearance of a crown , and has a tattoo of a sheaf of wheat . Next to her is a cornucopia , which symbolizes abundance and nourishment . She holds a lotus staff , described as a " flaming torch " . The figure also represents " the love of gardening " . Douglas fir trees and Woodstock Park , specifically its off @-@ leash dog area , are also depicted in the painting 's right section . 
 = = History = = 
 The Woodstock Neighborhood Association ( WNA ) originally made plans to paint a community mural on the east exterior of Lutz Tavern . Following an outreach effort to locate an artist , WNA and Lawrence held a brainstorming session . Kenny Heggem , who served as the project manager of the mural committee , recalled , " We talked about our fantastic park and its leash @-@ free dog area , Woodstock Elementary 's Mandarin Immersion Program , and our awesome library . " The session resulted in the group 's choosing the mural 's three themes . 
 In August 2012 , RACC confirmed funding of $ 6 @,@ 000 for the 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) x 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) painting . The mural 's design was divided into three parts to accommodate the exterior wall 's three sections . RACC published an image of Lawrence 's proposed mural and said the goal of the project was to " highlight the best of the neighborhood and instill a sense of community pride " . The agency also said the project was still raising funds and hoped to start in the spring of 2013 . Efforts stalled , but WNA later proposed a mural with a different design for the east side of the Red Fox Vintage building , located at the intersection of Southeast 46th Avenue and Southeast Woodstock Boulevard . 
 According to the Portland Tribune , the project was a collaboration between local businesses , institutions , and neighborhood residents . Beaver State Scaffolding and Sherwin @-@ Williams both contributed resources to the project . RACC awarded partial grant funding through its Public Art Murals Program , which is funded by the City of Portland and " provides funding for community murals that reflect diversity in style and media and encourages artists from diverse backgrounds and range of experience to apply " . WNA volunteers also assisted , led by Heggem and Becky <unk> , head of the neighborhood association . 
 Heidi Schultz of Schultz Art & Design served as the project 's production manager . She created a pattern against the wall using Lawrence 's digital design , then mixed the paint , completed the mural , and added a clear coating for protection . Painting the mural took about six weeks , and it was mostly finished by November 2013 . Red Fox Vintage hosted a party to celebrate the work 's completion on December 14 . The mural took nearly two years to plan and complete , which was longer than expected . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Not long after the mural 's completion , New Seasons Market announced plans to build a new store immediately adjacent to the mural . In January 2014 , the co @-@ owner of Red Fox Vintage , said , " We 're going to have a sit @-@ down with New Seasons about the mural . To the best of my knowledge , New Seasons will make it right . " She shared three options to discuss with the company : repainting the mural on Red Fox 's east wall , transferring it to the new store 's exterior wall , or keeping the original mural in place and making it visible from the grocery store 's interior . 
 New Seasons met with WNA and offered to reproduce the painting , either on the east side of the Red Fox Vintage building or the west side of the planned grocery store . <unk> said the latter option was more practical , because the artist could paint on panels in her studio instead of working outside . New Seasons hired Dan Cohen of Dan Cohen Creative Labs to duplicate the mural using a method similar to one he uses in his work as a " mega mural " painter . He said of the process : 
 I paint giant advertising murals all over the country . I do about one mural a month . We create the pattern using the original image , and paint on top of it . We use a special machine [ to create the underlying design ] that works like an arc welder . 
 During construction of the new building and the mural 's transfer , New Seasons displayed a banner which read , " The mural will return " . Cohen and his assistant , Christo Wunderlich , transferred the design using a machine , then painted the art by hand . The duo also added bread and a fish to the mural to represent the local businesses Grand Central Bakery and Portland Fish Market , respectively . The new store opened in October 2015 . 
 = Ojo de Agua Raid = 
 The Ojo de Agua Raid was the last important military engagement between Mexican Seditionistas and the United States Army . It took place at Ojo de Agua , Texas . As part of the Plan of San Diego , the rebels launched a raid across the Rio Grande into Texas on October 21 , 1915 aimed at harassing the American outposts along the Mexican border and disrupting the local economy . After moving across the border , the Seditionistas began an assault against the United States Army Signal Corps station at Ojo de Agua . The small group of American defenders was cornered into a single building and suffered heavy casualties before reinforcements arrived driving the <unk> force back into Mexico . The raid proved to be the tipping point in the American conflict with the Seditionistas , as its severity convinced American officials to send large numbers of American troops to the area in order to deter any further serious border raids by the Mexican force . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout 1915 Mexican insurgents raided the Texas border region as part of the Plan of San Diego . Supported by the Mexican Carranza government , a group of raiders known as the Seditionistas attacked American military and commercial interests along the United States – Mexican border in an effort to provoke a race war in the Southwestern United States with aims of returning the area to Mexican control . Charged with guarding the border , American General Frederick Funston had 20 @,@ 000 troops to pit against the few hundred Seditionista insurgents . Nonetheless , the Mexicans never raided in force and the long border was difficult for Funston to fully protect . The Seditionista raids became such a threat to the Americans in the Big Bend area that local vigilante groups were formed in order to repel the Mexican raiders as Funston did not have enough troops to ensure the safety of the American citizens living in the area . 
 In order to protect the Big Bend region , the United States deployed a number of cavalry and signalmen in various posts along the Texas border . One of these posts was at the village of Ojo de Agua which had been raided on September 3 , 1915 and was the planned target of a Seditionista raid in October 1916 . The American base at Ojo de Agua under the command of Sergeant Ernest Schaeffer consisted of a radio station manned by approximately ten men from Troop G , 3rd Cavalry , and eight men of the United States Army Signal Corps . The post at Ojo de Agua was lightly defended and seemed to be little match for the 25 to 100 raiders that planned to raid the village . 
 = = Raid = = 
 After crossing the Rio Grande and arriving at Ojo de Agua at approximately 1 am , the Mexican raiders attacked the village 's garrison . The American soldiers who had been sleeping in a wooden building stubbornly resisted . The Americans were heavily outgunned , though , as the Signal Corps personnel were armed only with pistols . In the fighting Sergeant Schaeffer was killed , and as a result command devolved to Sergeant First Class Herbert Reeves Smith who by that time had also been wounded three times . In addition to attacking the garrison , the raiders robbed the post office and attacked the home of the Dillard family , setting their house on fire and stealing their livestock . 
 Although the Americans at Ojo de Agua were unable to call for reinforcements due to the fact that their wireless station had been knocked out of action earlier in the attack , other American detachments in the vicinity heard gunfire and two groups of American cavalry set out to investigate . A company from the 3rd Cavalry under Captain Frank Ross McCoy at Mission , Texas some 8 miles ( 13 km ) from Ojo de Agua was dispatched , as was a small group of twelve recruits under Captain W. J. Scott . As Scott 's outfit was only 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the fighting , they arrived at the scene well before McCoy did and immediately attacked from the west of the raiders ' positions driving them off from their assault on the mission . McCoy 's force arrived just as the Mexicans withdrew and saw little or no fighting . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of the raid one civilian and three American soldiers had been killed and eight wounded including the Ojo de Agua post 's commanding officer , Sergeant Schaffer , who was included among the former . The Seditionistas also took several casualties , with five men dead and at least nine others wounded , of whom two later died . A Japanese man was found among the dead , as were two <unk> soldiers , a fact which was seen as evidence that the <unk> had been supporting the Plan of San Diego . The American soldiers were commended for their bravery during the raid , and Sergeant First Class Herbert Reeves Smith was awarded a Distinguished Service Cross for his actions during the engagement . 
 The Seditionista raid on Ojo de Agua had a vast impact on American military strategy in the area . The severity of the raid led the commanding American general in the region , General Frederick Funston , to reinforce the Texas – Mexico border region with troops and to contact Washington with demands that he be allowed to give no quarter to any Mexican raiders who attacked the United States in the future . Although Washington denied General Funston his request , the raids did come to an end when Washington finally gave diplomatic recognition to the Mexican government under Carranza . Wishing to maintain good relations with the American government , Carranza ordered the Seditionista commanders to cease their raiding activities . Without support from the Mexican federal government the Plan of San Diego movement fell apart and there were no further Mexican invasions of the United States until the Villistas raids began in 1916 . 
 = Showdown ( Cheers ) = 
 " Showdown " is the two @-@ part first @-@ season finale of the American television sitcom Cheers , written by Glen and Les Charles and directed by James Burrows . It originally aired on NBC ( as separate Parts One and Two , respectively ) on March 24 and 31 , 1983 . In the Cheers pilot , college @-@ educated Diane Chambers was neglected by her previous lover and then hired as a waitress by bartender Sam Malone . Since then , they flirted and resisted each other throughout the season . In this two @-@ part episode Sam 's more @-@ successful brother Derek becomes Diane 's love interest , leaving Diane torn between Derek and Sam . In the end , Sam and Diane passionately embrace in the office . 
 The original airings initially scored low Nielsen ratings , but subsequent airings have enjoyed improved ratings . Its reruns aired three days before the show won five Emmy Awards out of thirteen nominations ( including Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for this episode ) in the 1983 Primetime Emmy Awards , and one week before the second @-@ season premiere . Critical highlights of this episode are an unseen appearance by Derek Malone and Sam and Diane 's cliffhanger kiss . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Bartender Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) has been jealous of Derek ( who is more successful , better @-@ educated , multi @-@ talented and handsome ) for years , and discovers that he is arriving in Boston on his private jet . Meanwhile , co @-@ bartender Coach ( Nicholas Colasanto ) is offered a coaching job in Venezuela requiring fluency in Spanish . Derek ( an unseen character voiced by George Ball ) arrives unexpectedly at the bar and entertains the patrons with his talents , which include singing , playing a pool table , tap dancing and telling stories . Derek offers a job to regular patron Norm ( George Wendt ) , teaches Coach Spanish ( increasing his chances of being hired ) and impresses waitress Diane ( Shelley Long ) with their common interests . Diane and Derek pair off ( which bothers Sam ) . During his date with Debbie ( Deborah Shelton ) , Sam hears Derek 's private jet , where he carries Diane along . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 A week later , Norm is fired from his own job ( where the corporation has committed tax fraud ) for " [ taking ] a long lunch " . ( Norm dubs himself the only " honest man " in the corporation , which he considers the reason for his termination . ) Coach hears on the phone that he did not get the coaching job ( which was already given to someone else ) , putting his efforts to learn Spanish to waste . Sam forgets another fiancée Cindy 's ( Peggy <unk> ) name . Diane arrives at the bar after her trip with Derek , confessing to Coach that she is torn between her ideal mate Derek ( who is committed to her ) and her " bubblegum " Sam . Coach insists that Sam cannot express his feelings for her well . When Diane tells Sam she and Derek will be leaving immediately on another trip , Sam fires her . 
 After saying goodbye to everyone in the bar , Diane returns to the office and accidentally hits Sam 's nose when she opens the door . Because of that , she is convinced that Sam was coming out of the office to say something to her . They argue , admit their feelings for each other , and come into the terms that their relationship with Derek is nothing compared to their potential relationship together . Sam and Diane embrace , but then Diane rejects his advances , i.e. attempts to kiss her . They insult each other and , at the end , kiss passionately . 
 = = Production = = 
 The two @-@ part season finale was written by Glen and Les Charles and directed by James Burrows . Before it aired , the NBC network announced that it renewed Cheers for a second season on March 13 , 1983 . The show was filmed at the Stage 25 lot of Paramount Studios in Los Angeles , rather than at a local pub . Paul Vaughn and Alan Koss are credited for their background appearances in both parts . Lois de <unk> and Helen Page Camp portray Carla 's customers , who annoy her by randomly changing their orders until they choose " two boilermakers : Wild Turkey [ whiskey ] and Bud [ beer ] " . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 Part One of the episode originally aired on NBC at 9 : 30 pm on March 24 , 1983 , opposite CBS 's Simon & Simon and ABC 's It Takes Two . It was rated 51st out of 67 nationally broadcast programs , with a 13 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating . In Alaska , it aired on April 7 at 8 : 30 pm AKT . It reran September 15 , 1983 in the same time slot ( opposite CBS 's rerun of Simon & Simon and an ABC football game ) , and was rated 28th of 66 nationally broadcast programs with a 15 @.@ 9 rating and a 25 share . 
 Part Two originally aired on March 31 , 1983 at 9 : 30 pm , opposite CBS 's Simon & Simon and ABC 's It Takes Two ; it was rated 36th of 69 programs , with a 14 @.@ 7 rating . In Alaska , it aired on April 14 at 8 : 30 pm AKT . It reran in the same time slot September 22 , 1983 opposite CBS 's rerun of Simon & Simon and the two @-@ hour premiere of ABC 's Trauma Center , a week before the second @-@ season premiere ( " Power Play " ) and three days before the Primetime Emmy Awards . The episode was rated 23rd of 57 programs , with a 15 @.@ 7 rating and a 24 share . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In April 1983 , a reviewer from United Press International found the office scene between Sam and Diane " hilarious " . In September 1983 , television critic Rick Sherwood found the " sibling rivalry " plot " nothing new " , but praised it as " fresh " and sophisticated . Part One of this episode earned graphic designers James Castle and <unk> Bryant an award for Outstanding Individual Achievement of Graphic Design and Title Sequences at the 1983 Primetime Emmy Awards . At the same ceremony , Part Two of the episode earned James Burrows an Emmy for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series . Burrows and his crew also won a Directors Guild of America Award for a comedy series in 1984 . 
 Cory Barker , on the TV Surveillance website , found the finale 's romantic storyline and its subplots " gimmicky " , <unk> and poorly executed . Freelance writer Robert David Sullivan , in his blog , ranked Part Two of this episode No. 96 of his top 100 all @-@ time favorite episodes . Sullivan highlighted the cliffhanger kiss as a " landmark " in the increasing sitcom use of cliffhangers , but dismissed the sibling storyline as a cheap ploy to bring Sam and Diane together . Lisa M. <unk> , in her book The Female Investigator in Literature , Film , and Popular Culture , also considered unseen character Derek Malone a writer 's tool to bring the couple together . David Hofstede , in his directory 5000 Episodes and No Commercials , called Sam and Diane 's first kiss at the end as one of Cheers ' greatest moments . Reviews of the season finale on The A.V. Club website were positive . Noel Murray praised the episode 's four @-@ act structure ( two in each part ) and its subplots . Ryan McGee cited the concealed appearance of Derek Malone , Sam and Diane 's first kiss and their volatile confrontation . TV Guide and Amy Amatangelo of MSN Entertainment called Sam and Diane 's first kiss one of their own top @-@ ten kisses . Alan Howell of WhatCulture ! ranked Sam and Diane 's first kiss third on his list of " [ Five ] Greatest Sitcom Kisses Of All Time " . 
 In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " Showdown " # 29 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said that , in an episode from the third season of How I Met Your Mother , " Everything Must Go " , the taxicab ride scene of regular character Barney Stinson ( Neil Patrick Harris ) and recurring character Abby ( Britney Spears ) features a homage to Sam and Diane 's office scene from this episode , which includes lines , like " Are you as turned @-@ on right now as I am ? " and " More ! " 
 = Borat = 
 Borat : Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan ( or simply Borat ) is a 2006 British @-@ American mockumentary comedy film . The film was written and produced by British comedian Sacha Baron Cohen who also plays the title character , Borat Sagdiyev , a fictitious Kazakh journalist travelling through the United States recording real @-@ life interactions with Americans . The film was directed by Larry Charles and distributed by 20th Century Fox . Much of the film features unscripted vignettes of Borat interviewing and interacting with Americans , who believe he is a foreigner with little or no understanding of American customs . It is the second of three films built around Baron Cohen 's characters from Da Ali G Show ( 2000 – 04 ) : the first , Ali G <unk> , was released in 2002 , and featured a cameo by Borat , and the third , Brüno , was released in 2009 . The film is produced by Baron Cohen 's production company , Four By Two Productions ( " Four By Two " is Cockney rhyming slang for " Jew " ) . 
 Baron Cohen won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy , as Borat , while the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy in the same category . Borat was also nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay at the 79th Academy Awards . 
 Controversy surrounded the film from two years prior to its release , and after the film 's release , some cast members spoke against , and even sued , its creators . It was banned in all Arab countries except Lebanon , and the Russian government discouraged Russian cinemas from showing it . It was released on DVD 5 March 2007 ( a day later in Region 1 countries ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the behest of the Kazakh Ministry of Information , reporter Borat Sagdiyev leaves Kazakhstan for the " Greatest Country in the World " , the " U , S and A " to make a documentary . He leaves behind his wife <unk> and other inhabitants of his village – including his " 43 @-@ year @-@ old " mother , " No. 4 prostitute in all of Kazakhstan " sister , " the town rapist " , and " the town mechanic and abortionist . " His companions are his producer Azamat <unk> and a pet hen . 
 In New York , Borat sees an episode of Baywatch on TV and immediately falls in love with Pamela Anderson 's character , C. J. Parker . While interviewing and mocking a panel of feminists , he learns of the actress ' name and her residence in California . Borat is then informed by telegram that <unk> has been killed by a bear . Delighted , he secretly resolves to travel to California and make Anderson his new wife . He makes excuses to convince Azamat to travel to California with him . Azamat is afraid of flying because of the September 11 , 2001 attacks , which he believes were the work of Jews . Borat , therefore , takes driving lessons and buys a dilapidated Gaz truck for the journey . 
 During the trip , Borat acquires a Baywatch booklet at a yard sale and continues gathering footage for his documentary . He meets gay pride parade participants , politicians Alan Keyes and Bob Barr and African American youths . Borat is also interviewed on live television and disrupts the weather report . Visiting a rodeo , Borat excites the crowd with jingoistic American remarks , but then sings a fictional Kazakhstani national anthem to the tune of " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " , receiving a strong negative reaction . Staying at a bed @-@ and @-@ breakfast , Borat and Azamat are stunned to learn their hosts are Jewish . Fearful at the hands of their hosts , the two escape after throwing money at two woodlice , believing they are their Jewish hosts transformed . Borat attempts to buy a handgun to defend himself , but is turned away because he is not an American citizen . Borat purchases a bear for protection . 
 Borat seeks advice from an etiquette coach who suggests Borat attend a private dinner at an eating club in the South . During the dinner , he ( unintentionally ) insults or otherwise offends the other guests . When he lets Luenell , an African @-@ American prostitute , into the house and shows her to the table , they both get kicked out . Borat befriends Luenell , and she invites him into a relationship with her , but he tells her that he is in love with someone else . Borat then visits an antique shop with a display of Confederate heritage items , and clumsily breaks various items . 
 At a hotel , Borat , just out of the bath , sees Azamat masturbating over a picture of Pamela Anderson in the Baywatch booklet . An angry Borat accidentally reveals his real motive for traveling to California . Azamat becomes livid at Borat 's deception , and the situation escalates into a fully nude brawl with homoerotic undertones , which spills out into the hallway , a crowded elevator , and ultimately into a packed convention ballroom . The two are finally separated by security guards . 
 As a result , Azamat abandons Borat , taking his passport , all of their money , and their bear ( whose head is later seen inside Azamat 's motel refrigerator ) . Borat 's truck runs out of gas , and he begins to hitchhike to California . He is soon picked up by drunken fraternity brothers from the University of South Carolina . On learning the reason for his trip , they show him the Pam and Tommy sex tape , revealing that she is not the virgin he thought she was . After leaving the three students , Borat becomes despondent , burning the Baywatch booklet and , by mistake , his return ticket to Kazakhstan . He is also about to slaughter his pet hen , but then changes his mind and lets it go . 
 Borat attends a United Pentecostal camp meeting , at which Republican U.S. Representative Chip Pickering and Mississippi Supreme Court Chief Justice James W. Smith , Jr. are present . He regains his faith , and forgives Azamat and Pamela . He accompanies church members on a bus to Los Angeles and disembarks to find Azamat dressed as Oliver Hardy ( though Borat thinks that he is dressed as Adolf Hitler ) . The two reconcile and Azamat tells Borat where to find Pamela Anderson . Borat finally comes face @-@ to @-@ face with Anderson at a book signing at a Virgin Megastore . After showing Anderson his " traditional marriage sack " , Borat pursues her throughout the store in an attempt to abduct her until he is tackled and handcuffed by security guards . Borat visits Luenell and they return to Kazakhstan together . 
 The final scene ( set 8 months later ) shows the changes that Borat 's observations from America have brought to his village , including the apparent conversion of the people to Christianity ( the Kazakh version of which includes crucifixion and torturing of Jews ) and the introduction of computer @-@ based technology , such as iPods , laptop computers and a high @-@ definition , LCD television . 
 The film plays out with a recapitulation of a mock Kazakhstan national anthem glorifying the country 's potassium resources and its prostitutes as being the second cleanest in the region . The visual melange of Soviet @-@ era photos are mixed with the real flag of Kazakhstan and , incongruously , the final frames show the portrait of Ilham Aliyev , real @-@ life president of Azerbaijan , a country that had not been otherwise mentioned in the film . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sacha Baron Cohen as Borat Sagdiyev , a fictional Kazakh journalist , distinguished by exaggeratedly strong antisemitism , sexism , and <unk> , which is depicted as apparently the norm in his homeland . Borat was originally created as a character for Da Ali G Show and appeared in every episode of the show , along with a cameo in the film spin @-@ off . 
 Ken <unk> as Azamat <unk> , the producer of Borat 's documentary . Azamat was a new character created for the film . 
 Luenell as Luenell the prostitute ; first seen when Borat calls her to come to the Southern dinner , the climax of his effective destruction of the event . 
 Pamela Anderson as herself ; she plays a central role in the film as the reason for the journalist 's cross country journey . She also appears in person at the end of the film , in a botched abduction attempt by Borat for cultural " marriage " . 
 When Borat seeks advice from an etiquette coach , he goes on to show nude photos of his allegedly teenaged son . These photos actually show gay porn star <unk> , who was chosen because producers were seeking " someone who would look 13 or 14 but was actually of legal age and would do frontal nudity " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Except for Borat , Azamat , Luenell , and Pamela Anderson , none of the characters are portrayed by actors . Most scenes in the film were unscripted , although the end credits do credit a " Naked Fight Coordinator " . In most cases , the film 's participants were given no warning on what they would be taking part in except for being asked to sign release forms agreeing not to take legal action against the film 's producers . 
 Principal photography was already under way in January 2005 , when Baron Cohen caused a near riot in what would ultimately be the rodeo scene in the final cut of the film . An interview with Baron Cohen by Rolling Stone indicated that more than 400 hours of footage had been shot for the film . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The " Kazakhstan " depicted in the film has little or no relationship with the actual country , and the producers explicitly deny attempting to " convey the actual beliefs , practices or behaviour of anyone associated with Kazakhstan " in the " all persons fictitious " disclaimer . The scenes showing Borat 's home village were filmed in the village of <unk> , Romania . The name of Borat 's neighbour , Nursultan <unk> , is a cross between the names of Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev and opposition politician <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 No Kazakh language is heard in the film . Borat 's neighbours in Kazakhstan were portrayed by Romani people , who were unaware of the film 's subject . The Cyrillic alphabet used in the film is the Russian form , not the Kazakh one , although most of the words written in it ( especially the geographical names ) are either misspelled or make no sense at all . The lettering on the aircraft in the beginning of the film is merely the result of Roman characters on a reversed image , while promotional materials spell " <unk> " with a Cyrillic letter for D substituted for the " A " in Faux Cyrillic style typically used to give a " Russian " appearance . Sacha Baron Cohen speaks Hebrew in the film , while Ken <unk> speaks Armenian . They also use several common phrases from Slavic languages : Borat 's trademark expressions " <unk> " ( jak się <unk> ) and " <unk> " ( <unk> ) echo the Polish ( or other related languages ) for " How are you ? " and " thank you " , respectively . While presenting his house , Borat says " <unk> " to his house @-@ cow ; " <unk> / <unk> " is Russian ( similar words exist in other Slavic languages ) for " quiet ( er ) " or " be quiet " . 
 = = = Deleted scenes = = = 
 The DVD included several deleted scenes from the film , including Borat being questioned by police at a traffic stop , visiting an animal shelter to get a bear to protect him from Jews , getting a massage at a hotel , and visiting an American doctor . There is also a montage of scenes cut from the film , including Borat taking a job at Krystal and taking part in an American Civil War reenactment . The deleted scenes menu also includes an intentionally tedious supermarket sequence with an unusually patient supermarket owner ( Borat repeatedly asks about each product in the cheese section of the store and the owner responds the same way : " That 's cheese " ) , an actual local TV news report about Borat 's rodeo singing , and a final " happy ending " scene about Borat appearing in a Kazakh show entitled " <unk> " , a Baywatch clone that also starred Azamat , Luenell , and Alexandra Paul . A scene in which Borat " started pretending he was being arrested " was also filmed , but was removed under the threat of legal action by prison officials when they learned that the " documentary " was a satire . In an interview , one of the film 's writers , Dan Mazer , confirmed that there was a scene filmed but cut in which Borat observed the shooting of actual pornography with actress Brooke Banner . Mazer stated that the scene was deleted so as not to compete with the naked hotel fight , but hinted it might be included in future DVD releases . In a 2016 interview on Conan , Cohen elaborated on the deleted scene in which he was featured in the pornographic film . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Previews = = = 
 Borat was previewed at the 2006 Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California , on 21 July 2006 . Its first screening to a paying audience was during the 2006 Traverse City Film Festival , where it won the Excellence in Filmmaking Award . 
 The film 's official debut was in Toronto on 7 September 2006 , at the Ryerson University Theatre during the Toronto International Film Festival . Baron Cohen arrived in character as Borat in a cart pulled by women dressed as peasants . Twenty minutes into the showing , however , the projector broke . Baron Cohen performed an impromptu act to keep the audience amused , but ultimately all attempts to fix the equipment failed . The film was successfully screened the following night , with Dustin Hoffman in attendance . 
 In Israel , a proposed poster depicting Borat in a sling bikini was rejected by the film 's advertising firm in favour of one showing him in his usual suit . The film helped popularize the term " <unk> " . 
 = = = Scaled @-@ back U.S. release = = = 
 The film opened at No. 1 in the box office , maintaining first place for two weeks straight . The film earned more in the second week ( $ 28 @,@ 269 @,@ 900 ) than in the first ( $ 26 @,@ 455 @,@ 463 ) , due to an expansion onto 2 @,@ 566 screens . 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 Borat had its public release on 1 November 2006 in Belgium . By 3 November 2006 , it had opened in the United States and Canada , as well as in 14 European countries . Upon its release , it was a massive hit , taking in US $ 26 @.@ 4 million in its opening weekend , the highest ever in the United States and Canada for a film released in fewer than 1 @,@ 000 cinemas until Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert in 2008 . However , its opening day ( approximately $ 9 @.@ 2 million ) was larger than that of the Hannah Montana concert ( approximately $ 8 @.@ 6 million ) , leaving Borat with the record of the highest opening day gross for a film released in fewer than 1 @,@ 000 cinemas . On its second weekend , Borat surpassed its opening with a total of US $ 29 million . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a rating of 92 % , based on 213 reviews , with an average rating of 8 / 10 . The site 's critics consensus reads , " Part satire , part <unk> , Borat gets high @-@ fives almost all @-@ around for being offensive in the funniest possible way . <unk> ! " . On Metacritic , the film has a score of 89 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 In an article about the changing face of comedy , The Atlantic Monthly said that it " may be the funniest film in a decade " . Michael Medved gave it 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , calling it " ... simultaneously hilarious and cringe @-@ inducing , full of ingenious bits that you 'll want to describe to your friends and then laugh all over again when you do . " 
 The Guardian included the film in its list of ten ' Best films of the noughties ' ( 2000 – 09 ) . 
 One negative review came from American critic Joe <unk> , who went as far as to call Baron Cohen an " odious twit " . In an article for Slate , writer Christopher Hitchens offered a counter @-@ argument to suggestions of anti @-@ Americanism in the film . Hitchens suggested instead that the film demonstrated amazing tolerance by the film 's unknowing subjects , especially citing the reactions of the guests in the Southern dinner scene to Borat 's behaviour . 
 By posting scenes from the film on YouTube , Borat was also exposed to viral communication . This triggered discussions on different national identities ( Kazakh , American , Polish , Romanian , Jewish , British ) that Baron Cohen had exploited in creating the Borat character . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 American audiences embraced the film , which played to sold @-@ out crowds at many showings on its opening , despite having been shown on only 837 screens . Borat debuted at No. 1 on its opening weekend , with a total gross of $ 26 @.@ 4 million , beating its competitors Flushed Away and The Santa Clause 3 : The Escape Clause . The film 's opening weekend 's cinema average was an estimated $ 31 @,@ 511 , topping Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest , yet behind Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and Spider @-@ Man . It retained the top spot in its second weekend after expanding to 2 @,@ 566 theatres , extending the box office total to $ 67 @.@ 8 million . 
 In the United Kingdom , Borat opened at No. 1 , with an opening weekend gross of £ 6 @,@ 242 @,@ 344 ( $ 11 @,@ 935 @,@ 986 ) , the 43rd best opening week earnings in the UK as of March 2007 . Since its release , Borat has grossed over $ 260 million worldwide . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Borat received a nomination at the 79th Academy Awards for Best Adapted Screenplay , although the award ultimately went to The Departed . It was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award under the category of Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy , but lost to Dreamgirls . The Broadcast Film Critics Association named it the Best Comedy Movie of 2006 , and was nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay . 
 Baron Cohen won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy . He received equivalent awards from the San Francisco Film Critics Circle , the Utah Film Critics Association , the Toronto Film Critics Association , and the Online Film Critics Society . The Los Angeles Film Critics Association tied Baron Cohen with Forest Whitaker in The Last King of Scotland for their title of Best Actor . Baron Cohen was also nominated for Best Actor by the London Film Critics ’ Circle . 
 Borat has been featured in multiple top 10 lists of films in 2006 , including lists by the American Film Institute , Time Magazine , Rolling Stone , David Ansen for Newsweek , and Lou Lumenick for the New York Post . 
 = = = Retirement of Borat character = = = 
 A third film by Baron Cohen was released in 2009 , and was based on another of his characters : Brüno , a gay Austrian fashion reporter . Universal Studios is reported to have produced the film with a budget of $ 42 million . 
 Rupert Murdoch announced in early February 2007 that Baron Cohen had signed on to do another Borat film with Fox . However , this was contradicted by an interview with Baron Cohen himself in which Baron Cohen stated that Borat was to be discontinued , as he was now too well known to avoid detection as he did in the film and on Da Ali G Show . A spokesman for Fox later stated that it was too early to begin planning such a film , although they were open to the idea . 
 Baron Cohen subsequently announced that he was " killing off " the characters of Borat and Ali G because they were now so famous he could no longer trick people . Even though he decided to retire his trademark characters , on 26 February 2014 , he brought them back for the FXX series Ali G : <unk> , a collection of the sketches from all 18 episodes of Da Ali G Show , including new footage of Baron Cohen in @-@ character as Ali G , who is portrayed as the presenter of the show . 
 Baron Cohen revived the character of Borat in December 2015 on the late night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live to premiere the new trailer for Baron Cohen 's movie Grimsby . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Participants ' responses = = = 
