 After the film 's release , Dharma Arthur , a news producer for <unk> in Jackson , Mississippi , wrote a letter to Newsweek saying that Borat 's appearance on the station had led to her losing her job : " Because of him , my boss lost faith in my abilities and second @-@ guessed everything I did thereafter … How upsetting that a man who leaves so much harm in his path is lauded as a comedic genius . " Although Arthur has said she was fired from the show , she told the Associated Press that she left the station . She said that she checked a public relations website that Borat 's producers gave her before booking him . 
 In news coverage that aired in January 2005 of the filming of the rodeo scene , Bobby Rowe , producer of the Salem , Virginia , rodeo depicted in the film , provided background on how he had become the victim of a hoax . He said that " months " prior to the appearance , he had been approached by someone from " One America , a California @-@ based film company that was reportedly doing a documentary on a Russian immigrant " ; he agreed to permit the " immigrant " to sing the U.S. national anthem after listening to a tape . After the film 's release , Rowe said " Some people come up and say , ' Hey , you made the big time ' ; I 've made the big time , but not in the way I want it . " Cindy Streit , Borat 's etiquette consultant , subsequently hired high @-@ profile attorney Gloria Allred , who demanded that the California Attorney General investigate fraud allegedly committed by Baron Cohen and the film 's producers . 
 The Salon Arts & Entertainment site quotes the <unk> ( a Jewish couple whose guest house Borat and Azamat stay at ) as calling the film " outstanding " , referring to Baron Cohen as " very lovely and very polite " and a " genius " . The Boston Globe also interviewed the couple , saying they considered the film more anti @-@ Muslim than anti @-@ Semitic and had feared that Baron Cohen and his ensemble might be filming pornography in the house . 
 The feminists from Veteran Feminists of America ( VFA ) felt that they had been duped , having " sensed something odd was going on " before and during the interview with Borat . The Guardian later reported at least one of the women felt that the film was worth going to see at the cinema . 
 The New York Post had reported in November 2006 that Pamela Anderson filed for divorce from her husband Kid Rock after he reacted unfavourably to the film during a screening . The Post 's article specifically claimed he had said of her role in the film , " You 're nothing but a whore ! You 're a slut ! How could you do that movie ? " In an interview on The Howard Stern Show , Anderson confirmed that Rock was upset by her appearance in the film , but did not confirm that this was the cause of the separation . 
 = = = Legal action by participants = = = 
 The villagers of <unk> , Romania , took legal action against the producers of Borat , complaining that they were lied to about the nature of the filming and they were portrayed as incestuous and ignorant . Some said they were paid only three lei ( about US $ 1 @.@ 28 in 2004 ) each , while others stated they were paid between $ 70 and $ 100 each , which did not cover their expenses . They are asking for $ 38 million in damages . One lawsuit was thrown out by U.S. District Judge Loretta <unk> in a hearing in early December 2006 on the ground that the allegations in the complaint were too vague . The litigants said they planned to refile . 
 Two of the University of South Carolina fraternity brothers who appeared in the film , Justin Seay and Christopher Rotunda , sued the producers , claiming defamation . The suit by Seay and Rotunda was dismissed in February 2007 . The students had also sought an injunction to prevent the DVD release of the film , which was denied . 
 Another lawsuit was filed by a South Carolina resident who said he was accosted by Baron Cohen ( as Borat ) in the bathroom at a restaurant in downtown Columbia , with the actor allegedly making comments regarding the individual 's genitals , without signing any legal waiver . The lawsuit also sought to have the footage excluded from any DVD releases and removed from Internet video sites . 
 The Macedonian Romani singer <unk> <unk> sued the film 's producers , seeking € 800 @,@ 000 because the film used her song " <unk> <unk> " without her permission . Afterwards , <unk> won a € 26 @,@ 000 compensation , since it turned out that Baron Cohen had gotten permission from her production house to use the song , which she had not been notified about . 
 A lawsuit was launched by Felix Cedeno , who wanted $ 2 @.@ 25 million from 20th Century Fox , saying they invaded his privacy and needed permission to use his image . The 31 @-@ year @-@ old was riding the subway home to the South Bronx when Baron Cohen let a live hen out of his suitcase , causing chaos in the subway car . 
 Baltimore resident Michael Psenicska sought more than $ 100 @,@ 000 in damages from Baron Cohen , 20th Century Fox , and other parties . Psenicska — a high school mathematics teacher who also owns a driving school — was reportedly paid $ 500 in cash to give Baron Cohen 's bogus Kazakh journalist a driving lesson . In his action — filed in the U.S. District Court in Manhattan — the driving instructor said that he had been told the film was a " documentary about the integration of foreign people into the American way of life " , and that if he had known the film 's true nature , he would have never participated . Psenicska said he was entitled to damages because the defendants used images of him to advertise the film . The case was dismissed on 9 September 2008 . 
 Jeffrey <unk> , who was shown running and yelling , " Get away " as Borat attempted to hug strangers on a New York street , filed a legal case claiming his image was used in the film illegally , and that he suffered " public ridicule , degradation and humiliation " as a result . The case was dismissed . 
 Baron Cohen reacted to these suits by noting , " Some of the letters I get are quite unusual , like the one where the lawyer informed me I 'm about to be sued for $ 100 @,@ 000 and at the end says , ' P.S. Loved the movie . Can you sign a poster for my son Jeremy ? ' " 
 = = = Reception in Kazakhstan = = = 
 The government of Kazakhstan at first denounced Borat . In 2005 , following Borat 's appearance at the MTV Movie Awards , the country 's Foreign Ministry threatened to sue Sacha Baron Cohen , and Borat 's " Kazakh @-@ based " website , <unk> , was taken down . Kazakhstan also launched a multi @-@ million dollar " Heart of Eurasia " campaign to counter the Borat effect ; Baron Cohen replied by denouncing the campaign at an in @-@ character press conference in front of the White House as the propaganda of the " evil <unk> " of Uzbekistan . Uzbekistan is , throughout the film , referred to by Borat as his nation 's second leading problem , with the first being the Jews . 
 In 2006 , Gemini Films , the Central Asian distributor of 20th Century Fox , complied with a Kazakh government request to not release the film . That year , Kazakh ambassador <unk> <unk> , after viewing the film , called parts of the film funny and wrote that the film had " placed Kazakhstan on the map " . By 2012 , Kazakh Foreign Minister <unk> <unk> attributed a great rise in tourism to his country — with visas issued rising ten times — to the film , saying " I am grateful to ' Borat ' for helping attract tourists to Kazakhstan . " 
 The Kazakh tabloid Karavan declared Borat to be the best film of the year , having had a reviewer see the film at a screening in Vienna . The paper said that it was " ... certainly not an anti @-@ Kazakh , anti @-@ Romanian or anti @-@ Semitic " film , but rather " cruelly anti @-@ American ... amazingly funny and sad at the same time . " Another favorable word came from Kazakh novelist <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , who suggested Baron Cohen be nominated for the annual award bestowed by the Kazakh Club of Art Patrons . In a letter published by the newspaper Vremya , <unk> @-@ <unk> wrote , " ( Borat ) has managed to spark an immense interest of the whole world in Kazakhstan — something our authorities could not do during the years of independence . If state officials completely lack a sense of humor , their country becomes a laughing stock . " Amazon UK has also reported significant numbers of orders of Borat on DVD from Kazakhstan . 
 In March 2012 , the parody national anthem from the film , which acclaims Kazakhstan for its high @-@ quality potassium exports and having the second cleanest prostitutes in the region , was mistakenly played at the Amir of Kuwait International Shooting Grand Prix . The gold medalist , Maria <unk> , stood on the dais while the entire parody was played . The team complained , and the award ceremony was restaged . The incident apparently resulted from the wrong song being downloaded from the Internet . 
 = = = Accusations of ethnic defamation = = = 
 The European Center for <unk> Research , which works against negative attitudes toward Romani people , filed a complaint with German prosecutors on 18 October 2006 , based on Borat 's references to Gypsies in his film . The complaint accuses him of defamation and inciting violence against an ethnic group . As a consequence , 20th Century Fox declared that it would remove all parts referring to Romani people from trailers shown on German television as well as on the film 's website . 
 Before the release of the film , the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) released a statement expressing concern over Borat 's characteristic anti @-@ Semitism . Both Baron Cohen ( who is Jewish ) and the ADL have stated that the film uses the titular character to expose prejudices felt or tolerated by others , but the ADL expressed concern that some audiences might remain oblivious to this aspect of the film 's humor , while " some may even find it reinforcing their bigotry " . 
 = = = Censorship in the Arab world = = = 
 The film was banned in the entire Arab world except for Lebanon . Yousuf Abdul Hamid , a film censor for Dubai in the United Arab Emirates , called the film " vile , gross and extremely ridiculous " . The censor said that he and his colleagues had walked out on their screening before it had ended , and that only half an hour of the film would be left once all the offensive scenes were removed . The film has since been allowed to be aired in the Middle East with regular showing on local movie channels . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for Borat was released on the iTunes Store on 24 October 2006 , and in shops on 31 October 2006 . The album included music from the film , five tracks entitled " <unk> excerpt from <unk> " , as well as the controversial anti @-@ Semitic song " In My Country There Is Problem " from Da Ali G Show . 
 The folk music included in the soundtrack has no connection to the authentic music of Kazakhstan . The album features songs by Gypsy and Balkan artists ( mostly Emir Kusturica and Goran <unk> ) and includes music by <unk> Baron Cohen , founding member of <unk> Sound System and brother of Borat star Sacha Baron Cohen , as well as songs sung by Sacha Baron Cohen himself in character as Borat . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The Region 2 DVD was released 5 March 2007 , with the Region 1 release the following day . Special features include deleted scenes , faux advertisements for the soundtrack album , and a complete Russian language translation audio track using a professional dubbing cast , along with the English , French , and Spanish language tracks common on Region 1 . There is also a choice of Hebrew , but this is merely a joke ; choosing the Hebrew language option results in a warning screen reading " You have been trapped , Jew ! " which warns the viewer not to change his shape and to keep his claws where they can be seen , again playing on the anti @-@ Semitism supposedly prevalent in Borat 's version of Kazakhstan . It also includes footage of Borat 's publicity tour for the film , with Baron Cohen in character as Borat on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , the Toronto International Film Festival , and Saturday Night Live . The bonus features conclude with a news segment from a Virginia TV station about Borat 's night at the rodeo , complete with an interview with rodeo owner Bobby Rowe . 
 As a play on the copyright infringement common in the former Soviet Union , the packaging of the Region 1 ( United States / Canada ) , 2 ( Europe / Japan / South Africa / Middle East ) , and 4 ( Latin America / Oceania ) editions mimics a foreign bootleg DVD . The slipcover is in English but the case itself has all @-@ Cyrillic text ( a majority of which is in legitimate Russian , not faux Cyrillic ) and is made to look poorly photocopied . The disc itself is made to look like a " <unk> " DVD @-@ R with the slogan " Is life ? No . <unk> . " , a parody on " Is it live , or is it <unk> ? " ad campaign , and the word " <unk> " appearing to be crudely written in marker with the " R " written backwards . The UMD version is similar to the DVD , even being labelled a " UMD @-@ R " ( which do not exist ) . Even the Fox in @-@ cover advertising is written in broken English that appears poorly printed , indicating that there are " More movie discs available from US & A " and " Also legal to own in Kazakhstan " . 
 There are further jokes within the DVD itself . The menus are styled as a worn , static @-@ laden film on an erratically functioning projector , with more Cyrillic writing accompanied by translations in broken English . The DVD is described as a " prerecorded <unk> for purpose domestic viewing of <unk> " , and the viewer is warned that " selling <unk> of this <unk> will result in punishment by crushing " . The DVD 's collection of trailers promises that the depicted films are " coming Kazakhstan in 2028 " . By April 2007 , the DVD had sold over 3 @.@ 5 million copies , totaling more than $ 55 million in sales . While a Blu @-@ ray Disc release date for the U.S. has yet to be announced , it has been released on Blu @-@ ray in Germany , the United Kingdom , France , Australia , Brazil , the Netherlands , Ireland , Finland , Denmark , and Sweden . 
 = Demerara rebellion of 1823 = 
 The Demerara rebellion of 1823 was an uprising involving more than 10 @,@ 000 slaves that took place in the Crown colony of Demerara @-@ Essequibo ( now part of Guyana ) . The rebellion , which took place on 18 August 1823 and lasted for two days , was led by slaves with the highest status . In part they were reacting to poor treatment and a desire for freedom ; in addition , there was a widespread , mistaken belief that Parliament had passed a law for emancipation , but it was being withheld by the colonial rulers . Instigated chiefly by Jack Gladstone , a slave at " Success " plantation , the rebellion also involved his father , Quamina , and other senior members of their church group . Its English pastor , John Smith , was implicated . 
 The largely non @-@ violent rebellion was brutally crushed by the colonists under governor John Murray . They killed many slaves : estimates of the toll from fighting range from 100 to 250 . After the insurrection was put down , the government sentenced another 45 men to death , and 27 were executed . The executed slaves ' bodies were displayed in public for months afterwards as a deterrent to others . Jack was deported to the island of Saint Lucia after the rebellion following a clemency plea by Sir John Gladstone , the owner of " Success " plantation . John Smith , who had been court @-@ martialed and was awaiting news of his appeal against a death sentence , died a martyr for the abolitionist cause . 
 News of Smith 's death strengthened the abolitionist movement in Britain . Quamina , who is thought to have been the actual leader of the rebellion , was declared a national hero after Guyana 's independence . Streets and monuments have been dedicated to him in the capital of Georgetown , Guyana . 
 = = Context = = 
 Demerara was first colonised by the Dutch in the 17th century under the auspices of the Dutch West India Company ( <unk> ) . The economy , initially based on trade , began to be superseded in the 18th century by sugar cane cultivation on large plantations . The Demerara region was opened to settlement in 1746 , and new opportunities attracted British settlers from nearby Barbados . By 1760 , they had become the largest contingent in Demerara ; the 1762 business registers showed that 34 of 93 plantations owned by Englishmen . The British were a major external threat to Dutch control over the colonies from 1781 until 1796 , when Britain obtained de facto control . Following a raid by privateers in February 1781 , British occupation lasted until January 1782 , when the island was recaptured by the French , then allied with the Dutch . 
 The British transferred rule of Demerara to the Dutch in 1802 under the terms of the Peace of Amiens , but took back control of it a year later . In 1812 , the British merged Demerara and Essequibo into the colony of Demerara @-@ Essequibo . The colonies were ceded to Britain by treaty between the Netherlands and Britain on 13 August 1814 . <unk> , as the colony 's capital was known under the Dutch , was renamed as Georgetown in 1812 . The colonial powers appointed a governor to rule in their stead , and the local legislation was decided on by a Court of Policy . 
 The mainstay of its economy was sugar , grown on cane plantations worked by slaves . The sale of the crop in Britain enjoyed preferential terms . There were 2 @,@ 571 declared slaves working on 68 plantations in Essequibo , and 1 @,@ 648 slaves in Demerara in 1762 . These numbers were known to be much understated , as the slave headcount was the basis of taxation . By 1769 , there were 3 @,@ 986 declared slaves for Essequibo 's 92 plantations and 5 @,@ 967 for Demerara 's 206 plantations . The slave labour was in short supply and expensive due to the trading monopoly of the <unk> , and smuggling from Barbados was rife . Dutch colonists ensured white dominance over their growing slave population through the collaboration of indigenous natives , who strongly resisted white domination but could also be relied upon to take up arms against any Spanish incursions . When slaves rose up in Berbice in 1763 , natives blocked the border to prevent the disruption from spreading into Demerara . 
 Rapid expansion of plantations in the 19th century increased demand for African slaves at a time when supplies were reduced . The supply shortage of labour for production was exacerbated by the British abolition of trade in slaves in the Slave Trade Act 1807 . The population consisted of 2 @,@ 500 whites , 2 @,@ 500 freed blacks , and 77 @,@ 000 slaves . Ethnically , there were 34 @,@ 462 African @-@ born as against 39 @,@ 956 " creole Negroes " by 1823 in Demerara and Essequibo . Treatment of slaves were markedly different from owner to owner , and from plantation to plantation . Plantations managed by agents and attorneys for absentee owners were common . Caucasian owners and managers were prevalent , and there were very few mixed @-@ race " mulattoes " who advanced to become managers and owners . Lower @-@ class whites and coloureds were considered " superior " , giving them access to skilled work . Blacks who performed skilled work , or worked within households and enjoyed greater autonomy , were regarded as having higher @-@ status than other slaves . Slaves who toiled in the fields would work under drivers also slaves , but who had delegated authority of plantation overseers . 
 = = = The plantations = = = 
 Although some plantation owners were enlightened or paternalistic , the slave population was on the whole poorly treated . Churches for whites existed from the inauguration of the colonies , but slaves were barred from worshipping before 1807 as colonists feared education and Christianisation would lead slaves to question their status and lead to dissatisfaction . Indeed , a Wesleyan missionary who arrived in 1805 wanting to set up a church for slaves was immediately repatriated by order of the governor . The London Missionary Society ( LMS ) entered Guyana shortly after the end of the slave trade at the behest of a plantation owner who believed that slaves ought to have access to religious teachings . Hermanus Post , a naturalised Englishman of Dutch descent , advocated teaching of religion and literacy . The idea , considered radical at the time , was supported by some who may have thought religion was to be offered as a consolation in place of emancipation . The colonial administration was hostile to the idea . It was written in the official journal , Royal Gazette , in 1808 : " It is dangerous to make slaves Christians , without giving them their liberty . " Others strongly opposed . Other plantation owners , who felt that teaching slaves anything other than their duties to their masters would lead to " anarchy , chaos and discontent " and precipitate the destruction of the colony . Post ignored these protestations and made facilities available for worship . The facilities were easily outgrown by popularity of worship within just eight months . The LMS contributed £ 100 ; Post gave the land and paid the balance , and a chapel with 600 @-@ person capacity was inaugurated on 11 September 1808 . He also had a house constructed for the minister at a cost of £ 1200 , of which £ 200 was subscribed by other " respectable inhabitants of the colony " . The first pastor , Reverend John Wray , arrived in February 1808 and spent five years there ; his wife operated a girls ' school for white children . After the chapel 's construction , the owner wrote of improvements : 
 They were formerly a nuisance to the neighbourhood , on account of their drumming and dancing two or three nights in the week , and were looked on with a jealous eye on account of their dangerous communications ; but they have now become the most zealous attendants on public worship , <unk> , and private instructions . No drums are heard in this neighbourhood , except where the owners have prohibited the attendance of their slaves [ at the church ] . Drunkards and fighters have changed into sober and peaceable people , and endeavour to please those who are set over them . 
 Post sought to have more missionaries appointed to other places in the colony . However , Post died in 1809 , and was lamented by his slaves . Conditions of his slaves markedly deteriorated under new management – they were once again subject to whipping and forced to work on Saturdays and Sundays . Soon after Wray arrived in 1808 , he fought for the rights of slaves in the colony to attend church services which would take place nightly . When Governor Henri Guillaume Bentinck declared all meetings after dark illegal , Wray obtained the support of some plantation owners and managers . Armed with their testimonials , he sought to confront Bentinck but was refused audience . Wray went to London to appeal directly to the government . 
 When Wray was transferred to nearby Berbice at the end of his term , the mission was without a pastor for three years . John Smith , his replacement sent to the colony by the LMS , was equally welcomed by the slaves . Writing to the LMS , Smith said that the clergy was explicitly ordered to say nothing that would cause slaves ' disenchantment with their masters or dissatisfaction with their status . Many in the colony resented the presence of the preachers , whom they believed were spies to the abolitionist movement in London . They feared that the religious teachings and the liberal attitudes promoted would eventually cause slaves to rebel . Colonists interrupted services , threw stones at the churches , barred ministers ' access to certain plantations , refusing permission to build chapels on plantation land ; slaves were stopped from attending services at every turn . Smith received a hostile reception from the Governor John Murray and from most colonists . They saw his chapel services as a threat to plantation output , and feared greater unrest . Smith reported to the LMS the Governor had told him that " planters will not allow their negroes to be taught to read , on pain of banishment from the colony . " 
 Furthermore , religious instruction for slaves was endorsed by British Parliament , thus the plantation owners were obliged to permit slaves to attend despite their opposition . Colonists who attended were perceived by Smith to be disruptive or a distraction . Some overseers attended only to prevent their own slaves from attending . One of owners ' complaints was that slaves had too far to walk to attend services . When Smith had requested land to erect a chapel from John Reed , owner of " Dochfour " , the idea was vetoed by Governor Murray , allegedly because of complaints he had received about Smith . Colonists even perverted the intention of a circular from Britain which mandated giving slaves passes to attend services – on 16 August 1823 , the Governor issued a circular which required slaves to obtain owners ' special dispensation to attend church meetings or services , causing a sharp decline in attendance at services . 
 At about the same time , Smith wrote a letter back to George <unk> , the Secretary of the LMS , lamenting the conditions of the slaves : 
 Ever since I have been in the colony , the slaves have been most grievously oppressed . A most immoderate quantity of work has , very generally , been exacted of them , not excepting women far advanced in pregnancy . When sick , they have been commonly neglected , ill treated , or half starved . Their punishments have been frequent and severe . Redress they have so seldom been able to obtain , that many of them have long discontinued to seek it , even when they have been notoriously wronged . 
 Da Costa noted that the slaves who rebelled all had motives which were underpinned by their status as chattels : the families of many were caught in the turbulent changes in ownership of plantations and feared being sold and / or split up ( as in the case of the slave Telemachus ) ; Christians frequently complained of being harassed and chastised for their belief or their worshipping ( Telemachus , Jacky Reed , Immanuel , Prince , Sandy ) ; female slaves reported being abused or raped by owners or managers ( Betsy , Susanna ) . Slaves were also often punished for frivolous reasons . Many managers / owners ( <unk> , Spencer ) would insist that slaves work on Sundays , and deny passes to attend church ; Pollard , manager of " Non Pareil " and " Bachelor 's Adventure " , was notoriously violent . Quamina complained of frequently being deprived of his legal day off and missing church ; unable to take care of his sickly wife , he found her dead one night after coming home . Jack Gladstone , a slave on " Success " , who did not work under a driver and enjoyed considerable freedom , learned of the debate about slavery in Britain , and had heard rumours of emancipation papers arriving from London . 
 Among the plantation owners , Sir John Gladstone , father of British Prime Minister William , who had built his fortune as a trader , had acquired plantations in Demerara in 1812 through mortgage defaults . This included half share in " Success " , one of the largest and most productive plantations there ; he acquired the remaining half four years later . Gladstone switched the crop from coffee to sugar , and expanded his workforce of slaves from 160 to more than 330 . Sir John would continue to acquire <unk> plantations , often at fire sale prices after the rebellion and well into the decade , and his agents would be able to optimise his assets across the different properties . By the time emancipation was enacted in Britain in 1834 , he owned four plantations – " <unk> " , " Success " , " Wales " and " <unk> " . 
 John Smith , writing in his journal on 30 August 1817 , said that the slaves of " Success " complained about the work load and very severe treatment . Sir John Gladstone , believing that the slaves on his estates were properly treated , wrote a letter to the Missionary Society on 24 December 1824 to clear his name . He wrote that his intentions have " ever been to treat my people with kindness in the attention to their wants of every description , and to grant them every reasonable and practicable indulgence . " He stated that the work gangs were doubled from 160 after production shifted to sugar from coffee . Gladstone later maintained that 
 Even on Sugar Estates , the grinding [ of the canes ] ceases at sunset ; and the boilers , the only parties that remain longer , finish cleaning up before nine o 'clock ... Their general food , in addition to salt fish and occasionally salted provisions , consisted of plantains which they preferred to other food . <unk> were cultivated in the ordinary daily work of each estate , or purchased when deficient , and they were supplied with more than they could consume . The slaves were provided with clothing that was suitable for the climate and their situation ... They have the Sabbath and their other <unk> to dispose of , for the purpose of religion , if so inclined . 
 Gladstone , who had never set foot on his plantation , had been deluded by his attorney in Demerara , Frederick Cort , into believing that it was seldom necessary to punish the slaves . He asserted they were generally happy and contented , and were able to make considerable money by selling the surplus produce of their provision grounds . Subsequent to the revolt , the secretary of the London Missionary Society warned Gladstone that Cort had been lying , but Gladstone continued to identify himself with Cort and his other agents . Robertson , his second son , inspected the estates from 22 November 1828 to 3 March 1829 , during which he observed that Cort was " an idler and a deceiver " who had mismanaged one estate after another . Only then was Cort dismissed . In Britain , Lord Howick and others criticised the concept of absentee landlords . Sir Benjamin d 'Urban , who took up his office of Lieutenant Governor of Essequibo and Demerara in 1824 , wrote to Earl Bathurst , Secretary of State for the Colonies , on 30 September 1824 , criticising " .. the injudicious managers under whom too many of the slaves are placed ; half educated men of little discretion , or command over their own caprices ; good planters perhaps – but quite unfit to have the charge of bodies of men , although they might take very proper care of cattle " . 
 = = The revolt = = 
 Slaves with the highest status such as coopers , and some other who were members of Smith 's congregation , were implicated in leading the rebellion against the harsh conditions and maltreatment , demanding what they believed to be their right . Quamina and his son Jack Gladstone , both slaves on " Success " plantation , led their peers to revolt . Quamina , a member of Smith 's church , had been one of five chosen to become deacons by the congregation soon after Smith 's arrival . In the British House of Commons in May 1823 , Thomas Fowell Buxton introduced a resolution condemning the state of slavery as " repugnant to the principles of the British constitution and of the Christian religion " , and called for its gradual abolition " throughout the British colonies " . In fact , the subject of these rumours were Orders in Council ( to colonial administrations ) drawn up by George Canning under pressure from abolitionists to ameliorate the conditions of slaves following a Commons debate . Its principal provisions were to restrict slaves ' daily working hours to nine and to prohibit flogging for female slaves . 
 Whilst the Governor or Berbice immediately made a proclamation upon receiving his orders from London , and instructed local parson John Wray to explain the provisions to his congregation , John Murray , his counterpart in Demerara , had received the Order from London on 7 July 1823 , and these measures proved controversial as they were discussed in the Court of Policy on 21 July and again on 6 August . They were passed as being inevitable , but the administration made no formal declaration as to its passing . The lack of formal declaration led to rumours that masters had received instructions to set the slaves free but were refusing to do so . In the weeks prior to the revolt , he sought confirmation of the veracity of the rumours from other slaves , particularly those who worked for those in a position to know : he thus obtained information from Susanna , housekeeper / mistress of John Hamilton of " Le Resouvenir " ; from Daniel , the Governor 's servant ; Joe Simpson from " Le Reduit " and others . Specifically , Simpson had written a letter which said that their freedom was imminent but which warned them to be patient . Jack wrote a letter ( signing his father 's name ) to the members of the chapel informing them of the " new law " . 
 Those on " Le Resouvenir " , where Smith 's chapel was situated , also rebelled . Quamina , who was well respected by slaves and freedmen alike , initially tried to stop the slave revolt , and urged instead for peaceful strike ; he made the fellow slaves promise not to use violence . As an artisan cooper who did not work under a driver , Jack enjoyed considerable freedom to roam about . He was able to organise the rebellion through his formal and informal networks . Close conspirators who were church ' teachers ' included Seaton ( at " Success " ) , William ( at " Chateau Margo " ) , David ( at " Bonne Intention " ) , Jack ( at " Dochfour " ) , Luke ( at " Friendship " ) , Joseph ( at " Bachelor 's Adventure " ) , Sandy ( at " Non Pareil " ) . Together , they finalised planning in the afternoon of Sunday 17 August for thousands of slaves to raise up against their masters the next morning . 
 Joe of " Le Reduit " had informed his master at approximately 6 am that morning of a coordinated uprising planned the night before at Bethel chapel which would take place that same day . Captain Simpson , the owner , immediately rode to see the Governor , but stopped to alert several estates on the way into town . The governor assembled the cavalry , which Simpson was a part of . Although the rebellion leaders had hoped for mass action by all slaves , the actual unrest involved about 13 @,@ 000 slaves over some 37 estates located on the east coast , between Georgetown and <unk> . Slaves entered estates , ransacked the houses for weapons and ammunition , tied up the whites , or put some into stocks . The very low number of white deaths is cited as proof that the uprising was largely free from violence from the slaves . Accounts from witnesses indicate that the rebels exercised restraint , with only a very small number of white men were killed . Some slaves took revenge on their masters or overseers by putting them in stocks , like they themselves had been before . Slaves went in large groups , from plantation to plantation , seizing weapons and ammunition and locking up the whites , promising to release them in three days . However , according to Bryant , not all slaves were compliant with the rebels ; some were loyal to their masters and held off against the rebels . 
 The Governor immediately declared martial law . The 21st Fusiliers and the 1st West India Regiment , aided by a volunteer battalion , were dispatched to combat the rebels , who were armed mainly with cutlasses and bayonets on poles , and a small number of stands of rifles captured from plantations . By the late afternoon on 20 August , the situation had been brought under control . Most of the slaves had been rounded up , although some of the rebels were shot whilst attempting to flee . On 22 August 1823 , Lieutenant Governor Murray issued an account of the battles . He reported major confrontations on Tuesday morning at the Reed estate , " Dochfour " , where ten to fifteen of the 800 rebels were killed ; a skirmish at " Good Hope " felled " five or six " rebels . On Wednesday morning , six were killed at ' Beehive ' plantation , forty rebels died at Elizabeth Hall . At a battle which took place at " Bachelor 's Adventure " , " a number considerably above 1500 " were involved . 
 The Lieutenant @-@ Colonel having in vain attempted to convince these deluded people of their error , and every attempt to induce them to lay down their arms having failed , he made his dispositions , charged the two bodies simultaneously , and dispersed them with the loss of 100 to 150 . On our side , we only had one rifleman slightly wounded . 
 After the slaves ' defeat at " Bachelor 's Adventure " , Jack fled into the woods . A " handsome reward " of one thousand guilder was offered for his capture . The Governor also proclaimed a " FULL and FREE <unk> to all slaves who surrendered within 48 hours , provided that they shall not have been ringleaders ( or guilty of Aggravated <unk> ) " . Jack remained at large until he and his wife were captured by Capt. <unk> at " Chateau Margo " , after a three @-@ hour standoff on 6 September . 
 = = Trials = = 
 On 25 August , the Governor Murray constituted a general court @-@ martial , presided over by Lt.-Col. Stephen Arthur Goodman . Despite the initial revolt passing largely peacefully with slave masters locked in their homes , those who were considered ringleaders were tried at set up at different estates along the coast and executed by shooting ; their heads were cut off and nailed to posts . A variety of sentences were handed out , including solitary confinement , lashing , and death . Bryant ( 1824 ) records 72 slaves having been sentenced by court @-@ martial at the time of publication . He noted that 19 of the 45 death sentences had been carried out ; a further 18 slaves had been reprieved . Quamina was among those executed ; their bodies were hung up in chains by the side of a public road in front of their respective plantations and left to rot for months afterwards . Jack Gladstone was sold and deported to St Lucia ; Da Costa suggests that a letter Sir John had sent on his behalf resulted in clemency . 
 John Smith was arraigned in court @-@ martial before Lt. Col. Goodman on 13 October , charged with four offences : " promoting discontent and dissatisfaction in the minds of the Negro Slaves towards their Lawful Masters , Overseers and Managers , inciting rebellion ; advising , consulting and corresponding with Quamina , and further aiding and abetting Quamina in the revolt ; failure to make known the planned rebellion to the proper authorities ; did not use his best endeavours to suppress , detain and restrain Quamina once the rebellion was under way . " The officers on the court martial judging Smith included a young Captain Colin Campbell , later to become Field Marshal Lord Clyde . 
 Smith 's trial concluded one month later , on 24 November . Smith was found guilty of the principal charges , and was given the death sentence . Pending an appeal , Smith was transferred from Colony House to prison , where he died of " consumption " in the early hours of 6 February 1824 ; To minimise the risk of stirring up slave sentiment , the colonists interred him at 4 am . The grave went without markings to avoid it becoming a rallying point for slaves . The Royal reprieve arrived on 30 March . Smith 's death was a major step forward in the campaign to abolish slavery . News of his death was published in British newspapers , provoked enormous outrage and garnered 200 petitions to Parliament . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rebellion took place a few months after the founding of the Anti @-@ Slavery Society , and had a strong impact on Britain . Although public sentiment initially favoured the colonists , it changed with revelations . The abolitionist debate which had flagged , was galvanised by the deaths of Smith and the 250 slaves . The Martial law in Demerara was lifted on 19 January 1824 . In Demerara and Berbice , there was considerable anger towards the missionaries that resulted in their oppression . Demerara 's Court of Policy passed an ordinance giving financial assistance to a church that was selected by plantation owners in each district . The Le Resouvenir chapel was seized and taken over by the Anglican Church . 
 Under pressure from London , the Demerara Court of Policy eventually passed an ' Ordinance for the religious instruction of slaves and for <unk> their condition ' in 1825 which institutionalised working hours and some civil rights for slaves . The weekend was to be from sunset on Saturday to sunrise on Monday ; field work was also defined to be from 6 am to 6 pm , with a mandatory two @-@ hour break . A Protector of Slaves was appointed ; whipping was abolished for women as was its use in the field . The rights to marriage and own property was legalised , as was the right to acquire manumission . Amendments and new ordinances continued to flow from London , each progressively establishing more civil rights for the slaves , but they were strongly resisted by the colonial legislature . 
 Many planters refused to comply with their provisions . The confrontation continued as the planters challenged on several occasions the right of British government to pass laws binding on the colony , arguing that the Court of Policy has exclusive legislative power within the colony . Plantation owners who controlled the voting of the taxes disrupted administration by refusing to vote the civil list . 
 In August 1833 , the British parliament passed the ' Act for the abolition of slavery throughout the British Colonies , for promoting the industry of manumitted slaves , and for compensating the persons hitherto entitled to the services of such slaves ' , with effect from 1 August 1834 . Plantation owners of British Guiana received £ 4 @,@ 297 @,@ 117 10s . 6 ½ d. in compensation for the loss of 84 @,@ 915 slaves . 
 = Calakmul = 
 Calakmul ( / <unk> / ; also <unk> and other less frequent variants ) is a Maya archaeological site in the Mexican state of Campeche , deep in the jungles of the greater Petén Basin region . It is 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) from the Guatemalan border . Calakmul was one of the largest and most powerful ancient cities ever uncovered in the Maya lowlands . 
 Calakmul was a major Maya power within the northern Petén Basin region of the Yucatán Peninsula of southern Mexico . Calakmul administered a large domain marked by the extensive distribution of their emblem glyph of the snake head sign , to be read " Kaan " . Calakmul was the seat of what has been dubbed the Kingdom of the Snake or Snake Kingdom . This Snake Kingdom reigned during most of the Classic period . Calakmul itself is estimated to have had a population of 50 @,@ 000 people and had governance , at times , over places as far away as 150 kilometers . There are 6 @,@ 750 ancient structures identified at Calakmul ; the largest of which is the great pyramid at the site . Structure 2 is over 45 metres ( 148 ft ) high , making it one of the tallest of the Maya pyramids . Four tombs have been located within the pyramid . Like many temples or pyramids within Mesoamerica the pyramid at Calakmul increased in size by building upon the existing temple to reach its current size . The size of the central monumental architecture is approximately 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) and the whole of the site , mostly covered with dense residential structures , is about 20 square kilometres ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) . 
 Throughout the Classic Period , Calakmul maintained an intense rivalry with the major city of Tikal to the south , and the political manoeuvrings of these two cities have been likened to a struggle between two Maya superpowers . 
 Rediscovered from the air by biologist Cyrus L. Lundell of the Mexican Exploitation <unk> Company on December 29 , 1931 , the find was reported to Sylvanus G. Morley of the Carnegie Institute at Chichen Itza in March 1932 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Calakmul is a modern name ; according to Cyrus L. Lundell , who named the site , In Maya , ca means " two " , lak means " adjacent " , and mul signifies any artificial mound or pyramid , so Calakmul is the " City of the Two Adjacent Pyramids " . In ancient times the city core was known as Ox Te ' Tuun , meaning " Three Stones " . Another name associated with the site , and perhaps a larger area around it , is <unk> <unk> ' . The lords of Calakmul identified themselves as k 'uhul <unk> ajaw , Divine Lords of the Snake , but the connection of the title to the actual site is ambiguous . 
 = = Location = = 
 Calakmul is located in Campeche state in southeastern Mexico , about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) north of the border with Guatemala and 38 kilometres ( 24 mi ) north of the ruins of El Mirador . The ruins of El Tintal are 68 kilometres ( 42 mi ) to the southwest of Calakmul and were linked to both El Mirador and Calakmul itself by causeway . Calakmul was about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of the contemporary city of Oxpemul and approximately 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) southwest of La Muñeca . The city is located on a rise about 35 metres ( 115 ft ) above a large seasonal swamp lying to the west , known as the El Laberinto bajo ( a Spanish word used in the region to denote a low @-@ lying area of seasonal marshland ) . This swamp measures approximately 34 by 8 kilometres ( 21 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 0 mi ) and was an important source of water during the rainy season . The bajo was linked to a sophisticated water @-@ control system including both natural and artificial features such as gullies and canals that encircled a 22 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 5 sq mi ) area around the site core , an area considered as Inner Calakmul . The location of Calakmul at the edge of a bajo provided two additional advantages : the fertile soils along the edge of the swamp and access to abundant flint nodules . The city is situated on a promontory formed by a natural 35 @-@ metre ( 115 ft ) high limestone dome rising above the surrounding lowlands . This dome was artificially levelled by the Maya . During the Preclassic and Classic periods settlement was concentrated along the edge of the El Laberinto bajo , during the Classic period structures were also built on high ground and small islands in the swamp where flint was worked . 
 At the beginning of the 21st century the area around Calakmul remained covered by dense forest . During the 1st millennium AD the area received moderate and regular rainfall , although there is less surface water available than further south in Guatemala . <unk> is now located within the 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 7 @,@ 300 km2 ) Calakmul Biosphere Reserve . 
 = = Population and extent = = 
 At its height in the Late Classic period the city is estimated to have had a population of 50 @,@ 000 inhabitants and to have covered an area of over 70 square kilometres ( 27 sq mi ) . The city was the capital of a large regional state with an area of about 13 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . During the Terminal Classic the city 's population declined dramatically and the rural population plummeted to 10 % of its former level . 
 The Late Classic population density of Calakmul has been calculated at 1000 / km ² ( 2564 per square mile ) in the site core and 420 / km ² ( 1076 per square mile ) in the periphery ( an area of 122 square kilometres ( 47 sq mi ) . Calakmul was a true urban city and not just an elite centre surrounded by commoner residences . The site core of Calakmul was known in ancient times as Ox Te ' Tuun ( " Three Stones " ) which may have been because of the triadic pyramid Structure 2 . 
 The Calakmul kingdom included 20 secondary centres , among which were large cities such as La Muñeca , <unk> , <unk> , Oxpemul and <unk> . The total population of these secondary centres has been estimated at 200 @,@ 000 . The kingdom also included a large number of tertiary and quaternary sites , mostly fairly small and consisting of a number of groups arranged around courtyards , although there are also larger rural sites situated on ridges along the edges of the bajos that include temples , palaces and stelae . The total rural population of the kingdom is calculated at 1 @.@ 5 million people . The entire population of the Calakmul kingdom , including the city itself and the rural population in the 13 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 000 sq mi ) area of the regional state , is calculated at 1 @.@ 75 million people in the Late Classic period . 
 The Emblem Glyph of Calakmul has a greater distribution than the Emblem Glyph of any other Maya city . The Glyph is also found in more hieroglyphic texts than any other Emblem Glyph , including that of Tikal . Calakmul administered a large domain marked by the extensive distribution of their emblem glyph of the snake head sign , to be read " Kaan " . Calakmul was the seat of what has been dubbed the Snake Kingdom . At times the city had governance over places as far away as 150 kilometers . 
 = = Known rulers = = 
 The kings of Calakmul were known as k 'uhul kan <unk> ( / k ’ <unk> <unk> <unk> / ) ( " Divine Lords of the Snake Kingdom " ) . This list is not continuous , as the archaeological record is incomplete . All dates AD . 
 = = Emblem Glyph = = 
 At Calakmul 's peak in the 7th century , the polity was known as Kan . Interesting to know is that the title Kan was used at another place before Calakmul became a regional powerhouse . The Preclassic political state in the Mirador Basin also used the title Kan . There is the idea that , after the collapse of the Mirador state , its refugees migrated north towards Calakmul , where they founded a new Kan polity . However , epigraphical studies of the monuments at Calakmul show that prior to the 7th century AD the emblem glyph of Calakmul had nothing to do with a snake , but with a bat . It seems that a different polity ruled there . The Kan emblem glyph , before being associated with Calakmul , is found ( once ) at Dzibanché , a site more towards the east . Perhaps during the late 6th / early 7th century , the polity at Dzibanché moved to Calakmul in order to establish a more strategically placed capital . After Calakmul 's power dwindled in the 8th century , after the rule of Yuknoom Took K 'awiil , it appears that the bat emblem glyph made its resurgence . Still , many uncertainties remain and new epigraphical studies have to be done to fill the gaps . 
 = = History = = 
 Calakmul has a long occupational history and excavations have revealed evidence from the Middle Preclassic right through to the Postclassic . The causeway network that linked Calakmul with the cities of El Mirador , Nakbe and El Tintal suggest strong political links between the four cities that may have begun in the Preclassic , when both Calakmul and El Mirador were important cities , and continued into the Classic period when Calakmul itself was the most powerful city in the region . Calakmul was one of the largest and most powerful ancient cities ever uncovered in the Maya lowlands . 
 = = = Calakmul vs. Tikal = = = 
 The history of the Maya Classic period is dominated by the rivalry between Tikal and Calakmul , likened to a struggle between two Maya " superpowers " . Earlier times tended to be dominated by a single larger city and by the Early Classic Tikal was moving into this position after the dominance of El Mirador in the Late Preclassic and Nakbe in the Middle Preclassic . However Calakmul was a rival city with equivalent resources that challenged the supremacy of Tikal and engaged in a strategy of surrounding it with its own network of allies . From the second half of the 6th century AD through to the late 7th century Calakmul gained the upper hand although it failed to extinguish Tikal 's power completely and Tikal was able to turn the tables on its great rival in a decisive battle that took place in AD 695 . Half a century later Tikal was able to gain major victories over Calakmul 's most important allies . Eventually both cities succumbed to the spreading Classic Maya collapse . 
 The great rivalry between these two cities may have been based on more than competition for resources . Their dynastic histories reveal different origins and the intense competition between the two powers may have had an ideological grounding . Calakmul 's dynasty seems ultimately derived from the great Preclassic city of El Mirador while the dynasty of Tikal was profoundly affected by the intervention of the distant central Mexican metropolis of Teotihuacan . With few exceptions , Tikal 's monuments and those of its allies place great emphasis upon single male rulers while the monuments of Calakmul and its allies gave greater prominence to the female line and often the joint rule of king and queen . 
 = = = Preclassic = = = 
 Calakmul was already a large city in the Preclassic period . The early history of Calakmul is obscure , although a dynastic list has been pieced together that extends back into an ancestral past . This dynasty has been reconstructed in part from Late Classic ceramics from the region of great Preclassic cities of El Mirador and Nakbe . This may mean that Calakmul ultimately inherited its political authority from one of these cities , with its dynasty originating in the Late Preclassic in the Mirador Basin and relocating itself to Calakmul in the Classic period after the collapse of these cities . 
 = = = Early Classic = = = 
 Both Calakmul and Tikal were sizeable Preclassic cities that survived into the Classic Period . Early hieroglyphic texts from stelae found in Structure 2 record the probable enthronement of a king of Calakmul in AD 411 and also records a non @-@ royal site ruler in 514 . After this there is a gap in the hieroglyphic records that lasts over a century , although the Kaan dynasty experienced a major expansion of its power at this time . The lack of inscriptions recording the events of this period may be either due to the fact that the Kaan dynasty was located elsewhere during this time or perhaps that the monuments were later destroyed . 
 The earliest legible texts referring to the kings of the Kaan dynasty come from excavations of the large city of Dzibanche in Quintana Roo , far north of Calakmul . A hieroglyphic stairway depicts bound captives , their names and the dates they were captured together with the name of king Yuknoom Che 'en I , although the exact context of the king 's name is unclear - the captives may have been his vassals captured by an enemy or they may have been rulers captured by the king of Calakmul . The dates are uncertain but two of them may fall within the 5th century AD . The nearby Quintana Roo site of El <unk> has a jumbled hieroglyphic text , including a date in 529 , that indicates that the city was within the control of the Kaan dynasty . 
 By the middle of the 6th century AD Calakmul was assembling a far @-@ reaching political alliance , activity that brought the city into conflict with the great city of Tikal . The influence of Calakmul extended deep into the Petén ; king Tuun K 'ab ' Hix of Calakmul oversaw the enthronement of Aj Wosal to the rulership of Naranjo in 546 . Another vassal of Tuun K 'ab ' Hix was taken captive by Yaxchilan on the banks of the Usumacinta River in 537 . 
 In 561 , the king now known as Sky Witness installed a ruler at the site of Los Alacranes . Sky Witness played a major part in the political events of the Maya region . He became the overlord of the city of Caracol , to the south of Naranjo , which had previously been a vassal of Tikal . In 562 , according to a damaged text at Caracol , Sky Witness defeated Tikal itself and sacrificed its king Wak Chan K 'awiil , thus ending his branch of the royal dynasty at Tikal . This catastrophic defeat began a 130 @-@ year hiatus for Tikal , reflecting an extended period of dominance by Calakmul . This event is used as a marker to divide the Early Classic from the Late Classic . Sky Witness is also mentioned at <unk> , a site much further north in Quintana Roo . The last reference to Sky Witness occurs at Caracol and is dated to AD 572 . The text is damaged but probably records the death of this powerful king . 
 = = = Late Classic = = = 
 = = = = War with Palenque = = = = 
 Sky Witness was quickly succeeded by First Axewielder , who is mentioned in a text from Dzibanche celebrating the K 'atun @-@ ending of 573 . First Axewielder ruled for about six years . In 579 Uneh Chan became king of Calakmul . Uneh Chan engaged in an aggressive campaign in the western Maya region and attacked Palenque on 23 April 599 with his ally Lakam Chak , lord of the small city of Santa Elena 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) east of Palenque , defeating Palenque 's queen Lady Yohl Ik 'nal and sacking the city . The defeat is recorded on a series of hieroglyphic steps at Palenque itself and the event initiated a long @-@ lasting grudge against Calakmul . Lady Yohl Ik 'nal survived the battle and ruled for several more years , although she perhaps paid tribute to Calakmul . 
 Uneh Chan maintained his alliances with cities in the east and he is depicted on Caracol Stela 4 supervising an event involving king Yajaw Te ' K 'inich of that city that occurred before 583 . Calakmul again sacked Palenque on 7 April 611 under the personal direction of Uneh Chan . Palenque was now ruled by king Ajen Yohl Mat who had gained some sort of independence from Calakmul , provoking the new invasion . The immediate aftermath of this second victory over Palenque involved the deaths of the two most important nobles at the city , Ajen Yohl Mat himself and Janab Pakal , a high @-@ ranking member of the royal family and possibly co @-@ ruler . Janab Pakal died in March 612 and Ajen Yohl Mat a few months later . Their deaths so soon after the sacking of the city suggests that their demise was directly linked to Calakmul 's triumph . Palenque suffered a lengthy decline in its fortunes after this date before it was able to recover from its disastrous war with Calakmul . The wars against Palenque may have been undertaken by Uneh Chan in order to seize control of wealthy trade routes that passed through the western Maya region . 
 = = = = Rebellion at Naranjo = = = = 
 King Yuknoom Chan of Calakmul supervised an event at Caracol in 619 . Caracol Stela 22 records the accession of <unk> Uk 'ab ' K 'ak ' to the Calakmul throne in 622 . Two stelae were erected at Calakmul in 623 but their texts are too badly damaged to reveal the names of the royal couple involved . Approximately at this time Naranjo , a vassal of Calakmul , broke away when its king Aj Wosal died relatively soon after the death of Uneh Chan of Calakmul . Naranjo was independent of Calakmul by at least AD 626 , when it was twice defeated by Caracol and Yuknoom Chan may have been attempting to bring Naranjo back under Calakmul control . His attempts were brought to an end by his death in 630 . In 631 Yuknoom Head , the new king of Calakmul , finally regained control of Naranjo . Texts relate that the king of Naranjo was already captive at Calakmul on the day that his city was overrun and his punishment on the very same day is described by the word k <unk> ( / k ’ <unk> / ) meaning either " tortured " or " eaten " . Yuknoom Head conquered another city in March 636 , although the exact site is unknown . 
 = = = = Apogee = = = = 
 The Kaan dynasty was not originally established at Calakmul but rather re @-@ located there in the 7th Century from another city . Calakmul experienced its highest achievements during the reign of king Yuknoom Che 'en II , sometimes called Yuknoom the Great by scholars . Yuknoom Che 'en II was 36 years old when he came to the throne of Calakmul in AD 636 . A significant increase in the production of stelae at the city began with his reign and 18 stelae were commissioned by the king . Yuknoom Che 'en II was probably responsible for the construction of the palace complexes that form a major part of the site core . 
 = = = = = Calakmul and Dos Pilas = = = = = 
 In 629 Tikal had founded Dos Pilas in the Petexbatún region , some 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) to its southwest , as a military outpost in order to control trade along the course of the Pasión River . B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was installed on the throne of the new outpost at the age of four , in 635 , and for many years served as a loyal vassal fighting for his brother , the king of Tikal . In AD 648 Calakmul attacked Dos Pilas and gained an overwhelming victory that included the death of a Tikal lord . B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was captured by Yuknoom Che 'en II but , instead of being sacrificed , he was re @-@ instated on his throne as a vassal of the Calakmul king , and went on to attack Tikal in 657 , forcing Nuun Ujol Chaak , the then king of Tikal , to temporarily abandon the city . The first two rulers of Dos Pilas continued to use the <unk> emblem glyph of Tikal , and they probably felt that they had a legitimate claim to the throne of Tikal itself . For some reason , B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was not installed as the new ruler of Tikal ; instead he stayed at Dos Pilas . Tikal counterattacked against Dos Pilas in 672 , driving B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil into an exile that lasted five years . Calakmul tried to encircle Tikal within an area dominated by its allies , such as El Peru , Dos Pilas and Caracol . In 677 Calakmul counterattacked against Dos Pilas , driving Tikal out and reinstalled B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil on his throne . In 679 Dos Pilas , probably aided by Calakmul , gained an important victory over Tikal , with a hieroglyphic description of the battle describing pools of blood and piles of heads . 
 Troubles continued in the east , with renewed conflict between Naranjo and Caracol . Naranjo completely defeated Caracol in 680 but Naranjo 's dynasty disappeared within two years and a daughter of B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil founded a new dynasty there in 682 , indicating that Calakmul had probably intervened decisively to place a loyal vassal on the throne . The patronage of Yuknoom Che 'en II as overlord is recorded at a range of important cities , including El Peru where he oversaw the installation of K 'inich B 'alam as king and strengthened the tie with the marriage of a Calakmul princess to that king . The power of Calakmul extended as far as the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá , where Motul de San José is recorded as its vassal in the 7th century , although it was traditionally aligned with Tikal . Yuknoom Che 'en II commanded the loyalty of three generations of kings at <unk> , 245 kilometres ( 152 mi ) to the south , and supervised the enthronement of at least two of them , in 656 and 677 . King Yuknoom Che 'en II was involved , directly or indirectly , in the crowning of a king at Moral to the west in Tabasco and one of Yuknoom 's nobles supervised a ritual at Piedras Negras on the Guatemalan bank of the Usumacinta River . Yuknoom Che 'en II died in his eighties , probably at the beginning of 686 . When he died , Calakmul was the most powerful city in the central Maya lowlands . 
 Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' succeeded Yuknoom Che 'en II , his crowning on 3 April 686 was recorded on monuments at Dos Pilas and El Peru . He was born in 649 and was likely to have been the son of his predecessor . He already held high office before he was named king and may have been responsible for the major successes of the latter part of Yuknoom Che 'en II 's reign . He retained the loyalty of K 'inich B 'alam of El Peru and B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil of Dos Pilas and gained that of K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Chaak in 693 , when he was installed on the throne of Naranjo at the age of five . However , the texts on sculpted monuments do not reveal the full complexity of diplomatic activity , as revealed by a painted ceramic vase from Tikal , which depicts an ambassador of Calakmul 's king kneeling before the enthroned king of Tikal and delivering tribute . Just four years later , in August 695 , the two states were once again at war . Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' led his warriors against Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I in a catastrophic battle that saw the defeat of Calakmul and the capture of the image of a Calakmul deity named Yajaw Maan . It is unknown what happened to Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' ; a stucco sculpture from Tikal shows a captive and the king is mentioned in the accompanying caption but it is not certain if the captive and the king are the same person . This event marked the end of Calakmul 's apogee , with diplomatic activity dropping away and fewer cities recognising Calakmul 's king as overlord . No stelae remain standing in the site core recording Yuknoom Yich <unk> K 'ak , although there are some in the Northeast Group and 2 broken stelae were buried in Structure 2 . 
 = = = = Later kings = = = = 
 The next ruler of Calakmul , Split Earth , is mentioned on a pair of carved bones in the tomb of Tikal king Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I. He was ruling by November 695 but it is not known if he was a legitimate member of the Calakmul dynasty or whether he was a pretender placed on the throne by Tikal . 
 The next known king used a number of name variants , and is referred to by different name segments within and outside of Calakmul . A partial reading of his name is Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . He erected seven stelae to celebrate a calendrical event in 702 and is named at Dos Pilas in that year , presumably demonstrating that Dos Pilas was still a vassal of Calakmul . El Peru also continued as a vassal and Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil installed a new king there at an unknown date . La Corona received a queen from Yuknoom Took ' . Naranjo also remained loyal . Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil commissioned seven more stelae to mark the k 'atun @-@ ending of 731 . A new defeat at the hands of Tikal is evidenced by a sculpted altar at that city , probably dating to sometime between 733 and 736 , depicting a bound lord from Calakmul and possibly names Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . 
 = = = = = Calakmul and Quiriguá = = = = = 
 After this the historical record of Calakmul becomes very vague , due both to the poor state of the heavily eroded monuments at the city itself and also its reduced political presence on the wider Maya stage . Wamaw K 'awiil is named at Quiriguá on the southern periphery of Mesoamerica . Quiriguá traditionally had been a vassal of its southern neighbour Copán , and in 724 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil , king of Copán , installed K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat upon Quiriguá 's throne as his vassal . By 734 K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat had shown that he was no longer an obedient subordinate of Copán when he started to refer to himself as k 'ul ahaw , holy lord , instead of using the lesser term ahaw , subordinate lord ; at the same time he began to use his own Quiriguá emblem glyph . This local act of rebellion appears to have been part of the larger political struggle between Tikal and Calakmul . In 736 , only two years later , K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat received a visit from Wamaw K 'awiil of Calakmul , while Copán was one of Tikal 's oldest allies . The timing of this visit by the king of Calakmul is highly significant , falling between the accession of K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat to the throne of Quiriguá as a vassal of Copán and the outright rebellion that was to follow . This strongly suggests that Calakmul sponsored Quiriguá 's rebellion in order to weaken Tikal and to gain access to the rich trade route of the Motagua Valley . It is likely that contact with Calakmul had been initiated soon after K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat acceded to the throne . In 738 K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat captured the powerful but elderly king of Copán , Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil . An inscription at Quiriguá , although difficult to interpret , suggests that the capture took place on 27 April 738 , when Quiriguá seized and burned the wooden images of Copán 's patron deities . The captured lord was taken back to Quiriguá and on 3 May 738 he was decapitated in a public ritual . 
 In the Late Classic , alliance with Calakmul was frequently associated with the promise of military support . The fact that Copán , a much more powerful city than Quiriguá , failed to retaliate against its former vassal implies that it feared the military intervention of Calakmul . Calakmul itself was far enough away from Quiriguá that K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat was not afraid of falling directly under its power as a full vassal state , even though it is likely that Calakmul sent warriors to help in the defeat of Copán . The alliance instead seems to have been one of mutual advantage : Calakmul managed to weaken a powerful ally of Tikal while Quiriguá gained its independence . 
 = = = = Collapse = = = = 
 Five large stelae were raised in 741 , although the name of the king responsible is illegible on all of them and he has been labelled as Ruler Y. Calakmul 's presence in the wider Maya area continued to wane , with two of the city 's major allies suffering defeats at the hands of Tikal . El Peru was defeated in 743 and Naranjo a year later and this resulted in the final collapse of Calakmul 's once powerful alliance network , while Tikal underwent a resurgence in its power . 
 In 751 Ruler Z erected a stela that was never finished , paired with another with the portrait of a queen . A hieroglyphic stairway mentions someone called B 'olon K 'awiil at about the same time . B 'olon K 'awiil was king by 771 when he raised two stelae and he was mentioned at Toniná in 789 . Sites to the north of Calakmul showed a reduction in its influence at this time , with new architectural styles influenced by sites further north in the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 A monument was raised in 790 although the name of the ruler responsible is not preserved . Two more were raised in 800 and three in 810 . No monument was erected to commemorate the important Bak 'tun @-@ ending of 830 and it is probable that political authority had alreadly collapsed at this time . Important cities such as Oxpemul , <unk> and La Muñeca that were Calakmul 's vassals at one time now erected their own monuments , where before they had raised very few ; some continued producing new monuments until as late as 889 . This was a process that paralleled events at Tikal . However , there is strong evidence of an elite presence at the city continuing until AD 900 , possibly even later . 
 In 849 , Calakmul was mentioned at Seibal where a ruler named as Chan Pet attended the K 'atun @-@ ending ceremony ; his name may also be recorded on a broken ceramic at Calakmul itself . However , it is unlikely that Calakmul still existed as a state in any meaningful way at this late date . A final flurry of activity took place at the end of the 9th century or the beginning of the 10th . A new stela was erected , although the date records only the day , not the full date . The recorded day may fall either in 899 or 909 with the latter date the most likely . A few monuments appear to be even later although their style is crude , representing the efforts of a remnant population to maintain the Classic Maya tradition . Even the inscriptions on these late monuments are meaningless imitations of writing . 
 Ceramics dating to the Terminal Classic period are uncommon outside of the site core , suggesting that the population of the city was concentrated in the city centre in the final phase of Calakmul 's occupation . The majority of the surviving population probably consisted of commoners who had occupied the elite architecture of the site core but the continued erection of stelae into the early 10th century and the presence of high status imported goods such as metal , obsidian , jade and shell , indicate a continued occupation by royalty until the final abandonment of the city . The Yucatec @-@ speaking Kejache Maya who lived in the region at the time of Spanish contact in the early 16th century may have been the descendants of the inhabitants of Calakmul . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Calakmul was first reported by Cyrus Lundell in 1931 . A year later he informed Sylvanus Morley of the site 's existence and the presence of more than 60 stelae . Morley visited the ruins himself on behalf of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in 1932 . In the 1930s surveys mapped the site core and recorded 103 stelae . Investigations stopped in 1938 and archaeologists did not return to the site until 1982 when William J. Folan directed a project on behalf of the Universidad Autónoma de Campeche , working at Calakmul until 1994 . Calakmul is now the subject of a large @-@ scale project of the National Institute of Anthropology and History ( INAH ) under the direction of Ramón Carrasco . 
 = = Site description = = 
 The site core of Calakmul covers an area of approximately 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , an area that contains the remains of roughly 1000 structures . The periphery occupied by smaller residential structures beyond the site core covers an area of more than 20 square kilometres ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) within which archaeologists have mapped approximately 6250 structures . Calakmul matches the great city of Tikal in size and estimated population , although the density of the city appears to have been greater than that city . 
 The stone used in construction at the site is a soft limestone . This has resulted in severe erosion of the site 's sculpture . The city of Calakmul was built in a strongly concentric fashion and can be divided into zones as one moves outwards from the centre of the site . The innermost zone covers an area of approximately 1 @.@ 75 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 68 sq mi ) It contains most of the monumental architecture and has 975 mapped structures , about 300 of which are built from vaulted stone masonry . About 92 structures were built on large pyramids laid out around plazas and courtyards . The city 's core was bordered on the north side by a 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) high wall that controlled access from the north and may also have had a defensive function . 
 Many commoners residences were built along the edge of El Laberinto swamp to the west of the site core , although some high @-@ status residences and public buildings were interspersed among these . The area between the residences was used for horticulture . 
 = = = Water control = = = 
 The site is surrounded by an extensive network of canals and reservoirs . There are five major reservoirs , including the largest example in the Maya world , measuring 242 by 212 metres ( 794 by 696 ft ) . This reservoir is filled by a small seasonal river during the rainy season and continues to hold enough water for it to be used by archaeologists in modern times . 
 Thirteen reservoirs have been identified at Calakmul . The combined capacity of all the reservoirs is estimated at over 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 litres ( 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) . This quantity of water could have supported 50 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 people ; there is no evidence that the reservoirs were used to irrigate crops . 
 Aguada 1 is the largest of the reservoirs and has a surface area of 5 hectares ( 540 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Causeways = = = 
 Eight sacbe ( causeways ) have been located around Calakmul . Two of these have been mapped , three have been identified visually on the ground and three more identified with remote sensing . They have been numbered as Sacbe 1 through to Sacbe 7 . The causeway network not only linked Calakmul with local satellite sites but also with more distant allies and rivals , such as the great cities of El Mirador , El Tintal and Nakbe . Those causeways that cross swampy land are elevated above the surrounding wetland and they now tend to support denser vegetation than the surrounding forest . 
 Sacbe 1 is 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) long and is lined and filled with stone . It is located within the mapped urban area of the site core . Sacbe 1 was first mapped in the 1930s by the Carnegie Institution of Washington . 
 Sacbe 2 is 70 metres ( 230 ft ) long . It has been mapped within the urban area of the site core . Sacbe 2 is built of packed earth and was discovered during the archaeological excavation of a nearby quarry . This causeway may have been built to transport stone from the quarry in order to build Structures 1 and 3 . 
 Sacbe 3 extends 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) northeast from the site core and is visible from the summit of Structure 1 . It was first discovered in 1982 . 
 Sacbe 4 runs 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) southeast from the site core , it is also visible from the summit of Structure 1 and was discovered in 1982 . 
 Sacbe 5 runs westwards from the main watering hole , across El Laberinto seasonal swamp and carries on for a total distance of 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) or more towards <unk> . 
 Sacbe 6 runs southwest across El Laberinto bajo and links Calakmul with El Mirador ( 38 @.@ 25 kilometres ( 23 @.@ 77 mi ) to the southwest ) and , beyond it , El Tintal ( an additional 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) . 
 Sacbe 7 is located south of Sacbe 6 . It is at least 5 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 2 mi ) long and runs across El Laberinto swamp . 
 Sacbe 8 is on the west side of the swamp and does not appear to cross it to the site core . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Structure 1 ( or Structure I ) is a 50 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 160 ft ) pyramid to the east of the site core . A number of stelae were erected at its base by Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil in 731 . Because it was built on a low hill , Structure 1 appears to be higher than Structure 2 , although this is not the case . 
 Structure 2 ( or Structure II ) is a massive north @-@ facing pyramid temple , one of the largest in the Maya world . Its base measures 120 metres ( 390 ft ) square and it stands over 45 metres ( 148 ft ) high . In common with many temple pyramids in the Mesoamerican cultural region , the pyramid at Calakmul increased in size by building upon the pre @-@ existing temple in order to increase its bulk . The core of the building ( Structure 2A ) is a triadic pyramid dating to the Late Preclassic period , with this ancient building still forming the highest point of the structure . In the Early Classic a massive extension was added to the front of the pyramid , covering an earlier stucco @-@ covered building on the north side . Three new shrines were built upon this extension ( Structures 2B , 2C and 2D ) , each of these shrines had its own access stairway . Structure 2B was the central shrine , 2C was to the east and 2D to the west . The facade possessed six large masks set between these stairways , three arranged vertically on each side of the central stairway . Structure 2 is similar in date , size and design to the El Tigre pyramid at El Mirador , and associated ceramics are also similar . At a later time buildings were erected along the base of the facade , each of these contained stelae . In the 8th century AD , Structure 2B was entombed under a large pyramid and a stepped facade covered the giant masks . Later another facade was built over this 8th century stepped frontage but it may never have been finished . In the Late Classic a nine @-@ room palace was built on top of the pyramid , supporting a roof comb that had painted stucco bas @-@ relief decoration . The rooms were arranged in three groups of three , each room positioned behind the next . The entire Late Classic palace measured 19 @.@ 4 by 12 metres ( 64 by 39 ft ) . The front two rows of rooms ( Rooms 1 through to 6 ) were used for food preparation , metates and hearths were found in each of them . Room 7 , the southwest room , was a <unk> . 
 Structure 3 ( or Structure III , also known as the Lundell Palace ) is southeast of Structure 4 , on the east side of the Central Plaza . It is a building with multiple rooms . 
 Structure 4 ( or Structure IV ) is a group of three temples on the east side of the Central Plaza . It is divided into three sections , labelled Structures 4a , 4b and 4c . The central Structure 4b is built upon a substructure dating to the Preclassic period . Together with Structure 6 on the opposite side of the plaza , these buildings form an E @-@ Group that may have been used to determine the solstices and the equinoxes . 
 Structure 5 ( or Structure V ) is a large building located on the plaza to the north of Structure 2 . It was surrounded by 10 stelae , many dated to the 7th century AD although the building itself was first erected in the Preclassic period . 
 Structure 6 ( or Structure VI ) is on the west side of the Central Plaza and , together with Structures 4a , 4b and 4c , forms an E @-@ Group astronomical complex . In 1989 observations verified that on March 21 , the vernal equinox , the sun rose behind Structure 4b as seen from Structure 6 . 
 Structure 7 ( or Structure VII ) is a temple pyramid on the north side of the Central Plaza . It faces south and stands 24 metres ( 79 ft ) high . Five plain stelae were erected on the south side of the pyramid . It underwent several construction phases from in the Late to Terminal Classic . The pyramid was topped by a three @-@ room temple that possessed a tall stucco @-@ covered roof comb . A <unk> game board was carved into the floor of the outermost room of the temple . 
 Structure 8 ( or Structure VIII ) is a small building located on the north side of the Central Plaza , to the east of Structure 7 . It is associated with Stela 1 and its altar . 
 = = = Stelae , murals and ceramics = = = 
 Calakmul is one of the most structure @-@ rich sites within the Maya region . The site contains 117 stelae , the largest total in the region . Most are in paired sets representing rulers and their wives . However , because these carved stelae were produced in soft limestone , most of these stelae have been eroded beyond interpretation . Also many elaborate murals were discovered at Calakmul . These murals do not represent activities of the elite class . Rather , they depict elaborate market scenes of people preparing or consuming products such as <unk> , tamales , or tobacco as an ointment . Also items being sold were textiles and needles . These murals also have glyphs within them describing the actions occurring . The most prominent figure in these murals is identified as Lady Nine Stone ; she appears in many scenes . This brings a world of the Maya marketplace to vibrant life for archaeologists . Another highly beneficial resource to Maya archaeological understanding at Calakmul is the ceramic remains . The composition of the ceramic materials identifies the region or more specifically the polity that produced them . Ceramics with the snake emblem glyph found at several sites also give more evidence to identify ties or control over that site by Calakmul . 
 Stela 1 is associated with an altar and located by Structure 8 . 
 Stela 8 records the celebration of an event in AD 593 by Uneh Chan and was erected after his death . 
 Stela 9 is a thin slate monument dated to 662 . Its text describes the birth of king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' and gives him his full royal title . 
 Stela 28 and Stela 29 were erected in 623 and are the earliest monuments to survive from Late Classic Calakmul . They depict a royal couple but the texts are too poorly preserved to reveal their names . 
 Stela 33 was erected by Yuknoom Che 'en II in 657 and records an event in the reign of Uneh Chan , who may have been his father . The event was celebrated in 593 . 
 Stela 38 stands at the base of Structure 2 . 
 Stela 42 is also located at the base of Structure 2 . 
 Stela 43 dates to AD 514 . It was set in a vaulted chamber near the base of Structure 2 . The text is damaged but carries an early spelling of the k 'uhul <unk> <unk> non @-@ royal noble title used in Calakmul and the Mirador Basin . 
 Stela 50 is one of the last monuments erected during the final decline of the city . It bears a crude , clumsily executed portrait . 
 Stela 51 is the best preserved monument at Calakmul . It depicts Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil and dates to AD 731 . 
 Stela 54 dates to 731 and depicts a wife of Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . 
 Stela 57 is a tall stela erected in 771 by B 'olon K 'awiil . It is paired with Stela 58 and stands to the east of Structure 13 . 
 Stela 58 is the second of a pair erected by B 'olon K 'awiil in 771 , the other being Stela 57 . It was erected to the east of Structure 13 . 
 Stela 61 is a late monument bearing the name Aj Took ' . It is a stunted stela with a badly eroded portrait and a shortened date form that is equivalent to a date either in 899 or 909 , probably the latter . 
 Stela 62 was unfinished . It was carved to mark the K 'atun @-@ ending ceremony of 751 and bears the damaged name of Ruler Z. 
 Stela 76 and Stela 78 are a pair of monuments dated to AD 633 . They are badly eroded but should date to the reign of king Yuknoom Head . 
 Stela 84 is one of the last monuments erected at Calakmul and bears an inscription that is an illiterate imitation of writing . It probably dates to the early 10th century AD . 
 Stela 88 may have been paired with Stela 62 . The monument has the image of a queen but her name is unknown . B 'olon K 'awiil also appears to be mentioned on the stela . It dates to around 751 and stands on the stairway of Structure 13 . Stela 91 is another very late monument probably dating to the early 10th century . Like Stela 84 , it bears an inscription that is a meaningless imitation of hieroglyphic writing . 
 Stela 114 dates to AD 435 , in the Early Classic . It was moved in antiquity to be reset into the base of Structure 2 . The stela has a long hieroglyphic text that has resisted translation but probably commemorates a royal enthronement in 411 . 
 Stela 115 and Stela 116 date to the reign of Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' . They were broken and buried in Structure 2 and may be associated with the royal burial in Tomb 4 . 
 = = = Royal burial = = = 
 Tomb 4 was set into the floor of Structure 2B in the 8th century AD and is the richest burial known from Calakmul . The tomb contained a male skeleton wrapped in textiles and jaguar pelts that were partially preserved with resin . The tomb contained rich offerings that included jade ear ornaments handed down from the Early Classic , a jade mosaic mask , shell and bone beads , spiny oyster shells , eccentric obsidian blades , fine ceramics and the remains of wooden objects . One of the ceramics was a plate with a hieroglyphic text that specifically named king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' as its owner . The remains and the offering were placed in an arched wooden bier carved with elaborate decoration and hieroglyphs that was painted in a variety of colours . The bier has almost completely decayed but left an impression in the mud packed around it . Due to the plate and the possible association of Stelae 115 and 116 with the burial the tomb is believed to be that of the late 7th @-@ century king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' . 
 = U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky = 
 U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky is a concert film by Irish rock band U2 . It was recorded on 5 June 1983 at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Colorado , United States , on the group 's War Tour . Originally released in 1984 on videocassette , U2 Live at Red Rocks was the band 's first video release . It accompanied a 1983 live album entitled Under a Blood Red Sky , on which two tracks from the film appear . The video was directed by Gavin Taylor and produced by Rick Wurpel and Doug Stewart . 
 The film was arranged by U2 management to showcase the band 's live act and to promote them to American audiences . It depicts the band 's performance at Red Rocks on a rain @-@ soaked evening . The concert was almost cancelled because of the inclement weather , but the band had invested in the filming with Island Records and concert promoter Barry Fey and wished to proceed with the gig . The rain and the torch @-@ lit atmosphere of the surroundings made U2 's performance dramatic . Segments of U2 Live at Red Rocks were shown in regular rotation on MTV , and were also broadcast on other television networks . 
 Critics praised the concert and the video , and it subsequently became a best @-@ seller . The video , along with Under a Blood Red Sky , helped establish U2 's reputation as remarkable live performers and boosted Red Rocks ' stature as a live venue . A remastered edition of U2 Live at Red Rocks was released on DVD in September 2008 with previously unreleased tracks , coinciding with a remastered edition of Under a Blood Red Sky . Rolling Stone selected the film 's performance of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " as one of the " 50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Planning and organization = = = 
 In 1981 , U2 were on their Boy Tour to promote their debut album , Boy . Following their 11 May concert at Rainbow Music Hall in Denver , concert promoter Chuck Morris took the band to the nearby Red Rocks Amphitheatre — a natural amphitheatre located between sandstone cliffs in the Rocky Mountains . Bassist Adam Clayton said , " From the moment we saw it , we were thinking , ' Some day we will play here ' . It was very photogenic . " U2 's manager Paul McGuinness had long wanted to film the group for a concert video to highlight their success as a live act and to promote them to American audiences still unfamiliar with the Irish band . Concert promoter Barry Fey , who presented U2 's shows in the southwestern United States , saw the group 's potential and successfully lobbied for them to perform at Red Rocks . 
 In early 1983 , McGuinness contacted Malcolm Gerrie , producer of the British television series The Tube , about shooting a video of U2 at Red Rocks and possibly featuring it on The Tube . Gerrie initially assumed McGuinness was interested in creating a video of a single song ; however , McGuinness was hoping to create an hour @-@ long special . Because The Tube was not a " one @-@ band show " , Gerrie said he would have to sell the idea to Channel 4 television , but McGuinness insisted on giving Gerrie the rights to the video and letting Channel 4 broadcast the video without payment . 
 Filming costs were estimated at US $ 250 @,@ 000 , which included the illumination of the cliffs , a mobile sound recording unit , and a helicopter to film aerial footage . With U2 only able to invest $ 30 @,@ 000 , Fey agreed to help finance the project , along with Island Records . A joint production company called " U2 at Red Rocks Associates " was subsequently established to fund the filming ; the three parties split costs and shared profits from television rights and video sales . The radio rights were sold to American radio network NBC for inclusion in their concert series The Source . Throughout the United States leg of their War Tour , U2 filled venues with capacities similar to that of Red Rocks , leading the band to anticipate that the filming would take place before a sold @-@ out audience and that the concert 's revenues would help to offset production costs . 
 Fey 's corporation , <unk> Productions , coordinated with his production company , TTS , to manage the videotaping . Director Gavin Taylor and producer Malcolm Gerrie were selected as director and production associate , respectively . It was Taylor 's first visit to the United States , and it was the first time he filmed a major outdoor rock concert . Local producers Rick Wurpel and Doug Stewart were also on the staff . Taylor 's and McGuinness ' original plans were to feature the video on The Tube , but trade unions objected to their limited representation on the concert crew . However , a compromise was reached , allowing 15 minutes of the concert to be broadcast on The Tube . 
 = = = Weather challenges and preparations = = = 
 The group 's Red Rocks concert was scheduled for 5 June 1983 , but poor weather that day threatened to cancel the show . Torrential rain soaked the area , and flash flood warnings were issued . The weather made it difficult for the crew members to transport the band 's gear and video equipment through the mountains to the amphitheatre . The conditions also caused many technical problems for the filming and concert crews , which hampered stage construction and endangered the safety of those setting up lighting and sound equipment . Crew members used <unk> to keep rain away from the wires . The fans that attended had to hike through the Rocky Mountains in the rain . Between 15 and 20 fans were already camped out in the venue 's front rows early in the morning , and lead vocalist Bono accommodated them by serving coffee and tea . The Alarm and Divinyls cancelled their opening sets for safety reasons , and many fans thought the entire concert had been cancelled . The show was scheduled for 6 : 00 pm , and the band had until 1 : 00 pm to decide whether to move the concert elsewhere or risk the weather worsening , which could have necessitated a cancellation . 
 U2 , their crew and McGuinness thought that too much money had been invested to abort the concert , and they sympathised with the fans who had travelled to the venue in the poor weather . Accordingly , they decided to proceed with the concert as planned . Bono informed the fans waiting outside the venue that the show would be general admission , and told everyone to get as close to the stage as possible , regardless of the seating assignment on their tickets . Fey wanted to cancel the show but was flying to Denver from the US Festival in California with Morris when the decision to continue was made . After arriving in Denver , Fey called the amphitheatre to ask to where the concert was being moved , unaware that the band had decided to proceed with the show . Guitarist The Edge said that when Fey learned of the group 's decision , he could not believe it . The Edge said , " I don 't think he 'd ever heard anything quite so crazy in his life , going on with an outdoor show in the worst kind of weather , rain and wind in the mountains . He thought we 'd lost our minds completely . " Bono went on the radio that day to confirm that the Red Rocks concert was still taking place , and to promote a concert that the band planned for the following night at the CU Events Center to accommodate fans who were unable to attend the Red Rocks show . Clayton said during the band 's radio interviews , " We know it 's raining now but we 're sure it won 't be when the show starts , so please come . " Two hours before the concert , the downpour subsided and settled into a misty drizzle . The 9 @,@ 000 @-@ person venue had sold out , but because of the inclement weather , only about 4 @,@ 400 fans attended . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Taylor had a crew of six camera operators , including three Denver cinematographers and three others brought in by Taylor . Due to the thick fog and heavy rain on the night of the concert , very little aerial footage was suitable for the final edit . Although two " master angle " cameras on tripods provided wide and overview shots , most of the camera operators filmed with hand @-@ held cameras . The video cameras used had tube sensors , which created trails in the footage when they were pointed at direct light sources . As a result , much of the concert footage contains red streaks , prompting a notice on the future home video release informing viewers that the coloured lines in the footage " are a result of special lighting effects , and are not caused by a tape defect or your equipment " . The weather was cold enough that steam was coming out of the band members ' mouths , and The Edge had difficulty playing guitar because his hands felt " frozen stiff " . Drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. believes the weather contributed a dramatic atmosphere to the concert . Reduced attendance at the event was largely obscured in the concert footage by the thick mist that filled the air that evening , as well as strategic shots of the crowd . Taylor had a B @-@ stage built onto the set to reduce the gap between the audience and Bono , allowing him to perform close to the audience , surrounded by fans on three sides . Sound mixing was managed by Steve Lillywhite , who produced U2 's first three studio albums . Randy <unk> 's portable 24 @-@ track recording system , Effanel Music , was used because a conventional mobile recording studio could not be moved close enough to the stage . 
 Before U2 took the stage , Fey introduced the concert , making a reference to Bob Dylan 's live album Hard Rain . The concert itself featured 20 songs , with a set list identical to that of several previous shows on the tour . " Out of Control " opened the 16 @-@ song main set , which concluded with " Gloria " . A four @-@ song encore followed , with " 40 " being the final song performed . The band played songs from the tour 's supporting album War ( 1983 ) , as well as material from their first two albums , Boy ( 1980 ) and October ( 1981 ) . " Party Girl " — a B @-@ side from the single " A Celebration " ( 1982 ) , and the non @-@ album single " 11 O 'Clock Tick Tock " ( 1980 ) were played during the encore . 
 During the song " The Electric Co . " , Bono left the stage and climbed up a lighting rig to display a white flag . In a 2004 interview , The Edge said that Bono " scared the shit out of [ him ] " by climbing onto the rig and risking electrocution by the live wires in close proximity . Bono said " good night " to the crowd on nearly a half a dozen occasions so that the post @-@ production crew would have several choices of songs with which to end the film . Backstage , the band members were disappointed that the crowd did not initially chant " how long to sing this song ? " after the band had left the stage following the final song , " 40 " , which had become a tradition . However , tour manager Dennis Sheehan hid underneath the crowd barrier and began singing the refrain into a microphone without being asked . Eventually , the crowd joined in ; the film was edited to disguise the fact that the singing was organised . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcasts and home video = = = 
 The concert was first broadcast on 8 , 9 and 10 July 1983 on NBC 's radio network The Source under the title War Is Declared . The broadcast was sponsored by Budweiser and the United States Army , and was distributed to radio stations on two LP records , which included the full 20 @-@ song concert . Twelve of the concert 's songs were later broadcast on American television network Showtime , and nine songs were broadcast on MTV . The film 's performance of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " became the song 's music video ; Malcolm Gerrie , Rick Wurpel and Paul McGuinness were credited as producers . In June 1986 , the video was one of 10 concert films aired on television stations throughout the US as part of a series of music specials presented by the Coors Brewing Company and Radio Vision International . The concert has also been broadcast on VH1 and affiliates of the Public Broadcasting Service . 
 The Red Rocks film was screened at the CMJ Music Marathon in October 1983 to promote U2 's companion live mini @-@ LP Under a Blood Red Sky , which was released the following month . The mini @-@ LP , whose name was later used as a subtitle for the concert film , features eight live songs from the War Tour , two of which ( " Gloria " and " Party Girl " ) were taken from the Red Rocks concert ; the other tracks were taken from performances in Boston and West Germany , as U2 thought they were " more developed performances " . 
 U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky was U2 's first home video release , initially released on VHS and Betamax by MCA Home Video in 1984 . The video recording was re @-@ released in August 1986 by RCA / Columbia Pictures Home Video , followed by a LaserDisc release from RCA / Columbia and Image Entertainment in 1988 , and two additional VHS re @-@ releases by Virgin Video in 1987 and PolyGram in 1991 . 
 The image of Bono atop the lighting rig during his performance of " The Electric Co . " was used as the cover of the video with the text Under a Blood Red Sky . The film begins with a brief montage that includes an interview with U2 , preparations being made by the concert crew and reactions by anxious fans . The Clannad song " Theme from Harry 's Game " , which was played after many of U2 's shows at the time , is heard in the film 's opening montage and during the end credits . The film 's subtitle " Under a Blood Red Sky " , also the title of the companion live album , originates from a lyric in " New Year 's Day " . This lyric is not sung in the film ; instead Bono sang " under a thundercloud and rain " , in reference to the weather conditions . 
 During the band 's performance of " Cry / The Electric Co . " , Bono sang excerpts of Stephen Sondheim 's " Send in the Clowns " . The band failed to get permission or to pay the appropriate licensing and royalty fees to use the song . Initial pressings of U2 Live at Red Rocks , and the accompanying live album — which contains a different performance of the song from August 1983 — featured " Send in the Clowns " . U2 were forced to pay US $ 50 @,@ 000 in an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement . The initial release of the video was 55 minutes long and featured 13 songs from the film , including " Cry / The Electric Co . " , which was omitted from the track listing for legal reasons related to the excerpt of " Send in the Clowns " . 
 Recordings of " Twilight " and " An Cat Dubh " from the concert were featured on U2 's single " Sweetest Thing " in 1998 . In 2004 , the concert recording of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " appeared on the compilation album Carved in Stone Vol . 2 : Live at Red Rocks , a charity record to raise funds for the " Preserve the Rocks Fund " , which aimed to renovate and preserve Red Rocks Park . 
 Following the release of the official concert recordings , video and audio bootleg recordings circulated that featured the entirety of the band 's performance . 
 = = = DVD re @-@ release = = = 
 In 2005 , after Rick Wurpel re @-@ opened his production business , he realised that neither he nor TTS had the master tapes in their inventory and feared that the tapes had been lost . He discovered the Denver City Council possessed the tapes among an inventory of 164 recordings . A former employee of Wurpel had been storing the tapes and intended to dispose of them unless the city was interested . The city had paid her $ 3 @,@ 000 for the storage costs and took possession of the tapes . Legal proceedings subsequently ensued to return the tapes to Wurpel and U2 . 
 Barry Fey later signed paperwork for a future DVD release at U2 's request . U2 Live at Red Rocks was re @-@ released on 30 September 2008 on DVD by Interscope Records , Island Records , and Universal Music Enterprises . The " 2008 Edition " of the film was remastered , and the audio remastering was directed by The Edge . The DVD features several tracks that were previously unreleased , extending the film from 55 minutes to 82 minutes . " Cry / The Electric Co . " was included on the video 's track listing ; the performance was edited to remove the excerpt of " Send in the Clowns " that was present on the previous videocassette and LaserDisc releases . The editing @-@ out of the song created a continuity error in the video ; the previous versions showed Bono climbing the lighting rig and singing . The new edition removes that sequence , resulting in Bono leaving the stage and appearing on top of the lighting rig in the following shot . 
 The remastered DVD also features a version of " Two Hearts Beat as One " that was edited to remove an excerpt of " Let 's Twist Again " . The only song performed at the concert that does not appear in the remastered film is " I Fall Down " — played between " Cry / The Electric Co . " and " October " — which was omitted because of a camera malfunction . The DVD features a PCM stereo soundtrack , 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mixes in Dolby Digital and DTS sound , and an audio commentary by director Gavin Taylor . The re @-@ release of the film coincided with the release of a remastered version of its companion live album , Under a Blood Red Sky . These re @-@ releases were available separately or bundled together in a CD / DVD deluxe package . The liner notes for the film re @-@ release were written by music critic Anthony DeCurtis . Remastered versions of U2 's first three albums — Boy , October , and War — had been released earlier in 2005 , and a box set with the three albums and an open slot for the deluxe version of Under a Blood Red Sky was sold exclusively by Amazon.com. 
 = = Reception = = 
 Both the concert and the U2 Live at Red Rocks video received positive reviews from critics . In a review of the show , G. Brown of The Denver Post wrote , " A lot of things had to go so wrong for U2 's show at Red Rocks Amphitheater ... to come off so right . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised the film , saying , " The setting lent even more urgency to U2 's <unk> songs about apocalypse , pacifism and existential terror " . Pareles said , " Although there are a few too many exaggerated camera angles , the tape captures U2 's earnest intensity . " A review in the Philadelphia Daily News described the camerawork as " artful " and praised the visuals of the concert and the natural surroundings . Perry Seibert of Allmovie gave the film four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars , praising the band 's performance and the venue 's role in the concert , saying , " the historic Red Rocks venue provides a stirring backdrop for the band 's sweeping sound " . 
 In November 1984 , the video was nominated for the Best Long Form award at Billboard magazines 's Video Music Conference and the performance of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was nominated for the Best Concert Performance award . When Billboard debuted the Top Music Videocassettes chart ( later renamed Top Music Videos ) in the 30 March 1985 issue , U2 Live at Red Rocks was ranked at number seven , and was included in the year @-@ end Top 10 Music Videocassettes charts for 1985 and 1987 . Following the 2008 DVD release , the video re @-@ entered the chart for the first time since 1989 , listed at number 3 ; overall , U2 Live at Red Rocks spent 148 weeks on the Top Music <unk> / Top Music Videos chart . In April 1985 , the video appeared on Billboard 's Top Videocassette Sales chart at number 29 , and remained on the chart for 14 weeks . Billboard attributed the late increase in the video 's sales to U2 's sold @-@ out Unforgettable Fire Tour , and called it " a textbook example of a group 's current status having a direct influence on video sales " . 
 Following the release of the DVD in 2008 , Record Collector stated that " 25 years on , [ U2 Live at Red Rocks has ] lost none of its power " . Rocky Mountain News recalled that the video is " still a thrilling performance , raw but polished , passionate and sincere " . Andrew Gilstrap of PopMatters gave the remastered version of the film a rating of 8 out of 10 , stating , " It 's rare that a band can totally transform a scene — especially one with a stage show that boasts charisma as its only special effect — but it 's not hyperbole to say that U2 put on a dominating , flawless @-@ despite @-@ mistakes performance . This is the one that put U2 on the map . " In its review of the remastered version of Under a Blood Red Sky , online magazine Pitchfork Media said , " when the group performed at Red Rocks on a rainy June night , with lit torches above a panoramic skyline , the venue provided an ideal backdrop for U2 's literally flag @-@ waving music , with everything — earth , wind , fire — in place to maximise and heighten the drama of the moment and the songs . " James <unk> of The Sunday Telegraph and the Sunday Herald Sun gave the DVD a score of 5 out of 5 , praising the film 's concert , but stated that the " footage is still on the fuzzy side " . The Advertiser said the DVD 's audio commentary was very informative , but criticised the picture quality , stating , " even the remastered version looks like it was shot on a mobile phone " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 U2 Live at Red Rocks is often cited as a watershed moment in U2 's history which established their reputation as an exceptional live act . In the liner notes of the remastered version of the film , music journalist Anthony DeCurtis wrote , " this concert set goals for U2 that might have daunted any other young band . But in the shadow of their wild ambitions at Red Rocks , these four boys met , once again , the men of their future , and became who they would become . " Rolling Stone called the band 's performance of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " from the film one of the " 50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll " . The magazine said , " [ t ] he sight of Bono singing the anti @-@ violence anthem ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' while waving a white flag through crimson mist ( created by a combination of wet weather , hot lights and the illumination of those crags ) became the defining image of U2 's warrior @-@ rock spirit and — shown in heavy rotation on MTV — broke the band nationwide . " Director Gavin Taylor said that the video " kick @-@ started their career " and " fired them like a rocket into the sky " . In 2009 , Relix named U2 's performance at Red Rocks the 24th @-@ best concert of all time . The Denver Post said the concert affirmed Red Rocks Amphitheatre 's status as a premier outdoor venue . Rocky Mountain News said that the concert was " [ e ] asily one of the most famous , acclaimed concerts of the 1980s ( if not all time ) " , and that people who have visited the Amphitheatre ever since have been disappointed to learn that the pyres are not part of the venue and were only used for the U2 concert . Music biographer Dave Thompson said the concert " transformed U2 ... into a very successful rock band " , and that without U2 , " Red Rocks would be just another smartly lit amphitheater " . 
 Prior to the recording sessions for the band 's 1984 album The Unforgettable Fire , U2 wanted to work with Brian Eno on the album . However , Eno assumed that they were an " uninteresting rock band " and he was not interested in working with them . He changed his mind after listening to the Red Rocks concert and produced The Unforgettable Fire and several other U2 records — including The Joshua Tree , Achtung Baby , and All That You Can 't Leave Behind , which are among the band 's most successful — alongside his sound engineer Daniel Lanois . 
 In June 2007 , a U2 tribute band named Under a Blood Red Sky performed a note @-@ for @-@ note recreation of U2 's performance at Red Rocks . That same week , the City of Denver unsuccessfully tried to persuade U2 to return to Red Rocks . During the PopMart Tour in 1997 , Bono stated that because of low ticket sales for their Denver concert at Mile High Stadium , a return to the more intimate Red Rocks setting held appeal . However , in a 2008 interview , Barry Fey said that he had questioned U2 about performing at Red Rocks again , to which they replied , " Absolutely not " . On both occasions , Fey said that U2 could never top their original performance and that returning to Red Rocks would be " foolish " and " a no @-@ win situation " for the group . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 U2 
 Bono – vocals , guitar on " A Day Without Me " 
 Adam Clayton – bass guitar , guitar on " 40 " 
 The Edge – guitar , keyboards , backing vocals , lap steel guitar on " Surrender " , bass guitar on " 40 " , lead vocals on " Seconds " 
 Larry Mullen , Jr . – drums , backing vocals 
 Film crew 
 Malcolm Gerrie – production associate 
 Paul McGuinness for U2 at Red Rocks Associates – executive producer 
 Doug Stewart – producer 
 Gavin Taylor – director 
 Rick Wurpel – producer 
 = HMS Agincourt ( 1913 ) = 
 HMS Agincourt was a dreadnought battleship built in the United Kingdom in the early 1910s . Originally part of Brazil 's role in a South American naval arms race , she held the distinction of mounting more heavy guns ( fourteen ) and more turrets ( seven ) than any other dreadnought battleship , in keeping with the Brazilians ' requirement for an especially impressive design . 
 Brazil ordered the ship in 1911 as Rio de Janeiro from the British company Armstrong Whitworth . However , the collapse of Brazil 's rubber boom and a warming in relations with Argentina , the country 's chief rival , led to the ship 's sale while under construction to the Ottoman Empire . The Ottomans renamed her Sultan Osman I , after the empire 's founder , and the ship was nearly complete when World War I broke out . British fears of a coming Ottoman – German alliance led to her seizure for use by the Royal Navy , together with another Ottoman dreadnought being constructed in Britain . This act was a significant contributor to the decision of the Ottoman government to join the Central Powers , as the payments for both ships were complete . 
 Renamed HMS Agincourt by the Royal Navy , she joined the Grand Fleet in the North Sea . During the war , the ship spent the bulk of her time on patrols and exercises , although she did participate in the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . Agincourt was put into reserve in 1919 and sold for scrap in 1922 to meet the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the unstable period during and following the 1889 revolution in Brazil , which deposed Emperor Dom Pedro II , and the 1893 – 94 navy revolt , the Brazilian Navy found itself unable to care for its own ships , let alone acquire new vessels . Meanwhile , Chile had agreed to a naval @-@ limiting pact in 1902 with Brazil 's principal rival , Argentina , as part of solving a larger boundary dispute , but they both retained the vessels built in the interim , many of which were significantly more modern and powerful than Brazil 's ships . The Brazilian Navy was left behind its Argentine and Chilean counterparts in quantity as well — by the turn of the 20th century , Chile 's total naval tonnage was 36 @,@ 896 long tons ( 37 @,@ 488 t ) , Argentina 's 34 @,@ 425 long tons ( 34 @,@ 977 t ) , and Brazil 's 27 @,@ 661 long tons ( 28 @,@ 105 t ) — even though Brazil had nearly three times the population of Argentina and almost five times that of Chile . 
 Rising international demand for coffee and rubber in the early 20th century brought Brazil an influx of revenue . Simultaneously , the Baron of Rio Branco spearheaded a drive by prominent Brazilians to force the leading world nations to recognize Brazil as an international power . The National Congress of Brazil inaugurated a large naval acquisition program in late 1904 . They ordered three small battleships in 1906 , but the launch of HMS Dreadnought caused the Brazilian Navy to reconsider their purchase . In March 1907 , they signed a contract for three Minas Geraes @-@ class battleships . Two ships would be constructed immediately by the British companies Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers , with the third to follow . 
 Alarmed at the Brazilian move , Argentina and Chile quickly nullified their 1902 pact and sought dreadnoughts of their own . Argentina 's orders , after a drawn @-@ out bidding process , went to an American company , Fore River Shipbuilding Company , while Chile 's orders , delayed by the 1906 Valparaíso earthquake , went to Armstrong . Since Brazil 's relations with Argentina were warming and the country 's economic boom was losing steam , the government negotiated with Armstrong to remove the third dreadnought from the contract , but without success . They borrowed the necessary money , and Armstrong laid down Rio de Janeiro 's keel in March 1910 . 
 The Brazilian Navy had divided into two distinct factions , based on the size of the main battery . The outgoing naval minister favoured an increase over the 12 @-@ inch guns mounted on board the Minas Geraes class , while his incoming counterpart , Admiral Marques Leão , favoured keeping the smaller but faster @-@ firing gun . While the exact influences upon the Brazilian government are unclear , Leão was advocating strongly for his position in meetings with the President . Other events probably influenced them as well , such as the November 1910 Revolt of the Lash , payments on loans taken out for the dreadnoughts , and a worsening economy that had led to high government debt compounded by budget deficits . By May 1911 , the President had made up his mind : 
 When I assumed office , I found that my predecessor had signed a contract for the building of the battleship Rio de Janeiro , a vessel of 32 @,@ 000 tons , with an armament of 14 in. guns . Considerations of every kind pointed to the inconvenience of acquiring such a vessel and to the revision of the contract in the sense of reducing the tonnage . This was done , and we shall possess a powerful unit which will not be built on exaggerated lines such as have not as yet stood the time of experience . 
 A contract to build the ship that would become Agincourt was signed on 3 June 1911 , and its keel was laid on 14 September 1911 . The design called for a staggering fourteen 12 @-@ inch guns , something historian David Topliss attributed to political necessity : the ship had to appear more powerful to the Brazilian populace than her predecessors ( with twelve 12 @-@ inch guns ) but , without increasing the gun size , the only option left was increasing the total number of guns . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Agincourt had an overall length of 671 ft 6 in ( 204 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 89 feet ( 27 m ) , and a draught of 29 feet 10 inches ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . She displaced 27 @,@ 850 long tons ( 28 @,@ 297 t ) at load and 30 @,@ 860 long tons ( 31 @,@ 355 t ) at deep load . The ship had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 9 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) at deep load . She had a large turning circle , but manoeuvred well despite her great length . She was considered to be a good gun platform . 
 When she came to serve in the Royal Navy , Agincourt was considered a particularly comfortable ship and very well @-@ appointed internally . A knowledge of Portuguese was necessary to work many of the fittings — including those in the heads — as the original instruction plates had not all been replaced when she was taken over by the British . In 1917 , her crew numbered 1 @,@ 268 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Agincourt had four Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines , each of which drove one propeller shaft . The high @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines drove the wing shafts while the low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines drove the inner shafts . The three @-@ bladed propellers were 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 9 m ) in diameter . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) , but achieved more than 40 @,@ 000 shp ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) during her sea trials , slightly exceeding her designed speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 The steam plant consisted of twenty @-@ two Babcock & Wilcox water @-@ tube boilers with an operating pressure of 235 psi ( 1 @,@ 620 kPa ; 17 kgf / cm2 ) . Agincourt normally carried 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) of coal , but could carry a maximum of 3 @,@ 200 long tons ( 3 @,@ 300 t ) , as well as 620 long tons ( 630 t ) of fuel oil to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Electrical power was provided by four steam @-@ driven reciprocating electrical generators . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Agincourt mounted fourteen BL 12 @-@ inch Mk XIII 45 @-@ calibre guns in seven twin hydraulically powered turrets , unofficially named after the days of the week , starting from Sunday , forward to aft . This was the largest number of turrets and heavy guns ever mounted on a dreadnought battleship . The guns could be depressed to − 3 ° and elevated to 13 @.@ 5 ° . They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 725 ft / s ( 831 m / s ) ; at 13 @.@ 5 ° , this provided a maximum range of just over 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) with armour @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells . During the war the turrets were modified to increase their maximum elevation to 16 ° , but this only extended the range to 20 @,@ 435 yards ( 18 @,@ 686 m ) . The rate of fire of these guns was 1 @.@ 5 rounds per minute . When a full broadside was fired , " the resulting sheet of flame was big enough to create the impression that a battle cruiser had blown up ; it was awe inspiring . " No damage was done to the ship when firing full broadsides , despite the common idea that doing so would break the ship in half , but much of the ship 's tableware and glassware did shatter when Agincourt fired her first broadside . 
 As built , Agincourt mounted eighteen BL 6 @-@ inch Mk XIII 50 @-@ calibre guns . Fourteen were placed in armoured casemates on the upper deck and two each in the fore and aft superstructures , protected by gun shields . Two more were added abreast the bridge in pivot mounts protected by gun shields when the ship was purchased by the British . The guns could be depressed to − 7 ° and elevated to 13 ° , later increased to 15 ° . They had a range of 13 @,@ 475 yards ( 12 @,@ 322 m ) at 15 ° when firing a 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shell with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 770 ft / s ( 840 m / s ) . Their rate of fire was about five to seven rounds per minute , but this dropped to about three rounds per minute after the ready ammunition was used up because the ammunition hoists were too slow or few to keep the guns fully supplied . About 150 rounds were carried per gun . 
 Close @-@ range defence against torpedo boats was provided by ten 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 45 @-@ calibre quick @-@ firing guns . These were mounted in the superstructure in pivot mounts and protected by gun shields . Agincourt also carried three 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes ; one was on each beam and the last was in the stern . The water that entered the torpedo tubes when they were fired was discharged into the torpedo flat to facilitate reloading the tube and then pumped overboard . This meant that the torpedo crewmen would be operating in 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) of water if rapid fire was required . Ten torpedoes were carried for them . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 Each turret was fitted with an armoured rangefinder in the turret roof . In addition , another one was mounted on top of the foretop . By the time of the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , Agincourt was possibly the only dreadnought of the Grand Fleet not fitted with a Dreyer fire @-@ control table . A fire @-@ control director was later fitted below the foretop and one turret was modified to control the entire main armament later in the war . A director for the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns was added on each side in 1916 – 17 . A high @-@ angle rangefinder was added in 1918 to the spotting top . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 So much weight had been devoted to Agincourt 's armament that little remained for her armour . Her waterline belt was just 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick , compared with twelve inches or more found in other British dreadnoughts . It ran some 365 feet ( 111 @.@ 3 m ) , from the forward edge of " Monday " barbette to the middle of " Friday " barbette . Forward of this the belt thinned to six inches for about 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) before further reducing to 4 inches ( 102 mm ) all the way to the bow . Aft of the midships section the belt reduced to six inches for about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) and then thinned to four inches ( 102 mm ) ; it did not reach the stern , but terminated at the rear bulkhead . The upper belt extended from the main to the upper deck and was six inches thick . It ran from " Monday " barbette to " Thursday " barbette . The armour bulkheads at each end of the ship angled inwards from the ends of the midships armoured belts to the end barbettes and were three inches thick . Four of Agincourt 's decks were armoured with thicknesses varying from 1 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 to 64 mm ) . 
 The armour of the barbettes constituted a major weakness in Agincourt 's protection . They were 9 inches thick above the upper deck level , but decreased to 3 inches between the upper and main decks and had no armour at all below the main deck except for " Sunday " barbette ( which had 3 inches ) , and " Thursday " and " Saturday " barbettes ( which had 2 inches ) . The turret armour was 12 inches thick on the face , 8 inches ( 203 mm ) on the side and 10 inches ( 254 mm ) in the rear . The turret roofs were 3 inches thick at the front and 2 inches at the rear . The casemates for the secondary armament were protected by 6 inches of armour and were defended from raking fire by 6 @-@ inch @-@ thick bulkheads . 
 The main conning tower was protected by 12 inches of armour on its sides and it had a 4 @-@ inch roof . The aft conning tower ( sometimes called the torpedo control tower ) had 9 @-@ inch sides and a 3 @-@ inch roof . The communications tube down from each position was 6 inches thick above the upper deck and 2 inches thick below it . Each magazine was protected by two armour plates on each side as torpedo bulkheads , the first one an inch thick and the second one and a half inches thick . 
 Agincourt had another weakness in that she was not subdivided to Royal Navy standards as the Brazilians preferred to eliminate all possible watertight bulkheads that might limit the size of the compartments and interfere with the crew 's comfort . One example was the officer 's wardroom , which was 85 by 60 feet ( 25 @.@ 9 by 18 @.@ 3 m ) in size , much larger than anything in the Grand Fleet . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Approximately 70 long tons ( 71 t ) of high @-@ tensile steel was added to the main deck after the Battle of Jutland to protect the magazines . Two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were added to the quarterdeck in 1917 – 18 . A 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder was added to the former searchlight platform on the foremast at the same time . A high @-@ angle rangefinder was added to the spotting top in 1918 . 
 = = Construction and seizure = = 
 Rio de Janeiro , as Agincourt was named by her first owners , was laid down on 14 September 1911 by Armstrongs in Newcastle upon Tyne and launched on 22 January 1913 . After the keel @-@ laying the Brazilian government found itself in an unenviable position : a European depression after the end of the Second Balkan War in August 1913 reduced Brazil 's ability to obtain foreign loans , while at the same time Brazil 's coffee and rubber exports collapsed , the latter due to the loss of the Brazilian rubber monopoly to British plantations in the Far East . In addition , reports on new dreadnought construction coming in from overseas indicated that the vessel would be outclassed upon completion . These factors caused Brazil to put the ship up for sale in October 1913 , and she was sold to the Ottoman Navy for £ 2 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 on 28 December 1913 . Renamed Sultân Osmân @-@ ı Evvel , she underwent trials in July 1914 and was completed in August , just as World War I began . 
 The war broke out during her sea trials before delivery . Even though the Ottoman crew had arrived to collect her , the British Government took over the vessel for incorporation into the Royal Navy . The Turkish captain , waiting with five hundred Turkish sailors aboard a transport in the Tyne , threatened to board his ships and hoist the Turkish flag ; Churchill gave orders to resist such an attempt " by armed force if necessary . " At the same time the British also took over a second Ottoman battleship , a King George V class @-@ derived vessel being built by Vickers — Reşadiye — which was renamed HMS Erin . Such an action was allowed for in the contracts , as First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill did not want to risk the ships being used against the British , but it had consequences . 
 The takeover caused considerable ill will in the Ottoman Empire , where public subscriptions had partially funded the ships . When the Ottoman government had been in a financial deadlock over the budget of the battleships , donations for the Ottoman Navy had come in from taverns , cafés , schools and markets , and large donations were rewarded with a " Navy Donation Medal " . The seizure , and the gift of the German battlecruiser Goeben to the Ottomans , influenced public opinion in the Empire to turn away from Britain , and they entered the war on the side of Germany and the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire against the Triple Entente of Britain , France , and Russia on 29 October 1914 , after Goeben had attacked Russian facilities in the Black Sea . 
 The Royal Navy made modifications to Agincourt before commissioning her : in particular it removed the flying bridge over the two centre turrets . The ship was also initially fitted with Turkish @-@ style lavatories that had to be replaced . Her name , " Agincourt " , was a favourite of Churchill 's , and had initially been allocated to a sixth vessel of the Queen Elizabeth class ordered under the 1914 – 15 Naval Estimates , but not yet begun at the war 's outbreak . Her nickname , The Gin Palace , came from her luxurious fittings and a corruption of her name ( A Gin Court ) , pink gin being a popular drink among Royal Navy officers at the time . 
 The Admiralty was unprepared to man a ship of Agincourt 's size on such short notice and her crew was drawn " from the highest and lowest echelons of the service : the Royal yachts , and the detention barracks . " Agincourt 's captain and executive officer came from HMY Victoria and Albert III , most of whose crew was also transferred to Agincourt on 3 August 1914 . Most of the naval reservists had already been called up by this time and sent to other ships , so a number of minor criminals who had had their sentences remitted were received from various naval prisons and detention camps . 
 = = Service = = 
 Agincourt was working up until 7 September 1914 , when she joined the 4th Battle Squadron ( BS ) of the Grand Fleet . The fleet anchorage at Scapa Flow was not yet secure against submarine attack and much of the fleet was kept at sea , where Agincourt spent forty of her first eighty days with the Grand Fleet . This was the beginning of " a year and a half of inaction , only broken by occasional North Sea ' sweeps ' intended to draw the enemy from his bases . " 
 On 1 January 1915 , Agincourt was still assigned to the 4th BS , but had been assigned to the 1st Battle Squadron before the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 . She was the last ship of the Sixth Division of the 1st BS , along with HMS Hercules , HMS Revenge and the flagship , HMS Marlborough , the most heterogeneous group possible as each ship was from a different class . The Sixth Division was the <unk> column of the Grand Fleet as it headed south to rendezvous with the ships of Admiral Beatty 's Battlecruiser Fleet , then engaged with their opposite numbers from the German High Seas Fleet in the North Sea . Admiral Jellicoe , commander of the Grand Fleet , kept it in cruising formation until 6 : 15 p.m. when he ordered it to deploy from column into a single line based on the port division , each ship turning 90 ° in succession . This turn made the Sixth Division the closest ships in the Grand Fleet to the battleships of the High Seas Fleet and they fired on each ship as they made their turn to port . This concentration of fire later became known as " Windy Corner " to the British as the ships were drenched by German shell splashes although none were hit . 
 At 6 : 24 Agincourt opened fire on a German battlecruiser with her main guns . Shortly afterwards her six @-@ inch guns followed suit as German destroyers made torpedo attacks on the British battleships to cover the turn to the south of the High Seas Fleet . Agincourt successfully evaded two torpedoes , although another struck Marlborough . Visibility cleared around 7 : 15 and she engaged a Kaiser @-@ class battleship without result before it was lost in the smoke and haze . Around 8 : 00 Marlborough was forced to reduce speed because of the strain on her bulkheads from her torpedo damage and her division mates conformed to her speed . In the reduced visibility the division lost sight of the Grand Fleet during the night , passing the badly damaged battlecruiser SMS Seydlitz without opening fire . Dawn found them with only the detritus from the previous day 's battle in sight and the division arrived back at Scapa Flow on 2 June . Agincourt fired 144 twelve @-@ inch shells and 111 six @-@ inch shells during the battle , although she is not known to have hit anything . 
 Although the Grand Fleet made several sorties over the next few years it is not known if Agincourt participated in them . On 23 April 1918 , Agincourt and Hercules were stationed at Scapa Flow to provide cover for the Scandinavian convoys between Norway and Britain when the High Seas Fleet sortied in an attempt to destroy the convoy . The reports from German Intelligence were slightly off schedule , as both the inbound and outbound convoys were in port when the Germans reached their normal route so Admiral Scheer ordered the fleet to return to Germany without spotting any British ships . 
 Agincourt was later transferred to the 2nd Battle Squadron and was present at the surrender of the High Seas Fleet on 21 November 1918 . She was placed in reserve at Rosyth in March 1919 . After unsuccessful attempts to sell her to the Brazilian Government , she was listed for disposal in April 1921 , but was used for experimental purposes later that year . She was sold for scrap on 19 December 1922 to comply with the tonnage limitations of the Washington Naval Treaty , although she was not actually broken up until the end of 1924 . 
 = Ben May = 
 Ben Steven May ( born 10 March 1984 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a striker for National League club Bromley . 
 May began his career at Southampton 's youth academy in 1998 , before playing at Fulham 's centre of excellence for a year . In 2000 , he re @-@ moved , this time joining Millwall 's youth set @-@ up . Ahead of the 2002 – 03 season , May signed his first professional contract with the club , making his debut in August 2002 . He was loaned out to Brentford , and then Colchester United , during his six @-@ year tenure at Millwall . In September 2007 , May joined Scunthorpe United on a three @-@ month loan deal , which was made permanent in January 2008 . However , his time at Scunthorpe was plagued with injuries , and he was subsequently released in May 2010 . May signed for Stevenage on a free transfer in October 2010 , and was part of the squad that earned promotion to League One during the 2010 – 11 season . After struggling for first @-@ team appearances the following season , May joined League Two side Barnet on loan . He was released by Stevenage in May 2012 , and subsequently signed for Dover Athletic ahead of the 2012 – 13 season . After a successful season at Dover , May then joined Ebbsfleet United in June 2013 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Millwall = = = 
 May started his career at Southampton 's youth academy in 1998 , and went on to play at Fulham 's centre of excellence for one season . In 2000 , at the age of 16 , May moved to Millwall , progressing through the youth system and onto the periphery of the first @-@ team . In November 2001 , May was an unused substitute in Millwall 's 2 – 1 home defeat to Gillingham . He made his debut for Millwall at the start of the 2002 – 03 season , coming on as a 62nd @-@ minute substitute in Millwall 's 0 – 0 draw away at Watford on 13 August 2002 . Four days later , May started his first match for Millwall , playing 68 minutes in Millwall 's 1 – 0 away loss at Gillingham . He scored his first goal in the club 's following match against Ipswich Town , scoring after four minutes to give Millwall the lead in a game that ended 1 – 1 – the club 's website reported that " May was perfectly placed to stab home from close @-@ range after Neil Harris worked well to carve out an opening " . May featured periodically as a substitute in the opening months of the 2002 – 03 season , although he did not play a first @-@ team game for three months after being substituted after 59 minutes in a 1 – 0 loss at Crystal Palace on 7 December 2002 . He made a late substitute appearance in Millwall 's 2 – 0 home loss against Norwich City in March 2003 , before 27 March , when he joined Colchester United on loan until the end of the season . He made his Colchester debut two days after signing for the club , playing the whole match as Colchester secured a 1 – 0 victory over Swindon Town . May made five further appearances for Colchester , hitting the crossbar with a header in his final game against Queens Park Rangers after coming on as a late substitute . He made six appearances for Colchester , before returning to Millwall in May 2003 . 
 May did not play for Millwall at the start of the 2003 – 04 season , and was consequently loaned out once more , this time to Brentford on 25 August 2003 . He joined the club on an initial three @-@ month loan deal . He made his debut in Brentford 's 2 – 1 home win against Oldham Athletic , playing the whole match . May scored his first goal for Brentford two weeks later , on 6 September 2003 , in a 3 – 1 loss against Plymouth Argyle , scoring the goal that briefly tied the game at 1 – 1 . He received the first red card of his career when he was sent @-@ off for violent conduct in a Football League Trophy match against Barnet on 14 October 2003 . Four days later , he scored Brentford 's fourth goal in the 87th minute in a 4 – 2 victory against Luton Town , turning in Jay Tabb 's cross . In Brentford 's next league fixture , May scored his third goal of the season , " bundling home Brentford 's third " in a 4 – 0 win against Brighton & Hove Albion at Griffin Park . In November 2007 , May 's loan deal was extended until the end of the 2003 – 04 season . Millwall manager Dennis Wise stated " He will do very well under Brentford manager Wally Downes and will learn a lot under him . I didn 't feel he was quite ready for our first @-@ team just yet " . A month later , he scored the opening goal of the game in a 2 – 1 home defeat against Bristol City on 26 December 2003 , scoring with a header from Stephen Hunt 's corner . May scored two goals in the space of a week in January 2004 , scoring the equaliser in games against Oldham and Tranmere Rovers respectively . He scored his seventh goal of the 2003 – 04 campaign in a 2 – 1 loss at Swindon Town — " confidently firing home a left @-@ footed shot from ten yards " , although Brentford went on to lose their fourth consecutive match . It was May 's last goal of the season , in all he scored seven goals in 43 appearances as Brentford finished the season in 17th place . He returned to his parent club in May 2004 . 
 Ahead of the 2004 – 05 campaign , May re @-@ joined Colchester United on a two @-@ month loan deal . He impressed in a friendly match against Premier League side Charlton Athletic , scoring in a 2 – 2 draw , and this resulted in Phil Parkinson bringing May back to Layer Road for a second time . May started the season making four late substitute appearances as Colchester started the campaign by winning three of their four opening fixtures . He started his first game in a 4 – 1 home victory over Doncaster Rovers on 28 August 2004 . He scored his first goal for Colchester in September 2004 , scoring the club 's third goal in a 3 – 1 away victory at Bournemouth . Ten days later , May scored again in Colchester 's 2 – 1 victory over Premier League side West Bromwich Albion , coming on as a substitute in the 73rd minute and scoring from a " goalmouth scramble deep into extra time " . In October 2004 , May 's loan deal was extended for a further month . Colchester manager Phil Parkinson stated — " We 've extended the deal because he has done well and scored one or two vital goals for us . He is still developing but he has the potential to keep improving and he is an excellent lad to have around " . After Colchester 's 1 – 1 draw at Blackpool on 16 October 2004 , May and Colchester team @-@ mate Craig Fagan were charged by the Football Association after " a brawl broke out late in the game following an off @-@ the @-@ ball incident " — with May being charged with violent conduct . Two days later , it was announced that May would serve a three @-@ match suspension , with Colchester being fined £ 6 @,@ 000 after failing to control their players . As a result of his three @-@ game ban , May made his last appearance for Colchester as a 74th @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 1 home defeat to Wrexham on 19 October 2004 . He made 15 appearances during his three @-@ month loan spell at Colchester , scoring twice . In December 2004 , May signed for Brentford on a one month 's loan deal , having previously spent the 2003 – 04 season with the club . After playing in the club 's FA Cup draw with Hinckley United , he scored in a 2 – 0 win over Luton Town two days later when he " touched home Kevin O 'Connor 's near post cross " . His loan spell was subsequently extended for a further month in January 2005 . May provided assists in away victories at Luton Town and Port Vale respectively , and his loan was again extended for another month in February 2005 – with Brentford manager Martin Allen " delighted " with May 's development . May returned to Millwall in March 2005 , having scored one goal in 16 appearances during his loan spell at Brentford . He made eight appearances for Millwall towards the latter stages of the 2004 – 05 season , scoring one goal – a penalty in a 4 – 3 home win against Crewe Alexandra on 9 April 2005 – in a game that Millwall had thrown away a three @-@ goal lead before May 's goal proved to be the winner . 
 In May 2005 , Millwall took up the option to extend May 's contract for a further year , meaning he was contracted to the club throughout the 2005 – 06 season . He made his first appearance of the season in Millwall 's opening match of the campaign away at Leeds United on 7 August 2005 , coming on as a 79th @-@ minute substitute for Jay Simpson in a 2 – 1 defeat . May made his first starting appearance of the season in a 5 – 0 defeat at Reading , before scoring his first goal in late August 2005 , " levelling with a spectacular strike " in a 2 – 1 home loss against Ipswich Town . He scored again two days later , " firing a shot into the bottom corner " to restore parity in a game against Luton Town that Millwall went on to lose 2 – 1 . May 's third goal of the campaign came in a 3 – 2 away win at Mansfield Town in the League Cup in October 2005 . His fourth goal of the season came in a 1 – 1 away draw with Crystal Palace , heading in Jody Morris ' free @-@ kick to give Millwall the lead . May scored three goals in three games in February 2006 , the first of which came in another 1 – 1 stalemate with Crystal Palace , with May scoring an equaliser from eight yards in the 89th minute to salvage a point for Millwall . His other goals came in the following two games against Stoke City and Luton Town respectively . May 's fine form continued when he scored in Millwall 's surprise victory at promotion @-@ chasing Watford – the BBC reported that the goal came " in injury @-@ time , as Watford hunted for an equaliser ... Ben May drilled in a low shot after a swift counter @-@ attack " . He took his 2005 – 06 goal tally to eleven goals when he scored twice on the final day of the season in a 4 – 2 defeat at Crewe Alexandra . May finished as Millwall 's top goalscorer for the season with 11 goals in 44 games , although Millwall were relegated to League One as a result of finishing in 23rd place . In April 2006 , May was offered a new two @-@ year contract with the club , which he signed after speaking to new Millwall manager Nigel Spackman in May 2006 — " I spoke with the new manager briefly and I cannot wait to start working with him now " . 
 During pre @-@ season , ahead of the 2006 – 07 campaign , May injured his shoulder in training , resulting in him missing the club 's pre @-@ season tour of Iceland . Millwall manager Nigel Spackman revealed that May 's injury would rule him out of the first two months of the season — " He fell over during the close season , and it looks like he is going to be out for a couple of months " . He made his first appearance of the season in October 2006 , coming on as a second @-@ half substitute in Millwall 's 2 – 0 home win against Bournemouth in the Football League Trophy , scoring Millwall 's second goal with his first touch of the game . In his first start of the season , he scored after six minutes in the club 's 2 – 1 FA Cup win against Havant & Waterlooville in a game played at Fratton Park , netting from close range after good work from Chris Hackett . Five days later , he provided the assist for Darren Byfield 's goal in a 2 – 2 home draw with Doncaster Rovers . May scored his third goal in five appearances when he scored in Millwall 's 3 – 1 loss at Nottingham Forest on 24 November 2006 . After Millwall 's 2 – 0 home win against Bradford City , a game in which May assisted Filipe Morais in scoring Millwall 's first goal , Millwall manager Willie Donachie stated — " There 's more to come from this team , especially Darren Byfield and Ben May , who are as good as anyone in this league . They 're committed , honest players who want to work for each other " . Three days later , on 12 December 2006 , May 's pacey cross resulted in Nathan Doyle putting the ball into his own net , giving Millwall a 1 – 0 win against Bradford City after extra @-@ time in the FA Cup . May scored the only goal of the game in a 1 – 0 victory at Yeovil Town on 3 February 2007 , converting Darren Byfield 's cross to give Millwall the three points . However , he was substituted after 53 minutes in the same game with an ankle injury , and in March 2007 , he was ruled out of first @-@ team action for the rest of the 2006 – 07 season . Despite this , he made a second @-@ half substitute appearance on the last day of the season in a 2 – 2 draw at Bradford City , assisting Darren Byfield 's goal just after coming on . May scored four times in 19 appearances in a season disrupted by injuries . 
 May started the first four of Millwall 's games at the start of the 2007 – 08 season , before scoring his first goal of the campaign in a 3 – 2 away loss at Swansea City in the Football League Trophy on 4 September 2007 . After making a spate of substitute appearances for Millwall at the start of the campaign , May joined Championship side Scunthorpe United on a three @-@ month loan deal . He made his debut in Scunthorpe 's 1 – 0 win at Colchester United on 29 September 2007 . May made a total of five appearances for Scunthorpe , but was recalled by Millwall in November 2007 due to a number of injuries in their squad . On his return to Millwall , May played in four games for the club , scoring one goal and setting up another in a 2 – 1 FA Cup home win against Walsall on 15 January 2008 . It was to be May 's last game for the club . During his seven years at Millwall , May scored 19 goals in 95 appearances . 
 = = = Scunthorpe United = = = 
 In January 2008 , he signed a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract with Scunthorpe United for an undisclosed fee . A day after signing for Scunthorpe , May made his debut for the club , coming on as a substitute in the 58th minute in a 2 – 0 defeat against Wolverhampton Wanderers . He scored his first goal for the club in a 2 – 1 defeat to Ipswich Town on 22 March 2008 , scoring a consolation goal in injury @-@ time . May made a total of 21 appearances for Scunthorpe during the second half of the 2007 – 08 season , of which six were starting appearances , scoring one goal . May featured predominantly as a substitute during the first half of Scunthorpe 's 2008 – 09 season , scoring his first goal of the season in a 4 – 0 FA Cup victory against Alfreton Town in November 2008 . Two weeks later , he scored twice in Scunthorpe 's 4 – 4 draw with Northampton Town , before scoring his fourth goal in as many games three days later in a 2 – 1 victory over Tranmere Rovers in the Football League Trophy . He suffered an ankle ligament injury in January 2009 , ruling him out of first @-@ team action for two months . On his return , May made four late substitute appearances , although he was not involved in Scunthorpe 's successful play @-@ off campaign as the club were promoted back to the Championship after a 3 – 2 victory over May 's former employers , Millwall , in May 2009 . May made 29 appearances during the 2008 – 09 season , scoring four goals . 
 Ahead of the club 's 2009 – 10 campaign , May scored five second @-@ half goals in Scunthorpe 's 12 – 0 pre @-@ season victory against Brigg Town . He also scored in friendlies against Jersey and Lincoln City . Despite his impressive pre @-@ season form , he was an unused substitute in the club 's first three fixtures of the 2009 – 10 season , before suffering an ankle injury that ruled him out for a month . Having returned to training in October 2009 , May suffered another setback after injuring his other ankle – ruling him out of first @-@ team action for six weeks . He made his first appearance of the 2009 – 10 season as a late substitute in a 3 – 1 home defeat against West Bromwich Albion on 28 December 2009 . It was to be May 's only appearance of the season , and he was released by Scunthorpe in May 2010 . May made 51 appearances during his two and a half @-@ year tenure at Scunthorpe , scoring five times . 
 = = = Stevenage = = = 
 In October 2010 , May went on trial with League Two club Stevenage , and featured in a " behind closed doors " friendly against Dagenham & Redbridge , scoring in a 4 – 3 win . Shortly after , May signed for Stevenage on a permanent basis , and was assigned the number 12 shirt on his arrival . Due to May 's past history in terms of injuries , he signed a contract that was largely appearance based . Stevenage manager Graham Westley said " it 's fantastic to see a player putting their football before pound notes " . May made his debut for Stevenage three days after signing for the club , coming on as an 80th @-@ minute substitute in a 0 – 0 draw with Morecambe . May scored his first goal for Stevenage on 7 May 2011 , in the club 's 3 – 3 draw with Bury , a result that meant Stevenage reached the play @-@ offs in their first ever Football League season . However , he was injured after he scored the goal , and was substituted immediately after for Chris Beardsley . As a result , May missed Stevenage 's three play @-@ off fixtures as the club was promoted to League One following a 1 – 0 victory over Torquay United . May 's season was disrupted by injuries , making a total of 22 appearances for the club , of which seven were starting appearances . 
 In March 2012 , May joined League Two side Barnet on loan until the end of the 2011 – 12 season . He made a scoring debut for the club , scoring from close range as Barnet came from a goal down to win 2 – 1 at Port Vale . May was ever @-@ present during his time at Barnet , making eleven appearances , as the club narrowly avoided relegation on the last day of the season . During his two @-@ months with Barnet , he scored four times . He was released by Stevenage in May 2012 . 
 = = = Dover Athletic = = = 
 Ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , May went on trial with League Two club Gillingham , training with the club for a number of weeks and playing in several pre @-@ season friendlies . However , no move materialised , and May signed for Conference South side Dover Athletic on a free transfer on 8 August 2012 . May made his competitive debut for Dover in a 2 – 2 away draw against Sutton United on 21 August 2012 , coming on as an 86th @-@ minute substitute . He made his first start four days later as Dover defeated AFC Hornchurch 1 – 0 at Hornchurch Stadium , before scoring his first goal for the club in a 3 – 1 away win at Eastleigh on 1 September . May went on to score in seven consecutive games running from September to November , five of which in the league and a further two in the FA Cup , subsequently taking his goal tally for the season to eight . Goals in convincing victories over Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Truro City took May 's goal count into double figures . He ended the year with a run of five goals in three matches , scoring braces in wins against Eastleigh and Hayes & Yeading United , as well as scoring a late consolation strike in a 2 – 1 defeat to Tonbridge Angels on 26 December 2012 . It took May a month to get off the mark at the start of the new year , controlling the ball and scoring on the turn in a 3 – 2 win over Welling United at the Crabble Athletic Ground on 9 February 2013 . He scored four times in March 2013 , subsequently taking his tally for the season to over 20 goals – the first time May had reached this milestone in his career . He scored two further times during the regular season , in away victories against Chelmsford City and Staines Town . Dover finished the season in third place , meaning they would play fourth placed Eastleigh in the two legged play @-@ off semi @-@ finals . May scored a dipping volley as Dover took a 3 – 1 lead in the first leg , controlling the ball on his chest with his back to goal , turning and hitting the ball from 25 @-@ yards past Ross <unk> in the Eastleigh goal . Dover progressed to the final , but lost 3 – 2 to Salisbury City after extra @-@ time , with May playing in all three play @-@ off matches . During his one season at Dover , May finished the season as the club 's top goalscorer , scoring 24 times in 45 matches . 
 = = = Ebbsfleet United = = = 
 In June 2013 , May signed for Conference South side Ebbsfleet United . On joining Ebbsfleet , May said — " It 's all exciting stuff ; Steve Brown showed an interest in signing me as soon as he knew he would be manager of Ebbsfleet . I ’ m currently enjoying a nice little break from football but I ’ m itching to lace my boots up and get back on the pitch " . He eventually left the club in January 2015 . 
 = = = Bromley = = = 
 Following his departure from Ebbsfleet , May signed for league rivals Bromley , the team for which his brother , Jay , had played for the previous season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 May was born in Gravesend , Kent . May states that his favourite footballers when growing up were Alan Shearer and Ian Wright as he believed they were " great goalscorers and always entertaining " . He enjoys watching the television sitcom Only Fools and Horses . May is good friends with England international footballer Glen Johnson , as well as Celtic striker Gary Hooper . He attended Leigh CTC School in Dartford alongside Johnson . 
 In January 2007 , it was reported that May and England defender Glen Johnson were caught at a B & Q store in Dartford , Kent , attempting to steal bathroom fittings . They both received £ 80 fines . Johnson described the incident as " comical " because it was a misunderstanding — " Ben was doing up his bathroom so we went to B & Q and found one of those sets where you get everything in one box . But he wanted a seat with a slow @-@ close lid , so we took out the seat and put in another one . What we didn 't know was that the new seat was £ 2 @.@ 35 more expensive . We went through the till , paid for it and then the security guard stopped us and said he had been watching on CCTV . We just burst out laughing . Where 's Jeremy Beadle then ? But he said , ' No , this is serious , the police are on their way . ' The police turned up and they were laughing . I said to the security guard , ' Can we not just pay the £ 2 @.@ 35 ? ' " He said , ' No , this is a serious offence . ' So the police gave us two options : go to court and fight it out , or pay an on @-@ the @-@ spot fine . We couldn 't be bothered going to court so we paid the fine but doing that made us look guilty " . 
 His older brother , Jay ( engaged to Gina Riley ) and younger cousin , Alfie are also footballers . Alfie currently plays for Erith & Belvedere , while Jay is with Maidstone United . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Scunthorpe United 
 League One play @-@ offs ( 1 ) : 2008 – 09 
 Stevenage 
 League Two play @-@ offs ( 1 ) : 2010 – 11 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 26th March 2016 
 = Diet of Galicia and Lodomeria = 
 The Diet of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria , and of the Grand Duchy of Cracow was the regional assembly of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria , a crown land of the Austrian Empire , and later Austria @-@ Hungary . In the history of the Polish parliaments , it is considered the successor of the former sejm <unk> , or general sejm of the Kingdom of Poland and the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , and also of the sejmik , or local councils , in the territories of the Austrian Partition . It existed from 1861 until the dissolution of Austria @-@ Hungary in 1918 . 
 = = Name = = 
 The multi @-@ ethnic nature of the Kingdom resulted in the diet having multiple different names . In German , the lingua franca of Cisleithania ( north @-@ western part of the monarchy ) , it was called Landtag von <unk> und <unk> , meaning ' Diet of Galicia and Lodomeria ' . In Polish , it was called either Sejm krajowy , meaning ' Sejm of the Land ' , or sejm <unk> , meaning ' Lwów Sejm ' . In Ukrainian , it was called <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ й <unk> , transcribed <unk> <unk> <unk> , meaning ' Sejm of Galicia ' . 
 Landtag is a German word that means ' regional assembly ' , or ' diet ' . In Polish and Ukrainian , the word used was Sejm ( the latter also used version <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Parts of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth Lesser Poland territories were included in the Austrian partition as early as the First Partition of Poland in 1772 . From about 1775 to 1848 , with several gaps , the crown land of Galicia had a relatively powerless parliamentary body , known originally as the Postulate Sejm ( Polish : sejm <unk> ) , and from 1817 , as Estates of Galicia ( Polish : <unk> <unk> ) . The Diet of Galicia and Lodomeria , which was formed in 1861 following the promulgation of the October Diploma by Emperor Franz Joseph I , had more real power than its predecessors . In Polish parliamentary tradition , it is considered to have continued the history of the general sejm and regional sejmiks on the lands of Lesser Poland and Ruthenia . 
 The Diet was initially dominated by Polish nobles , but in time , it saw the emergence of a strong peasant faction . Another notable change over time included the emergence of a Ruthenian ( modern Ukrainian ) bloc , changing the balance of power within the body . Overall , the Diet preserved the Polish parliamentary tradition during a time in which it waned in the Prussian Partition and the Russian Partition , and saw the emergence of the major political parties and groupings that were to dominate the political life of the Second Polish Republic after World War I. The leader of the Polish peasant movement in the Second Polish Republic , Wincenty Witos , gained his experience in the Diet , elected for the first time in 1908 . Similarly , the National Democrats , and the Polish socialists , had their political blocs in the diet around that time . 
 = = Composition and organization = = 
 As established by the February Patent of 1861 , the Diet was unicameral , and was made up of 150 deputies . All but nine were elected by four different " Curiae " , or assemblies of the social classes . An electoral system based on curiae was also used in the Imperial Council of Cisleithania , until 1907 . 
 The Curia of the Landowners consisted of fifty @-@ two electors chosen from amongst those people who owned land that had previously been owned by the feudal nobility , and paid at least 100 gulden a year in tax . These electors had the right to elect forty @-@ four deputies to the Diet . 
 The Curia of the Chambers of Commerce consisted of thirty @-@ nine electors from the chambers of commerce in Lemberg , Kraków , and Brody . These electors had the right to elect three deputies , one from each city 's chamber of commerce . 
 The Curia of the Cities consisted of <unk> electors from important cities . The position of " elector " was granted based on status : those within the two @-@ thirds highest tax bracket were eligible , and others became eligible on the basis of their education , or because they held an important office . Electors usually were members of the clergy , office workers , doctors , teachers at the high schools , and directors of primary schools . These electors had the right to elect twenty @-@ three ( increased to 26 in 1863 ; 31 in 1900 ) deputies to the Diet . 
 The Curia of Other Municipalities consisted of <unk> electors from amongst small @-@ scale rural landowners . There were two stages of voting for this curia . In the first stage , the suffrage was determined in the same manner as with the Curia of the Cities : those in the two @-@ thirds highest tax bracket , with a high level of education , or an important office , were eligible . These voters elected the electors , who then elected seventy @-@ four deputies to the Diet , each holding a constituency equivalent to a rural district . 
 Nine deputies sat ex officio : two chancellors of universities , and seven archbishops and bishops . The initial nine were composed of three Greek Catholic bishops , three Roman Catholic bishops , and one Armenian Catholic bishop , along with representatives of Lemberg University and Kraków University . Three seats were added later : an additional Roman Catholic representative , one for the Lemberg <unk> University , and one for the Kraków Academy of Learning . 
 This system of limited suffrage caused the predominantly Polish landowning class to dominate the Diet . Whilst they only made up about 0 @.@ 4 % of the population , they held 28 @.@ 2 % of the seats in the Diet . Small @-@ scale rural landowners , on the other hand , made up about 95 % of the population , but held only 52 @.@ 3 % of the seats in Diet . This system also skewed representation for different ethnicities in the Diet . Whilst Ruthenians made up about 40 % of the population of Galicia , they only held 15 % of the seats in the Diet , as they lived primarily in rural communities . Reform of the suffrage system in late 1913 added a fifth curia for the upper peasantry , which had the right to elect twenty deputies . Due to the outbreak of the First World War , no further elections to the Diet took place , and hence the fifth curia existed only on paper . 
 Elections were not held on a regular schedule ; they occurred usually every five to six years , upon Emperor 's decree . Thus the deputies ' term of office lasted about six years . The Diet had ten elections : 1861 , 1867 , 1870 , 1877 , 1883 , 1889 , 1889 , 1895 , 1901 , 1908 , and the final one , in 1913 . 
 At first , the deputies met in the Skarbek Theatre ( today Maria <unk> National Academic Ukrainian Drama Theater ) . From 1881 , the Diet met in a newly constructed building designed by architect Juliusz Hochberger and with a program of architectural sculpture by Teodor <unk> . The building is now owned by the University of Lviv . 
 = = Competences = = 
 In the period of 1861 to 1873 , the Diet elected 38 representatives from among its deputies to be sent to the Imperial Council of Cisleithania . 
 The Diet had legislative powers . The legislative initiative was possessed by the Emperor , along with the Diet executive ( six deputies and the Marshal ) , and all individual deputies . It could debate and pass laws related to many issues in the field of education , culture , welfare , justice , public works , administration , religion and military . It could also impose supplementary taxes , up to 10 % of the direct tax . 
 = = = Marshal and Vice @-@ Marshal = = = 
 The position of ' Marshal ' was equivalent to the position of ' Speaker ' in Westminster @-@ style parliaments . The Marshal was considered the presiding officer of the Diet . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 Notable members of the Diet of Galicia and Lodomeria include : 
 = Fata Morgana ( Sanctuary ) = 
 " Fata Morgana " is the third episode of the science fiction television series Sanctuary . The episode first aired on the Sci Fi Channel in the United States on October 10 , 2008 . It subsequently aired on ITV4 in the United Kingdom on October 20 , 2008 . The episode , which is named after a mirage of the same name , was written by Damian Kindler . Martin Wood served as director . 
 " Fata Morgana " was originally released as the back half of the eight original Sanctuary webisodes in 2007 . In the episode , the Sanctuary team investigate an ancient crypt in an island off the Scottish coast and encounter three sisters with abnormal powers . " Fata Morgana " was met with a 1 @.@ 6 household rating and was generally well received by critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The team travels to a crypt in an island off the coast of Scotland that Helen Magnus ( Amanda Tapping ) believes to contain an elixir of life . However , the team is spotted and ambushed . After defeating the abnormal crypt Keepers , the team finds three women in comatose state . They are brought to the Sanctuary for study , where it is later determined that the sisters , Danu ( Miranda <unk> ) , Tatha ( Leah Cairns ) and Caird ( Laura Mennell ) , have been held in suspended animation for 1 @,@ 200 years . After the sisters awaken , Will Zimmerman ( Robin Dunne ) learns that they were taken to the crypt because of an incurable disease . However , Will believes they are delusional , partly due to their ability to speak perfect English for people from the Middle Ages ( according to director Martin Wood , they were able to speak English after some sort of " mind meld " between Will and Danu ) . The sisters also experience nightmares in which they destroy an entire village . The sisters eventually determine that these nightmares are in fact memories , and it was they who caused the destruction 1 @,@ 200 years ago . 
 After some research , Magnus determines that the sisters are the Morrígan , who were created with the intention of destroying man . Magnus also discovers ties to a powerful secret organization , the Cabal , who had put the sisters into the crypt to be used again in the future . Ashley Magnus ( Emilie Ullerup ) learns that the Cabal was formed in the seventh century with the intention of controlling every abnormal on Earth for their own benefit ; since going underground in the nineteenth century , its members have infiltrated several major organizations worldwide to continue their operation . 
 In the meantime , a group of Cabal mercenaries have captured several Keepers in Scotland and they release them to the Sanctuary in order to regain what they see as their " property " . Before and during the battle between Magnus and the Keepers , Will teaches the sisters about freedom , and sends them to a safe @-@ house . After killing the Keepers , the team are surrounded by the mercenaries . In the end , Danu , Caird and Tatha surrender to the mercenaries who in exchange spare the team 's lives . Will believes his teachings of freedom got to them , as they plan to escape from the mercenaries . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fata Morgana " was originally released as the back half of the eight original webisodes . The episode was given an ancient and mythological feel to set the intended tone of Sanctuary . During the original writing , director and executive producer Martin Wood brought up the idea of incorporating the Morrígan from Irish mythology into the episode . Writer Damian Kindler researched the subject and named the episode after Fata Morgana as a reference to the Morrígan . During pre @-@ production , the producers decided that around half of the episode would contain footage from the webisodes , and the other half would be rewritten to improve the storyline . Since they felt that Ashley Magnus was previously underused , they included her more into the storyline . The ending from the original webisodes , where the sisters manage to escape , was also rewritten . 
 " Fata Morgana " was originally scheduled to be the fourth episode in the first season . However , it was moved up to the third after Amanda Tapping felt strongly that it would make a great start @-@ stand alone episode after " Sanctuary for All " . She also cited continuity reasons , as the characters appeared more comfortable with each other in the following episode , " Folding Man " . Filming started in January 2007 when they were filming the webisodes . The new scenes were filmed in June 2008 . The actors consciously played the characters more open to each other . 
 When Martin Wood became unavailable during one day of filming , Amanda Tapping filled in for him as director . Furthermore , a photo double stood in for Leah Cairns in some scenes when Cairns was unavailable to play Tatha . The outdoor scene that featured Kandyse McClure was filmed in the same slot as " Sanctuary for All " , because Wood wanted to use the present rain . One scene was filmed on the same set that was previously used in Stargate SG @-@ 1 . In total , " Fata Morgana " contained over 400 visual effects shots , more than any other episode in the first season . The scene where Ashley was sitting on the edge of a tall building was actually done by having Emilie Ullerup sitting on a green beam , and next to a wind machine . Every visual effects shot made for the " Fata Morgana " webisodes were remastered in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Fata Morgana " was broadcast on October 10 on Sci Fi in the United States , and October 20 , 2008 on ITV4 in the United Kingdom . According to the Nielsen Galaxy Report , " Fata Morgana " received a household rating of 1 @.@ 6 after original airing in the United States ; this was a drop from the 2 @.@ 2 rating in " Sanctuary for All " . It was still placed second in the top ten Sci Fi Channel shows the week it aired , behind Ghost Hunters , which received a 2 @.@ 0 rating . In the United Kingdom , the episode was seen by 471 @,@ 000 , placing Sanctuary number two in the top ten ITV4 viewings the week it aired , behind a live UEFA Champions League game . 
 Reviews for the episode were generally positive . Tory Ireland Mell of IGN rated the episode an " outstanding " 9 @.@ 3 out of 10 , calling it a " great episode , and completely fun to watch . " Mell praised the episode for its pace , action , choreographed fight sequences , visual effects and character development , but thought that Magnus and Ashley 's relationship was a little forced . <unk> Spence @-@ <unk> of Airlock Alpha reacted positively to the episode , particularly for its use of celtic mythology , how Damian Kindler and Martin Wood incorporates it into the storyline , and the introduction to the Cabal 's . Spence @-@ <unk> was however , critical of the fact that " too much is being crammed into one . " Amber Spence of <unk> also reacted positively to the episode , calling it a " much stronger showing than the [ somewhat convoluted ] premiere , " and that the action and pace were well executed to draw in the audience . Paul Simpson of Total Sci @-@ Fi gave a more mixed reaction to the episode , rating it 6 out of 10 . Though Simpson called it the first proper episode , he didn 't feel it was as strong as the pilot . 
 = Cameron Mitchell ( Stargate ) = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Cameron " Cam " Mitchell , USAF is a fictional character in the Canadian @-@ American military science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 , a science fiction show about a military team exploring the galaxy via a network of alien transportation devices . Played by Ben Browder , Cameron Mitchell is introduced as a main character in the season 9 premiere " Avalon " , holding the military rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the United States Air Force . Learning of the SG @-@ 1 team 's off @-@ screen separation after the previous season , Mitchell is assigned as new commanding officer of SG @-@ 1 , which he remains throughout season 10 ( 2006 – 2007 ) and the direct @-@ to @-@ DVD films Stargate : The Ark of Truth and Stargate : Continuum ( 2008 ) . 
 The first episodes of season 9 show Mitchell 's struggle to reunite the former SG @-@ 1 members under his command . With the aid of Lt. Col. Samantha Carter , Dr. Daniel Jackson , the Jaffa Teal 'c , and the alien thief Vala Mal Doran , Mitchell attempts to stop the Ori threat to the Milky Way galaxy during the series ' run . Mitchell is an experienced fighter pilot and is often involved in close combat . 
 Despite Browder 's popularity as former lead in the sci @-@ fi TV series Farscape , Mitchell 's role as the SG @-@ 1 leader attracted some viewers ' resentment for taking over Carter 's former position . Browder noted a lack of Mitchell @-@ centric episodes and insufficient interaction between Mitchell and the other main characters . For his portrayal of Cameron Mitchell , Ben Browder was nominated for a Saturn Award in the category " Best Supporting Actor on Television " in 2006 . 
 = = Role in Stargate SG @-@ 1 = = 
 = = = Character arc = = = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Cameron Mitchell is the son of Frank and Wendy Mitchell , long @-@ time residents of Auburn , Kansas . Mitchell occasionally mentions his Bible @-@ thumping grandmother in comparison and contrast to the Ori religion . As shown in Stargate : Continuum , Mitchell 's grandfather was the captain of the ship that transported the Alpha Gate from Egypt to the United States in the late 1930s . 
 Two episodes flash back to Mitchell 's past . As revealed in " Collateral Damage " , Mitchell 's father was a test pilot for the United States Air Force and lost both legs in an accident when Mitchell was a child . When Cameron Mitchell was a USAF Captain , he piloted an F @-@ 16 over the Middle Eastern desert and mistakenly bombed a vehicle containing innocent refugees rather than the enemy . The season 9 premiere " Avalon " flashes back to Lieutenant Colonel Mitchell during the events over Antarctica in season 7 's " Lost City " . Mitchell led a squadron of F @-@ 302 fighters against the forces of the arch villain Anubis and was shot down , resulting in severe injuries . During his recovery in the hospital , he received the Medal of Honor and was promised any assignment by Brigadier General Jack O 'Neill . Mitchell began reading all mission reports that the SG @-@ 1 team had filed . 
 In his first appearance in the season 9 premiere " Avalon " , Mitchell has fully recovered and opts to join SG @-@ 1 . When he learns that the original team has moved on to new assignments , he becomes the new SG @-@ 1 leader but fails to assemble a new team . After the alien Vala Mal Doran arrives on Earth , Dr. Daniel Jackson and the alien Teal 'c assist Mitchell for a treasure hunt on Earth that eventually sets off the Ori arc . Mitchell takes his place at the head of this provisional team rather reluctantly . Lieutenant Colonel Samantha Carter temporarily joins Mitchell 's team in season 9 's sixth episode , " Beachhead " , which ends with Vala 's disappearance . Mitchell officially reunites the former SG @-@ 1 team one episode later in " Ex Deus Machina " . Vala reappears in late season 9 and officially joins SG @-@ 1 under Mitchell 's command in season 10 's " Memento Mori " . Mitchell continues to lead SG @-@ 1 in Stargate : The Ark of Truth and is promoted to Colonel before his appearance in Stargate : Continuum ( where the credits mistakenly list him as " Lieutenant Colonel " ) . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 At the beginning of season 9 , Mitchell 's main motivation is to get the SG @-@ 1 team back together . Producer Robert C. Cooper wanted Cameron Mitchell to mirror the Stargate fandom and be a " super fan " of SG @-@ 1 and a " Stargate geek " , who is enthusiastic about exploring the galaxy . Nevertheless , Browder described Mitchell as a " stoic " character who " actually follows military protocol " ; the character has " a certain naïvety and innocence , even though he is neither particularly naïve or innocent " . Mitchell 's personality and attitude depends on his location ( on @-@ base and off @-@ world ) and the people around him . With Mitchell 's team demeanor becoming subtler in season 10 , Browder felt that the writers " finally figured out Mitchell 's only superpower is getting beat up and bleeding " . 
 Browder considered Mitchell to be more restrained than his former Farscape character John Crichton , who had higher emotional stakes and was " literally going insane through the process of the series . Mitchell 's focus was on his job , and on the fun of his job . But Crichton 's focus was on survival , and on the creation of a family . " Crichton was also the center of the Farscape narrative , whereas the SG @-@ 1 characters serve as nearly equal parts in an ensemble show . Browder did not view Mitchell as a substitute for Richard Dean Anderson 's role of Colonel Jack O 'Neill , the undisputed SG @-@ 1 team leader from seasons 1 through 7 . While O 'Neill 's approach was " normally couched in sarcastic terms " in later years , Mitchell is " more optimistic and has a wry sense about him that 's not so much sarcastic " . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Mitchell maintains a level of decorum around General Landry ( Beau Bridges ) , but is more laid @-@ back around the SG @-@ 1 members . Michael Shanks ( Daniel Jackson ) and Browder did not want to repeat the " cliché [ d ] " original O 'Neill @-@ Daniel dynamic where views on military and diplomacy clash . The actors tried to find some commonality between the characters while trying to develop an entertaining rapport between them . By mid @-@ season 9 , their interaction had become playful , without being decidedly positive or antagonistic . Although Mitchell and Teal 'c ( Christopher Judge ) are both warriors and leaders , Teal 'c is taken aback by Mitchell 's enthusiasm at first , as he is more used to O 'Neill 's reserved attitude . Teal 'c is unsure if he likes Mitchell , but Mitchell forces Teal 'c to interact with him . By not letting Teal 'c step back and observe , Mitchell makes Teal 'c an active part of the scene . 
 Because Ben Browder and Claudia Black ( Vala Mal Doran ) were well known for formerly starring as star @-@ crossed lovers in Farscape , the Stargate producers refrained from emphasizing the pairing of Mitchell and Vala beyond in @-@ jokes . The producers instead opted to further the comedic chemistry between Claudia Black and Michael Shanks . When Vala 's relationship with the SG @-@ 1 team members evolved in season 10 , the producers grew comfortable with pairing Browder 's and Black 's characters more often , and even teased ( and misled ) viewers about them " end [ ing ] up in a motel room bed together " in the episode " Memento Mori " , involving underwear , " handcuffs as well as creamy Twinkies " . A scene in the milestone episode " 200 " also parodied the show 's connection to Farscape . 
 Amanda Tapping ( Samantha Carter ) found that the introduction of the Ori threat inhibited major character and relationship development in season 9 . The characters are of equal rank , and regard each other with respect according to producer Joseph Mallozzi . They give each other fair weight in decision @-@ making , and Mitchell defers to Carter on all science @-@ related issues . Tapping 's favorite Mitchell @-@ Carter scenes were some " neat sibling @-@ type moments " in " Arthur 's Mantle " , and moments showing their history and friendship in " Line in the Sand " , " The Road Not Taken " , and Stargate : The Ark of Truth . Browder regretted after season 10 that he had not worked enough with the cast besides Tapping , and that " the fans probably feel that way as well " . 
 Several episodes hint at Mitchell 's love life . The early episodes of season 9 suggest a relationship between Mitchell and Landry 's daughter , Dr. Carolyn Lam ( Lexa Doig ) ; a scripted romantic subplot in " Avalon " was filmed but was cut for time when the two @-@ parter ran long for over twenty minutes . In season 9 's " Collateral Damage " , Mitchell has a romantic encounter with a female human researcher from another planet , named <unk> Varrick but she is killed . At his 20 @-@ year high school reunion in " Bounty " , Mitchell lays the foundation for a relationship with his high school crush , Amy <unk> . 
 = = = SG @-@ 1 leadership = = = 
 Mitchell was conceived as the leader of SG @-@ 1 who brings the team back together . Following negative fan reactions to Carter 's cancelled leadership within the team ( she commanded SG @-@ 1 throughout season 8 ) , Browder noted the production difficulties that came with Amanda Tapping 's maternity leave , and claimed that new leaders are brought in routinely into units in military reality . Tapping admitted to also have been " kind of put off " upon learning that someone else would lead SG @-@ 1 , and hoped that the producers would make SG @-@ 1 more of an ensemble team in season 10 by removing the patriarchal line of command . The writers decided after an animated discussion after the initial season 9 episodes that Mitchell and Carter should co @-@ command the team , although they left Mitchell in the official leadership position . 
 Whereas Mitchell can hardly cope with leading the team in season 9 , Mitchell is more comfortable with his leadership position in Stargate : The Ark of Truth . Browder described Mitchell 's early leadership difficulties as " dealing with what are essentially legendary characters within the mythology of the show " ; ordering them around would ring false or as hubris from both an <unk> and storytelling perspective . Tapping eventually considered the question of leadership irrelevant ; Mitchell cannot give orders to his team since he and Carter hold the same military rank , and Daniel and Teal 'c are not members of the United States military . Mitchell thus plays more to the strength of the team , choosing a leadership style that is comparable to elite teams like Delta units , where everyone participates to the fullest of their abilities and defers to the specialist quickly when needed . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The producers had discussed casting Ben Browder as a possible Major John Sheppard and Colonel Dillon Everett for the first season of Stargate Atlantis . Browder was still filming Farscape at that time , but had met several Stargate producers on sci @-@ fi conventions . With Richard Dean Anderson 's ( Jack O 'Neill ) departure from Stargate SG @-@ 1 after season 8 ( 2005 ) , Ben Browder and the Stargate producers got together as soon as the introduction of new main characters was discussed . Browder 's character was codenamed " M.M. " until the producers settled on the name " Cameron ' Cam ' Mitchell " , with the aviator call sign " Shaft " , a pun on camshaft . 
 Also joining the main cast in season 9 was Beau Bridges as General Hank Landry . The alien Vala Mal Doran ( played by Browder 's former Farscape co @-@ star Claudia Black ) was re @-@ introduced for a six @-@ episode story arc to cover for the maternity leave of SG @-@ 1 regular Amanda Tapping ( Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Samantha Carter ) . Since the producers had not realized the physical resemblance between Browder and Michael Shanks ( Daniel Jackson ) when Browder was cast , Shanks grew a beard that he would sport in the first six episodes of season 9 ; the characters would also often wear differently @-@ colored Battle Dress Uniforms . Vala 's line in " Avalon " that Earth seems to have a " limited gene pool " refers to the actors ' similar looks . 
 Having sporadically watched episodes of SG @-@ 1 over the years , Browder watched the first previous seasons of SG @-@ 1 in two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks to catch up with the show , which the writers would turn into a recurring in @-@ joke that Mitchell had read every SG @-@ 1 mission report before joining the SG @-@ 1 team . Browder relocated to Vancouver , Canada , where Stargate SG @-@ 1 was being filmed . His family , who had been with him in Australia during his Farscape years , stayed in Los Angeles , although Browder 's children would appear as background characters in " The Ties That Bind " during their set visit . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Browder put the character 's direction into the hands of the writers but thought that the audience would define Mitchell through the character 's actions and words and not by his backstory in the end . He wanted to humanize the character without letting him be entirely dictated by military terms , while turning him slowly into as much a hero as the other SG @-@ 1 team members already are . Producer Robert C. Cooper , who wrote Mitchell 's introduction in the first three episodes of season 9 , wanted Mitchell to be enthusiastic about exploring the galaxy from the beginning . Mitchell should be a " super fan " of SG @-@ 1 and a " Stargate geek " , mirroring the Stargate fandom . Browder did not want the character 's first on @-@ screen reaction to be enthusiasm , so the character was written to be stoic and guarded around General Landry in the first scenes . Cooper incorporated Mitchell into a flashback to a memorable SG @-@ 1 scene from season 7 's " Lost City " to avoid a contrived heroic action by Mitchell in the season 9 opener . 
 Although Mitchell was the leading man , most episodes in the first half of season 9 do not particularly focus on Mitchell . Several writers , who had been used to Anderson 's reduced filming schedule in past seasons , subconsciously diminished Mitchell 's role until Cooper reminded them of Browder 's full @-@ season contract . Although Mitchell had a more prominent role in the season 10 episodes " Uninvited " , " Company of Thieves " , and " Bounty " , Browder noted the lack of Mitchell @-@ centric episodes in season 10 . Producer Joseph Mallozzi explained this as the result of having to service the Ori arc and Vala as the new main character . Mitchell also did not appear in any Stargate Atlantis episodes , which Browder explained with the lack of history between Mitchell and Atlantis ; for instance , Daniel possesses Ancient knowledge , and Carter shares a history with the Atlantis character Rodney McKay ( David Hewlett ) . Having penned two Farscape episodes , Browder did not pitch possible SG @-@ 1 storylines to the producers until season 10 . Browder received story credit for his basic pitch for season 10 's " Bad Guys " , which Stargate Atlantis producer / writer Martin Gero developed into a teleplay . 
 = = = Stunt work and on @-@ screen violence = = = 
 Mitchell is often at the center of the action and fight sequences . Browder joked for years that " Mitchell 's super power is getting his ass whipped " , which was the opposite of the powerful warrior Teal 'c . Browder enjoyed the physicality of the role and wanted to do many of his own stunts . Browder had acquired first fight experiences in drama school , and had done much stunt work on Farscape . Browder worked with fight choreographers in seasons 9 and 10 of Stargate SG @-@ 1 . Browder 's first fight sequence on SG @-@ 1 was a sword fight with a knight in " Avalon " , where Browder did not have a stunt double and used real swords because heavy swords look more real in action . This fight was followed by an elaborate fight to the death with a <unk> Jaffa warrior in " Babylon " . Although writer Paul Mullie was concerned that fans might be put off by the violence and darkness of " Collateral Damage " , where Mitchell has memories of beating a love interest to death , the producers did not want to <unk> Mitchell 's emotional journey and chose to not shy away from violence in the episode . Browder played another sword fight in " Camelot " , and was involved in an extended hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with a Replicator @-@ possessed IOA member James <unk> ( played by Currie Graham ) in The Ark of Truth . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although TV Zone 's Stephen Graves believed that Ben Browder and Claudia Black 's first post @-@ Farscape encounter in " Avalon " was " somewhat underplayed " , he considered Mitchell 's introduction entertaining , with Mitchell 's " excruciating " interviews with potential new recruits as " a particular highlight " . However , Graves was disappointed that Mitchell did not contribute much to the story after the knight fight , and that Mitchell 's " frantic " efforts to get the old SG @-@ 1 team back together hinted too much at the production team 's efforts to turn around the season 8 finale . While some fans were upset that Carter did not resume command of the SG @-@ 1 team after her return , Leonard Fischer of The Seattle Times considered Browder and Michael Shanks to have developed " some fun on @-@ screen rapport " by the middle of season 9 . 
 By season 10 's " Memento Mori " , TV Zone 's Anthony Brown felt that " Ben Browder and Claudia Black have [ ... ] reached a point where they can play out an amusing take on Misery without you feeling that [ their Farscape characters ] have somehow <unk> onto SG @-@ 1 's Earth " . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune called Browder and Black 's interaction in season 10 " great fun ; the rapport they developed on the stellar Farscape was still much in evidence , even though they played radically different characters on SG @-@ 1 . " 
 For his portrayal of Cameron Mitchell , Ben Browder was nominated for a Saturn Award in the category " Best Supporting Actor on Television " in 2006 . Per popular demand , Diamond Select Toys included Mitchell in their third series of Stargate action figures . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 The following are the medals and service awards fictionally worn by Colonel Mitchell . 
 = Cooter ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Cooter " is the fifteenth episode of the second season of 30 Rock and thirty @-@ sixth episode of the series . It was written by series ' creator Tina Fey and was directed by one of the season 's producers , Don Scardino . The episode first aired on May 8 , 2008 on the NBC network in the United States . " Cooter " follows Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) attempt to get fired from his new job in politics ; Liz Lemon 's ( Fey ) pregnancy scare and decision to adopt a baby ; Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) creation of a pornographic video game ; and Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) aspiration to be an NBC page at the Beijing Olympics . 
 " Cooter " received positive review from critics , and several considered it to be among the series ' best episodes . Several critics noted that Liz had a pregnancy scare the same week that Fey 's film Baby Mama was released , possibly used as cross promotion . The episode was watched by 5 @.@ 61 million American viewers on its original broadcast , and was nominated for two awards , winning one . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack gets a job in politics as the " Homeland Security Director for Crisis and Weather Management " ; however , it is not what he expected . When he learns that Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) , the CEO of General Electric , said " Jackie Boy " while in his coma , he schemes with another government employee , Cooter ( Matthew Broderick ) , to get fired after his letter of resignation is rejected . Jack also enlists the help of Celeste " C.C. " Cunningham ( Edie Falco ) , his Congresswoman ( D @-@ VT ) ex @-@ girlfriend , to approve research into a " gay bomb " . Jack hopes that the bomb , an old Pentagon project that is expensive , inefficient and offensive to " both the red states and the gayer blue states " will ultimately result in their dismissal . 
 Meanwhile , Liz thinks she may be pregnant and is horrified when she discovers it is most likely the baby of her ex @-@ boyfriend , Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) . After several pregnancy tests , she tells a visiting Jack that the positive tests are a result of her eating " Sabor de Soledad " ( " Taste of Loneliness " in Spanish ) cheese puffs , which contain bull semen . Nevertheless , she tells Jack that she is ready to have a child and wants to adopt . Kenneth learns of an opportunity to be an NBC page at the Beijing Olympics , however head page Donny Lawson ( Paul Scheer ) tries to make sure that he does not submit his essay on time . Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) helps him complete his essay , but Donny stalls Kenneth by forcing him to deliver paper . Pete shoots Donny in the leg with an arrow and Kenneth delivers his essay in time . Tracy 's invention , the world 's first pornographic video game , is nearly complete . He gives Frank , who has helped him , the prototype copy of the game . 
 The episode shows what happens three months later , in August 2008 . Jack and Cooter present their " gay bomb " to the Pentagon , which only works in closed areas , thus useless in combat . However , Cooter accidentally breaks the vial , causing everybody in the room , including Vice @-@ president Dick Cheney , to " feel funny " . Frank emerges from his office after playing Tracy 's game non @-@ stop for three months , not realizing the amount of time that has passed . While in Beijing , Kenneth gets involved with a Chinese woman who wants his kidneys . The last point was said in Mandarin without subtitles , leaving the English @-@ speaking audience unaware of Kenneth 's trouble . 
 The conversation roughly translates as : 
 Lady : " Kenneth , I like you , because I am attracted to your two healthy kidneys . " 
 Kenneth : " What ? " 
 ( Man breaks down the door with gun drawn ) 
 Kenneth : " I had no idea ! " 
 The conversation in Mandarin : Lady : Kenneth , <unk> ， <unk> 。 
 Kenneth : <unk> ？ 
 ( Man breaks down the door with gun drawn ) 
 Kenneth : <unk> ！ 
 = = Production = = 
 The title of the episode is one of Fey 's favorite words , which she used multiple times when she appeared as an anchor on the Saturday Night Live sketch Weekend Update . Fey explains that she likes the word because " it 's one of the least graphic ways to describe the female genitals " . This episode marks the final appearance of Edie Falco , who was hired for a three episode arc . Falco made her debut in the episode " Somebody to Love " as Celeste Cunningham , a Congresswoman and romantic interest of Jack . She appeared in " Secrets and Lies " , where James Carville helps the fledgling relationship . The pair breaks up in Episode 210 , when they realize their careers prevent them from staying together . Falco said that she was " thrilled for the opportunity to work with such great comic actors " , and expressed her enjoyment of watching the series . Fey was " thrilled to have such an amazing actress come join us " , and joked that " a lot of guys on our crew want The Sopranos ending explained to them " , in which Falco was a series star . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Cooter " was watched by 5 @.@ 6 million viewers , and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating and 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The 2 @.@ 6 refers to 2 @.@ 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. , and the 7 refers to 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television in the U.S. at the time of the broadcast . By comparison CBS 's CSI was viewed by 17 @.@ 82 million viewers , ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy received 15 @.@ 60 million viewers , Fox 's Don 't Forget the Lyrics ! received 6 @.@ 22 million viewers , and The CW 's Supernatural received 2 @.@ 53 million viewers . The finale was watched by 206 @,@ 000 more viewers than the previous episode . 
 Terry Morrow of the Knoxville News Sentinel said that although 30 Rock is struggling to find viewers , this " tiny show ... shines with absolute brilliance " , and declared " Cooter " one of its best episodes . He speculated that the lack of viewers may be because the show has failed to create an emotional bond with its audience , and is " happy to be a very witty sitcom " . He felt the entire cast was " spot on " , but singled out Jane Krakowski for her " scene @-@ stealing " moments when she revealed the art of backhanded compliments . Verne Gay of Newsday praised Jenna and Kenneth 's storylines , and liked the cameo by Broderick , stating his " comic chops [ were ] on full display . " Robert Canning of IGN praised Kenneth and Tracy 's storylines , and described Tracy 's voice recording session for his porn video game as " thank @-@ goodness @-@ this @-@ is @-@ airing @-@ later @-@ than @-@ 8 : 30 " . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger felt the " nearly @-@ perfect " episode was marred by Kenneth 's page rivalry which " didn 't work . " Time called " Cooter " the eighth best episode of 2008 . 
 Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald felt " Cooter " was one of the best episodes of 30 Rock 's shortened season , with something for everyone in the ensemble cast to do . He noted that Fey 's character Liz has a pregnancy scare the same week that Fey 's film Baby Mama was in theaters , asking " how much mama drama does Tina Fey think viewers want " ? Bob Sassone of TV Squad originally thought the episode might have been secretly cross promoting Baby Mama , but ultimately decided against his judgment . Jeff Labrecque of Entertainment Weekly was disappointed that Liz was not actually pregnant , and hoped that her former boyfriend Dennis would continue to reappear in the next season . Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV speculated that the episode may have been hinting at Alec Baldwin 's real life political plans , who was considering running for office . 
 The episode was nominated for Primetime Emmy Awards , winning one . Tina Fey won for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series and Ken Eluto was nominated for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . 
 = Revelations : Persona = 
 Revelations : Persona , released in Japan as Megami Ibunroku Persona ( Japanese : <unk> , lit . " Goddess ' Odyssey : Persona " ) , is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Atlus . It is the first entry in the Persona series , itself a subseries of the Megami Tensei franchise , and the first role @-@ playing entry in the series to be released in the west . Originally released for the PlayStation in 1996 in Japan and North America , the title was ported to Microsoft Windows in 1999 . A port to the PlayStation Portable retitled Shin Megami Tensei : Persona was released in 2009 in North America and Japan , and 2010 in Europe . This port featured new cutscenes and a redone localization . 
 The story focuses on a group of high school students as they are confronted by a series of supernatural incidents . After playing a fortune @-@ telling game , the group each gain the ability to summon Personas , the multiple selves within them . Using this power under the guidance of Philemon , a benevolent being representing humanity 's subconscious , the group face off against multiple forces that threaten the world . Gameplay revolves around the characters navigating environments around their town and fighting enemies using their Personas . During the course of the game , the player can create new Personae for battle using spell cards gained in battle or by talking with enemies . 
 Persona began development after the release of Shin Megami Tensei If ... , with the idea of creating a subseries around the positively received high school setting of If .... Multiple staff members from previous Megami Tensei titles were involved in development , including character designer Kazuma Kaneko , and director Kouji Okada . Multiple aspects of the story , including the Persona and the character Philemon , were taken from Jungian psychology , while Kaneko 's character designs were based on both staff members , and celebrities and fictional characters of the time . Reception to the game has generally been positive , with most praising its approach to the genre , while its navigation and localization were criticized . Its PSP port shared most points of praise with the original , along with the improved localization , but also drew negative comments for its by @-@ then dated mechanics and graphics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Revelations : Persona is a role @-@ playing video game in which the player takes control of a group of high school students . A mixture of navigation styles are used : navigation round the students ' hometown is done using an overhead view , navigation of standard environments such as outside areas and story locations use an angled third @-@ person view , and dungeons and most buildings are navigating in first @-@ person . An icon in the top right @-@ hand corner of the screen displays a lunar phase : this display shows the passage of in @-@ game time , and its status determines the activity patterns and moods of enemy demons . Battles are both triggered by story events and through random encounters around the world map and dungeon environments . If the player attacks an enemy from behind , the party is given a set of attacks costing no magic points or health points . 
 Battles take place on a grid @-@ based battle arena , with characters and enemies moving according to their position on the grid . Four commands are available to the party : Attack ( fight enemies ) , Contact ( talk with an enemy ) , Analyze ( check an enemy for its strength and weaknesses ) , and Form ( rearrange the party on the grid ) . The character 's main means of attack is their Persona , beings summoned into battle to cast a spell that can heal the party , and inflict physical or elemental damage on an enemy . Each Persona has access to up to eight skills , and each character can change their Persona during their turn . Personas earn experience points independent of the characters they are assigned to , and gain new abilities through extended use . Experience is awarded based on how often the player uses certain characters or Personas . Alongside their Personas , each character is able to attack with an equipped melee weapon or firearm , use an item , or attempt to talk with the demons that act as the game 's standard enemies . 
 Talking to a demon has different effects based on its personality , responding in a specific way to certain actions . There are four emotional responses that the player can elicit from a demon : anger , fear , joy , and interest . <unk> one of these emotions three times will cause the demon to perform an action : an angry demon will attack the party , a frightened demon will flee the battle , a joyful demon will give the player an item , and an interested demon will either leave the battle , give the player an item , or give the player a special spell card ( tarot cards aligned with a particular Persona family or Arcanum ) . Functions related to the customization of Personas are performed in a special place called the Velvet Room : there , the character Igor can summon new Personas from among the various enemies defeated for a fee . He can also use two spell cards along with a special item to create a new Persona , which can inherit skills from the Personas used in the fusion . A Persona can only be fused using cards from certain Persona families . Personas can also be deleted if the player so chooses . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The game takes place in Japan in 1996 , in the town of Mikage @-@ cho . All the main characters attend St. Hermelin High , the town 's high school , being in Class 4 taught by Saeko Takami . The other main feature of the town is the local branch of SEBEC ( Saeki Electronics & Biological & Energy Corporation ) . All the main characters have the power to summon Personas , described in the manual as " the power of their hidden selves " . The power to call Personas is granted by Philemon , a being born from the Collective Unconscious who acts as the party 's spiritual guide and helper . He appears both in a human form and as a butterfly . 
 The player controls a silent protagonist , a second @-@ year student who acts as their in @-@ game representation . The rest of the cast are Maki <unk> , whose near @-@ constant ill health has made her inwardly bitter ; Kei Nanjō , a self @-@ confident heir to an important family business ; Yukino Mayuzumi , a former gang member reformed through the efforts of Saeko ; Hidehiko Uesugi , a man who puts on a facade of strength to cover his weaknesses ; Yuka Ayase , a girl who consciously acts like a stereotypical " high school girl " ; Masao Inaba , a spoiled and rebellious youth ; and Eriko Kirishima , a woman with half @-@ American parentage with an interest in the occult . The main antagonist is Takahisa Kandori , who runs the local SEBEC facility . During the SEBEC route , the player has the option of recruiting Reiji Kido , a student with a vendetta against Kandori . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game starts with the protagonist , along with schoolmates Hidehiko , Yuka and Masao , playing a fortune @-@ telling parlor game called " Persona " while Kei and Yukino watch . After playing the game , the group see a ghostly figure , and the protagonist , Masao , Kei and Yukino are rendered unconscious . The protagonist is then drawn into the realm of Philemon , who grants him the power of Persona and warns him that his new power will soon be needed . After the four recover and at the suggestion of their teacher Saeko , they go to have a check @-@ up and visit classmate Maki at the hospital . While visiting , Maki is taken ill , and while they are waiting for news , the ICU where Maki is being treated vanishes and the town is attacked by demons , the summoned manifestations of people 's inner darkness . Using their Personae , the four defend themselves , and after meeting up with Eriko , they head to the town 's <unk> Shrine to find Maki 's mother Setsuko . Upon arrival , they find Setsuko wounded after an attack by Kandori . Setsuko reveals him to be the culprit behind the changes to the town , caused by a reality @-@ altering machine called the Deva System . Nanjo and Masao head out to confront SEBEC , while the protagonist , Eriko and Yukino bring Setsuko back to the school . After this point , the game splits into two story routes : the main SEBEC route , and the alternate Snow Queen route . 
 In the SEBEC route , should the protagonist decide to confront SEBEC , he is first joined by an apparently @-@ recovered Maki , then asked by Nanjo to help save Masao , who is captured by demons . The protagonist , Maki and Nanjo rescue Masao , but on the way Maki displays an odd lack of certain memories including being hospitalized . After rescuing Masao and infiltrating SEBEC , the group confront Kandori . After cornering him inside the Deva System , a girl in black called Aki appears and knocks the party unconscious . When they awake , they find themselves in a duplicate , idealized version of their world . The group eventually find and corner Kandori , whose ultimate goal was to become a deity and find meaning in life . After an initial fight , Kandori is possessed by his Persona Nyarlathotep , then finally defeated . Before dying , Kandori reveals that the Maki who has been traveling with the party is the " Ideal Maki " , a version of herself from the true Maki 's heart . Aki and a girl in white called Mai are also pieces of Maki , and the idealized Mikage @-@ cho was created by Maki , and brought into reality when she unexpectedly linked with the Deva System . The group must help Maki avoid Kandori 's path towards isolation and his current actions . The group manage to convince Ideal Maki to overlook her original self 's unconscious actions and join them in fixing the problem . After rescuing the true Maki 's self from the Sea of Souls , where all human life begins , the group must then confront Pandora , an aspect of Maki that wants to use the Deva System to destroy everything . When Pandora is defeated , all the pieces of Maki merge back into one , reversing the effects on the town and restoring her to full health . Philemon meets with the group and congratulates them on their success . 
 The Snow Queen route , which takes place in the real town of Mikage @-@ cho , is unlocked by investigating an urban legend within the school surrounding a theatrical mask used in performances of " The Snow Queen " : nearly everyone who wears the mask to play the title role has died . After finding the mask , the protagonist encounters Saeko , who puts on the mask and is possessed by a spirit within it . Freezing the entire town , the possessed Saeko generates three towers , with the spirits of those previously killed by the mask as their guardians , whilst setting up her Ice Castle within the high school . Along with Yukino , Ayase , Eriko , and Hidehiko , the protagonist heads out to save Saeko . Philemon contacts them and tells them that the only way to save Saeko is the Demon Mirror , which can remove the source of the mask 's curse . The spirit possessing Saeko turns out to be former classmate Tomomi Fujimori , who was horribly disfigured by the mask when she wore it in place of Saeko . Using the mirror , the group are able to free Saeko and bring Tomomi peace . It is then revealed that Tomomi herself was controlled by the Night Queen Asura , a powerful entity who wants to cloak the world in darkness . Upon defeating the Night Queen , the town is freed from her power . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development of Revelations : Persona began in 1994 , after the release of Shin Megami Tensei If .... The high school setting of If ... was received positively upon release , so Atlus decided to create a dedicated subseries focusing on the inner struggles of young adults . This concept eventually evolved into Persona , and its underlying focus on the " human soul " would become a mainstay of the Persona series . The title Megami Ibunroku was designed to show the title 's status as a spin @-@ off directly related to the Megami Tensei series , although it was removed for later Persona titles . The Persona system was directly inspired by the Guardian system used in If ... , originally designed by future Persona director Katsura Hashino . Veteran Megami Tensei producer Kouji Okada , and character designer Kazuma Kaneko took over these respective staff roles . New to the production team was writer Satomi Tadashi . The script took about a year to write , with the staff going through twenty drafts . The first draft involved the students going on a field trip and being caught in a series of mysterious events . This was one of the more fondly @-@ remembered versions . Shigenori Soejima , a future designer for the series , was involved in designing minor characters and coloring promotional and cover artwork . The main concept behind Persona was a Megami Tensei game that could be enjoyed by people new to the series . The popularity of casual games on the PlayStation was a key factor in making this decision . The development team 's focus on Persona resulted in development on Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne coming to a near @-@ halt . 
 Kaneko designed the main cast around multiple notable celebrities and fictional characters of the time , along with members of Atlus staff . While the characters wearing the same uniform helped designate them as a single group , it also made them look the same . To balance against this , Kaneko expressed their individuality through accessories . Atlus staff members also made cameos as minor characters . The character of Philemon was based on Carl Jung 's titular wise old man archetype , described as a contradictory existence . His appearance in @-@ game was based on paintings of Chinese philosopher Zhuang Zhou . Multiple ideas and terms used in @-@ game were based on Jungian psychology and archetypes . The Velvet Room , a key gameplay location , was based on the Black Lodge from Twin Peaks . One of the characters focused on by Kaneko was Maki , who was given multiple forms throughout the story . The first versions created were the original Maki , who had been bed @-@ ridden for a long time , and the " ideal " version , whose inexperience with the outside world and interactions with others made her an expressionless doll . In addition to these forms , black @-@ clothed " Aki " and white @-@ clothed " Mai " were created when Maki 's personality split , representing her extremes . The true Maki represented balance , so Kaneko made her uniform grey . Because of this , the school uniform had to be grey . To represent her psychological immaturity , she was given a ribbon to represent her <unk> , along with a locket she believes can grant wishes . 
 = = = Ports and localization = = = 
 Persona was released in Japan on September 20 , 1996 for the PlayStation . The game was ported to Microsoft Windows and released on March 25 , 1999 by ASCII Corporation . The game was compatible with Windows 95 and 98 operating systems . The PlayStation Portable version was directed by Shoji Meguro , the original game 's composer . It was Meguro 's first project as a director . It was decided to remake the original Persona as a large number of new fans had been brought to the series by Persona 3 and 4 , so Atlus decided to give them easier access to the beginning of the series . The game was announced in February 2009 , and released on April 29 of that year . Along with gameplay adjustments and balancing , such as adding adjustable difficulty levels and modifying enemy encounter rates , full @-@ motion cutscenes produced by anime studio Kamikaze Douga were created . The cutscenes were voiced , while the rest of the game used text @-@ based dialogue as in the original . In Europe and Australia , the title was released by Atlus as a digital title on PlayStation Network . 
 Persona was the first role @-@ playing entry in the Megami Tensei series to be released in the west , with the first Megami Tensei release being action game Jack Bros. in 1995 . While the main Megami Tensei series ' use of Christian imagery made it unsuitable for localization at the time , Persona employed a different naming system to make it more acceptable . Persona was localized by Atlus ' then @-@ new North American branch Atlus USA . Persona was chosen as a series that could help define the company and compete with the likes of Final Fantasy , Suikoden and Breath of Fire . The team that localized Persona was quite small , which made the process quite difficult : not only was there a large amount of text to translate , but the team needed to adjust or change the Japanese references as they feared it might alienate western players . Among the changes were altering the player character 's hairstyle , the ethnic origins of multiple characters , the character and location names , and multiple pieces of dialogue . The entire Snow Queen route was also cut from the game , leaving only the SEBEC story route open for exploration . 
 The PSP remake 's localization was similar to those done for Persona 3 and 4 , with the dialogue being in tune with modern youth and keeping as close to the original dialogue as possible except for Japan @-@ specific cultural references . To provide a reference for their work , the localization team played through the original version of Persona . The changes made to character names and appearances were all changed back to how they appeared in the original Japanese release , with the exception of a couple of lines that had become fan favorites . These were included as a kind of homage to both players and the company 's history of game localization . The entire Snow Queen quest was also reinstated . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Persona was written by <unk> Aoki , Kenichi Tsuchiya , Misaki <unk> and Shoji Meguro . Persona was Tsuchiya and Meguro 's first major work , with Meguro beginning shortly before he officially joined Atlus ' internal staff . Meguro worked on the title for approximately a year , composing ten to twenty percent of the score . The first piece composed by Meguro was " The Aria of the Soul " , the theme for the Velvet Room , originally commissioned by Aoki . " The Aria of the Soul " would become a mainstay in future Persona titles . For the PSP re @-@ release , Meguro composed new music alongside remixing original tracks . While he kept the original atmosphere , he also used the experience and musical techniques gained from his work on Persona 3 and 4 . He also tried some new techniques , such as with the opening theme , which began with a pop motif before transitioning into heavy metal , along with changing the important lyrics from English to Japanese . 
 The official soundtrack album , Persona Be Your True Mind Original Soundtrack , was released on June 17 , 1999 . An arrange album , Megami Ibunroku Persona Original Soundtrack & Arrange Album , was released April 18 , 1999 . In Japan , the official soundtrack for the PSP port was released on April 29 , 2009 . In the United States , the Persona soundtrack was packaged with the game 's retail release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its year of release in Japan , Persona sold 391 @,@ 556 units , reaching # 21 in the 100 best @-@ selling games of that year . Persona was described at the time of its original western release as a " sleeper hit " . The PSP port of the game was also highly successful : while Atlus estimated sales of 50 @,@ 000 and 35 @,@ 000 in Japan and North America , respectively , actual sales reached 160 @,@ 000 and 49 @,@ 000 . 
 Famitsu was generally positive about the setting and plot , and enjoyed the careful incorporation of Megami Tensei gameplay mechanics alongside new features . GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann called it " a truly different RPG " , praising the story , setting and gameplay , while criticizing the quality of the localization and feeling indifferent about the graphics and level layout . IGN called the game " an RPG masterpiece " , praising its departure from fantasy @-@ based RPGs of the time . Game Informer variously complemented the game for its challenging gameplay , and story and setting , with one reviewer calling it " the best PlayStation RPG available . " Jeff Walker , writing a retrospective review of the game for RPGamer , generally shared points of praise and criticism with Gerstmann , summing the game up as " a sure winner " . RPGFan writer <unk> was positive overall about the game , calling it " an achievement in dedicated game design " , and saying in closing that " [ Revelations : Persona ] deserves much more respect than it has received . " 
 Reviewing the PSP port , Eric L. Patterson of Play was highly positive about the game 's old @-@ school mechanics and the chance to replay it with an improved localization and the Snow Queen route reinstated . He did say that for fans of the PlayStation 2 Persona games , " [ Persona ] could very well feel like a punch to the face and a boot to the crotch . " Jeremy Parish , writing for 1UP.com , said that the way Persona broke away from RPG norms through the communication with demons during battle made it essential playing for fans of the genre . He was generally positive about most aspects apart from its visuals . Game Informer 's Joe Juba , despite noting awkward navigation and the inability to appreciate character and enemies designs due to their small sprite size , generally praised the game for improving on the original game 's flaws . Ben Reeves , giving a second opinion on the game as part of the review , generally shared Juba 's points of praise , though found the minimap inadequate . GameSpot 's Lark Anderson was more critical than most , praising the story and improved localization , but finding the combat , navigation and graphics fairly dated compared to both recent and contemporary RPGs . IGN 's Sam Bishop shared critiques about the graphics with other reviewers , but enjoyed most other parts of the game , and particularly appreciated the inclusion of the Snow Queen route . RPGamer 's Glenn Wilson and RPGFan 's Neal Chandran generally echoed other reviewers ' sentiments : Wilson cited it as a less enjoyable game than the PlayStation 2 Persona entries while still being a quality project , and Chandran called it " a killer trip down memory lane with a pair of high @-@ definition rose @-@ colored glasses . " Shin Megami Tensei : Persona was also awarded RPGFan 's Editor 's Choice Award . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Revelations : Persona was successful enough to establish the Persona series in North America and become a cult classic . The games success prompted the development of a sequel . Persona 2 : Innocent Sin , which was released in 1999 and involved many of the same staff . Persona was adapted into a manga titled Megami Ibunroku Persona . Originally serialized in 1996 , it was later reissued in 2009 . In 2006 , Atlus and mobile company Bbmf released a mobile version of the game , Megami Ibunroku Persona : Chapter of the Foreign Tower of Emptiness . The game is a 3D dungeon crawler set within the locations of Persona . The unexpected success of the PSP port led to the development of enhanced remakes for both Innocent Sin and its sequel , Persona 2 : Eternal Punishment . Both these ports were also directed by Meguro . 
 = Craigflower Manor and Schoolhouse = 
 The Craigflower Manor and Craigflower Schoolhouse are National Historic Sites of Canada located in View Royal , British Columbia ( the Manor ) and Saanich ( the Schoolhouse ) near Victoria . The centerpiece of each historic site is a 19th @-@ century building — a manor and schoolhouse commissioned by the Hudson 's Bay Company to provide education and lodging for their employees . Built as part of the agricultural community Craigflower Farm , the buildings served as a focal point for the community into the modern era ; they remain open to the public today as museums devoted to the colonial history of Victoria . 
 The sites also have unique archaeological merit , encompassing three distinct periods , and types , of human habitation which span thousands of years . In addition , the existing structures have great historical and cultural value , remaining some of the best , and last , examples of their kind in Canada . These factors combine to make these two sites important National Historic Sites , and have been given government protection for the public trust . 
 = = Site history = = 
 The land in the area was formed during the last ice age in North America , approximately 13 @,@ 000 years ago , when receding glaciers carved a deep gouge into the earth , which became a number of small lakes and streams . Over time , these lakes rejoined the ocean , becoming a salt @-@ water inlet known today as the Gorge waterway , which the indigenous people call " <unk> " . The <unk> , a Coast Salish tribe and ancestors of the modern Esquimalt and <unk> First Nations , settled in the area , calling the whole region " <unk> " , after the legend of a girl they believed was turned to stone there . 
 Archaeologists working in the Gulf of Georgia , Vancouver Island , and the Lower Mainland have identified several distinct periods of cultural activity , known as " culture types " in the region . The site at Craigflower Farm exhibits three of these culture types , known as " Locarno Beach " , " Gulf of Georgia " and " Historic " . The " Historic " culture type refers to the colonial settlement of the area , and is contiguous with the European colonization ; a majority of the artifacts recovered from the site have been dated to this period . 
 The other two periods of human habitation are discernible mainly by the presence of a large shell midden on the site ; testifying to the abundant shellfish and game in the area . The earliest of the periods , the " Locarno Beach " type , used many different types of stone tools , including <unk> , adzes , and other shaped or sharpened objects . The next culture type , dating from around 2500 years ago and known as the " Gulf of Georgia " type , is characterized by an increased use of bone tools , such as wedges and awls made from antlers , as well as different kinds of wood . This culture type 's presence on the site ends with the arrival of Europeans , and the colonization of Vancouver Island — altogether , around 1000 indigenous artifacts were recovered from the site during two separate archaeological digs . 
 Both the manor and the schoolhouse were part of a settlement known as Craigflower Farm , which was one of Western Canada 's first farming communities . Established in 1853 by the Puget Sound Agricultural Company , a subsidiary of the Hudson 's Bay Company , the farm was to supply fresh produce to the nearby Fort Victoria , and to aid in settlement of lower Vancouver Island . The farm was named after Craigflower Farm in England which was owned by Andrew Colville , Governor of the Hudson 's Bay Company from 1852 to 1856 . The land for the farm , was purchased from the Esquimalt First Nation ( recorded as the " <unk> " on the treaty ) in 1850 , who relocated nearby . 
 = = Craigflower Schoolhouse = = 
 Originally called Maple Point School , the schoolhouse was commissioned by first farm director , Kenneth McKenzie , to provide education for the children of farm employees . This was to be the third school constructed in the colony of Vancouver Island , following Governor James Douglas ' call " to give a proper moral and religious training to the children of the settlers who are growing up in ignorance and the utter neglect of all their duties to God and society . " The need was judged to be most severe for children of Protestant denomination , as Roman Catholics received ( until 1851 ) " very able and zealous " instruction from a priest from the Society des <unk> . Construction was commenced , using timber milled on the farm , in August 1854 and continued until late February 1855 . The first students took classes there in March of the same year , and were charged a fee of between 30 shillings and 1 pound . 
 The two @-@ story building was built in Georgian Revival style , and boasted a single schoolroom on the first floor , as well as six rooms for the teacher , their family , and student boarders from other parts of Vancouver Island . A large brick fireplace , as well as a stove , provided heating for the building , and a bell salvaged from the wrecked steamship Major Tompkins was hung in the yard to call students to class . Initially , the school was accessible from the main part of the farm only by boat , but the 1856 completion of the first Craigflower bridge linked the two parts of the farm together . 
 The schoolhouse became the focal point of social and religious events on the farm , and saw continuous use until 1872 when town council neglected to provide funding for Victoria 's schools . However , Education Act amendments returned the school to operation soon after , and in 1873 education was made mandatory for students aged seven to 14 . The school continued to operate until 1911 , when it was replaced by the second Craigflower school , built across the road . The current school , called Craigflower Elementary School , was built in 1964 to replace the aging 1911 building . The schoolhouse , however , was converted into a museum in 1931 and run by a local service club until 1975 when the provincial Historical Parks board acquired it and restored the structure . It was briefly run as a museum by The Land Conservancy of British Columbia in public trust — it is the oldest surviving schoolhouse in Western Canada , though it is often erroneously referred to as " the first school built in British Columbia " . The Schoolhouse is now the home of the Hallmark Heritage Society , The Capital Regional District 's oldest heritage preservation organization , and is open to the public for special presentations during the summer and will be the site of heritage workshops beginning in the fall of 2015 . 
 = = Craigflower Manor = = 
 The manor house was built shortly after the completion of the schoolhouse , to serve as a home and office for the management of the Craigflower farm , and their family . The house was constructed as a Georgian Revival version of a Scottish manor house , at the request of Kenneth McKenzie 's wife , Agnes . The foundation was laid in 1853 , prior to the McKenzies ' arrival , and was completed in May 1856 . 
 A grand , two @-@ story structure , the manor was over 900 square feet ( 84 m2 ) in size and second only to the first Government House in elegance . The building boasted a dining room , sitting room , office , music room , kitchen , and four bedrooms for the large McKenzie family . Heat was provided by several fireplaces , serviced by two large brick chimneys . The manor was used as lodging up until 1922 , when the Hudson 's Bay Company converted it into a community centre . It eventually became a hotel , before being sold to the government in 1965 . As the building is the earliest , and one of the few remaining , examples of its type in Western Canada , it was extensively restored in 1967 by the province , before being run as a museum . It is currently leased by the Highland Games Society . 
 = Nicki Minaj = 
 Onika Tanya Maraj ( born December 8 , 1982 ) , known professionally as Nicki Minaj , is a Trinidadian @-@ born American rapper , singer and songwriter . Born in Saint James , Trinidad and Tobago and raised in South Jamaica , Queens , New York , Minaj earned public attention after releasing three mixtapes between 2007 – 09 . She has been signed to Young Money Entertainment since 2009 . 
 Minaj 's first and second studio albums , Pink Friday ( 2010 ) and Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded ( 2012 ) , both peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and produced the successful singles " Super Bass " and " Starships " , respectively . In 2010 , Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven singles simultaneously charting on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . Her third studio album , The Pinkprint ( 2014 ) , was preceded by its second single , " Anaconda " , which peaked at number two on the Hot 100 and is her highest @-@ charting single in the U.S. to date . Minaj made her film debut in the 2012 animated film Ice Age : Continental Drift , followed by supporting roles in The Other Woman ( 2014 ) and Barbershop : The Next Cut ( 2016 ) . In 2013 , she was a judge on the twelfth season of American Idol . 
 Minaj was the first female artist included on MTV 's Annual Hottest MC List , with a The New York Times editor saying that some consider her to be " the most influential female rapper of all time " . In 2016 , Minaj was included on the annual Time 100 list of the most influential people in the world . Her rapping is distinctive for its fast flow and the use of alter egos and accents , primarily British cockney . Early in her career , Minaj was known for her colorful costumes and wigs . According to Billboard , Minaj has the most Hot 100 entries in history amongst female rappers , and also has the third @-@ most entries amongst women of all genres . Minaj has received ten Grammy nominations throughout her career , and has won six American Music Awards , eleven BET Awards , three MTV Video Music Awards , four Billboard Music Awards , and was the recipient of Billboard 's Women in Music 2011 Rising Star award . She has further endorsed Adidas , MAC Cosmetics and Pepsi . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Onika Tanya Maraj was born in Saint James , Trinidad and Tobago on December 8 , 1982 . Her parents Robert Maraj , a financial executive and part @-@ time gospel singer , and Carol Maraj , also a gospel singer , are Trinidadians of African heritage , with Robert additionally of Asian Indian heritage . Carol worked in payroll and accounting departments during Minaj 's youth . Minaj 's father was addicted to alcohol and other drugs , and had a violent temper , burning down their house in December 1987 . She has two siblings . 
 As a small child , Minaj and a sibling lived with her grandmother in Saint James . Her mother , who had moved to The Bronx , New York to attend Monroe College and brought her husband six months later , brought them to Queens , New York , when Minaj was 5 . By then the family had a house on West 147th Street . Minaj recalled , " I don ’ t think I had a lot of discipline in my household . My mom motivated me , but it wasn ’ t a strict household . I kind of wanted a strict household . " Minaj successfully auditioned for admission to LaGuardia High School in Manhattan , which focuses on visual and performing arts . After graduation , Minaj wanted to become an actress , and she was cast in the Off @-@ Broadway play In Case You Forget in 2001 . When her acting career failed to take off , at age 19 she worked as a waitress at Red Lobster in the Bronx , but was fired for discourtesy to customers . She said she was fired from " at least fifteen jobs " for similar reasons . She also worked as an administrative assistant , in customer service and as an office manager for a Wall Street business . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2004 – 09 : Career beginnings = = = 
 Minaj briefly signed with Brooklyn group Full Force , in which she rapped in a quartet called " The <unk> " composed of Lou $ tar ( son of " <unk> Lou " ) , Safaree Samuels ( <unk> <unk> ) and <unk> Up . In 2004 the group recorded the entrance song for WWE Diva Victoria , " Don 't Mess With " , which was featured on the compilation album <unk> : WWE The Music , <unk> Minaj left Full Force and uploaded songs on her Myspace profile , sending several of her songs to people in the music industry . At the time , she was managed by Debra <unk> . Fendi , CEO of Brooklyn label Dirty Money Entertainment , signed Minaj to his label in 2007 under a 180 @-@ day contract . Originally adopting the stage name " Nicki Maraj " , she changed it to Nicki Minaj stating that " My real name is Maraj . Fendi flipped it when he met me because I had such a nasty flow ! I eat bitches ! " 
 Minaj released her first mixtape , Playtime is Over , on Dirty Money Records on July 5 , 2007 and her second , <unk> Free , on April 12 , 2008 . That year , she was named Female Artist of the Year at the 2008 Underground Music Awards . In 2009 Minaj was involved in a conflict with ego trip 's Miss Rap Supreme winner <unk> Steele , who was annoyed when Minaj interrupted her interview and put a sign behind Steele 's head ; Minaj hung up on interviewers from <unk> magazine when they asked about the incident . She released her third mixtape , Beam Me Up Scotty , on April 18 , 2009 and it received favorable coverage on BET and MTV . One of its tracks , " I Get Crazy " , reached number 20 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Rap Songs chart and number 37 on the magazine 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 After Minaj was discovered by fellow rapper Lil Wayne , in August 2009 it was reported that she signed a recording contract with his Young Money Entertainment . That November , she appeared with Gucci Mane and Trina on the remix of " 5 Star Bitch " by Yo Gotti . Minaj also appeared on " BedRock " and " Roger That " on the compilation album , We Are Young Money ( 2009 ) . The singles peaked at numbers two and 56 , respectively , on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 ; their parent album reached number @-@ nine on the U.S. Billboard 200 , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Minaj was featured on Mariah Carey 's " Up Out My Face " , which reached number 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 . At Jay @-@ Z 's suggestion , that February Robin Thicke featured Minaj on " Shakin ' It 4 Daddy " . 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : Breakthrough with Pink Friday = = = 
 Minaj released the intended lead single from her upcoming debut album , " Massive Attack " on March 29 , 2010 . Plans for the single were scrapped after an underwhelming commercial performance . As a result , " Your Love " was released as the album 's lead single on June 1 , peaking at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number @-@ one on the Billboard Rap Songs chart . In August Minaj announced that the album would be entitled Pink Friday , a play on " Black Friday " . The following month she released " Check It Out " and " Right Thru Me " as follow @-@ up singles . In October , Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven songs on the Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously and the first woman to appear on MTV 's Annual Hottest MC List . 
 Pink Friday was released on November 19 , debuting at number @-@ two on the Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 375 @,@ 000 copies . " Moment 4 Life " was released as the fourth single shortly after . The album was certified platinum in December , and eventually reached number @-@ one in the United States in February 2011 . Minaj performed " Right Thru Me " and " Moment 4 Life " as the musical guest on the January 29 episode of Saturday Night Live . " Super Bass " , the album 's fifth single , was released in April 2011 . The song peaked at number @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 and has been certified octuple @-@ platinum in the U.S. Minaj credited the song 's initial exposure to its mention by Taylor Swift , after videos of Swift and Selena Gomez rapping along to the song went viral , paving the way for Minaj 's first big crossover pop moment . Minaj was one of the opening acts on Britney Spears ' June 16 – August 13 Femme Fatale Tour . She and Kesha appeared on the remix of Spears ' " Till the World Ends " , which peaked at number @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 . On August 7 , 2011 , Nicki experienced a " nip slip " during a live performance on Good Morning America . Minaj was criticized for wearing the low @-@ cut shirt during her performance which led to the brief exposure of her breast on a live telecast . ABC apologized for incident . Minaj , while interviewed on ABC 's Nightline show , apologized for the incident and denied that she intentionally sought to expose herself on live television as a publicity stunt . The incident soaked protest from the Parents Television Council . President of the PTC president Tim Winter stated , " the Parents Television Council has something to say about Nicki Minaj ’ s wardrobe malfunction this morning . For the umpteenth time in recent memory a morning news show has included inappropriate content for children and families . " Winter called out Good Morning America for not using the five @-@ second delay to prevent the broadcast of the exposure . Minaj has been invited to perform at fashion events ; Donatella Versace invited her to perform with Prince for the introduction of a Versace collection for H & M , and she performed " Super Bass " at the 2011 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show . 
 Since her breakout with Pink Friday , Minaj has been involved in a feud with rapper Lil ' Kim , who accused Minaj of copying her style . Although Minaj 's " Roman 's Revenge " was thought to be directed at Kim , she said she was " talking about everyone who has been in interviews talking ... no one is worth being singled out . No one is worth having their name mentioned out of my mouth and they never will get that . " Kim escalated the feud with her mixtape , Black Friday ( 2011 ) , whose title and artwork mimic Pink Friday ; a fragment from Minaj 's diss track , " Tragedy " , previewed that April . Their conflict sparked a feud between Minaj and rapper Foxy Brown , who said Minaj misrepresented their conversation about Kim . Brown released the diss tracks " Hold Yuh " and " Massacre " ( directed at Kim and Minaj ) in November 2010 and January 2011 , respectively , but Brown and Minaj settled their dispute in June 2012 . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 : Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded and American Idol = = = 
 Minaj released her second studio album Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded in April 2012 . The album was preceded by the promotional singles " Roman in Moscow " and " Stupid Hoe " . Critics suggested that the latter song was directed at Lil ' Kim , who said : " If you have to make a song called ' Stupid Hoe , ' you must be a stupid hoe . " Minaj and rapper M.I.A. joined Madonna to perform their single , " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , on the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show on February 6 , 2012 . She was the first solo female rapper to perform at the Grammy Awards , premiering " Roman Holiday " during the 2012 ceremony on February 12 . Her exorcism @-@ themed performance was controversial , with the American Catholic League criticizing Minaj for bringing a fake " Pope " to escort her on the red carpet . The " exorcism " scene that was performed during her appearance was criticized as well . According to the Catholic League president Bill Donohue " Perhaps the most vulgar part was the sexual statement that showed a scantily clad female dancer stretching backwards while an altar boy knelt between her legs in prayer . Finally , ' Come All Ye Faithful ' was sung while a man posing as a bishop walked on stage ; Minaj was shown levitating . " 
 " Starships " was released in February 2012 as the lead single from Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded . The song reached number @-@ five on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was the fifth best @-@ selling single of 2012 . For the most part , mainstream critics didn 't receive well the pop crossover move . Minaj was sued by Chicago artist Clive Tanaka in September 2013 for its alleged copyright infringement . Follow @-@ up singles " Beez in the Trap " and " Right by My Side " were released shortly after . Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded was released on April 2 , two months later than planned . The album debuted at number @-@ one on the Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 253 @,@ 000 copies , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in June 2012 . However , its mix of hip @-@ hop songs and mainstream pop material received mixed reviews from music critics . " Pound the Alarm " and " Va Va Voom " were released as the final singles from the album . Minaj began her headlining Pink Friday Tour on May 16 , 2012 , which was followed by the Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour beginning October 14 . Although she was scheduled to headline the June 3 Hot 97 Summer Jam at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey , at the request of Lil Wayne she canceled her appearance the day of the show after Peter Rosenberg of the station called " Starships " not " real hip @-@ hop " . The following month , Minaj voiced Steffie in the animated film Ice Age : Continental Drift ( 2012 ) . She won awards for Best Female Video ( for " Starships " ) at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards and Best Hip @-@ Hop at the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards . An expanded version of Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , subtitled The Re @-@ Up , was released on November 19 . That month , Minaj was the subject of a three @-@ part E ! documentary titled Nicki Minaj : My Truth . She announced plans for her own record label after signing Parker Ighile , <unk> , Keisha and Blackout Movement . 
 In September Minaj joined the judges ' panel for the twelfth season of American Idol with fellow new judges Mariah Carey and Keith Urban and the returning Randy Jackson . That October a leaked video circulated , with Minaj and Carey in a heated argument during auditions in Charlotte , North Carolina . Carey accused Minaj of saying , " If I had a gun , I would shoot that bitch " , but Minaj denied the allegation . Carey said that Minaj created an " unsafe work environment " , increasing her security as a result . Tensions escalated after Carey said that Minaj did not have a number @-@ one song on the Billboard Hot 100 during a live broadcast in May 2013 , to which Minaj responded in a series of " extremely harsh " tweets directed at the singer . Minaj and Carey left the series that month , at the end of the season . That year Minaj was the most @-@ charted female rapper in the history of the Billboard Hot 100 , with 44 entries . Her seven nominations led those for rap musicians at the 2013 Billboard Music Awards , and she was the first rapper to win the BET Best Female Hip @-@ Hop Artist Award four consecutive times . 
 = = = 2014 – 15 : The Other Woman and The Pinkprint = = = 
 Minaj 's first live @-@ action theatrical film The Other Woman was filmed in spring 2013 and premiered on April 25 , 2014 . She played Lydia , assistant to Carly ( played by Cameron Diaz ) . In 2013 , Minaj described her then @-@ forthcoming third album , The Pinkprint as " a continuation of The Re @-@ Up with a lot more " and said it would focus on her " hip @-@ hop roots " . During an MTV interview , she said that her third album would be " next level " and have " much to talk about " : " I 'm really excited and the people that have been working with me now , have been people that I haven 't worked with before so it 's like they 're bringing a new sound to the album that I 've never experimented with . " " Pills n Potions " was released as the lead single from The Pinkprint in May 2014 . " Anaconda " was released in August as the second single , peaking at number @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming her highest @-@ charting single in the U.S. to date . The video set a 24 @-@ hour Vevo record , accumulating 19 @.@ 6 million views on its first day of release , breaking the record previously held by Miley Cyrus for " Wrecking Ball " . The album was officially released on December 15 , 2014 , peaking at number @-@ two on the Billboard 200 chart . In support of the album , Minaj embarked on her third international concert tour entitled The Pinkprint Tour . 
 On June 29 , Minaj became the only artist to win the BET Award for Best Female Hip @-@ Hop Artist for five consecutive years , while also tying Missy Elliott for the most wins with five . In November 2014 , Minaj released a video containing Nazi @-@ style imagery for her third single " Only " . There was immediate backlash from the Anti Defamation League , who stated that it was " troubling that no one among Minaj 's group of producers , publicists and managers raised a red flag about the use of such imagery before ushering the video into public release . " They called the video " insensitive to Holocaust survivors and a trivialization of the history of that era . " 
 On November 9 , 2014 , Minaj hosted the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards at The SSE Hydro , Glasgow , Scotland . She also won an award for Best Hip @-@ Hop . In December , Minaj received two Grammy nominations : for Best Rap Song for " Anaconda " and Best Pop Duo / Group Performance for " Bang Bang " with Jessie J and Ariana Grande . In March 2015 , Minaj embarked on her third world tour entitled The Pinkprint Tour . The tour kicked off in Europe . It is scheduled to travel to the United States , Canada , Brazil , Mexico , Dubai , Philippines , Australia and New Zealand . In March 2015 , she became the first female artist to chart four songs simultaneously in the top 10 of Billboard 's Mainstream R & B / Hip @-@ Hop airplay chart . At the 2015 BET Awards , Minaj won her sixth consecutive award for Best Female Hip @-@ Hop Artist , becoming the female rapper with most wins in that category . 
 = = = 2016 : Barbershop : The Next Cut and Nicki = = = 
 In May 2015 , it was announced that Minaj would feature in the third installment of the Barbershop film series , alongside Ice Cube , Cedric the Entertainer , Eve , and other original cast members . Titled Barbershop : The Next Cut , the film was released on April 15 , 2016 and received critical acclaim , earning an average score of 93 % on Rotten Tomatoes . Minaj 's character in the film is a " sassy " hairdresser named <unk> . 
 It was announced that Minaj will executive produce and appear in a scripted single @-@ camera comedy series for ABC Family ( now Freeform ) based on her life growing up in Queens , New York . The show has been titled Nicki and is scheduled to be broadcast in 2016 . The project , from Aaron Kaplan ’ s Kapital Entertainment , filmed the pilot episode in Minaj ’ s hometown in January 2016 , and production has since continued . Ariana Neal will play a young Minaj in the series , alongside Selita Ebanks ( her mother ) , Wesley Jonathan ( her father ) , and <unk> McCausland ( her older brother ) . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Minaj 's physique has attracted positive attention from the media . In 2010 , she said that although she originally felt obligated to mimic the provocative behavior of the " female rappers of [ her ] day " , she intended to subdue her sexuality because she " [ wants ] people — especially young girls — to know that in life , nothing is going to be based on sex appeal . You 've got to have something else to go with that . " The rapper has made autographing breasts part of her movement to empower women . In a Guardian interview , Minaj said she competes with male and female rappers . In " Moment 4 Life " , she refers to herself as a " king " rather than a queen . Early in her career Minaj claimed to be bisexual , but eventually she said she just did that to get attention . " I think girls are sexy , but I 'm not going to lie and say that I date girls . " 
 Minaj has been called the " black Lady Gaga " because of her costumes and wigs . In one interview , Minaj rejected the comparison , but in another interview , she said that she is inspired by Gaga 's creativity . Minaj has cited Alexander McQueen , Gianni Versace and Christian Louboutin as her favorite designers . The Huffington Post described her style as " risk @-@ taking " and " far @-@ out " , with " bold sartorial choices " ; Yahoo ! called her dress " colorful " and " crazy " , and " the fashion and music world would certainly be very quiet without Ms Minaj " . 
 Billboard listed Minaj the fourth @-@ most @-@ active musician on social media on its March 2011 Social 50 chart . On Twitter , she is the world 's most @-@ followed rapper . There , in public appearances and interviews Minaj calls her fans " Barbs " collectively and her male heterosexual and LGBT followers " boys " and " Ken Barbs " respectively ( alluding to her Barbie persona ) . She deleted her Twitter account for eight days in April 2012 after a dispute with fans who leaked snippets from her then @-@ unreleased album . Minaj lost about nine million of her 11 million followers at the time . In 2013 Minaj introduced a more " natural " look , including less @-@ colorful makeup and wigs , during later episodes of American Idol to be taken more seriously . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Minaj is known for her animated rapping style , her flow in particular . She often combines metaphors , punch lines and word play into her work , which has been compared to her mentor Lil Wayne . The New York Times called Minaj " a sparkling rapper with a gift for comic accents and unexpected turns of phrase . She 's a walking exaggeration , outsize in sound , personality and look . And she 's a rapid <unk> , discarding old modes as easily as adopting new ones . " Although many critics describe her technique as bubblegum rap , Minaj said : " What people don 't know is that before I was doing that craziness I was doing me , I was just doing regular sounding rap that anyone could hear and identify with . But once I started doing all that weird shit — I 'm not mad at it because it got everyone 's attention . " Noted as a rap artist , she lends herself to electronic music genres ( especially electropop ) . Pink Friday marked her exploration of the genres , spawning electro songs including the pop @-@ laden " Super Bass " . Also combining rap with synthesizer music , Minaj 's second album had a number of electropop songs : " HOV Lane " , " Whip It " , " Automatic " , " Come On A Cone " , " Young Forever " , " Fire Burns " , " Roman Holiday " and " Beez in the Trap " ; while " Starships " is an europop and dance song . She collaborated with other artists , producing more electronic songs : " The Boys " with " Me & U " singer Cassie and " Beauty and a Beat " with Justin Bieber . 
 Her verse in Kanye West 's " Monster " was appreciated by critics , who said she had the best verse in the song . Her alter egos are incorporated with her lyrics in British accents ( Roman Zolanski ) or soft @-@ spokenness ( Harajuku Barbie ) . Ice @-@ T said about Minaj 's rapping style , " [ Minaj ] does her thing . She has her own way of doing it . She has an ill [ sic ] vocal delivery . She kind of reminds me of a female Busta Rhymes , like how she throws her voice in different directions . " 
 = = = Alter egos = = = 
 With her parents frequently fighting during her childhood , Minaj lived through characters she created as a means of escape . She recalled that " fantasy was my reality " and her first identity was Cookie , who became Harajuku Barbie and ( later ) Nicki Minaj . In November 2010 , Minaj assumed the alter ego Nicki Teresa , wearing a colorful headdress and calling herself " healer to her fans " during a visit to the Garden of Dreams Foundation at Fuse Studios in New York . She introduced another alter ego , Rosa ( pronounced with an exaggerated R ) , to commemorate her December 2010 appearance on Lopez Tonight . 
 For Pink Friday , Minaj created another alter ego : Roman Zolanski , " a demon inside her " , Minaj 's " twin brother " whose character she assumes when she is angry . Roman has been compared to Eminem 's alter ego Slim Shady , and on " Roman 's Revenge " Minaj and Eminem collaborate as their alter egos . On her next album , she said that there would be a lot of Roman : " And if you 're not familiar with Roman , then you will be familiar with him very soon . He 's the boy that lives inside of me . He 's a lunatic and he 's gay and he 'll be on there a lot . " Roman has a mother , Martha Zolanski , who appeared on " Roman 's Revenge " with a British accent and singing on " Roman Holiday " for the first time . Martha appeared in the " Moment 4 Life " video as Minaj 's apparent fairy godmother . Although Minaj was rapping in songs such as " All I Do Is Win ( Remix ) " , she promised to introduce Nicki , Roman and Onika on her first album . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Minaj has said that artists who have influenced her musical style include Lisa " Left Eye " Lopes , Lil Wayne , Smokey Robinson , Lauryn Hill , Jadakiss , Natasha Bedingfield , Remy Ma , Lil ' Kim , Missy Elliott , Janet Jackson , Madonna , Beyoncé , Britney Spears , Marilyn Monroe , Grace Jones , M.I.A. , Cyndi Lauper and TLC . She cites Foxy Brown and Jay @-@ Z as major influences : " I really loved [ Foxy ] as a female rapper . I was really interested in her mind and her aura [ and ] I was really , really into Jay @-@ Z. Me and my friends in high school , we were reciting all of the Jay lyrics . His words were our words in our conversations all the time . " She said : " I never really told Foxy how much she has influenced me and how much she changed my life , and you 've gotta tell people that when they 're alive to even be able to take the compliment , instead of paying tribute to them when they 're no longer here " , adding that Foxy Brown was " the most influential female rapper " for her , though she initially was compared to Lil Kim when she first debuted . Nicki and Lil Kim , often cited as Foxy 's main rap rival , have reportedly exchanged words with each other , on social media and in their music . 
 Jada Pinkett Smith is one of Minaj 's role models in her acting career . Minaj was inspired by R & B singer Monica , singing " Why I Love You So Much " at every talent show she entered . Performing in Atlanta on her Pink Friday Tour , she called Monica one of her all @-@ time greatest musical influences . Minaj has also cited Kanye West , Trina and Drake as influences . 
 She called Betsey Johnson a fashion inspiration : " [ Betsey ] is a free spirit . When I met her the other day , I felt like I knew her for my whole life . She 's so warm and considerate and caring . She 's amazingly talented and I 've been wearing her clothes forever , so to meet her was like , ' Yay ! ' [ I was ] bowing down to her ; she 's dope ! " Minaj has also expressed appreciation for Cyndi Lauper 's style and how her videos inspired her as a teenager : " When I first went to get my hair colored , I was about 14 and I wanted blonde highlights . The beautician said , ' No , you have to get your mother on the phone , ' and I was just crying and begging . I 've always been experimenting . Cyndi Lauper 's videos - that 's what intrigued me . " 
 = = Products and endorsements = = 
 Minaj has been affiliated with several manufacturing companies and has endorsed a number of products during her career . Her first collaboration was a November 2010 endorsement deal with MAC Cosmetics which sold a lipstick , " Pink 4 Friday " , for four consecutive Fridays to promote her album Pink Friday . In 2011 , Minaj helped introduce the Casio <unk> in Times Square , and created a six @-@ piece nail polish collection for OPI Products with colors named after her songs . That December , Mattel produced a custom @-@ made , Minaj @-@ themed Barbie doll valued at about $ 15 @,@ 000 for auction on <unk> . 
 In April 2012 , Minaj helped launch the Nokia Lumia 900 in Times Square . The following month , Minaj appeared in television and internet advertisements for Pepsi 's " <unk> " campaign , which featured a remix of her single " Moment 4 Life " . She endorsed the 2012 Viva Glam campaign with Ricky Martin , which raised $ 270 million for the Mac AIDS Fund . With designer Jeremy Scott , Minaj signed an endorsement deal with Adidas ' fall and winter 2012 campaign to appear in internet advertisements and commercials for Adidas Originals . Set to her song , " Masquerade " , her segment of the advertisement was filmed in Brooklyn and also featured Big Sean , Derrick Rose , Sky Ferreira and 2NE1 in other locations worldwide . 
 Early 2013 , Minaj fronted the Viva Glam campaign by herself , which included the introduction of " Nicki 2 lipstick and lip gloss " . She also introduced the " Nicki Minaj Collection " clothing line for Kmart , composed of clothing , accessories and housewares . In February 2013 , Bluewater Comics announced that Minaj would star in the Fame biographical @-@ comic series , debuting in Fame : Nicki Minaj . She partnered with Beats Electronics to introduce her " Pink Pill " speakers in April 2013 , appearing with DeRay Davis in a commercial for the speakers that same month . In June 2013 , Minaj lead an ad campaign for Myx Fusions , a fruit @-@ infused , single serve <unk> wine beverage of which she is a part owner . 
 Minaj has a prominent fragrance line , which was launched in September 2012 . She partnered with ' Give Back Brands ' to introduce her first fragrance , Pink Friday . A " Pink Friday : Special Edition " was released in April 2013 . A deluxe edition version of the fragrance , titled " Pink Friday : Deluxe Edition " , was also launched in December 2013 . Her second fragrance line , <unk> , was launched in September 2013 . A flanker fragrance , " <unk> : Exotic Edition " , was released exclusively to the Home Shopping Network in June 2014 . This was followed by the launch of her third fragrance line , " Onika " , in September 2014 . 
 In December 2014 , Minaj was announced as the new face of the Roberto Cavalli spring / summer 2015 campaign . The campaign images , shot in Los Angeles by Italian photographer Francesco Carrozzini , see Minaj posing in <unk> bohemian dresses , defined by embroideries and animal prints typical of the Cavalli brand . On March 30 , 2015 , it was announced that Minaj is a co @-@ owner of the music streaming service Tidal . The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos . In addition to Minaj and company owner Jay Z , sixteen stakeholders including Beyoncé , Madonna , Rihanna and Kanye West own a 3 % equity stake in the service . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Minaj is the only woman to be featured on the Forbes Hip Hop Cash Kings list . She made her first appearance on the list in 2011 , earning U.S. $ 6 @.@ 5 million from May 2010 to May 2011 . In 2012 , she placed eighth on the list , earning U.S. $ 15 @.@ 5 million from May 2011 to May 2012 . Minaj rose to the fourth position on the list in 2013 , earning U.S. $ 29 million from June 2012 to June 2013 . She made her fourth consecutive appearance on the list in 2014 , earning U.S. $ 14 million from June 2013 to June 2014 . In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy , Minaj donated $ 15 @,@ 000 to the Food Bank For New York City and held a turkey drive at her alma mater , PS 45 . 
 Minaj has stated that after her father went to rehab and began attending church , " he got saved and started changing his life " . In July 2011 , Minaj 's cousin , Nicholas Telemaque , was murdered near his home in Brooklyn , which she references in her songs " Champion " : " Cause they killed my little cousin , Nicholas / But my memory 's only happy images " , and " All Things Go " : " I lost my little cousin to a senseless act of violence " . In late 2014 , Minaj separated from her longtime boyfriend Safaree Samuels . Several tracks on The Pinkprint are believed to have been inspired by the end of their relationship . She also revealed she had an abortion as a teenager in her song " All Things Go " . Minaj began dating rapper Meek Mill in early 2015 . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Throughout her career , Minaj has won numerous awards including : six American Music Awards , ten BET Awards , seven BET Hip Hop Awards , four Billboard Music Awards , three MTV Video Music Awards , three MTV Europe Music Awards , two People 's Choice Awards , one Soul Train Music Award , and four Teen Choice Awards . 
 Throughout 2011 – 16 , Minaj has received a total of 10 Grammy Award nominations . She received her first Grammy nomination in 2011 for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for the single " My Chick Bad " with fellow rapper Ludacris . For the 54th Grammy Awards in 2012 , Minaj received three nominations , including Best New Artist and Best Rap Album for her debut album Pink Friday . Minaj received her second nomination for Best Rap Album at the 58th Grammy Awards for The Pinkprint . 
 Minaj won the American Music Awards for Favorite Rap / Hip @-@ Hop Artist and Favorite Rap / Hip @-@ Hop Album in three different years for her first three albums . She has won twice MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip @-@ Hop Video for " Super Bass " and " Anaconda " , and one Best Female Video for " Starships " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Pink Friday ( 2010 ) 
 Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded ( 2012 ) 
 The Pinkprint ( 2014 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Ice Age : Continental Drift ( 2012 ) 
 The Other Woman ( 2014 ) 
 Barbershop : The Next Cut ( 2016 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Headlining tours 
 Pink Friday Tour ( 2012 ) 
 Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour ( 2012 ) 
 The Pinkprint Tour ( 2015 ) 
 Opening act 
 America 's Most Wanted Tour ( 2008 ) 
 I Am Still Music Tour ( 2011 ) 
 Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) 
 = Skullgirls = 
 Skullgirls is a 2D fighting game independently developed by Reverge Labs and co @-@ published by Autumn Games and Konami . The game was released through the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in North America , Europe , and Australia from April to May 2012 , and later received a Japanese release by CyberFront for the PlayStation Network in February 2013 . A Microsoft Windows version , developed by Lab Zero Games and co @-@ published by Autumn Games and Marvelous , was released in August 2013 . A mobile version of the game , developed by Hidden Variable Studios , will be released for Android and iOS devices in late 2016 . 
 In Skullgirls , players engage in combat against one another with teams of one , two , or three characters , attempting to knock out their opponents or have the most cumulative health when time runs out . The setting of the game revolves around the " Skull Heart " , an artifact which grants wishes for women . If a wisher with an impure soul uses the Skull Heart , she is transformed into the next " Skullgirl " , a monster bent on destruction . Skullgirls received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised the animation and gameplay mechanics , while criticizing its limited roster size and online multiplayer features . 
 Development of post @-@ release content faced numerous setbacks . In May 2012 , publisher Autumn Games was sued over allegations of fraud regarding an unrelated property , Def Jam Rapstar , cutting off Skullgirls ' financial support and forcing developer Reverge Labs to lay off the entire development team . The core team would eventually reform as Lab Zero Games in November 2012 , launching a successful crowdfunding campaign to raise funds to continue their work . After Autumn Games severed ties with co @-@ publisher Konami in December 2013 , the latter formally requested to have the game removed from the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade . The game was later re @-@ released on both platforms as Skullgirls Encore . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The engine and playstyle for Skullgirls were intentionally modeled after Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , incorporating several similar game mechanics such as tag team @-@ based combat , character assists , snapbacks , and delayed hyper combos . The game can be played using different ratios of characters , with each player able to select up to three fighters on their team . The teams are then balanced based on the number of team members . A single character possesses more health and deals more damage , while larger teams gain the ability to perform character assists and recover health when tagged out . Players can also customize their character assist attacks . 
 The game includes a story mode , arcade mode , versus mode , training room , tutorial mode , and online play using the <unk> networking library . Skullgirls includes various unique features to address system and balance problems , such as infinite combo detection . When the game detects a looping combo through monitoring the players ' attacks , the other player can break free of the infinite by hitting any button . In addition , Skullgirls offers protection against " unblockable attacks " , which occur when a player , for example , uses a low @-@ hitting move and a high @-@ hitting assist attack at the same time , making it nearly impossible for the opponent to block . The game attempts to remedy the issue by offering a brief period of unblockable protection after successfully blocking any attack . 
 At release , Skullgirls Encore saw numerous gameplay adjustments and additions , including character balance tweaks , faster gameplay , an online training mode , and a stun meter designed to limit lengthy combos without compromising creativity . A new local game mode called " Typing of the Skullgirls " , a mode inspired by games like The Typing of the Dead , was also added . When enabled , teams automatically generate meter and all attacks deal negligible damage . Super moves give typing prompts to the player , awarding damage for typing accuracy . In addition to fully voiced story modes and cross @-@ platform play across the entire PlayStation family , Skullgirls 2nd Encore introduced challenges , where players fight against opponents under unique battle conditions ; trials , which test players ' skills by having them perform combos ; and survival mode , which pits players against endless waves of enemies . The mobile version of Skullgirls will incorporate RPG @-@ like progression , customization , and deck @-@ building mechanics . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Skullgirls takes place in the fictional Canopy Kingdom , a country reminiscent of 1940s postwar America . In a corrupt and war @-@ torn world , several individuals and organizations seek to obtain an artifact known as the Skull Heart . Once every seven years , the Skull Heart grants one woman 's wish . However , if a woman with an impure soul attempts to use the Heart , her wish will be corrupted and she will be transformed into a monster known as the Skullgirl . Hundreds have sought after the Skull Heart , yet none of its wielders have been deemed worthy and spared of its curse . 
 Seven years following the Grand War , a battle fought between three nations , the newest Skullgirl , Marie , has emerged and begun to terrorize the Canopy Kingdom . The game follows several fighters and their journeys to confront Marie and claim the Skull Heart . Each character has their own motive for seeking the Heart , whether to destroy the artifact or use its power for their own interests . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The Skullgirls roster initially consisted of eight playable characters : Filia , <unk> , Peacock , <unk> , Ms. Fortune , <unk> , Valentine , and Double . Following the conclusion of the game 's Indiegogo crowdfunding campaign , an additional five downloadable characters were developed : Squigly , Big Band , Eliza , Beowulf , and Robo @-@ Fortune . On April 1 , 2014 , a clone of Filia , named <unk> , was added to the game . The character was intended to be a temporary inclusion for April Fools ' Day , but was kept in response to fan feedback . 
 = = Development = = 
 Skullgirls was originally conceived as several stray character designs that illustrator Alex " o _ 8 " Ahad had been creating since high school . While attending college , Ahad had the hypothetical idea to use the characters concepts for a fighting game roster . The idea would later become a reality when Ahad was introduced to fighting game enthusiast and tournament @-@ goer Mike " Mike Z " <unk> , who had been working on a fighting game engine during his own spare time . Early work on their new Skullgirls project began in 2008 . Engine development and pre @-@ production began in 2009 . Ahad and <unk> pitched Skullgirls to several companies , eventually teaming up with recently founded independent developer Reverge Labs in 2010 . They later went on to sign with publisher Autumn Games . At the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011 , Japanese developer and publisher Konami announced that they would help distribute the game . 
 Following the game 's release , the Skullgirls team began teasing future content for the game , including new voice packs , color palettes , and downloadable characters . However , shortly thereafter , Autumn Games was hit with a series of lawsuits regarding Def Jam Rapstar , which " <unk> up everything related to Autumn 's funding . " The entire Skullgirls development team was laid off by Reverge Labs in June 2012 after Autumn Games and Reverge Labs allowed their contract to expire without agreeing upon a new one . This prompted the team to reform under a new moniker , Lab Zero Games , to continue work on the PC release and downloadable content . Autumn Games , revealed to be in full possession of the IP , claimed it was " fully behind the new studio " and promised to " continue to work with [ Lab Zero Games ] in the future on all Skullgirls @-@ related endeavors . " 
 From January through February 2013 , fighting game website Shoryuken hosted a charity donation drive to determine the final game to be featured in the 2013 Evolution Championship Series ' tournament lineup , with all proceeds sent to the Breast Cancer Research Foundation . The Skullgirls community raised over US $ 78 @,@ 000 , placing second to eventual winner Super Smash Bros. Melee , which raised over $ 94 @,@ 000 . Although the game did not win , Shoryuken announced that EVO 2013 event organizers would support the Skullgirls side tournament by providing prize money and exhibition support due to their effort in the fundraiser . 
 = = = <unk> and publisher transition = = = 
 Despite Autumn Games ' support and desire to expand Skullgirls , their continued litigation prevented the publisher from providing any financial backing . Attempting to pick up where they left off , Lab Zero Games decided to ask its fanbase for help once more , following the success of the EVO 2013 charity drive . On February 25 , 2013 , Lab Zero Games set up an Indiegogo page for Skullgirls , in an effort to raise $ 150 @,@ 000 for the development of the game 's first DLC character , Squigly . Contributors received various rewards , including desktop wallpapers , a digital copy of the official soundtrack , Steam keys for the PC release , Steam keys for Half @-@ Minute Hero , and the chance to add a background character to the game , among others . The campaign reached its initial goal in less than 24 hours , while the stretch goal of a second DLC character , Big Band , secured funding in just over 2 weeks . A third DLC character , determined by fan vote , was funded during the final two days , along with a playable robotic version of Ms. Fortune named Robo @-@ Fortune . With minutes left before the end of the drive , the last stretch goal was met , securing funding for another fan @-@ selected DLC character . The Indiegogo campaign raised nearly $ 830 @,@ 000 of its original $ 150 @,@ 000 goal . Several alternate character and announcer voice packs were also funded . All downloadable characters and voice packs were free to download on all platforms within the first three months of their release . 
 On November 7 , 2013 , Lab Zero Games announced that Autumn Games had severed ties with Konami , citing Konami 's unresponsiveness as a major hurdle to the release of further console patches . Following the dissolution of the partnership , Konami requested the removal of Skullgirls from the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade by the end of 2013 . In response , Lab Zero Games announced on December 17 , 2013 that Skullgirls would be re @-@ released on consoles as Skullgirls Encore , a new build including up @-@ to @-@ date changes and additions , in January 2014 . Encore marked the transition of the console versions to its new publishers , Marvelous and CyberFront , and coincided with the console releases of Squigly and the " Character Color Bundle " DLC . While Encore was released as a title update for the Xbox 360 version , the PlayStation 3 version required owners to re @-@ download the game at no cost ; leaderboard rankings , save data , and trophies were not carried over . The PC version was later patched to reflect the new title . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Skullgirls Original Soundtrack consists of 28 original compositions . The album features music by Michiru Yamane , Vincent Diamante , Blaine <unk> , and Brenton Kossak . The soundtrack was released on April 24 , 2012 on iTunes . People who donated at least $ 10 to the Skullgirls Indiegogo crowdfunding campaign received a digital copy of the soundtrack . An exclusive , physical CD release of the Skullgirls Original Soundtrack was offered , among other rewards , to those who donated $ 150 or more to the drive . 
 On April 20 , 2011 , Reverge Labs officially announced that they had enlisted Yamane , primarily known for her work on Konami 's Castlevania series , to help create the soundtrack for Skullgirls . According to Richard Wyckoff , CEO of Reverge Labs , the developers sought out Yamane because " [ they ] knew her mixture of haunting gothic themes , jazz and rock would lend itself perfectly to Skullgirls ' ' Dark Deco ' style . " When Reverge Labs requested Yamane to write " jazzy " music , she " played a bit with the rhythm and different sounds to try and heighten the impact and almost primal nature of the unique graphics . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Skullgirls was released on the PlayStation Network in North America on April 10 , 2012 , and the Xbox Live Arcade on April 11 , 2012 . Europe and Australia later received the PlayStation Network version on May 2 , 2012 . The game was released in Japan by CyberFront on the PlayStation Network in February 14 , 2013 , and was also brought to Japanese arcades through the <unk> digital distribution system . The public beta test for the Microsoft Windows version of Skullgirls began on July 4 , 2013 . The official Microsoft Windows version was released by Marvelous on August 22 , 2013 . 
 Skullgirls Encore launched on the PlayStation Network in North America on February 11 , 2014 , and Europe on March 19 , 2014 . The Xbox Live Arcade version of Skullgirls received an update for Encore on April 22 , 2014 . On July 10 , 2014 , Lab Zero Games announced that Skullgirls Encore would be released on PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita sometime in 2014 . The PlayStation 4 and Vita port , later titled Skullgirls 2nd Encore , would eventually be delayed until 2015 . 2nd Encore was released for the PlayStation 4 on July 7 , 2015 . The Android and iOS versions will be released in late 2016 . 
 In May 2013 , when Lab Zero Games was asked on their official Twitter account about a potential release for Nintendo 's Wii U console , the developer replied that while it was possible , it " [ wasn 't ] looking likely " , citing the console 's low sales and not having an established " digital presence " at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Skullgirls received " generally positive " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . 
 Several reviewers praised the presentation and animation . Ryan Clements of IGN praised the graphics , claiming that the game created " some of the best hand @-@ drawn character sprites ever used in gaming . " Clements also gave the game an Editor 's Choice award . John Learned of GamesRadar also praised the art style , stating that the art deco design gave playable characters and backgrounds added flair . However , some reviewers criticized the art style and overtly sexualized all @-@ female cast , including accusations of sexism . Dan Ryckert of Game Informer stated that while Skullgirls was beautifully animated , some animations were " juvenile and unnecessary " . Ryckert expressed disappointment with the artistic focus on " anatomy and fetishistic outfits . " 
 Reviewers also praised the gameplay and system mechanics . Maxwell McGee of GameSpot credited the ability to adjust team sizes , adding that the trade @-@ off between strength and versatility helped to accommodate a wider skill range of players . Neidel Crisan of 1UP praised the tutorial system for teaching beginner players about the fundamentals of the fighting game genre . Daniel Maniago of G4 complimented the custom assists , anti @-@ infinite system , and online play , praising Reverge Labs for utilizing feedback from the fighting game community during development . 
 Skullgirls received its share of criticism . IGN 's Ryan Clements criticized the small selection of gameplay modes , missing character move lists , and overly aggressive AI . GameTrailers criticized the limited roster size , stating that the tag @-@ based battling felt underdeveloped as a result . Simon Parkin of Eurogamer pointed out the lack of online features , such as a spectator mode , replays , and endless lobbies . Jordan Mallory of Joystiq reprimanded the game for its " goofy and immature " premise , sexualized art style , and unoriginal character movesets . Mallory concluded that the series would have been better off spending another year in development . 
 Skullgirls received Best Fighting Game nominations from IGN , 1UP , and the Official E3 Game Critics Awards . The game was nominated for 2012 Best Animated Video Game at the 40th Annual Annie Awards . Skullgirls was also recognized in the 2013 Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition for the most frames of animation per character , reaching 11 @,@ 515 total frames for its initial eight characters and averaging 1 @,@ 439 frames per fighter . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The game sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies across both platforms within the first ten days of its release date . Skullgirls became the highest selling game on the Xbox Live Arcade upon its release . It was also listed as the third best @-@ selling title on the PlayStation Network for April 2012 . The game saw a similar performance in Japan , climbing to the top spot on the PlayStation Network ’ s list of best @-@ selling downloadable PlayStation 3 titles within a week of its release . According to Peter Bartholow , CEO of Lab Zero Games , Skullgirls met Japanese publisher CyberFront 's lifetime sales estimates in the first two weeks of its release . 
 = Tajik alphabet = 
 The Tajik language has been written in three alphabets over the course of its history : an adaptation of the Perso @-@ Arabic script ( specifically the Persian alphabet ) , an adaptation of the Latin script , and an adaptation of the Cyrillic script . Any script used specifically for Tajik may be referred to as the Tajik alphabet , which is written as <unk> <unk> in Cyrillic characters , <unk> <unk> with Arabic script , and <unk> <unk> in Latin script . 
 The use of a specific alphabet generally corresponds with stages in history , with Arabic being used first , followed by Latin for a short period and then Cyrillic , which remains the most widely used alphabet in Tajikistan . The Bukhori dialect spoken by Bukharan Jews traditionally used the Hebrew alphabet but more often today is written using the Cyrillic variant . 
 = = Political context = = 
 As with many post @-@ Soviet states , the change in writing system and the debates surrounding it is closely intertwined with political themes . Although not having been used since the adoption of Cyrillic , the Latin script is supported by those who wish to bring the country closer to Uzbekistan , which has adopted the Latin @-@ based Uzbek alphabet . [ 1 ] The Persian alphabet is supported by the devoutly religious , Islamists , and by those who wish to bring the country closer to Iran and their Persian heritage . As the de facto standard , the Cyrillic alphabet is generally supported by those who wish to maintain the status quo , and not distance the country from Russia . 
 = = History = = 
 As a result of the influence of Islam in the region , Tajik was written in the Persian alphabet up to the 1920s . Until this time , the language was not thought of as separate and simply considered a dialect of the Persian language . The Soviets began by simplifying the Persian alphabet in 1923 , before moving to a Latin @-@ based system in 1927 . [ 2 ] The Latin script was introduced by the Soviet Union as part of an effort to increase literacy and distance the , at that time , largely illiterate population , from the Islamic Central Asia . There were also practical considerations . The regular Persian alphabet , being an abjad , does not provide sufficient letters for representing the vowel system of Tajik . In addition , the abjad is more difficult to learn , each letter having different forms depending on the position in the word . [ 3 ] 
 The Decree on Romanisation made this law in April , 1928 . [ 4 ] The Latin variant for Tajik was based on the work by <unk> scholars who aimed to produce a unified Turkic alphabet , [ 5 ] despite Tajik not being a Turkic language . The literacy campaign was successful , with near @-@ universal literacy being achieved by the 1950s . 
 As part of the " <unk> " of Central Asia , the Cyrillic script was introduced in the late 1930s . The alphabet remained Cyrillic until the end of the 1980s with the disintegration of the Soviet Union . In 1989 , with the growth in Tajik nationalism , a law was enacted declaring Tajik the state language . In addition , the law officially equated Tajik with Persian , placing the word <unk> ( the local name for Persian ) after Tajik . The law also called for a gradual reintroduction of the Persian ( Arabic ) alphabet . 
 The Persian alphabet was introduced into education and public life , although the banning of the Islamic Renaissance Party in 1993 slowed down the adoption . In 1999 , the word <unk> was removed from the state @-@ language law . [ 6 ] As of 2004 the de facto standard in use is a Cyrillic alphabet , [ 7 ] and as of 1996 only a very small part of the population can read the Persian alphabet . [ 8 ] 
 = = Variants = = 
 The letters of the major variants of the Tajik alphabet are presented below , along with their phonetic values . There is also a comparative table below . 
 = = = Persian alphabet = = = 
 A variant of the Persian alphabet ( technically an abjad ) is used to write Tajik . In the Tajik version , as with all other versions of the Arabic script , with the exception of ' <unk> ' ( <unk> ) , vowels are not given unique letters , but rather optionally indicated with diacritic marks . 
 = = = Latin = = = 
 The Latin script was introduced after the Russian Revolution of 1917 in order to facilitate an increase in literacy and distance the language from Islamic influence . Only lowercase letters were found in the first versions of the Latin variant , between 1926 @-@ 9 . A slightly different version used by Jews speaking the Bukhori dialect , who included three extra characters for phonemes not found in the other dialects : ů , ə ̧ , and <unk> . [ 9 ] ( Note that " c " and " ç " are switched relative to their usage in the Turkish alphabet , which has formed the basis for other Latin scripts in the former Soviet Union . ) 
 The unusual character <unk> is called <unk> and represents the phoneme / ɣ / . The character is found in the Common Turkic Alphabet in which most non @-@ Slavic languages of the Soviet Union were written until the late 1930s . The Latin alphabet is not used today , although the adoption of it is advocated by certain groups . [ 10 ] 
 = = = Cyrillic = = = 
 The Cyrillic script was introduced in Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic in the late 1930s , replacing the Latin script that had been used since the October Revolution . After 1939 , materials published in Persian in the Persian alphabet were banned from the country . [ 11 ] The alphabet below was supplemented by the letters <unk> and <unk> in 1952 . 
 In addition to these thirty @-@ five letters , the letters <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> can be found in loanwords , although they were officially dropped in the 1998 reform , along with the letter <unk> . Along with the deprecation of these letters , the 1998 reform also changed the order of the alphabet , which now has the characters with diacritics following their unaltered partners , e.g. <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , <unk> etc . [ 12 ] leading to the present order : <unk> <unk> в <unk> <unk> д е <unk> <unk> <unk> и <unk> й <unk> <unk> л <unk> н о <unk> <unk> с т у <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ч <unk> <unk> <unk> э <unk> я . In 2010 it was suggested that the letters е <unk> <unk> я might be dropped as well . [ 13 ] The letters е and э have the same function , except that э is used at the beginning of a word ( ex . <unk> , " Iran " ) . 
 The alphabet includes a number of letters not found in the Russian alphabet : 
 During the period when the <unk> took place , <unk> <unk> also appeared a few times in the table of the Tajik Cyrillic alphabet . [ 14 ] 
 = = = Transliteration standards = = = 
 The transliteration standards for the Tajik alphabet in Cyrillic into the Latin alphabet are as follows : 
 Notes to the table above : 
 ISO 9 — The International Organization for Standardization ISO 9 specification . 
 <unk> — From the placenames database of the Institute of the Estonian Language . 
 <unk> — From World ’ s Writing Systems , Bernard <unk> ( ed . ) 
 ALA @-@ LC — The standard of the Library of Congress and the American Library Association . 
 Edward <unk> , ed . Nationalities of the Soviet East . Publications and Writing Systems ( NY : Columbia University Press , 1971 ) 
 BGN / <unk> — The standard of the United States Board on Geographic Names and the Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use . 
 = = = Hebrew = = = 
 The Hebrew alphabet is , like the Persian alphabet , an abjad . It is used for the Jewish Bukhori dialect primarily in Samarkand and Bukhara . Additionally , since 1940 , when Jewish schools were closed in Central Asia , the use of the Hebrew Alphabet outside Hebrew liturgy fell into disuse and Bukharian Jewish publications such as books and newspapers began to appear using the Tajik Cyrillic Alphabet . Today , many older Bukharian Jews who speak Bukharian and went to Tajik or Russian schools in Central Asia only know the Tajik Cyrillic Alphabet when reading and writing Bukharian and Tajik . 
 Sample text : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . – <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . <unk> – <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . [ 15 ] 
 = = Samples = = 
 = = = Tajik Cyrillic , Tajik Latin and Persian alphabet = = = 
 For reference , the Arabic variant transliterated letter @-@ for @-@ letter into the Latin script appears as follows : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> bh <unk> my ̱ <unk> w <unk> <unk> <unk> w <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> w <unk> , <unk> <unk> bh <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 And the ISO 9 transliteration of the Cyrillic text : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> ba <unk> <unk> va az <unk> <unk> <unk> bo <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ba <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Tajik Cyrillic and Persian alphabet = = = 
 Vowel @-@ pointed Persian includes the vowels that are not usually written . 
 = = Comparative table = = 
 A table comparing the different writing systems used for the Tajik alphabet . The Latin here is based on the 1929 standard , the Cyrillic on the revised 1998 standard , and Arabic letters are given in their stand @-@ alone forms . 
 = Salman Aristo = 
 Salman Aristo ( born 1976 ) is an Indonesian screenwriter and film director best known for his work on Ayat @-@ Ayat Cinta , Laskar Pelangi , Garuda di Dadaku , and Sang Penari . 
 Born in Jakarta , Aristo became interested in films from a young age , though he did not consider a career in the industry until after graduating from university . At the suggestion of a friend , he wrote his first screenplay , Tak <unk> Kembali Sama . With feedback on the script from director Rudy Soedjarwo and after a period reading old , successful scripts , Aristo – at the time a film reviewer for a magazine – was able to befriend Hanung Bramantyo , who asked him to write a script about brownies . The resulting film , a critical success , led to Aristo receiving numerous requests for screenplays , including several adaptations of novels . In 2010 , he released his directorial debut , Jakarta Maghrib . 
 Aristo , who is married to fellow screenwriter Ginatri S. Noer , is influenced by several Western and Indonesian screenwriters , including Woody Allen , Robert Altman , Richard Linklater , Richard Curtis , Arifin C. Noer , and Asrul Sani . He has been nominated for three Citra Awards for screenwriting , although he has yet to win . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Aristo was born in Jakarta in 1976 . As a child , he became interested in film when he and his family went to the movie theatre together ; in an interview with Tabloid Nova , he recalled that one of the first films he saw was a comedy starring <unk> . After beginning junior high school in 1988 , he began to go to the theatres to watch films on his own . Despite his enjoyment of film , he was initially active in an indie band . 
 After senior high school , Aristo studied journalism at <unk> University in Bandung , from which he graduated in 1999 . While in university , he stayed active in the indie music scene with his band Silentium . After graduation he worked in journalism for a while before drifting to filmmaking upon the suggestion of <unk> <unk> , later guitarist for the band Naff . Several months later , after moving back to Jakarta Aristo 's first screenplay , a 90 @-@ page work titled Tak <unk> Kembali Sama ( Never Been the Same Again ) , was read by director Rudy Soedjarwo . Soedjarwo gave the film several critiques , which drove Aristo to improve his writing . 
 To do so , beginning in 2002 Aristo began regularly going to Usmar Ismail Film Documentation Center in Kuningan , Jakarta , to read screenplays . Among the works he read were several by Asrul Sani , which he found highly useful ; he later recalled that the script for <unk> Daku Kau <unk> ( Chase Me , I 'll Catch You ) was one of the best . In the meantime , he took a job as a film reviewer for a local music magazine , which gave him greater access to the industry . 
 = = = Success and later career = = = 
 At a seminar , Aristo met director Hanung Bramantyo and showed him one of his screenplays . Bramantyo , who liked what he saw , asked Aristo to write a screenplay for a new film he was working on with Leo <unk> of <unk> . The resulting work , written after intensive research into the production of brownies and titled after the snack , was released in 2004 . It garnered a Citra Award for Best Director at the Indonesian Film Festival for Bramantyo and a nomination for best original screenplay for Aristo . While Brownies was in production , Aristo wrote four other screenplays , for Catatan Akhir Sekolah ( Notes from the End of School ) , Cinta Silver ( Silver Love ) , <unk> ( Single ) , and Alexandria . All of these were made into films between 2005 and 2006 . After these successes , at the end of 2006 Bramantyo asked Aristo and his new wife , screenwriter Ginatri S. Noer , to adapt the novel Ayat @-@ Ayat Cinta ( Verses of Love ) by <unk> El <unk> , into a film . The resulting work , also entitled Ayat @-@ Ayat Cinta , was highly successful . This was followed by Karma ( 2007 ) , and <unk> <unk> : The Movie ( 2008 ) . 
 In 2008 , Aristo wrote a film adaptation of Andrea Hirata 's 2005 novel Laskar Pelangi ( Rainbow Troops ) after being asked by the film 's producer , Mira Lesmana . The film , directed by Riri Riza , was a critical and commercial success . He soon wrote another screenplay , for Garuda di Dadaku ( Garuda on my Chest ; 2009 ) upon request of producer Shanty Harmayn . The film , directed by Ifa Isfansyah , reportedly sold 1 @.@ 2 million tickets , a large number for the Indonesian film industry . 
 Aristo joined Twitter in September 2009 as a way to promote his films . That year , his short film <unk> Baru ( New Partners ) was screened at the <unk> Film Festival in Sanur , Bali . He also wrote Sang <unk> ( The Dreamers ) , a film adaptation of the sequel to Laskar Pelangi . In 2010 he joined the online flash fiction Twitter community Fiksimini . His works , written in under 140 characters , were well received , and he soon became a moderator . 
 That same year , Aristo was a juror at the Asia Pacific Screen Awards , held in Gold Coast , Queensland , Australia . He also wrote the screenplay for Hari Untuk Amanda with Ginatri S. Noer ( Days for Amanda ) , which earned a Citra Award nomination at the 2010 Indonesian Film Festival . He made his feature film directorial debut that year with Jakarta Maghrib ( Jakarta at Maghrib ) , which details several families in the minutes before Maghrib prayers and how the call to prayer stops their daily activities . It premiered at the Jakarta International Film Festival . 
 In March 2011 , Aristo published <unk> , an illustrated collection of flash fiction mostly dealing with politics . That same year , he cowrote the screenplay for Sang Penari ( The Dancer ) with Ifa Isfansyah and Shanty Harmayn ; the work was an adaptation of Ahmad Tohari 's trilogy Ronggeng Dukuh Paruk ( The Ronggeng of Paruk Village ) . The trio were nominated for Best Screenplay at that year 's Indonesian Film Festival . Later that year , he wrote Lima Elang ( Five Eagles ) , a film directed by Rudy Soedjarwo . Focusing on five young children at camp , it was one of the first local films in decades to use Scouting as a central theme . Another film , Garuda di Dadaku 2 followed in December . As of 2011 , he and Noer have two children . 
 Aristo wrote a television adaptation of Laskar Pelangi in late 2011 . Directed by Guntur <unk> , the series starred five youths from Bangka @-@ Belitung and was shown in early 2012 . Later in 2012 , Aristo adapted Ahmad <unk> 's novel Negeri 5 Menara ( The Land of Five Towers ) into a film of the same name . Directed by <unk> Abdul Rachman , the film also featured Aristo as a producer . 
 = = Influences = = 
 In an interview with The Jakarta Post , Aristo called Richard Curtis a large inspiration ; he said that he really enjoyed Curtis ' film The Girl in the Café ( 2005 ) . He also cited Woody Allen , Richard Linklater and Robert Altman as further influences . His experience in journalism may have influenced his directing style . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As writer unless specified . 
 Brownies ( 2004 ) 
 Catatan Akhir Sekolah ( Notes from the End of School ; 2005 ) 
 Cinta Silver ( Silver Love ; 2005 ) 
 Alexandria ( 2007 ) 
 <unk> ( Single ; 2007 ) 
 Ayat @-@ Ayat Cinta ( Verses of Love ; 2007 ) 
 Karma ( 2008 ) 
 Laskar Pelangi ( Rainbow Troops ; 2008 ) 
 <unk> <unk> : The Movie ( 2008 ) 
 Sang <unk> ( The Dreamers ; 2009 ) 
 Garuda di Dadaku ( Garuda on my Chest ; 2009 ) 
 <unk> Baru ( New Partners ; 2010 ; short film ; as director ) 
 Hari Untuk Amanda ( Days for Amanda ; 2010 ) 
 Jakarta Maghrib ( Jakarta at Maghrib ; 2010 ; as director ) 
 Sang Penari ( The Dancer ; 2011 ) 
 Lima Elang ( Five Eagles ; 2011 ) 
 Garuda di Dadaku 2 ( Garuda on my Chest 2 ; 2011 ) 
 Negeri 5 Menara ( Land of Five Towers ; 2012 ; as writer and producer ) 
 Ada Cinta Di SMA ( 2016 ) 
 = The Best of Both Worlds ( song ) = 
 " The Best of Both Worlds " is a pop rock song performed by American singer – songwriter and actress Miley Cyrus , performing as Hannah Montana – the alter ego of Miley Stewart – a character she played on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana . It was released as the lead single from the Hannah Montana soundtrack album on March 18 , 2006 . " The Best of Both Worlds " is the theme song for the television series ; in the series ' third season , the 2009 Movie Mix is used as the theme . A live version is available on Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert ( 2008 ) , a karaoke version is included in the soundtrack 's karaoke series ( 2008 ) , and the 2009 Movie Mix is featured on Hannah Montana : The Movie soundtrack ( 2009 ) . The song has elements of bubblegum pop and pop rock . Lyrically , it is a showcase of the double life lived by the series ' protagonist Miley Stewart . 
 " The Best of Both Worlds " is considered to be one of Cyrus ' signature songs , introducing her to the music industry . The song received some critical praise , noting that the song was written well , but the concept was " weird " . " The Best of Both Worlds " reached number ninety @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 , making the song only one of two television themes of the decade ( the other being Leave It All to Me by Miranda Cosgrove ) to chart on the Hot 100 , and achieved average commercial success internationally . The song reached its highest international chart peak position in the Irish Singles Chart , at number seventeen . A promotional music video for the song was taken from a recording of a concert performance . Cyrus promoted the song by performing it in several venues , including during the opening act for the Cheetah Girls ' The Party 's Just Begun Tour and as the closing number on her own first headlining concert tour of the same name . Cyrus ' performances of the song on the Best of Both Worlds Tour were as herself , but when she performed the song on television , she did so in character as Hannah Montana . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Best of Both Worlds " is a song that uses out of beat electric guitars , upbeat synths and backing vocals ' . Genre influences come from dance , rock and country music . It is set in common time with a moderately fast tempo of 130 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of C major . Cyrus ' vocals spans from A3 to D5 . The song has the following chord progression , C5 – G5 – D5 – F5 . 
 The song was written by Matthew Gerrard and Robbie Nevil . The duo wrote three other songs on the Hannah Montana soundtrack and continue writing songs for the franchise , including " Nobody 's Perfect " and " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) . " Lyrically , the song is one of the three ( " Just Like You " and " The Other Side of Me " ) that explicitly allude to Stewart 's double life as Montana : regular adolescent that moved from Nashville , Tennessee to Malibu , California by day and pop star by night . In the song , Cyrus sings about the privileges and advantages that are faced in leading in two lives with references to Orlando Bloom , concerts , friendship and film premieres . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from critics . Heather Phares of Allmusic described the song as having " sharper @-@ than @-@ average songwriting " and one of the best tracks from the Hannah Montana soundtrack . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly compared the song to the musical styles of Avril Lavigne , Ashlee Simpson and Britney Spears . However , Willman stated that the concept of " The Best of Both Worlds " was " a nice fantasy for Brangelina , but a weird one to push on little girls . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song received mediocre airplay due to it being released to Radio Disney , but not to other mainstream radio stations . The song debuted at number sixty @-@ four on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs Chart which led to an appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week ending August 12 , 2006 . It debuted and peaked at number ninety @-@ two on the Hot 100 , and stayed on the chart for two weeks . In the same week of its entry on the Hot 100 , the song charted at number seventy @-@ one on the Pop 100 and dropped from the chart the following week . 
 " The Best of Both Worlds " reached higher peak chart positions in Europe . For the week ending February 22 , 2007 , the song debuted and peaked at number seventeen in the Irish Singles Chart , and dropped out of the chart the following week . The song debuted and peaked at number forty @-@ three on the UK Singles Chart dated Feb. 24 , 2007 , and spent one week on the chart . It became Cyrus 's highest peaking single in the United Kingdom , when credited as Hannah Montana . In 2008 it charted in the German Singles Chart , debuting at number seventy @-@ one and eventually peaking at number sixty @-@ six . It spent a total of seven weeks on the chart . 
