 = = Original artwork = = 
 Van Meegeren was a prolific artist and produced thousands of original paintings in a number of diverse styles . This wide range in painting and drawing styles often irritated art critics . Some of his typical works are classical still lifes in convincing 17th century manner , Impressionistic paintings of people frolicking on lakes or beaches , jocular drawings where the subject is drawn with rather odd features , Surrealistic paintings with combined fore- and backgrounds . Van Meegeren 's portraits , however , are probably his finest works . 
 Among his original works is his famous Deer , pictured above . Other works include his prize @-@ winning St. Laurens Cathedral ; a Portrait of the actress Jo <unk> ( his second wife ) ; his Night Club ; from the Roaring Twenties ; the cheerful watercolor A Summer Day on the Beach and many others . 
 = = = The forger forged = = = 
 Van Meegeren ’ s own work rose in price after he had become famous , and it consequently became worthwhile to fake his paintings , as well . Existing paintings obtained a signature " H. van Meegeren " , or new pictures were made in his style and falsely signed . When van Meegeren saw a fake like that , he ironically remarked that he would have adopted them if they had been good enough , but regrettably he had not yet seen one . 
 Later on , however , his son Jacques van Meegeren started to fake his father ’ s work . He made paintings in his father ’ s style – although of much lower quality – and was able to place a perfect signature on these imitations . Many fakes – both by Jacques and by others – are still on the market . They can be recognized by their low pictorial quality , but are not always regarded as such . 
 = Back to the Shack = 
 " Back to the Shack " is a song by the American rock band Weezer . It was released as the first single from their ninth studio album Everything Will Be Alright in the End on July 22 , 2014 . The song was sent to radio stations and uploaded to Weezer 's YouTube channel a day before the single 's official release . It was written in response to the band 's past several albums , with lead vocalist Rivers Cuomo wanting to return to their roots . The song received generally favorable reviews . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Back to the Shack " was written by Rivers Cuomo and Jacob Kasher Hindlin . The song was produced by Ric Ocasek . Cuomo wrote a majority of the song , with Karl Koch describing Jacob Kasher Hindlin 's contribution to the song as " randomly singing out the title while hanging out on the couch listening to [ Rivers Cuomo ] strumming the song . It doesn 't take much to get half a songwriting credit . " At one point , the song was performed with the bridge containing the lyric " we belong in the rock zone " , before Cuomo , based on fan suggestions changed it from " rock zone " to " rock world " . Regarding the composition of the song , Cuomo stated that he " tried to find different melodies and different beats and all these different things . " Further , he stated that as he " couldn 't crack the code " they had to go ahead and record it anyway . Ocasek introduced a synth melody line to the song during this period . 
 Cuomo explained that the lyrics refer to how he feels bad for the direction the band has taken on some of their past material . He admitted that sometimes he " went over the edge " . He explained his desire to create " a classic alt @-@ rock record . " The word " shack " serves as a reference to Amherst house , a home where some of the original Weezer members had lived and recorded a few of their demos . 
 Lyrically , " Back to the Shack " deals with the theme of nostalgia and a wish to return " to [ the band 's ] 1994 roots " . Dave Lewis stated the song serves as a thematic continuation of two previous Weezer songs , " In the Garage " and " Memories " . It also deals with Weezer 's relationship with their fans and serves as " basically an apology for the past two decades and a promise to embrace their nerdy roots . " The song 's opening lines — " I 'm sorry guys , I didn 't realize that I needed you so much " — in particular reinforce this theme . The song has been categorized under alternative rock and power pop . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Back to the Shack " received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Carolyn Menyes from Music Times regarded " Back to the Shack " to be instrumentally similar to the band 's second album Pinkerton , and stated that the song " features hooks for days , and the turn of events in the chorus is nothing short of a pure earworm . " Mike Ayers of The Wall Street Journal described the song as " three minutes of pure Weezer joy " , particularly for " its simple , yet heavy riffs and self @-@ deprecating lyrics " , while Spin critic Colin Joyce complimented the song for its " anthemic choruses and guitar anti @-@ heroics " . HitFix reviewer Dave Lewis called the song " generic rock " , although he went on to compliment the middle eight and considered the song as a whole to be " a lot more promising " , than their more recent releases . 
 Chris Payne of Billboard ranked it as the band 's fifth best lead single , beating out " Hash Pipe " , " ( If You 're Wondering If I Want You To ) I Want You To " , " Pork and Beans " , and " Memories " . Hilary Hughes of Fuse praised it as a return to the band 's old sound , saying " a promising look at what 's sure to be a satisfying listen for new and old fans alike . " Ian Rogers from The Vine commented that it " Sounds exactly like a highly professional , crassly commercial L.A. rock band performing a Weezer @-@ styled song about Weezer returning to their roots . " 
 = = Release and live performances = = 
 " Back to the Shack " was released as the first single from Everything Will Be Alright in the End on July 22 , 2014 . The day before its release , the song was sent to radio stations , and uploaded to the band 's YouTube channel . 
 Prior to release , the song was performed in February during the 2014 Weezer Cruise . The band performed it on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on July 23 , the song 's first performance on television . In August , the song was played during <unk> . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Back to the Shack " was directed by Warren Fu and released on September 29 , 2014 . The video features the band playing the song on the moon . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Feng Tianwei = 
 Feng Tianwei ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ̌ ŋ <unk> ́ <unk> ] ) is a Singapore table tennis player . Born in China , she moved to Singapore under the Foreign Sports Talent Scheme in March 2007 and commenced her international career in competitive table tennis the following month . She received Singapore citizenship in January 2008 . 
 Feng represented Singapore for the first time in the Olympic Games at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . On 15 August 2008 , the Singapore team comprising Feng and her teammates Li Jiawei and Wang Yuegu defeated South Korea 3 – 2 in the semifinals . The team lost to China in the final , obtaining the silver medal . This was Singapore 's first Olympic medal in 48 years and its first as an independent nation . 
 On 30 May 2010 , the trio of Feng Tianwei , Wang Yuegu and Sun Beibei stunned the reigning champions China 3 – 1 in the Liebherr World Team Table Tennis Championships in Moscow , making Singapore world champion for the first time . 
 On 1 August 2012 , Feng defeated Kasumi Ishikawa of Japan 4 – 0 to win the women 's singles bronze medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Singapore 's first Olympic singles medal since the 1960 Summer Olympics . On 7 August 2012 , she was part of the women 's team with Li and Wang that achieved the bronze against South Korea . This was the first time Singapore had won two medals at an Olympic Games . 
 On 15 March 2015 , Feng defeated Zhu <unk> and Liu Shiwen at the 2015 Asian Cup in Jaipur to be crowned Asian Cup Champion for the first time . At the same time , she broke China 's 7 consecutive years of dominance in this tournament . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Feng Tianwei was born on 31 August 1986 in Harbin , Heilongjiang , People 's Republic of China . She is the only daughter of Feng <unk> , a granary worker , and his wife Li <unk> , an employee of a department store . Feng 's parents , who were poor , lived frugally for years to pay for her table tennis training . Her father suffered from multiple sclerosis , but she was not told how severe his illness was . He died in 2002 , weeks before Feng tried out for China 's national B squad . Although Feng topped the qualifying matches a month later and was called up for the national team in 2003 , she suffered from a long illness ; a source close to her said it was " because she missed her father too much " . Feng left China in 2005 to play in the Japanese professional league . While there she was spotted by Liu Guodong , then a coach with the Singapore Table Tennis Association , in 2006 . In March 2007 she was invited to train in Singapore under the Foreign Sports Talent Scheme . She became a Singapore citizen in January 2008 . 
 = = Career as national player = = 
 Feng made her international début for Singapore in June 2007 as an under @-@ 21 player at the International Table Tennis Federation ( ITTF ) Pro Tour Volkswagen Korean Open . As a singles player , Feng was ranked 73rd in the world in August 2007 . Nonetheless , that month she achieved a silver medal in the singles at the ITTF Pro Tour Chinese Taipei Open , her compatriot Li Jiawei beating her to take the gold . 
 Feng was a member of the silver medal @-@ winning team at the World Team Championships in Guangzhou in 2008 and defeated the top seed Zhang Yining from China in the Quarter @-@ finals of the Asian Cup held in Sapporo between 29 and 30 March 2008 , eventually achieving second place behind China 's Guo Yue . Due to her outstanding records in international competitions , she rose to the top 10 world rankings within a year . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Feng represented Singapore for the first time at the 2008 Summer Olympics in the women 's team tournament . She contributed significantly to Singapore 's 3 – 2 win against South Korea in the semifinals by defeating Dang Ye @-@ Seo and Park Mi @-@ Young in two singles matches . Feng 's match against Park was closely fought , with Feng eventually overcoming Park 3 – 1 . Singapore was assisted by the implementation of the expedite system when the game failed to be completed in ten minutes . Under the system , players serve on alternative points rather than on every two points . A receiving player scores a point if she manages 13 returns , which disadvantages defensive play by the server . The system unsettled Park , and Feng won two minutes after its introduction in the match when Park committed a service fault . Interviewed afterwards , Feng said : " I definitely did not expect that [ Park 's error ] . It was a surprise and the best birthday present I 've ever gotten . " 
 On 17 August 2008 , Feng and her teammates achieved a silver medal in women 's table tennis after losing to China in three matches . Feng played the starting singles match , winning the first game but eventually losing to China 's Wang Nan 1 @-@ 3 . This was the first time Singapore had won an Olympic medal since its independence in 1965 . The medal came 48 years after Tan Howe Liang won the country 's first medal , a silver in weightlifting in the lightweight category at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . 
 Feng received byes into the third round of the women 's singles tournament . Feng defeated South Korea 's Dang Ye @-@ Seo 4 – 0 in the third round , Netherlands ' Li Jie 4 @-@ 1 in the fourth round , but fell 1 @-@ 4 to China 's Zhang Yining in the quarter @-@ finals . Feng made the world number one work for her win , with the final scores being 11 – 13 , 14 – 12 , 12 – 14 , 10 – 12 , 11 – 13 . According to the Straits Times , Zhang leveraged on her experience by stalling for time at crucial stages of the game , which broke Feng 's rhythm . Interviewed after the match , Feng said : " I 'm sure I 'll win a medal at the next Olympics . " 
 At a victory celebration in Singapore on 25 August 2008 , Vivian Balakrishnan , the Minister for Community Development , Youth and Sports , announced that Feng , Li and Wang would be presented with the Pingat Jasa Gemilang ( Meritorious Service Medal ) . This is only the third time the medal will be awarded to athletes , the two previous recipients being weightlifter Tan Howe Liang ( 1962 ) and swimmer Joscelin Yeo ( 2006 ) . 
 = = = Competitions between 2008 and 2012 = = = 
 On 9 September 2008 , Feng beat her compatriot Wang to clinch the bronze medal at the ITTF Women 's World Cup in Kuala Lumpur . Despite crashing out of the singles event earlier , Feng and her teammates Li and Wang won the top title at the ITTF Pro Tour ERKE German Open in Berlin on 22 November 2008 . Feng won her first professional singles title at the Polish Open in Warsaw on 30 November 2008 , in an all @-@ Singapore final against Wang . Feng and Yu Mengyu also took silver in the doubles . On 2 December 2008 , the ITTF announced that Feng was ranked sixth in the world . This made her the top Singapore female table tennis player and the highest @-@ ranked player in the world not representing China . She was third in Today newspaper 's list of athletes of the year for 2008 . 
 On 23 August 2009 , Feng achieved her second Pro Tour singles title at the KAL Cup Korean Open in Seoul . 
 Feng took part in the 25th Southeast Asian Games in Vientiane , Laos . She was a member of the Singapore women 's team with Sun Beibei and Wang Yuegu that defeated Thailand 3 – 0 to win Gold on 10 December 2009 . On 14 December 2009 , she and her partner Wang Yuegu were defeated by compatriots Sun Beibei and Yu Mengyu in an all @-@ Singapore final in the women 's doubles . The following day , in her maiden appearance at the Games , she achieved gold in the singles competition after defeating Wang 4 – 1 . 
 The Singapore Table Tennis Association made Feng the inaugural winner of its Best Player of the Year award on 12 February 2010 . As of 8 April 2010 , she had worked her way up to a second @-@ place ranking in the world . On 3 May 2010 , the Singapore National Olympic Council named her Sportswoman of the Year for 2009 . The national table tennis women 's team , composed of Feng , Li Jiawei , Wang Yuegu and Sun Beibei were awarded the Team of the Year prize at the Singapore Sports Awards . 
 Together with Sun and Wang , Feng was a member of the team at the Liebherr World Team Table Tennis Championships in Moscow that defeated China , 17 @-@ time winner and the reigning world champion , with a score of 3 – 1 . In the two games she played , Feng defeated Liu Shiwen and Ding Ning , ranked number one and four in the world respectively and Wang contributing another point to the team by defeating Liu Shiwen . This was the first time Singapore had lifted the <unk> cup . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Feng represented Singapore at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , and was the nation 's flagbearer at the Parade of Nations segment of the opening ceremony . She entered the women 's singles competition seeded sixth , and progressed until she was defeated 2 @-@ 4 by China 's Ding Ning in the semi @-@ finals . On 1 August 2012 , she overcame Kasumi Ishikawa of Japan 4 – 0 ( 11 – 9 , 11 – 6 , 11 – 6 , 11 – 5 ) to take the bronze medal , becoming the second Singaporean to win an individual Olympic medal . ( The first was Tan Howe Liang who won a silver for weightlifting in the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome . ) Interviewed after her win , Feng said : " I 'm really happy , although I feel it 's come a little too suddenly . My form wasn 't very good lately , so I didn 't dare to carry too much expectations coming into the London Olympics . It was just a relief to win . " 
 Feng also participated in the women 's team competition with Li Jiawei and Wang Yuegu . They were beaten 0 – 3 by Japan in the semifinals , but took the bronze medal by edging out South Korea 3 – 0 . Feng defeated Kim Kyung Ah 11 – 9 , 11 – 8 , 4 – 11 , 13 – 11 , Li also successfully fended off Seok Ha Jung 11 – 5 , 11 – 8 , 6 – 11 , 11 – 8 . Li and Wang then succeeded in the doubles game against Seok and Dang Ye Seo 11 – 9 , 11 – 6 , 6 – 11 , 11 – 5 . This marked the first time Singapore had won more than one medal at an Olympic Games . Feng commented : " Against Japan , we gave ourselves too much pressure and lost the psychological battle . After that , I told myself that I must prepare myself well mentally and it 's only when I do what I 'm capable of that I can win . " 
 Singles Event 
 Team Event 
 = = = 2016 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Feng participated in ITTF Asian @-@ Olympics Qualifier ( South @-@ East Asian region ) at Hong Kong from 13 @-@ 17 April 2016 . She was the winner for SEA group and was given a direct entry to the singles event at Rio de Janeiro Olympics . This will be her third Olympics participation . In the qualifier match , She defeated <unk> <unk> in the Quarter @-@ Finals , <unk> <unk> in Semi @-@ Finals & Yu Mengyu in the Finals . 
 According to July world ranking published by ITTF , Feng was seeded second in Olympics singles . This was her highest @-@ ever Olympic seeding . 
 = = Key Career Records = = 
 Legend : Gold Silver Bronze QR : Qualifying Round 
 = = Singapore Contingent in Summer Olympics = = 
 Singapore at the 2008 Summer Olympics 
 Table tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics 
 Singapore at the 2012 Summer Olympics 
 Table tennis at the 2012 Summer Olympics 
 Singapore at the 2016 Summer Olympics 
 Table tennis at the 2016 Summer Olympics 
 = Robert of Cricklade = 
 Robert of Cricklade ( died after 1188 ) was a medieval English writer and prior of St Frideswide 's Priory in Oxford . He was a native of Cricklade and taught before becoming a cleric . He wrote a number of theological works as well as a lost biography of Thomas Becket , the murdered Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 = = Life = = 
 Robert was from Cricklade in Wiltshire , and was of Anglo @-@ Saxon descent . At some point he taught in the schools , where he was called " master " for his learning . He became an Augustinian canon at Cirencester Abbey before becoming prior of the priory of St Frideswide in Oxford , an office he occupied from sometime before the end of 1139 , when he is first securely attested in the office , until after 1174 , his last appearance as prior . In 1158 he went to Rome , extending his travels to Sicily and Paris on the same trip . Another trip was to Scotland in the 1160s . Possibly he also travelled to Rome in 1141 and Paris in 1147 , but these trips are not securely attested . Although earlier historians claimed that he was chancellor of Oxford , this office did not yet exist during Robert 's lifetime . There were students at Oxford in his lifetime , who probably did listen to Robert 's sermons and possibly his teaching at his priory . His successor was in office by 3 March 1185 . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Robert was the author of a number of works , including De <unk> Iacob , which was dedicated to Lawrence of Westminster ; Defloratio Historiae naturalis Plinii , an epitome of Pliny the Elder 's Natural History which was dedicated to King Henry II of England ; <unk> super <unk> ; the Speculum fidei ; and Vita et miracula Sancta Thomae <unk> , a story of the life and martyrdom of Thomas Becket . Two other works are attributed to him – a commentary on the Psalms , and a saint 's life of Frideswide . A letter of his to Benedict of Peterborough also survives in quotations by Benedict . Of these works , the life of Thomas Becket has been lost . The others survive in manuscript , though only one has been published – the Defloratio Historiae naturalis Plinii in the early 20th century . 
 The epitome of Pliny is of some importance in the transmission of Pliny 's ideas to medieval Europe . It appears to have originally been composed in the 1130s , perhaps as a text for his students , and only later dedicated it to King Henry . The De <unk> Iacob was written while Robert was at Cirencester and was an allegorical treatment of the Jacob story from the Bible . The Speculum fidei was a theological work that mainly collected texts from the Old and New Testament discussing various theological concepts , only delving into great depth with the sections dealing with Robert 's refutation of the views of Peter Lombard 's theology . The <unk> super <unk> were 42 homilies on the Book of Ezekiel and were written about 1172 . 
 Robert 's life of Becket , written about 1173 to 1174 , was one of the main sources for an Icelandic saga on Becket titled <unk> saga <unk> , which survives in a copy dating from the first half of the 14th century . This saga preserves a number of otherwise unknown details about Becket 's life and remains one of the main sources for Becket studies . Robert 's life also was a source for the work of Benet of St Albans , another biographer of Becket . From these sources , a modern historian reconstructed Robert 's biography partially and published the reconstituted work in the journal Analecta <unk> in 1966 . A major source for Robert 's work on Becket was the writings of John of Salisbury . Robert may have written the work on Becket because the saint cured the author 's bad leg . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Robert died sometime after 1188 , and was probably buried in his priory . A modern biographer of Becket , the historian Frank Barlow , speculates that Robert 's biography was lost because it favoured the king 's side of the story , rather than Becket 's . Besides his theological works , Robert also searched throughout England for Hebrew texts of the works of Josephus , according to Gerald of Wales , who claimed that Robert had a knowledge of the Hebrew language . 
 = The World of Strawberry Shortcake = 
 The World of Strawberry Shortcake is a 1980 animated television special written by Romeo Muller , directed by Charles Swenson , and produced by Swenson , Muller and Fred Wolf . Starring the voices of Romeo Muller , Russi Taylor , Julie McWhirter and Joan Gerber , it was made by animators from Murakami @-@ Wolf @-@ Swenson in the United States and by Toei Doga in Japan . The music was written and performed by Flo & Eddie of the rock group , The Turtles . 
 The title character , Strawberry Shortcake , lives in a fictional place called Strawberryland . In the special , narrated by Romeo Muller ( as Mr. Sun ) , she and her friends celebrate her sixth birthday . While preparations for her party are underway , a villain called the Peculiar Purple Pieman plots to steal the berries from Strawberry 's home in order to make his pies . 
 Produced and sponsored by the Kenner toy company , The World of Strawberry Shortcake was the first special to feature the American Greetings character , Strawberry Shortcake . Bypassing network television , it debuted on March 28 , 1980 , in syndication across more than 90 U.S. cities , and was later released on 16 mm film , VHS , Beta and DVD . The special received generally favorable reviews in the School Library Journal , which reviewed it in 1983 and 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Strawberry Shortcake lives in a place called Strawberryland , with her calico cat Custard ; her house resembles a shortcake . Her friends – Huckleberry Pie , Blueberry Muffin , Raspberry Tart , Plum Puddin ' and toddler Apple Dumplin ' – also live close by . One morning , during their Market Day , Strawberry 's friends discuss plans for her sixth birthday – all except for lazy Huckleberry Pie . 
 Strawberry 's villain , the Peculiar Purple Pieman , lives atop the Pie Tin Palace on a black hill called Porcupine Peak . While she is doing chores , the Pieman sends his crows – " berry birds " – to retrieve some berries for his pies . Strawberry tries shooing the flock away with her broom , but a moving tree helps out as a scarecrow , and she thanks him for helping . In desperation , the Pieman heads down to Strawberryland himself to get his supply , dressed as a kind old peddler . 
 At noon , Strawberry calls her friends over for lunch , but they leave her behind and go to Lilac Park to prepare for her surprise party . Soon after , the disguised Pieman meets her and offers watering cans for sale . To his chagrin , Strawberry cannot afford to buy a magical one guaranteed to produce strawberries seven feet tall . Assisted by Lucky Bug , Huckleberry 's ladybug aide , he goes to the Park , where Huckleberry pays for the equipment . 
 Strawberry soon arrives at the venue to see her friends , who greet her with " Happy Birthday " and give her a present : the Pieman 's watering can . The device fails to grow anything and spills over instead , flooding the Park and much of Strawberryland . The children are dismayed that the Pieman tricked them for his berry @-@ stealing plot , and soon they harvest every bit of that supply over to him . 
 The group travels to the Pie Tin Palace on rafts made of flotsam . Landing upon a mud field , they find out from Lucky Bug that Apple Dumplin ' ended up at the Palace ; they now have no way to rescue her . Mr. Sun , the narrator of the story , grants Strawberry a wish . She wishes to defeat the Pieman , and a grove of marching trees help her accomplish this ; their stomping causes the Palace to collapse . Afterward , Apple Dumplin ' gives him a note demanding that he surrender and do good deeds ; he reluctantly does so , giving the toddler and berries back to Strawberry and company . At the end of the special , Strawberry Shortcake offers him a chance to sell his pies at Strawberry Market , and become friends with her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Produced and sponsored by the Kenner toy company , The World of Strawberry Shortcake was the first of six television specials to star the title character . The franchise began in 1977 , when American Greetings staff member Muriel <unk> drew the first designs of Strawberry and her pet cat Custard . In 1979 , she appeared in greeting cards ; dolls , books and games soon followed . 
 The special was made by Murakami @-@ Wolf @-@ Swenson , which previously worked on The Point ! and Frank Zappa 's 200 Motels , both from 1971 ; <unk> Associates of New York City was another production partner . Animation work was also handled by Japan 's Toei Doga . At the time of production , the producers called it a " morality play for tots " . One of the crewmembers was Romeo Muller , writer for several Rankin / Bass television specials . Muller served as writer , co @-@ producer and lyricist of the Strawberry Shortcake special ; he also voiced Mr. Sun , the narrator . After he proposed the idea to Kenner , the company and American Greetings agreed to do it . According to Jack Chojnacki , co @-@ president of Those Characters from Cleveland , a subsidiary of American Greetings , the card manufacturer considered new additions to the script , and reminded the writer that every character should be marketable . With those suggestions in mind , Muller came up with a villain called the Peculiar Purple Pieman . The Toy Group division of General Mills , which owned Kenner at the time , spent US $ 400 @,@ 000 on the special . 
 = = Release = = 
 Upon completion , Muller was satisfied with how The World of Strawberry Shortcake turned out . Although he pointed out the lack of such influences in the special , he told The New York Times in April 1981 : " I suppose the show is a commercial , in the largest sense of the word . " Some time after the title character 's debut at the 1980 American International Toy Fair , major television networks in the U.S. were offered a chance to air the special . They also deemed it an advertisement for the toy line , and rejected it . On March 28 , 1980 , the special debuted on independent stations in over 90 U.S. cities ; it aired on WNEW ( now WNYW ) in the New York City market , and on KTLA in Los Angeles . Kenner launched a collection of dolls and toys based on the special , concurrently with the original broadcast . This led John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times to proclaim , " Onward and upward with the art of marketing ! " 
 In 1981 , the Lexington Broadcast Services Company acquired syndication rights to The World of Strawberry Shortcake , along with its follow @-@ up , Strawberry Shortcake in Big Apple City . By 1986 , the Television Program Source took over the rights for the first special . It was released on 16 mm film by the Coronet company in 1982 , and on VHS and Beta in October 1985 by Family Home Entertainment . A Region 1 DVD from <unk> FilmWorks , featuring this special and Big Apple City , was released on March 6 , 2007 . In Germany , the original special premiered on ZDF on April 4 , 1983 , as Emily im <unk> . A soundtrack album , with contributions by Flo & Eddie of The Turtles , was released by Kid Stuff Records the same year as the original airing . The track list featured the " Strawberry Shortcake Theme " , along with " Smile a Sunny Morning " , " Sunflower Market " , " Monster Trees " and " Berry Talk " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The World of Strawberry Shortcake was reviewed twice by the School Library Journal . In the December 1983 issue , Margaret Bush said that the " Story , characters , dialogue and bits of stage business are busy , bright , contrived , and will appeal of young children . " She added , however , that " Some of the lyrics and dialogue are not easily understood – it sounds as if adult voices may be attempting to simulate the voices of small children . " In August 2007 , Kirsten Martindale gave the DVD set a positive review . She wrote that " Fans [ ... ] will be thoroughly engaged by these two episodes " , and recommended it " For nostalgic moms and their young daughters . " She however singled out the audio and video quality : " [ F ] or those who haven 't experienced the charm and simplicity of older cartoons , this may be annoying , but the nostalgic effect of the original presentation is relaxed and welcome . " In 1987 , Kathleen <unk> of The Video Directory called it " Delightful fun for children . " 
 = Space Hulk ( 1993 video game ) = 
 Space Hulk is a 1993 real @-@ time tactical video game for DOS , Amiga and PC @-@ 98 . The game was based on Games Workshop 's 1989 board game of the same name . Set in the fictional Warhammer 40 @,@ 000 universe , the player directs squads of Space Marines , genetically enhanced armoured soldiers , in their missions to protect the human race from deadly aliens . Space Hulk was developed and published by Electronic Arts , with support from Games Workshop . 
 The game takes place aboard huge <unk> known as space hulks . Drifting in and out of the Warp — an alternate dimension used to cross interstellar distances — these vessels are infested with the four @-@ armed Genestealers . Using overhead maps , the player orders the Marine squads , and controls individual Marines via first @-@ person shooter interfaces . The game features a time @-@ limited option to pause the action while enabling the player to continue issuing commands . 
 Space Hulk 's theme of pitting slow and heavily armed Marines against fast , deadly Genestealers produced moments of frantic gameplay and a scary atmosphere for its reviewers , earning positive ratings for the game . A few reviewers , however , felt the game was too difficult and proved to be too frustrating . Space Hulk was followed up by Space Hulk : Vengeance of the Blood Angels in 1996 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game features 51 missions that involve exterminations , retrieval of objects , and rearguard actions . A campaign , comprising 21 of these missions played in sequence , centres around a story about a Space Marine investigation of a distress beacon in a region of space threatened by Genestealers . The remaining missions are tutorials designed to help players learn the game and standalone missions . Before a mission , the game briefs the player on the objectives and shows a small map of the operational area . Marines are equipped with a gun — the Storm <unk> — for long @-@ range combat , and an energised glove — the Power Fist — for hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . For certain missions , the player can customise the squads ' armaments , selecting from 10 other weapons , such as Power Swords and Heavy <unk> . In the campaign , Marines who survive a mission gain experience , improving their combat abilities and chances of survival for future missions . 
 The player 's Marines begin each mission grouped together at one or two starting points of the operational area , while Genestealers continually enter the mission from marked entry points . Gameplay at this stage takes place between two separate interfaces : the Terminator View Screen , where the player takes direct control of individual Marines , and the Planning Screen , where orders are issued to the Marines by clicking on command icons . The Planning Screen has two maps ; the smaller one on the bottom @-@ left shows the operational area and the larger map a close @-@ up view of the region selected by the player . Shown on the maps are the continuously updated positions of the Marines and their enemies . The game simulates fog of war by blacking out unexplored areas on the maps and representing unseen Genestealers as blips , unveiling them as Marines come within sight . 
 Switching to the Terminator View Screen offers a first @-@ person perspective of the mission through the Marines ' eyes . The Screen contains five monitors : a large primary monitor at the bottom and four smaller secondary displays arrayed above . The primary monitor displays the view of the Marine under the player 's control . The character is moved by pressing the keyboard 's cursor keys or clicking the directional arrows next to the monitor . The mouse is also used to aim and shoot at targets , although the computer determines if an accurate shot kills the target . The secondary monitors show the views of other squad members . Although the player cannot control the movements of these Marines through these interfaces , he or she can click them to shoot the Marines ' weapons at the centre of their views . However , the player can take full control of a Marine by switching the character 's view to the primary monitor . 
 At any time , Marines armed with Storm <unk> and not under the player 's control assume " Overwatch " mode , automatically firing at obstacles and enemies that come into their paths . Storm <unk> may jam under sustained firing , rendering the weapon useless for a few seconds until the malfunction is cleared . Although the action unfolds in real @-@ time , the player can pause the game by clicking the " Freeze " button and entering " Freeze Time " . While in this mode , every unit stops its motion while a timer runs down ; the player can freely issue and modify orders to the Marines . Once the timer is depleted or the Freeze button is clicked again , every unit resumes its movement . The timer for Freeze Time slowly replenishes , as long as the game stays in real @-@ time . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Space Hulk is a video game based on a 1989 board game of the same name . Set in the fictional Warhammer 40 @,@ 000 universe , the video game tasks the player to take control of genetically enhanced soldiers called Space Marines . Wearing powered exoskeletons known as Terminator suits , these Marines embark on missions aboard the eponymous derelict starships that drift in and out of the Warp , an alternate region of space through which vast interstellar distances can be traversed in a short time . The vessels are infested with Genestealers , four @-@ armed aliens , who invade worlds encountered in the ships ' paths . Sworn to protect the human race , the Marines aim to eradicate the alien threat . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Space Hulk 's campaign is mostly <unk> through pre @-@ mission briefings . The prologue in the game manual states the Dark Angels , a force of Space Marines , had repelled a <unk> incursion in the <unk> system many centuries before current events in the game . A Dark Angel hero was leading his men aboard the invading space hulk , Sin of Damnation , when it vanished into the warp . The first mission in the campaign sends the player 's squad to investigate the <unk> system for a distress call of Dark Angels ' origin . A nest of Genestealers is uncovered on the planet Ma <unk> , and the player 's forces are ordered to destroy the aliens ' Hive Mind . However , there are too many Genestealers , and the Marines are forced to withdraw . Without any other options , the Marines destroy the infestation and all other life forms on the planet through <unk> with virus bombs — biological weapons of mass destruction . As they are doing so , the Sin of Damnation re @-@ enters the system , and the player receives orders to invade the hulk . Aboard the vessel , the player 's squads destroy the Genestealers ' gene banks and their Patriarch . The end of the campaign tasks the player to control a lone Marine as he goes deep into the hulk to find the source of the distress call . 
 = = Development = = 
 The original Space Hulk board game was published by Games Workshop . It was the company 's third board game that was adapted as a video game ; the previous two board games were <unk> and Space Crusade , whose video game adaptations were both published by Gremlin Graphics . The board game version of Space Hulk is played between two players , who assume the roles of the Marines and Genestealers . The players take turns moving their pieces to accomplish their objectives ; the Marines ' player , however , is given a certain amount of time to complete each of his or her turn . The game is designed to encourage the two players to adopt different tactics in their play — the slow @-@ moving Space Marines with long @-@ range guns versus the fast @-@ moving Genestealers who fight hand @-@ to @-@ hand . 
 Conversion of Space Hulk into a video game was initiated in 1991 by video game company Electronics Arts , who also managed the project 's development . Instead of following Gremlin 's approach and creating exact copies of the board games in digital form , Electronic Arts and Games Workshop opted to develop a video game , based on Space Hulk , with features that took advantage of the personal computer 's technological advancements . The interior walls of the space hulks were rendered by ray tracing , passing much of the graphical work to computers . This method reduced the time needed to introduce new sets of walls into the game from two weeks to twelve hours . Although digital speech was a relatively new technology at the time , the team made use of sound card technologies to produce alien screeches and roars that permeate the hulks , and warning cries from Marines under attack . The game 's opening tune , " Get Out Of My Way " , was recorded by British hard rock band D @-@ Rok , with Brian May of Queen as guest guitarist . Games Workshop helped Electronic Arts keep the game true to its Warhammer 40 @,@ 000 roots by providing the writers with materials and answers on the fictional universe . The development team created the tutorial missions , but adapted the other missions straight from the board game and the <unk> Campaign expansion set . 
 Initially released in June 1993 on floppy disks for IBM Personal Computers and their clones that ran DOS , Space Hulk was later published for other platforms and media . The CD @-@ ROM version of Space Hulk included nine new missions , new cinematic animations , and new digital sound effects and speech ( which required a sound card ) . Unlike the versions that ran on DOS , the Amiga version ( published in Autumn 1993 ) cannot be installed on a hard drive ; Amiga users have to swap floppy disks at several points of the game while playing it . In Japan , the game was ported to the NEC PC @-@ <unk> in Japan by a local video game company , Starcraft . In 1996 , Electronic Arts produced a sequel , Space Hulk : Vengeance of the Blood Angels , to Space Hulk . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewers noted the atmosphere experienced while playing Space Hulk , describing it as similar to the science @-@ fiction film Aliens ( 1986 ) . Aside from the concept of pitting heavily armed soldiers against aliens that looked like H. R. Giger 's " exo @-@ skeletal nightmares " , Space Hulk 's Terminator View Screen was reminiscent of a sequence in the film where a marine lieutenant monitored and ordered his troops as they executed a mission in a dark , dank environment . 
 Handling slow , cumbersome Marines against fast , deadly Genestealers proved to be intense sessions of panic and fear for the game 's critics . They were stressed from monitoring several Marines at the same time while Genestealers probed the flanks and sent decoys to lure Marines to their deaths . Despite playing in a well @-@ lit , noisy office , David Upchurch of The One said the game " [ scared ] the pants off " him , and Jeff James of Computer Gaming World stated that because of the combination of " excellent use of digitized sound " and " Genestealers rendered in sickening purple hue " , " More than once I jumped out of my command chair " . Similarly , CU Amiga 's Tony Dillon believed the game was not for those with " a weak heart " . Compute ! ' s Scott May declared the game " a bug blaster 's nightmare come true . " The game further evoked a sense of esprit de corps with its monastic @-@ style briefings , according to Amiga User International . However , video game journalist Alec Meer remembered the briefings as " one of videogame history 's greatest atmosphere @-@ spoilers " for their flat deliveries . 
 Besides its atmosphere , Space Hulk 's game mechanics received close attention . Lester Smith of Dragon said the video game was an excellent adaptation of its original tabletop form . He praised Electronic Arts for conveying the " bug @-@ hunting experience on its own merits , using the computer 's strength " , rather than attempting to imitate those aspects of the board game . Upchurch , along with Rik Skews of Computer and Video Games , agreed , pointing out that the electronic version was better off with the concept of Freeze Time than implementing a recreation of dice rolls and sequence of turns found in the board game . A few reviewers disagreed . Dee and Jay of Dragon wanted a " computer game that was faithful to the elements of the board game " , and said the video game 's design proved too difficult for them ; they found controlling five or more Marines in real @-@ time against Genestealers impossible . Similarly , Amiga Force 's Mark Smith and Ian Osborne were flustered by having to command several Marines at the same time while they came under sudden attacks from several directions . The Marines ' slow speed were another frustration . Offering another insight , Meer opined the Marines ' slow response was integral to the game 's atmosphere : made slow and cumbersome by the game 's design and interface , the Marines ' battles against fast and deadly foes became nerve @-@ wrecking affairs for the player . Likewise , May found the multitasking nature of the game crucial to its intensity . Rob Mead offered an opinion not from a player of the board game in his article for Amiga Format . He rated the video game " very good but not brilliant " , and suggested it would appeal more to aficionados of the board game because such players tend to appreciate attention to detail , planning , and tactics . 
 Amiga reviewers had a common grouse : the frequent disk swaps required were tedious . Regardless , the game 's tense atmosphere — generated by the combination of game mechanics , use of sounds , and artificial intelligence — provided memorable moments to many reviewers . As one of them — Simon Clays of Amiga Computing — put it , Space Hulk was " a very difficult strategy @-@ cum @-@ 3D dungeon @-@ esque title with plenty of action and gripping play . " May said the game offered " demented " violence but was " irresistibly <unk> when the action erupts in nonstop , <unk> carnage . " A decade after the game 's release , several reviewers mentioned Space Hulk as a Warhammer 40 @,@ 000 video game worthy of praise . Meer reflected on replaying the game fifteen years after its release , " The panic and terror of facing 90 degrees away from your enemy , and knowing that you can 't do a damn thing about it before your lower intestine spills onto your feet , is still something pretty special . " 
 = Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen = 
 Pokémon FireRed Version and LeafGreen Version are enhanced remakes of the original Pokémon Red and Green video games , which were released in 1996 . The new titles were developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance and have compatibility with the Game Boy Advance Wireless Adapter , which originally came bundled with the games . FireRed and LeafGreen were first released in Japan in January 2004 and released to North America and Europe in September and October respectively . Nearly two years after their original release , Nintendo re @-@ marketed them as Player 's Choice titles . 
 FireRed and LeafGreen are members of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing video games . As in previous games , the player controls the player character from an overhead perspective , and participates in turn @-@ based combat encounters . However , new features such as a contextual help menu and a new region the player may access have also been added . Throughout the games , the player captures and raises Pokémon for use in battle . 
 The games received mostly positive reviews , obtaining an aggregate score of 81 percent on Metacritic . Most critics praised the fact that the games introduced new features while still maintaining the traditional gameplay of the series . Reception of the graphics and audio was more mixed , with some reviewers complaining that they were too simplistic and lacked improvement compared to the previous games , Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire . FireRed and LeafGreen were commercial successes , selling a total of around 12 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with all Pokémon role @-@ playing games released for handheld consoles , FireRed and LeafGreen are in third @-@ person , overhead perspective . The main screen is an overworld , in which the player navigates the protagonist . Here a menu interface may be accessed , in which the player may configure his or her Pokémon , items , and gameplay settings . When the player encounters a wild Pokémon or is challenged by a trainer , the screen switches to a turn @-@ based battle screen that displays the player 's Pokémon and the engaged Pokémon . During battle , the player may select a move for his or her Pokémon to perform , use an item , switch his or her active Pokémon , or attempt to flee . All Pokémon have hit points ( HP ) ; when a Pokémon 's HP is reduced to zero , it faints and can no longer battle until it is revived . Once an enemy Pokémon faints , all of the player 's Pokémon involved in the battle receive a certain amount of experience points ( EXP ) . After accumulating enough EXP , a Pokémon may level up . 
 Capturing Pokémon is another essential element of the gameplay . During battle with a wild Pokémon , the player may throw a Poké Ball at it . If the Pokémon is successfully caught , it will come under the ownership of the player . Factors in the success rate of capture include the HP of the target Pokémon and the type of Poké Ball used : the lower the target 's HP and the stronger the Poké Ball , the higher the success rate of capture . 
 While FireRed and LeafGreen are remakes of Red and Green ( Pokémon Green was only released in Japan , whereas the American version was Blue ) , they contain usability enhancements such as a contextual tutorial feature which allows players to look up data at any point in the game . Additionally , when continuing a saved game , players are shown the last four actions they performed , allowing them to remember what they were doing . 
 The games support the Game Boy Advance Game Link Cable , through which connected players may trade or battle . Players may also connect with Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire , as well as with Pokémon Colosseum , allowing them to obtain over 350 Pokémon . FireRed and LeafGreen also have the ability to connect to the Nintendo GameCube and interact with Pokémon Box : Ruby and Sapphire . In Box , the player may organize and view his or her collected Pokémon , and in Colosseum , Pokémon may be used in battle . FireRed and LeafGreen are also the first games in the series to be compatible with the Game Boy Advance Wireless Adapter , which comes prepackaged with the games . The adapter can be plugged into the link port of the Game Boy Advance system , and allows players within a radius of 30 – 50 feet ( 9 – 15 meters ) to wirelessly interact with each other . In addition , as many as 30 players at a time may join a special location called the " Union Room " , where they can trade , battle , or chat . Nintendo has set up " <unk> " at Japanese retail locations for this purpose . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen takes place mostly in the fictional region of Kanto . This is one distinct region of many in the Pokémon world , which includes varied geographical habitats for the Pokémon species , human @-@ populated towns and cities , and routes between locations . Some areas are only accessible once the player acquires a special item or one of the player 's Pokémon learns a special ability . Near the end of the plot , the protagonist is able to venture to the Sevii Islands , a new area not present in the original Red and Blue games . The Sevii Islands are an archipelago of seven islands , and contain Pokémon normally exclusive to the Johto region , as well as several post @-@ game missions . After the aforementioned missions on the Sevii Islands are completed , trading with Pokémon of the Hoenn region becomes available . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The silent protagonist of FireRed and LeafGreen is a child who lives in a small town . After players start a journey and venture alone into deep grass , a voice warns them to stop . Professor Oak , a famous Pokémon researcher , explains to the player such grass is often the habitat of wild Pokémon , and encountering them alone can be very dangerous . He takes the player to his laboratory where the player meets Oak 's grandson , another aspiring Pokémon Trainer . The player and the rival are both instructed to select a starter Pokémon for their travels . The rival then challenges the player to a Pokémon battle with their newly obtained Pokémon , and continues to battle the player at certain points throughout the games . 
 After reaching the next city , the player is asked to deliver a parcel to Professor Oak . Upon returning to the laboratory , the player is presented with a Pokédex , a high @-@ tech encyclopedia that record the entries of any Pokémon that are encountered . Oak asks the player to fulfill his dream of compiling a comprehensive list of every Pokémon in the game . 
 While visiting the region 's cities , the player encounters special establishments called <unk> . Inside these buildings are Gym Leaders , each of whom the player must defeat in a Pokémon battle to obtain a Gym Badge . Once a total of eight badges are acquired , the player is given permission to enter the Pokémon League , which consists of the best Pokémon trainers in the region . There the player battles the Elite Four . Also throughout the game , the player has to fight against the forces of Team Rocket , a criminal organization that abuses Pokémon . They devise numerous plans to steal rare Pokémon , all of which the player must foil , meeting and defeating the organization boss Giovanni . 
 After the first time the player defeats the Elite Four one of the members , Lorelei , disappears . After gaining access to the Sevii Islands , an entirely new region , the player discovers Lorelei in her house and convinces her to come back with him . Once more , the protagonist must thwart the Team Rocket 's plans on several occasions , recover two artifacts , the Ruby and the Sapphire , and put them in the main computer at One Island . After that , the player can communicate , battle , trade , etc . , with games other than FireRed or LeafGreen . 
 = = Development = = 
 FireRed and LeafGreen were first announced in September 2003 as upcoming remakes of the original Pocket Monsters Red and Green games that were released in Japan in 1996 . Game director Junichi Masuda stated the new titles would be developed around the idea of simplicity , as the game engine was a slightly modified version of the one used in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire . As a result , FireRed and LeafGreen were made fully backward compatible with Ruby and Sapphire , allowing players to trade Pokémon between games . 
 FireRed and LeafGreen 's connectivity with the Game Boy Advance Wireless Adapter was heralded by Nintendo president Satoru Iwata as being able " to enhance head @-@ to @-@ head battles , exchange of information , and communication with others . " An enhanced interface was created for the game to increase usability for new players , as well as a contextual in @-@ game help system that could aid lost or confused players during their journey . President of The Pokémon Company Tsunekazu <unk> noted , " We don 't feel that this a remake at all . We feel that this is a new game , with wireless technology " , referring to the bundled wireless adapter . 
 The music used in the titles was derived from the classic game consoles , and arranged by Go Ichinose . Masuda and Ichinose decided not to change the reused music from the basic background sounds used in the originals , and instead updated them by adding additional sounds . A two @-@ disc set of the music entitled GBA Pokémon FireRed & LeafGreen Super Complete was released , with the first disc featuring all the music used normally in @-@ game , while the second disc featured bonus tracks based on and inspired by the music in the games . Among these are two vocal tracks . 
 Track list of GBA Pokémon FireRed & LeafGreen Super Complete : 
 The exclusive Japanese production run for FireRed and LeafGreen was limited to half a million copies , despite the success of Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire . IGN speculated that Nintendo was expecting less demand for the new games , or that it was limited by the production of the bundled wireless adapter . The east American versions of FireRed and LeafGreen were secondly indirectly announced at DICE in 2004 . Although the original games were released as Red and Blue in North America , the remakes retained the Japanese names of " Red " and " Green " . Masuda noted this as a choice on his part , stating the leaf represented a peaceful icon , in contrast to the alternative of water which he saw as suggesting conflict with the icon of fire used by the other game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its first week of release in Japan , FireRed and LeafGreen sold a combined total of 885 @,@ 039 copies , which was less than the amount sold by Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire in that time period , but IGN reasoned that the smaller sales were due to the new titles being remakes . In the first half of August before FireRed and LeafGreen were released in the U.S. , the games received over 150 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders , over twice the amount that Ruby and Sapphire received . Nintendo 's Senior Vice President of Marketing and Corporate Communication George Harrison remarked , " This pre @-@ sell indicates more than twice the player interest ! " Over one million copies of FireRed and LeafGreen were sold in the US less than one month after their release in that region . As of March 31 , 2008 , the games had sold 11 @.@ 82 million copies worldwide . The games later entered Nintendo 's Player 's Choice line in North America , and were re @-@ marketed with a significantly lower retail price . However , unlike the original release , the Player 's Choice edition games did not include a bundled Wireless Adapter . 
 Reviews of FireRed and LeafGreen were mostly positive , and the games currently hold an aggregate score of 81 percent on Metacritic . Craig Harris of IGN gave the games an " Outstanding " 9 @.@ 0 / 10 rating and praised the creators of the games for creating a game that " works extremely well for the handheld market . It doesn 't have quite the same variety as Ruby / Sapphire , but it 's still incredibly satisfying . " Harris was less positive about the games ' graphics , which he thought were " limited " and " basic " . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin , who gave the games 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 , commented that " though Pokémon could probably use a few new twists after all these years , FireRed and LeafGreen are great role @-@ playing games on their own merits , filled with lots more content and more challenges than last year 's Ruby and Sapphire , and offering up plenty of addictive gameplay that can be a lot of fun for players of all ages . " Unlike Harris , Kasavin praised the games ' graphics for their " colorful good looks and the endearing character designs that the series is known for . " Game Informer rated the games a " Very Good " 8 / 10 for being " a lot of fun " , yet they saw the graphics as " utterly unremarkable " when compared to other handheld games . 
 GameSpy reviewer Phil Theobald , who awarded the games four out of five stars , stated , " Before I knew it , I was hooked all over again . The engrossingly simple gameplay combined with the more @-@ strategic @-@ than @-@ they @-@ first @-@ appear battles was just too much to resist . And yeah , the ' gotta catch ' em all ' gimmick is still effective , not to mention necessary to build a well balanced party . There 's just something about tracking down , capturing , and training all those Pokémon that really draw you into the game 's world . " He justified the games ' graphics by comparing them to the " ugly " original Red and Blue versions . Additional praise was given to the new features such as the contextual tutorial , and flashbacks when loading a saved game , as well as the games ' multiplayer capabilities via the Wireless adapter . Nintendo Power , which gave the games a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 average , stated " [ t ] here 's a great game hiding under all the Pikachu cuteness , and you have to play it for only a bit to find yourself addicted . " 
 = Humbug ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Humbug " is the twentieth episode of the second season of American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Darin Morgan and directed by Kim Manners . Morgan had previously appeared in a guest role as the Flukeman in an earlier episode of that season called " The Host " . " Humbug " aired in the United States on March 31 , 1995 on the Fox network . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Humbug " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 , being watched by 9 @.@ 8 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received generally positive reviews and critics appreciated Morgan 's unique writing style . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of murders in a community of former circus sideshow performers . Mulder believes the murderer to be the mysterious " Fiji mermaid " , which Scully argues is only a hoax — a mere humbug . 
 " Humbug " was the first explicitly comedic episode in the series and Morgan later wrote three more scripts for the series that continued his comic take on the show . According to critical analysis of the episode , " Humbug " explored themes of " Otherness " and difference . Guest stars included real @-@ life sideshow performers Jim Rose and The Enigma , as well as actors Michael J. Anderson and Vincent Schiavelli . " Humbug " was nominated for an Edgar Award and a Cinema Audio Society Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the town of <unk> , Florida one night , two brothers are playing in their home outdoor swimming pool . A mysterious figure approaches them from the woods surrounding their home and jumps into the pool without them noticing . As the brothers play , they notice something is wrong and before they leave the pool , the figure emerges from the water . It 's revealed to be the boys ' father , " Alligator Man " , who scares his sons for fun . After some laughs in the pool , the " Alligator Man " tells his children to go back into the house as it 's late and time for them to go to bed . The boys leave the pool and their father stays behind to swim . An unknown mysterious figure approaches the pool from the woods . It attacks and kills " Alligator Man " in his pool . 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) travel to <unk> to investigate a 28 @-@ year series of attacks by an unknown assailant in a community of former circus sideshow performers . They attend the funeral of the " Alligator Man " ( who suffered from <unk> ) . Among the people they meet afterwards are " self @-@ made freaks " human blockhead Dr. Blockhead ( Jim Rose ) ( who interrupted the funeral by hammering a railroad spike into his own chest ) and his " geek " sidekick The Conundrum ( The Enigma ) , who will eat anything , but says nothing . The agents also meet former performer Jim Jim , the Dogface Boy , who later became the local sheriff after his face went through hair loss . 
 Mulder and Scully stay at the Gulf Breeze trailer court , whose name is a reference to the 1987 Gulf Breeze UFO incident , also mentioned in season 1 episode , " Fallen Angel " . Here , they meet the distrustful manager Mr. Nutt ( Michael J. Anderson ) , and Lanny ( Vincent Schiavelli ) , an alcoholic with an underdeveloped conjoined twin named Leonard . The agents hear a story about the legendary Fiji mermaid , a common sideshow act in the 19th century that generally turned out to be a monkey with a fish tail attached — the " humbug " referred to by the episode 's title . Despite Scully 's usual skepticism , Mulder is intrigued because of what look like simian tracks left by the mystery attacker . 
 One night , Mr. Nutt is fatally attacked by a creature . The agents eventually discover that the attacker is Lanny 's twin , Leonard , who is able to detach himself from Lanny 's body . According to Lanny , Leonard attacks people and attempts to burrow into them because he is looking for a new brother to replace Lanny , who is dying from liver failure due to years of alcohol abuse . Lanny voluntarily locks himself in the local jail in an effort to keep Leonard from escaping , but dies during the night , and Leonard is able to slip through the bars on the cell window and flee . Mulder and Scully try to capture Leonard , who goes inside a funhouse , but he manages to get away . Upon leaving the funhouse , they find The Conundrum lying on the ground , rubbing his stomach , apparently having been attacked by Leonard . As Dr. Blockhead prepares to leave town with The Conundrum the following morning , he comments to Scully that with modern science eradicating genetic anomalies , it will be up to self @-@ made freaks like him to remind people that " nature abhors normality . " The Conundrum looks unwell and Mulder asks what the matter is . The Conundrum — in his only line of the episode — replies , " probably something I ate . " As Dr. Blockhead drives away with The Conundrum , Mulder and Scully turn to each other with confused and somewhat shocked expressions . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Humbug " was written by Darin Morgan ; it was his first script for the series . Earlier in the second season , he appeared in the second episode " The Host " as the Flukeman . He also helped his brother Glen Morgan — already a regular writer on The X @-@ Files — with the script for the following episode , " Blood " . Series creator Chris Carter offered Darin Morgan a permanent place on The X @-@ Files writing team , which he reluctantly accepted . Morgan said he was uncomfortable initially , stating " One of the reasons I was uncomfortable joining the staff is that I 'm a comedy writer and this isn 't a comedy show , so I was trying more or less to have an episode with a little bit of humor , without telling anybody what I was doing . " Glen suggested that he write an episode about sideshow performers . Before writing the episode Darin Morgan watched a tape of Jim Rose 's circus sideshow and subsequently cast Rose and The Enigma as Dr. Blockhead and The Conundrum , respectively . Other guest stars were Twin Peaks regular Michael J. Anderson as Mr. Nutt and Vincent Schiavelli as Lanny . 
 Morgan 's script turned out to be the most comedic episode of the series so far . The departure from The X @-@ Files ' usual style made some of the crew , including director Kim Manners , uncomfortable , and some of the more explicitly comic scenes were cut . After " Humbug " , Morgan went on to write three more comedy @-@ infused stories for the show : " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " , " War of the Coprophages " and " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " . David Duchovny later commented , " what I loved about his scripts was that he seemed to be trying to destroy the show . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his 2002 book Strange TV , M. Keith Booker describes " Humbug " as an important episode in the show 's " <unk> " of its exploration of " Otherness " ; from the start it challenges the characters ' — and viewers ' — assumptions about difference . In the teaser , what appears to be a monster is in fact a suburban father and eventual murder victim . When Mulder and Scully are quick to suspect the freak show performers of murder , Dr. Blockhead , a self @-@ made freak and " postmodern celebration of difference " , confronts their prejudice and bemoans a future with no genetic anomalies . The agents , with their conventional appearance are considered outsiders , and are quickly ( and correctly ) judged to be working for the FBI . According to Booker , the freak show characters from the episode exemplify the concept of the Other . He contrasts the perspective of " Humbug " , which celebrates Otherness , with that of The X @-@ Files overall in which " Other " is generally synonymous with danger and evil , much like Leonard . Despite this association between difference and malevolence generally found in The X @-@ Files , the show meets the audience 's need for difference and diversity , in its sheer number of strange and different characters . This need for something beyond everyday existence is mirrored by the main characters in Mulder 's " wanting to believe " in the paranormal and Scully 's Catholic faith . In " Humbug " , this is highlighted by Dr. Blockhead 's argument that the freaks add a richness to life that will be eliminated by genetic advancements . 
 According to Rhonda Wilcox and J. P. Williams in " What Do You Think ? The X @-@ Files , Liminality , and Gender Pleasure " , " Humbug " is about " difference , sex , and looking " . Regarding The X @-@ Files as a whole , they say that the relationship between Mulder and Scully is non @-@ sexual and " quasi @-@ marital " . Although sharing a degree of intimacy that allows them to share each other 's space , they avoid a sexual or objectifying gaze : " They look into each other 's eyes and argue ideas , rather than gazing at each other 's bodies . " This status quo is challenged in this episode as the objectifying gaze is highlighted and deconstructed , although not between the partners themselves . According to Wilcox and Williams , a key scene involves Agent Scully and Lanny . When Lanny goes to wake Scully in her trailer one morning , he catches a glimpse of her breasts ; she inadvertently exposes herself as she in turn catches sight of Lanny 's uncovered parasitic twin ; " each gaze involves the objectification of difference " . This objectification is emphasized by the fact that Scully 's body is not normally revealed in this way . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Humbug " was first broadcast in the United States on March 31 , 1995 , on the Fox network . In its original broadcast it was watched by 9 @.@ 8 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 10 @.@ 3 rating / 18 share among viewers meaning that 10 @.@ 3 percent of all households in the US , and 18 percent of all people watching television at the time , viewed the episode . The episode was nominated for an Edgar Award for ' Best Episode in a Television Series ' and a Cinema Audio Society Award for ' Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Series ' . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Humbug " received praise from critics . In a 2010 review of the episode , The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff gave it a " Grade A " rating . He noted the difference between the style of the episode and previous stories of the series , saying that at first , it " feel [ s ] like it might be a very special Murder , She Wrote or something , " and that later , " we 're clearly in some other show entirely , the only links in the continuity chain being Mulder and Scully themselves . " Including Morgan 's other scripts for the show , VanDerWerff called his writing " deeply , deeply funny " , but said that " Humbug " " may be [ his ] weakest script " . He particularly praised the ending of the episode , saying " there are few other TV writers that would come up with something as haunting and as perfectly understanding of the human condition as the final reveal of who the killer is . " Also writing for The A.V. Club in 2010 , Zack Handlen called it " a terrific episode ... well @-@ written and odd " . Ted Cox of the Daily Herald called " Humbug " " the pivotal episode of The X @-@ Files . " Robert Goodwin said of the episode " Talk about offbeat . It 's very theatrical and grandiose . The trick was being careful that it didn 't become like a bad Vincent Price movie , but it worked out well . " Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity gave the episode an A grade . Reviewers for website IGN named " Humbug " the tenth best standalone X @-@ Files episode of the entire series . Topless Robot named it the sixth funniest episode of the series . 
 = Ann Romney = 
 Ann Lois Romney ( née Davies ; born April 16 , 1949 ) is the wife of American businessman and politician , Mitt Romney . From 2003 to 2007 , Romney was First Lady of Massachusetts , while her husband served as Governor . 
 She was raised in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan , and attended the private Kingswood School there , where she dated Mitt Romney . She converted to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) in 1966 . She attended Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , married Mitt Romney in 1969 , and in 1975 received a Bachelor of Arts degree in French . 
 As First Lady of Massachusetts , Romney served as the governor 's liaison for federal faith @-@ based initiatives . She was involved in a number of children 's charities , including Operation Kids . She was an active participant in her husband 's U.S. presidential campaigns in 2008 and again in 2012 , when he was the Republican Party nominee . 
 Romney was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1998 and has credited a mixture of mainstream and alternative treatments with giving her a lifestyle mostly without limitations . In one activity , equestrianism , she has consequently received recognition in dressage as an adult amateur at the national level and competed professionally in Grand Prix as well . In 2008 , she was also diagnosed with ductal carcinoma in situ , a non @-@ invasive type of breast cancer . She underwent a lumpectomy in December of the same year and has since been cancer @-@ free . 
 Ann and Mitt Romney have five sons , born between 1970 and 1981 , and twenty @-@ three grandchildren . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born Ann Lois Davies in Detroit on April 16 , 1949 , she was raised in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan , by parents Edward Roderick Davies and Lois Davies . She has two brothers . Her father , originally from <unk> near Maesteg , Wales , was a self @-@ made businessman who in 1946 co @-@ founded Jered Industries , a maker of heavy machinery for marine use located in Troy , Michigan . He had also held the part @-@ time position of Mayor of Bloomfield Hills . Raised in the Welsh Congregationalists , he had become strongly opposed to all organized religion , although on her request the family very occasionally attended church , and she nominally identified as an Episcopalian . At times , she helped out at her father 's plant . 
 Ann Davies knew of Mitt Romney since elementary school . She went to the private Kingswood School in Bloomfield Hills , which was the sister school to the all @-@ boys Cranbrook School that he attended . The two were re @-@ introduced and began dating in March 1965 ; they informally agreed to marriage after his senior prom in June 1965 . 
 While he was attending Stanford University for a year and then was away starting two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of Mormon missionary duty in France , she decided on her own to convert to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints during 1966 . In doing so she accepted the guidance of Mitt 's father George Romney , the Governor of Michigan . George included her in Romney family events while Mitt was away ; she appreciated his treating her as an equal and picked him to baptize her . 
 Ann graduated from high school in 1967 and began attending Brigham Young University ( BYU ) . She also spent a semester at the University of Grenoble in France during her freshman year and was there during the 1968 Winter Olympics . The Mormon missionary rules allowed her only two brief visits with Mitt and very rare telephone calls with him . She involved herself in campus life at BYU , spending several days a week as a volunteer in the academic affairs office . While at BYU , she dated future business academic Kim S. Cameron . She sent Mitt a " Dear John letter " of sorts , while Mitt sent letters back imploring her to wait for him . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 Immediately after Romney 's return from France in December 1968 , the pair reconnected and agreed to get married as soon as possible . Ann Davies and Mitt Romney were married in a civil ceremony on March 21 , 1969 , at her Bloomfield Hills home , with a reception afterward at the Bloomfield Hills Country Club . It was presided over by Edwin B. Jones , a banker and Romney family friend then serving as an LDS Church Regional representative of the Twelve . Among the 250 – 300 guests were U.S. House Minority Leader Gerald Ford and automotive executives such as Semon Knudsen and Edward Cole , and President Richard Nixon sent congratulations . The following day the couple flew to Utah for a wedding ceremony inside the Salt Lake Temple ; her parents could not attend since they were non @-@ Mormons , but were present at a subsequent wedding breakfast held for them across the street . ( Both her brothers converted to Mormonism within a year of her doing so . Her mother converted just before her death in 1993 . Her father never did , but the family performed a baptism for the dead regarding him a year after his 1992 death . ) 
 The couple 's first son was born in 1970 while both were undergraduates at BYU ( to where Mitt had transferred based upon her request ) . After Mitt graduated , the couple moved to Belmont , Massachusetts , so that he could attend Harvard Business School and Harvard Law School . Slowed down by parenthood , she later finished her undergraduate work by gaining a semester and half 's worth of credits via taking night courses at Harvard University Extension School . Ann Romney received a Bachelor of Arts degree with a concentration in French language from BYU in 1975 . 
 A stay @-@ at @-@ home mother , Romney raised the family 's five sons : Taggart ( known as " Tagg " , born in 1970 ) , Matthew ( " Matt " , 1971 ) , Joshua ( " Josh " , 1975 ) , Benjamin ( " Ben " , 1978 ) , and Craig ( 1981 ) . She faced criticism from her parents over her decision to marry and start a large family so young . She also felt snubbed by her peers , at a time when the feminist movement was blooming and educated women were establishing careers . She later said , " My parents were questioning my choices , my peers were . But [ ... ] I was pretty resolute , pretty confident in what I was doing . " She taught early morning seminary to them and other children while her husband worked , first in business , then in politics . She wanted to go on for a master 's degree , perhaps in art history , but first taking care of her children , and later her health issues , forestalled that . She was active in the local PTA and with the League of Women Voters . With a friend , she held local cooking classes for a brief period . Naturally athletic , she began playing tennis and became one of the best players around the local country clubs . 
 = = Early involvement in politics = = 
 Ann Romney ran for the position of town meeting representative in Belmont in 1977 . She studied local issues and engaged in door @-@ to @-@ door campaigning , and won the election . 
 It was partly due to her urging that her husband entered politics and ran in the 1994 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts against incumbent Democrat Ted Kennedy . The race constituted her first prolonged public exposure as she campaigned for him on a nightly basis . She was seen as superficial and too deferential to him and some columnists labelled her a " Stepford wife " . Late in that campaign , she gave a long interview to The Boston Globe . Her statement in it that she and her husband had never had a serious argument during their married years came in for ridicule , and her portrayal of the couple 's student years as financially impoverished , while they lived off of sales of George Romney 's stock and loans , made her seem privileged and naïve and brought a harsh public reaction . Boston University political science professor later said , " She definitely hurt him in that race . " Asked following her husband 's loss if she would be involved in future campaigns , Ann said , " Never . You couldn 't pay me to do this again . " She later termed the experience " a real education " . 
 = = Multiple sclerosis = = 
 During 1997 , Ann Romney began experiencing severe numbness , fatigue , and other symptoms , and just before Thanksgiving in 1998 , she was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis . Mitt Romney described watching her fail a series of neurological tests as the worst day of his life . He later said : " I couldn 't operate without Ann . We 're a partnership . We 've always been a partnership so her being healthy and our being able to be together is essential . " She initially experienced a period of severe difficulty with the disease , and later said : " I was very sick in 1998 when I was diagnosed . I was pretty desperate , pretty frightened and very , very sick . It was tough at the beginning , just to think , this is how I 'm going to feel for the rest of my life . " 
 Since then , she credits a mixture of mainstream and alternative treatments with giving her a lifestyle mostly without limitations . She initially used corticosteroids , including intravenously , and credited them with helping stop the progression of the disease . She then dropped them and other medications due to counterproductive side effects . She has partaken of reflexology , acupuncture , and <unk> therapy , and has said , " There is huge merit in both Eastern and Western medicine , and I 've taken a little bit from both . " She is a board member for the New England chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Romney is an avid equestrian , crediting her renewed involvement in it while in Park City , Utah ( where the couple had built a vacation home and where they lived when he was in charge of the 2002 Winter Olympic Games ) , for much of her recovery after her multiple sclerosis diagnosis and for her continued ability to deal with the disease . She has said that riding " saved my life " , explaining that , " I was losing most of the function of my right side . And I decided I needed to go back and do what I loved before I couldn 't do it anymore . " At first she could barely stay on a horse without getting tired , but gradually the muscle control required for riding proved directly beneficial , and psychologically , " Riding exhilarated me ; it gave me a joy and a purpose . When I was so fatigued that I couldn 't move , the excitement of going to the barn and getting my foot in the stirrup would make me crawl out of bed . " As a result , she said , " My desire to ride was , and is , so strong that I kept getting healthier and healthier . " 
 She has received recognition in dressage as an adult amateur at the national level , including earning her 2006 Gold Medal and 2005 Silver Medal at the Grand Prix level from the United States Dressage Federation . She also sometimes competes in professional dressage events and has broken the 60 % level at Grand Prix . Romney works with California trainer Jan Ebeling , who schools her and her horses in dressage and works with her importing new stock from Europe . The pair qualified for the Pan @-@ Am games in 2004 . 
 By 2011 , the horses she owned and kept at Ebeling 's <unk> , California , stables , which she is a partner in , were valued at more than $ 250 @,@ 000 . The Romneys helped fund Ebeling 's aspirations for equestrian competition at the 2012 Summer Olympics , and Ann was present in Gladstone , New Jersey , in June 2012 when Ebeling , riding on the horse <unk> ( co @-@ owned by him and Ann ) won a spot on the U.S. dressage team . At the London games in August 2012 , she watched the pair place 28th in the competition . 
 = = Charitable work = = 
 Ann Romney has been involved in a number of children 's charities , including having been a director of the inner city @-@ oriented Best Friends , which seeks to assist inner @-@ city adolescent girls . She advocated a celibacy @-@ based approach to the prevention of teen pregnancy . She worked extensively with the Ten Point Coalition in Boston and with other groups that promoted better safety and opportunities for urban youths . 
 She was an honorary board member of Families First , a parent education program in Cambridge , Massachusetts . She was a volunteer instructor of middle @-@ school girls at the multicultural Mother Caroline Academy in Boston . 
 She has said her interest in helping underprivileged children dates back to when she and her five boys saw a vehicle carrying a group of boys to a Massachusetts Department of Youth Services detention center . She began volunteering for the United Way of Massachusetts Bay soon after that , and by 2002 was serving as one of that organization 's board members . She was on the Faith in Action Committee for the United Way , working with local religious establishments to assist at @-@ risk children and helping to found United Way Faith and Action . Earlier , by 1996 , she was a member of the Massachusetts Advisory Board of Stand for Children . 
 During the 2002 Winter Olympics effort , she co @-@ chaired the Olympic Aid charity , which provides athletic activities and programs for children in war @-@ torn regions . 
 = = First Lady of Massachusetts = = 
 Romney joined in her husband 's campaign in the 2002 Massachusetts gubernatorial election from the start , and nominated him at the state party convention . A commercial entitled " Mitt and Ann " , highlighting their romance and marriage , began the campaign 's television advertising . She avoided media interviews like the one that plagued her in 1994 , but was a force behind the scenes during the eventually successful campaign . 
 In January 2003 , following his election , Romney became First Lady of Massachusetts , a position she held through January 2007 . In that role , she generally kept a low public profile , with by her husband 's initial indications no public role in administration or its policies . In 2006 , The Boston Globe characterized her as " largely invisible " within the state ( although by then she was becoming more visible outside the state , due to national appearances in connection with her husband 's possible presidential campaign ) . Romney was president of the Doric <unk> , the volunteer tour directors who inform visitors to the State House about its architecture and history and the Massachusetts legislative process . 
 While Massachusetts First Lady , she was active in teenage pregnancy prevention efforts . In 2004 , she said she was in favor of stem cell research as long as it was done " morally and ethically " . One of her rare public appearances at the Massachusetts State House came in 2004 when she lobbied the legislature to raise awareness about multiple sclerosis . 
 In 2005 , the governor appointed his wife as head of a new special office whose purpose was to help the state 's faith @-@ based groups gain more federal monies in association with the White House Office of Faith @-@ Based and Community Initiatives . This came after the state had seen its share of faith @-@ based grants decline over the preceding three years . In this unpaid Governor 's Liaison position , Ann Romney was termed a " dynamo " by Jim <unk> , director of the White House office . 
 At the conclusion of her time as Massachusetts First Lady , Romney said that the role " doesn 't need to change your life at all . I think it 's an opportunity for service and an opportunity to see people of all walks of life from across the Commonwealth ... It 's an enriching part of your life [ and one will ] treasure it forever . " Her health was still a primary factor in family decisions about her husband 's career , and Mitt said in 2005 that if her multiple sclerosis flared up , " I wouldn 't be involved in politics anymore ; that would be over . " 
 = = Role in 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 Ann Romney was an active participant in her husband 's 2008 presidential campaign . One past issue that arose involving her was disclosure of her donation of $ 150 to Planned Parenthood in 1994 , when her husband was a pro @-@ choice candidate for the U.S. Senate . She said she did not remember the contribution ; her own public stance on abortion has evolved in a similar manner to his , and by this time she was co @-@ chair of the capital campaign for Massachusetts Citizens for Life . By late 2007 , she had become an integral part of his campaign , and was doing more trips and appearances on her own , despite the risk that added stress would aggravate her condition . 
 Her political message was often mixed with discussions of her family , her recipes , or managing her affliction . Romney 's television advertisements in the early primary states prominently featured her and by the close of 2007 , she was the most visible of all the Republican candidates ' wives in campaigning . Regarding having to witness criticism of her husband , she later acknowledged that she sometimes wanted to " come out of my seat and clock somebody [ but ] you learn to just take a deep breath . " By the time he ended his campaign in February 2008 , she had become openly distasteful of the whole process . 
 = = Between campaigns = = 
 In late 2008 , Romney was diagnosed with mammary ductal carcinoma in situ , a non @-@ invasive type of breast cancer , and had the lump removed via lumpectomy ; she subsequently underwent radiation therapy . Her prognosis from this condition was excellent , and she later reflected that " I was really lucky " to have caught it so early . President @-@ elect Barack Obama was among the well @-@ wishers who called her . She has been cancer @-@ free since . 
 In June 2009 , due to her husband 's request , Ann Romney became the first spouse to be included in the official Massachusetts State House gubernatorial portrait . 
 For many years the couple 's primary residence was a house in Belmont , Massachusetts , but this and the Utah home were sold in 2009 . They resided in Wolfeboro , New Hampshire , along Lake Winnipesaukee , and at an oceanfront home in La Jolla , San Diego , California , that they had bought the year before . Both locations were near some of the Romneys ' grandchildren and the La Jolla location was near where she rides horses and was well @-@ situated for her multiple sclerosis therapies and for recovering from her cancer treatments . They also bought a smaller condominium in Belmont during 2010 . 
 = = Role in 2012 presidential campaign = = 
 Regarding another possible run for office by her husband in the 2012 presidential election , Romney said in March 2010 that this time the process would hold no surprises , and that if he decided in favor of doing it , " I 'm up to saying , go storm the castle , sweetie . " Although still not liking the political process , which she referred to as " a very difficult game " , she urged her husband to run again and was one of the few family members to initially support the notion . 
 Once the campaign began , she stumped for her husband in early primary states and criticized the record and ideological direction of the Obama administration . As part of trying to lighten her husband 's image , she sometimes participated in comic setup routines with him . Romney said that if she became First Lady of the United States , she would seek to work with at @-@ risk youths and on behalf of those with multiple sclerosis . She expressed admiration for three former first ladies , Mamie Eisenhower , Nancy Reagan , and Barbara Bush . 
 By December 2011 , Romney assumed an even more prominent role in the campaign , as she tried to offer a more rounded and compelling portrait of her husband while he fell behind Newt Gingrich for a stretch in polls . Her emphasis on their 42 years of marriage and his steadfastness following the onset of her disease offered an implicit but clear contrast with Gingrich 's own personal history . She had long been known within the family as the " Mitt @-@ stabilizer " , due to the calming effect she had on her husband , and continued to perform that role during the up @-@ and @-@ down campaign . In particular , she began appearing with him more often during February 2012 as he dueled with Rick Santorum during the Republican presidential primaries . Regarding the couple 's net worth , she alluded to her health problems and said , " Look , I don 't even consider myself wealthy , which is an interesting thing , it can be here today and gone tomorrow . And how I measure riches is by the friends I have and the loved ones that I have and the people that I care about in my life . " 
 In April 2012 , Ann Romney was spotlighted when Democratic commentator Hilary Rosen declared Romney to be unfit to address women 's economic issues because as a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother , she had " never worked a day in her life " . In response , Ann Romney issued her first tweet , saying " I made a choice to stay home and raise five boys . Believe me , it was hard work . " Rosen apologized the following day . Like all presidential candidates ' wives , her fashion choices came under scrutiny , with some critics praising her for a contemporary look that avoided standard campaign appearance clichés , while others said she lacked consistency and did not seem to be using the services of a stylist . On August 28 , Romney gave a prime @-@ time speech before the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa , Florida , in which she stressed her own background and her family experiences , in an appeal to women voters . By early October , she and son Tagg had convinced the campaign to spend more time emphasizing her husband 's personal nature and character , rather than simply present issue and record arguments against Obama . 
 In the November 6 , 2012 , general election , Mitt Romney lost as President Obama was re @-@ elected . The couple , along with the senior campaign staff , had thought they were going to win up until polls closed that evening and returns started coming in . Ann cried as her husband concluded their chances were over , then appeared stricken as she went on stage with him following his concession speech . 
 = = Subsequent activities = = 
 Following the election , Ann Romney received an offer to appear on the spring 2013 season of Dancing with the Stars , but although she was a fan of the show , she declined : " I would 've loved to have done it , and I am turning 64 , and I started thinking about it . I 'm not really as flexible as I should be . " She still mourned the election loss , perhaps more than her husband did . In a late February 2013 interview , she said , " And you know , the other part of it was an amazing thing , and it was really quite a lot of energy and a lot of passion and a lot of – a lot of people around us and all of a sudden , it was nothing , " then adding , " But the good news is we like each other . " In October 2013 , she published , and made promotional appearances for , The Romney Family Table : Sharing Home @-@ Cooked Recipes & Favorite Traditions , a cookbook that made the New York Times Best Seller list . 
 Most of the couple 's time was spent seeing their grandchildren , who by 2015 numbered twenty @-@ three . They purchased a house in the Deer Valley area of Park City , Utah , in a return to that state , followed by a property capable of equestrian use in Holladay , Utah , where they plan to tear down an existing house and build a new one . The Romneys also gained long @-@ sought permission to replace their La Jolla home with a much bigger one . With the new acquisitions the couple briefly had five homes , located near each of their five sons and respective families . They then sold the condominium in Belmont and decided to make their main residence in Utah , including switching voter registration . 
 In 2014 , the Ann Romney Center for Neurological Diseases was opened at the Brigham and Women 's Hospital in Boston . With a fundraising goal of $ 50 million , the center was created to focus on research into Alzheimer 's disease , multiple sclerosis , Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , Parkinson 's disease , and brain tumors . The center has some 250 scientists and researchers on its staff . She gives inspirational talks based on overcoming the challenges of living with a disease . 
 During 2014 , speculation about Mitt Romney staging a third presidential run increased . Ann Romney 's reaction was to say it would not happen : " Done . Completely . Not only Mitt and I are done , but the kids are done . Done . Done . Done . " However , like her husband , she left open the slight possibility that things could change in this regard , and by January 2015 was reported by Romney advisors to be supporting the possibility as he seriously considered a third presidential bid . In any event , he soon decided against making a run . 
 In March 2015 , her book Whatever You Choose to Be : 8 Tips for the Road Ahead was published , based upon a commencement address she gave the year before at Southern Utah University . This was followed in September 2015 when her memoir In This Together : My Story was published . In it she discussed her diagnosis of multiple sclerosis , the different treatments she found beneficial , and the important role her family played . The book became popular among those afflicted with the disease . 
 During the course of the 2016 election cycle , Romney expressed sympathy toward Democratic front @-@ runner Hillary Clinton since she had also experienced claims of not being relatable . She was also puzzled by Republican front @-@ runner Donald Trump 's success despite touting his wealth whereas the Romneys had not , yet still were criticized for not relating to common voters because of theirs . Though highly critical of her husband after he spoke negatively of the Trump candidacy in March 2016 , Trump praised Ann Romney as " a lovely woman " . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 In 2005 , Ann Romney received an honorary degree from Mount Ida College . In 2006 , she received the MS Society Inspiration Award from the Central New England Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and the 2006 Lifetime Achievement Award from Salt Lake City @-@ based Operation Kids . In May 2008 , she shared with her husband the Canterbury Medal from The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty , for " refus [ ing ] to compromise their principles and faith " during that year 's presidential campaign . In 2014 , Romney received an honorary degree in public service from Southern Utah University , for " her contributions of time , funding and support on behalf of children and families . " 
 = French ironclad Thétis = 
 The French ironclad Thétis was a wooden @-@ hulled armored corvette built for the French Navy in the late 1860s . She was named for the Greek sea @-@ goddess Thetis . During the Franco @-@ Prussian War she was assigned to a squadron of French ships that attempted to blockade the Prussian ports in the Baltic Sea in 1870 . She accidentally rammed her sister Reine Blanche in 1877 . En route to the Pacific in 1884 her propeller fell off and she had to return to France under sail . Thétis was eventually hulked in New Caledonia . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Alma @-@ class ironclads were designed as improved versions of the armored corvette Belliqueuse suitable for foreign deployments . Unlike their predecessor the Alma @-@ class ships were true central battery ironclads as they were fitted with armored transverse bulkheads . Like most ironclads of their era they were equipped with a metal @-@ reinforced ram . 
 Thétis measured 69 @.@ 03 meters ( 226 ft 6 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 13 meters ( 46 ft 4 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 26 meters ( 20 ft 6 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 569 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 513 long tons ) . Her crew numbered 316 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . On sea trials the engine produced 1 @,@ 676 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 250 kW ) and the ship reached 11 @.@ 99 knots ( 22 @.@ 21 km / h ; 13 @.@ 80 mph ) . Unlike all of her sisters except Jeanne d 'Arc , she had two funnels , mounted side @-@ by @-@ side . Thétis carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal which allowed the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 620 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 860 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 453 square meters ( 15 @,@ 640 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Thétis mounted her four 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 breech @-@ loading guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 194 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship . The four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were also mounted on the upper deck . She may have exchanged her Mle 1864 guns for Mle 1870 guns . The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 20 @-@ caliber Mle 1870 gun weighed 165 @.@ 3 pounds ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Thétis had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , backed by 240 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of wood . The unarmored portions of her sides were protected by 15 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Thétis , named for the Greek sea @-@ goddess Thetis , was laid down at Toulon in 1865 and launched on 22 August 1867 . The ship began her sea trials on 1 May 1868 and was put into reserve at Brest the following year . She was commissioned on 20 July 1870 for the Franco @-@ Prussian War and assigned to the Northern Squadron . On 24 July 1870 she departed Cherbourg in company with the rest of the Northern Squadron and they cruised off the Danish port of Frederikshavn between 28 July and 2 August until they entered the Baltic Sea . The squadron , now renamed the Baltic Squadron , remained in the Baltic , attempting to blockade Prussian ports on the Baltic until ordered to return to Cherbourg on 16 September . The ship was assigned to the Evolutionary Squadron in 1871 and detached to the Levant Squadron the following year . 
 During the Cantonal Revolution Thétis and her sister Reine Blanche spent much of September – October 1873 in the port of Cartagena , Spain where they could protect French citizens . She became the temporary flagship of Vice Admiral Roze after 31 October 1875 when the armored frigate Magenta caught fire and exploded in Toulon . Thétis was paid off on 1 March 1876 , but was recommissioned on 18 April 1877 for service with the Evolutionary Squadron . 
 On 3 July 1877 she accidentally rammed Reine Blanche who had to be run ashore to prevent her from sinking . The ship was in reserve between 1878 and 1881 although she was intended to be used as the flagship of the Pacific Squadron . Her sister Montcalm was sent instead . On 8 October 1885 she was commissioned as the flagship of Rear Admiral Marcq de St. Hilaire and sailed for the Pacific . Thétis lost her propeller off Madeira and had to return to Cherbourg under sail where the admiral transferred his flag to the Champlain . She ended her days as a hulk in Nouméa , New Caledonia . 
 = Gwoyeu Romatzyh = 
 Gwoyeu Romatzyh ( pinyin : <unk> <unk> , literally " National Language Romanization " ) , abbreviated GR , is a system for writing Mandarin Chinese in the Latin alphabet . The system was conceived by Y. R. Chao ( Zhao <unk> ) and developed by a group of linguists including Chao and Lin Yutang from 1925 to 1926 . Chao himself later published influential works in linguistics using GR . In addition a small number of other textbooks and dictionaries in GR were published in Hong Kong and overseas from 1942 to 2000 . 
 GR is the better known of the two romanization systems which indicate the four tones of Mandarin by varying the spelling of syllables ( " tonal spelling " ) . These tones are as fundamental to the Chinese language as vowels are to English ; their presence lets speakers discriminate between otherwise identical syllables and words . Other systems indicate the tones with either diacritics ( for example Pinyin : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) or numbers ( Wade – Giles : <unk> , <unk> , etc . ) . GR spells the same four tones ai , air , ae and ay . These spellings , which follow specific rules , indicate the tones while retaining the pronunciation of the syllable ai . 
 Chao claimed that , because GR embeds the tone of each syllable in its spelling , it may help students to master Chinese tones . One study however , found the opposite to be true in a study of GR . GR uses a complicated system of tonal spelling that obscures the basic relationship between spelling and tone ; for example , the difference between tones 1 and 2 is variously indicated as <unk> vs. ma , ching vs. <unk> , chang vs. <unk> , etc . Although tonal spelling has been adopted as part of the normal romanization of a number of Asian languages ( e.g. Hmong ) , all such systems indicate different tones in a simple and consistent fashion by adding letters to the end of a syllable ( e.g. in Hmong , <unk> indicates high tone , -s indicates low tone , <unk> indicates high @-@ falling tone , etc . ) . 
 In 1928 China adopted GR as the nation 's official romanization system . GR was used to indicate pronunciations in dictionaries of the National ( Mandarin @-@ based ) Language . Its proponents hoped one day to establish it as a writing system for a reformed Chinese script . But despite support from a small number of trained linguists in China and overseas , GR met with public indifference and even hostility due to its complexity . Another obstacle preventing its widespread adoption was its narrow basis on the Beijing dialect , in a period lacking a strong centralized government to enforce its use . Eventually GR lost ground to Pinyin and other later romanization systems . However , its influence is still evident , as several of the principles introduced by its creators have been used in romanization systems that followed it . Its pattern of tone spelling was retained in the standard spelling of the Chinese province of Shaanxi ( <unk> ) , which cannot be distinguished from Shanxi ( <unk> ) when written in pinyin without diacritics . 
 = = History = = 
 Tonal spelling , Gwoyeu Romatzyh 's most distinctive feature , was first suggested to <unk> Chao by Lin Yutang . By 1922 Chao had already established the main principles of GR . The details of the system were developed in 1925 – 1926 by a group of five linguists , led by Chao and including Lin , under the auspices of the Preparatory Commission for the Unification of the National Language . In 1928 GR was officially adopted by the government . GR was intended to be used alongside the existing <unk> ( <unk> ) phonetic symbols : hence the alternative name for GR , " Second Pattern of the National Alphabet . " Both systems were used to indicate the revised standard of pronunciation in the new official Vocabulary of National Pronunciation for Everyday Use of 1932 . The designers of GR had greater ambitions : their aim was complete reform of the script , using GR as a practical system of writing . 
 In the 1930s two shortlived attempts were made to teach GR to railway workers and peasants in <unk> and <unk> provinces . Support for GR , being confined to a small number of trained linguists and Sinologists , " was distinguished more for its quality than its quantity . " During this period GR faced increasing hostility because of the complexity of its tonal spelling . Conversely , Sinologist Bernhard <unk> criticised GR for its lack of phonetic rigour . Ultimately , like the rival ( toneless ) system <unk> <unk> , GR failed to gain widespread support , principally because the " National " language was too narrowly based on Beijing speech : " a sufficiently precise and strong language norm had not yet become a reality in China " . 
 A vestigial use of GR can be seen in the official spelling of the first syllable of Shaanxi for <unk> province , to distinguish it from <unk> province , particularly in foreign @-@ language text where the tone marks are often omitted . Some prominent Chinese have used GR to <unk> their names : for example the mathematician <unk> @-@ Shen Chern . The romanization system was changed by the government of the People 's Republic of China in 1958 to the current system used now in the country , and other foreign and international institutions , like the United Nations , the Library of Congress , the International Organization for Standardization , and is widely used to teach Mandarin Chinese to foreign students : Hanyu Pinyin . Meanwhile , in the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) , GR survived until the 1970s as a pronunciation aid in monolingual dictionaries such as Gwoyeu <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] and <unk> [ <unk> ] , but was officially replaced in 1986 by a modified form known as Mandarin Phonetic Symbols II . 
 = = Description = = 
 Note : In this section the word " tone " is abbreviated as " T " : thus T1 stands for Tone 1 ( first tone ) , etc . To assist readers unfamiliar with GR , Pinyin equivalents have been added in brackets . 
 = = = Basic forms ( Tone 1 ) = = = 
 An important GR innovation , later adopted by Pinyin , was to use contrasting unvoiced / voiced pairs of consonants from Latin to represent aspirated and unaspirated sounds in Chinese . For example b and p represent / p / and / pʰ / ( p and p ‘ in Wade ) . Another distinctive feature of GR is the use of j , ch , and sh to represent two different series of sounds . When followed by i these letters correspond to the alveolo @-@ palatal sounds ( Pinyin j , q , and x ) ; otherwise they correspond to the retroflex sounds ( Pinyin zh , ch , and sh ) . Readers used to Pinyin need to pay particular attention to these spellings : for example , GR ju , jiu , and <unk> correspond to Pinyin zhu , ju , and jiu respectively . 
 GR orthography has these additional notable features : 
 iu represents the close front rounded vowel / y / spelled ü or in many cases simply u in Pinyin . 
 Final -y represents the [ ɨ ] allophone of i : GR shy and sy correspond to Pinyin shi and si respectively . 
 el corresponds to Pinyin er ( -r being reserved to indicate <unk> ) . The most important use of - ( e ) l is as a <unk> suffix , as in ideal = i dean + - ( e ) l , " a little " ( <unk> ) . 
 A number of frequently occurring morphemes have abbreviated spellings in GR . The commonest of these are : <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , -m ( <unk> ) , sh ( shi ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Tonal modifications = = = 
 By default , the basic GR spelling described above is used for <unk> syllables . The basic form is then modified to indicate tones 2 , 3 and 4 . This is accomplished in one of three ways : 
 either a vowel is changed to another vowel resembling it in sound ( i to y , for example , or u to w ) 
 or a letter is doubled 
 or a silent letter ( r or h ) is added after the vowel . 
 Wherever possible the concise first method is used . The following rules of thumb cover most cases . 
 Tone 1 ( basic form ) 
 <unk> , chuan , chang , hai , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Tone 2 : i / u → y / w ; or add -r 
 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , hair , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , cháng , <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Tone 3 : i / u → e / o ; or double vowel 
 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , bao ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Tone 4 : change / double final letter ; or add -h 
 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , hay , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Neutral tone : precede with a dot ( full stop ) 
 <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 Exception Syllables with an initial sonorant ( l- / <unk> / n- / <unk> ) use the basic form for T2 rather than T1 . In these syllables the ( rarer ) T1 is marked with <unk> as the second letter . For example <unk> is T1 ( <unk> ) , whereas ma is T2 ( <unk> ) . T3 and T4 are regular : maa ( mǎ ) and mah ( mà ) . 
 = = Compounds as words = = 
 An important principle of GR is that syllables which form words should be written together . This strikes speakers of European languages as obvious ; but in Chinese the concept of " word " is not easy to pin down . The basic unit of speech is popularly thought to be the monosyllable represented by a character ( 字 <unk> , zì ) , which in most cases represents a meaningful syllable or morpheme , a smaller unit than the " linguistic word " . Characters are written and printed with no spaces between words ; yet in practice most Chinese words consist of two @-@ syllable compounds , and it was Chao 's bold innovation in 1922 to reflect this in GR orthography by grouping the appropriate syllables together into words . This represented a radical departure from hyphenated Wade – Giles forms such as <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( the Wade spelling of GR ) . 
 = = Use in published texts = = 
 Chao used GR in four influential works : 
 A Concise Dictionary of Spoken Chinese ( in collaboration with Lien Sheng Yang ) ( 1947 ) 
 Mandarin Primer ( 1948 ) 
 This course was originally used in the Army Specialized Training Program at the Harvard School for Overseas Administration in 1943 – 1944 and subsequently in civilian courses . 
 A Grammar of Spoken Chinese ( <unk> ) 
 " Sayable " in this context means colloquial , as opposed to the vernacular Chinese ( <unk> , Pinyin <unk> ) style often read by students . 
 Readings in Sayable Chinese was written " to supply the advanced student of spoken Chinese with reading matter which he can actually use in his speech . " It consists of three volumes of Chinese text with facing GR romanization . They contain some lively recorded dialogues , " Fragments of an autobiography , " two plays and a translation of Lewis Carroll 's Through the Looking @-@ Glass ( <unk> daw <unk> <unk> ) . Two extracts from <unk> daw <unk> <unk> with facing translations can be read online . 
 In 1942 Walter Simon introduced GR to English @-@ speaking sinologists in a special pamphlet , The New Official Chinese Latin Script . Over the remainder of the 1940s he published a series of textbooks and readers , as well as a Chinese @-@ English Dictionary , all using GR . His son Harry Simon later went on to use GR in scholarly papers on Chinese linguistics . 
 In 1960 <unk> Liu , a colleague of Walter Simon 's at SOAS , published Fifty Chinese Stories . These selections from classical texts were presented in both classical and modern Chinese , together with GR romanizations and romanized Japanese versions prepared by Simon ( by that time Professor Emeritus of Chinese in the University of London ) . 
 Lin Yutang 's Chinese @-@ English dictionary ( 1972 ) incorporated a number of innovative features , one of which was a simplified version of GR . Lin eliminated most of the spelling rules requiring substitution of vowels , as can be seen from his spelling <unk> Romatzyh , in which the regular -r is used for T2 and a doubled vowel for T3 . 
 The first 3 issues of the Shin <unk> magazine ( which would be Xin Tang in Pinyin ; published in 1982 @-@ 1989 ) used a Simplified Romanisation ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) based on Gwoyeu Romatzyh ; the fourth edition , entitled Xin <unk> , used Pinyin with Gwoyeu Romatzyh @-@ like tone marking . 
 The simplified GR tone marking method is also used in <unk> ' Pinyin reading materials . 
 = = Language learning = = 
 Most learners of Chinese now start with Hanyu Pinyin , which Chao himself believed easier to learn than GR . Chao believed that the benefit of GR was to make tonal differences more salient to learners : 
 For example , it may be easier to memorize the difference between GR <unk> ( the city ) and <unk> ( " background " ) than the Pinyin versions <unk> and <unk> , where the tones seem to be almost an afterthought . One study conducted at the University of Oregon in 1991 – 1993 , compared the results of using Pinyin and GR in teaching elementary level Chinese to two matched groups of students , and concluded that " GR did not lead to significantly greater accuracy in tonal production . " 
 GR continues to be used by some teachers of Chinese . In 2000 , the Princeton Chinese Primer series was published in both GR and Pinyin versions . 
 = = Example = = 
 Here is an extract from <unk> Chao 's Sayable Chinese . The topic is scholarly ( " What is <unk> ? " ) , but the style colloquial . The tonal spelling markers or " clues " are again highlighted using the same colour @-@ coding scheme as above . Versions in Chinese characters , Pinyin and English are given below the GR text . 
 = Provenance ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Provenance " is the ninth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 3 , 2002 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Kim Manners . " Provenance " helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology . The episode received a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 5 and was watched by 5 @.@ 8 million households and 9 @.@ 7 million viewers . It received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on special agents of the FBI who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , when rubbings from the spaceship resurface the FBI hides its investigation from the X @-@ Files . Meanwhile , Scully is forced to take drastic measures when she discovers a threat to William . 
 " Provenance " introduced the character of the Toothpick Man , played by Alan Dale . This character became the leader of the New Syndicate and worked within the FBI during the show 's ninth season . The episode makes reference to rubbings from an alien wreck , a direct continuation from the plots of the sixth season finale " Biogenesis " and the seventh season opener " The Sixth Extinction " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Navajo rubbings are found in the satchel of a motorcyclist who crashed while attempting to cross the Canada – United States border . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is called into a meeting with Alvin Kersh ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , Brad Follmer ( Cary Elwes ) and a few unknown men . She is shown a copy of the rubbings and is asked whether she can identify them . After the meeting , Scully explains to John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) that the rubbings are similar to ones she found on a wrecked spacecraft three years prior . Meanwhile , the motorcyclist uses an alien artifact which begins to heal the wounds from his crash . 
 Meanwhile , in Alberta , Canada , a downed spacecraft is being excavated under the direction of Josepho , the leader of a UFO religion . At the FBI , Doggett breaks into Skinner 's office and steals the rubbings , along with an FBI personnel file belonging to Agent Robert Comer , the motorcyclist . Reyes reveals that Comer 's rubbings do not match those from Africa , suggesting the existence of a second craft . Meanwhile , Comer goes to Scully 's apartment , overpowers Margaret Scully ( Sheila Larken ) and locks himself in William 's room . Scully arrives and , after a struggle , is forced to shoot Comer when he tries to smother the baby . 
 The mortally wounded Comer tells Scully that William " has to die " . Scully searches Comer 's jacket and discovers the artifact . Later , in Calgary , one of the cultists , the Overcoat Woman , sees a newspaper headline about Comer 's shooting ; she rushes to the dig site and informs Josepho . In Washington , Kersh admits to Scully and Doggett that Comer had gone undercover into Josepho 's cult , and reveals that Josepho is a former U.S. military officer . Kersh explains that Comer was given the assignment to investigate a series of death threats against Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . 
 As Reyes brings William back to Scully 's apartment , Comer 's artifact flies over William and hovers above his head . Scully , realizing something is wrong , plans to drive William to somewhere safe . At the same time , Doggett notices the Overcoat Woman watching them nearby . As Scully and Reyes drive away , Doggett confronts the woman at gunpoint , but she runs him over . Scully places William under the care of The Lone Gunmen , but they are soon ambushed by the Overcoat Woman . With Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) and Richard Langly ( Dean Haglund ) incapacitated , the woman opens the back door of the van to find John Fitzgerald Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) holding William . The woman puts a gun to Byers ' head . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Provenance " was written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Kim Manners . Manners was very pleased with Anderson 's performance in the episode . He later noted , " There was something about Gillian that was very sexual . " He further elaborated , " There 's some burning within her that really comes across on screen . She really is brilliant , and she brings so much ; the camera loves her . " A large portion of the episode was based on the ancient astronaut theory ; a theory that proposes intelligent extraterrestrial beings have visited Earth in antiquity or prehistory and made contact with humans . The themes had previously been visited in the " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " story arc . 
 The episode marked the first appearance of Alan Dale as the Toothpick Man , the leader of the New Syndicate who works within the FBI . An interview with Digital Spy described him as " effectively [ stepping ] into the nicotine @-@ stained chair of the departed Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) as the head of a shady new syndicate , although he was later exposed as an alien . " Laura Leigh Hughes makes her third and final appearance as Kersh 's Assistant . She had previously appeared in the sixth season episodes " Triangle " and " Dreamland . " 
 The scenes in Calgary were actually shot in the back of the Universal Studios lot in Los Angeles . In order to convert the Los Angeles cityscape into Calgary 's , Mat Beck created a matte of the shot ; the background buildings were then edited out . A separate shot of Calgary was superimposed in the background and the scenes were mixed . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Provenance " first premiered on the Fox network in the United States on March 3 , 2002 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 5 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 5 % of the nation 's estimated households and was viewed by 5 @.@ 8 million households . " Provenance " was viewed by 9 @.@ 7 million viewers and was the 61st most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 3 . The episode eventually aired on BBC Two on January 12 , 2003 . " Provenance " was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 " Provenance " received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity awarded the episode an A – grade . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it a 9 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was a powerfully intense episode with plenty of strong characterization and ties to former continuity . In short , this episode had something for everyone . I only hope that the next episode manages to live up to this beginning . " Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk concluded that " Provenance " , along with its follow @-@ up " Providence " , " does a fairly good job without including Duchovny " due to its adherence to " the series ' main storyline [ about ] the government conspiracies . " 
 Other reviews were more negative . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two noted that Anderson was constantly playing " a mother who 's always crying , shouting or looking miserable " in the episode . They wrote that the episode 's " characters no longer make sense " and that the plot has " been so required to dance through the little conspiracy hoops that there 's no consistency any more . " Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson criticized the idea to suggest that Mulder died in the episode , due to the fact that Carter announced Duchovny would return for the season finale . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , criticised the plot of the episode , saying that it " throws up many elements that we 've seen the series do better elsewhere ... in the hope that something will stick " . 
 = Faryl Smith = 
 Faryl Smith ( born 23 July 1995 ) is a British mezzo @-@ soprano who rose to fame after appearing on the second series of the ITV television talent show Britain 's Got Talent in 2008 . She received praise throughout the competition , and although the favourite to win after the second round , she finished outside the top three in the live final on 31 May . During the competition , she was tutored by singing coach Yvie Burnett and received offers from various record labels . After the show , she , unlike other finalists , did not sign with Simon Cowell 's Syco , although she did appear on fellow finalist Andrew Johnston 's debut album , One Voice . 
 Smith signed a contract with Universal Classics and Jazz for a £ 2 @.@ 3 million advance in December 2008 , the largest ever granted to a schoolgirl . Her debut album , Faryl , was recorded from December 2008 to January 2009 and released in March 2009 . Faryl became the fastest @-@ selling solo classical album in British chart history , selling 29 @,@ 200 copies in the first week . It debuted at number six and rose to number four the following week , making Smith the third Britain 's Got Talent contestant to have a top ten album . In 2010 , on account of Faryl , Smith was nominated for two Classical BRIT Awards and became the youngest artist ever to receive a double nomination . 
 Smith 's second album , Wonderland , was released in November 2009 . A concept album based on Alice in Wonderland , the album was well received by critics , but was not successful in the charts . After the release of Wonderland , Smith 's contract with Universal ended . In addition to releasing her albums , she featured on a charity cover of " The Prayer " , released in March 2010 , provided vocals for the 2012 album The Magic of a Thousand Strings by the International Harp Ensemble , and has performed at numerous events , including the 2009 Royal Variety Performance . Smith currently attends the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London , where she is studying music . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Britain 's Got Talent = = = 
 Before her appearance on television , Smith had performed competitively in the Kettering , Northamptonshire Eisteddfod , the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod , the Pontins Junior <unk> competition and Festival 4 Stars . She auditioned for the second series of the ITV reality show Britain 's Got Talent , giving what Jon O 'Brien , of Allmusic , called a " mature " performance of " Ave Maria " , and was put through to the live shows . Simon Cowell described her audition as " the best audition I 've heard in years " . Before performing live , she and Andrew Johnston were favourites to win . She won her semi @-@ final by the public vote , performing a cover of Sarah McLachlan 's " Angel " . This placed her in the final , and left her as the favourite to win . During her first live show , Cowell described her as " literally one in a million " . She then performed in the live final , where she was described by Cowell as one of the five acts ( along with George Sampson , Johnston , Signature and Kate and Gin ) who had a chance of winning . She again performed " Ave Maria " , but finished outside the top three . Sampson eventually won the show as a result of the phone @-@ in , with Signature second , and Johnston third . As a result of her final performance of " Ave Maria " , Smith was invited to be a guest singer at a songwriting awards ceremony in London . She then went on to perform in the Britain 's Got Talent Live Tour with other contestants , where she first performed a duet of " Walking in the Air " with Johnston . 
 While Smith was competing in Britain 's Got Talent , Cowell arranged for her to receive free singing lessons from leading vocal coach Yvie Burnett , who had previously coached 2007 <unk> Got Talent winner Paul Potts and 2006 The X Factor winner Leona Lewis . The story was broken by The Sunday Mirror ; writing for the paper , Lara Gould characterised the lessons as " secret " , while writers for The Daily Mail claimed that the lessons were " likely to upset fellow contestants " , and were evidence that Smith was " already being groomed for stardom " . During her participation in the competition , Smith was offered record deals , but she and her family turned them down . Her father , Tony Smith , said " We have had offers from people interested in Faryl . But when Simon Cowell , the big man , says your daughter is special , you listen . " Cowell described Smith 's potential career during the show , saying " I know she says Katherine [ Jenkins ] is her idol but she is far better than her . She is by far the most talented youngster I 've ever heard . When she opens her mouth her voice is just incredible . " 
 = = = Record deal = = = 
 The day after the Britain 's Got Talent finals , Max Clifford , speaking for Simon Cowell , said that it was " quite possible " that Cowell would be signing some of the finalists , including Smith . Though she did not sign with Syco , Cowell 's record label , she did record a duet of " Walking in the Air " with Johnston , which appeared on his debut album , One Voice , and was tipped as a potential Christmas number @-@ one . Before the release of One Voice , it was revealed that Smith and her father , Tony Smith , were finalising the details of her record deal . In November , it was announced that Smith would be performing on stage in Kettering with Sylvia Berryman , a vocal tutor who had worked with Smith prior to her appearance on Britain 's Got Talent . Smith said that she was " really looking forward to singing locally again " , and it was again reported that Smith hoped to soon sign her own record deal . 
 In December 2008 the Daily Mail reported that Smith had signed a £ 2 @.@ 3 million , multi @-@ album deal with Universal Music Group that was the " most lucrative recording contract ever handed to a schoolgirl " . Smith said " I 'm honoured to be joining such a fantastic record company , especially since it 's where [ Jenkins ] started . " Dickon Stainer , speaking on behalf of Universal , said " as soon as we saw Faryl , it became an ambition to sign her . " Universal claimed it intended to market Smith as a pop star . Smith signed the contract at the Royal Albert Hall , following which she performed with Katherine Jenkins . Neil Fisher , writing for The Times , described Smith as " heir apparent " to Jenkins ; the pair had first met when Smith won a competition at the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod . By 2009 , Jenkins was acting as a mentor to Smith . 
 In January 2009 plans were released for Smith to perform with Plácido Domingo , an idea originally suggested by him . In an interview with the Metro , Smith talked about her future plans , insisting that she did not wish to be dubbed as the next Charlotte Church . She later said that " In the papers , it sounded like I was snobby when I said ' I don 't want to be like Charlotte Church ' , but I didn 't mean it like that . " She has also spoken of her desire to appear in films on top of her musical career . She said " Films and movies are something I 'd really like to do . I 've always wanted to act so doing a film would be amazing . " 
 = = = Faryl = = = 
 Smith 's first album , Faryl , was recorded at Air Studios , London , in December 2008 , during Smith 's Christmas holiday ; it was completed on 3 January 2009 and features a 60 @-@ piece orchestra . Smith described the song " River of Light " by saying that The Blue Danube " music now has words put to it . I like it because it 's different . Everyone knows the tune and everybody has got high hopes for it . " Smith said that her favourite song on the album was her version of the Welsh hymn , " Calon Lân " . Other songs include Smith 's version of " Amazing Grace " , a cover of John Denver 's " Annie 's Song " , and a version of " The Way Old Friends Do " , rewritten for Smith by Björn Ulvaeus . Smith spoke about the song , saying " It was about divorce ... They didn 't think it was appropriate for me to sing about that , so Björn changed the lyrics so it 's about friendship . " The album was produced by Jon Cohen , who had previously worked with artists including the <unk> and Vanessa Mae . 
 Promotion began in January , with performances at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel and appearances at the debut of 2009 London revival of Oliver ! . A television advert and music video for " River of Light " were recorded to further publicise the release , and Smith appeared on the cover of April 's Classic FM Magazine . More promotional appearances in the weeks leading up to the release of Faryl included Loose Women , The Paul O 'Grady Show , BBC Radio 4 , Radio Five Live and BBC Breakfast . She also appeared at the Children 's Champion Awards and met Gordon Brown at 10 Downing Street . On the day of the release , there was an album signing in Smith 's hometown of Kettering , at the HMV branch . Smith said " I definitely want to be at home for the launch . I want to be surrounded by my friends and family because obviously , it 's a big deal for me . " 
 Pete Paphides , writing for The Times , said that the songs were performed " with power and restraint " and that the " arrangements by Jon Cohen suggest some kind of aesthetic endeavour beyond the basic thing for which they exist " . He compared it favourably to three other Mothering Sunday releases : Lionel Richie 's Just Go , Ronan Keating 's Songs for My Mother and Barry Manilow 's The Greatest Songs of the Eighties . He awarded Faryl 3 out of a possible 5 , the highest rating of the four . Retailers in the United Kingdom ordered more than 80 @,@ 000 copies of the album in the week before release , which Simon Cable , writing for the Daily Mail , noted was more copies than U2 's recent No Line on the Horizon . It also topped the Amazon.co.uk presale chart . On the day of the release the album was at the number one spot on the UK Albums Chart , based on presales alone . The album became the fastest @-@ selling classical solo album in British history , selling 20 @,@ 000 copies in the first four days . The previous record holder had been Hayley Westenra 's Pure . The first week resulted in sales of 29 @,@ 200 copies , which is higher than any other debut album of a classical singer . Faryl officially entered the charts at number six and rose to fourth place the next week . The success of the album left Smith the third Britain 's Got Talent contestant to achieve a top ten album , after Potts ( with One Chance ) and Johnston ( with One Voice ) . 
 In April 2009 Smith travelled to Los Angeles to begin her promotion of Faryl in the United States . She appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in early May as part of her promotional tour . Faryl was released in the US on 5 May . Smith said before the release that she did not expect it to sell as well as it did in the UK . She said that " in the US it 's a lot harder because I 'm not as well @-@ known . " Smith travelled back to the UK in early May , and , on 23 May , Faryl peaked at 31st place on Top Heatseekers Albums chart and at sixth place on the Classical Albums chart , remaining in the charts for one and 17 weeks respectively . Smith opened the 2009 Classical BRIT Awards , where , according to Elisa Roche of the Daily Express , she " captivated the best names in classical music " . She is the youngest performer ever to sing at the Classical BRITs . On 30 May , Smith became the youngest person to sing the United Kingdom national anthem , " God Save The Queen " , at an FA Cup final when she performed during the opening ceremony at the 2009 final , held in the Wembley Stadium . In June , Smith performed a duet with José Carreras at the Hampton Court Palace Festival , and in July , she attended the O2 Silver Clef Awards , winning the Classical Award . 
 In February 2010 , after the release of Smith 's second album , Faryl was nominated for a Classical BRIT Award in the album category . The category is voted for by the public , and the shortlist comprises the ten best @-@ selling classical albums of the previous year . Faryl lost to Only Men Aloud 's Band of Brothers . Smith also lost in the young British classical performer category to Jack <unk> , a violinist . Smith became the youngest artist ever to receive a double nomination . In November , Smith was awarded the best classical award at the 2009 Variety Club awards , the youngest ever recipient in the awards ' 57 @-@ year history . 
 = = = Wonderland = = = 
 In July 2009 it was announced that Smith was hoping to release her second album later in the year . In an interview , she expressed surprise and pleasure that the label wanted her to do another album so soon after the first . In September , further details about the album were released , including its name , Wonderland , and planned release date , 30 November . Smith claimed that Faryl " was an introduction to me and an introduction for me to recording " , while Cohen , producer of both Faryl and Wonderland , said Smith had " matured as an artist since the first album and I have no doubt that once again , people will be astonished and moved by her performances " . The album , which was recorded at Sarm Studios in Notting Hill , London , was completed in early October , and is loosely based on Lewis Carroll 's Alice in Wonderland . Wonderland was released on 30 November . To publicise the album , Smith appeared on numerous radio shows , as well as television appearances including Ready Steady Cook , Blue Peter , the BBC News Channel , The Alan Titchmarsh Show and Sky News Sunrise . 
 Wonderland was well received by critics ; Paul Callan , reviewing the album for the Daily Express , described it as " a joy " . He compared it to other Christmas albums , saying that " [ t ] oo many are tired , much @-@ repeated carol selections . " He described Smith 's " control , tone and warmth " as " very moving " . Andy Gill , reviewing Wonderland for The Independent , gave a less positive review . He said that the influence of Alice in Wonderland was often hard to perceive and that Cohen and Smith had " sweetened the classical elements " . However , he praised the arrangements of " Adiemus " , " Barcarolle " , " Merry Christmas , Mr Lawrence " and " Blow The Wind Southerly " , but noted that on tracks including " Close To You " , " the lack of emotional weight is telling . " Overall , Gill gave Wonderland 3 out of 5 . However , the album failed to perform as well as Faryl ; it entered the British album charts at number 56 for the week ending 12 December before dropping to number 92 the following week and then out of the top 100 . After Wonderland , Smith 's contract with Universal ended , and she subsequently received less attention from the press . Smith described the break with the label as mainly her decision , as she needed to focus on her A levels , which would allow her to get to university , explaining in an interview that " It wasn 't like it ended horribly . " 
 Smith performed at the 2009 Royal Variety Performance in front of Queen Elizabeth II , where she sang " God Save the Queen " with The Soldiers . She later said that the experience , including subsequently meeting the Queen , as the highlight of her year . Smith also performed elsewhere with The Soldiers , including at St Paul 's Cathedral and Great Ormond Street Children 's Hospital . 
 = = = " The Prayer " and The Magic of a Thousand Strings = = = 
 In the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake , Smith and 22 other classical musicians from the UK recorded a cover version of " The Prayer " , which was released for download on 14 March . The proceeds of the single went to the Disasters Emergency Committee . Smith said " It 's a real honour to be a part of something that is being done for the first time , and I hope that all music lovers get involved and help raise money for the campaign . I really hope that we can make a difference together to help the horrible situation that Haiti is in at the moment . " The group , dubbed " Classical Band Aid " , recorded the track at Metropolis Studios and were backed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . Each vocalist in the group performed their own solo lines , and the entire group came together for the finale . " The Prayer " was the first ever classical charity single ; Smith noted that " Pop singers do things like this a lot but it 's unusual for classical singers to get involved so I 've been really excited . " 
 In the summer of 2010 Smith performed at various festivals and events . Her father stated that " because she is still so young , we don 't want her doing complete shows on her own and we don 't want her doing too much . " Appearances included the Mercedes @-@ Benz World Summer Concert in Weybridge on 4 July , That Glorious Noise charity concert in aid of muscular dystrophy in Cleethorpes on 17 July and the Last Night of the Kenwood Proms on 21 August , as well as the wedding of Eamonn Holmes and Ruth <unk> . Smith also opened the Serenata festival . Angela Young , reviewing the festival for the Bournemouth Daily Echo , said " Faryl Smith was my personal highlight of the Thursday night line @-@ up , her bizarrely powerful voice ( considering her diminutive size and age ) taking my breath away and it contrasted so well with her naivete as she said ' at least it 's not raining ' – just as the heavens opened . " 
 In October Smith performed for the first time in Ireland , at the National Concert Hall , Dublin . She continued to perform publicly throughout 2011 . In May , she performed at a Help for Heroes charity concert , which raised £ 2 @,@ 000 , and in both June and October , she performed at concerts to celebrate the 90th year of the Royal British Legion . She again appeared at the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod in July , where she sang with Russell Watson . Smith 's father described the appearance as " like a homecoming " , due to her previous appearance at the competition . In further charitable events later in the year , she raised £ 2 @,@ 700 for a hospice in <unk> , and performed in aid of the Salvation Army in Portsmouth . During the Christmas period , Smith performed for the Great Ormond Street Hospital Children 's Charity in their annual Christmas carol concert , and at the North Wales Choral Festival at Llandudno . She also appeared as a guest on Rhydian Roberts 's talent show on S4C in December . In 2012 , she performed with the Mousehole Male Voice Choir in Penzance , and in 2013 , she continued to perform locally in Kettering . 
 From 2012 – 3 , Smith performed several times with the International Harp Ensemble , a Surrey @-@ based group of harpists who produce a variety of different styles of harp music , including appearing with the group on a September episode of Songs of Praise . She also guest @-@ featured on the group 's 2012 album The Magic of a Thousand Strings , singing on five tracks . Further shows with the International Harp Ensemble were planned into 2014 . While working with the International Harp Ensemble , Smith began training with vocal coach Joy <unk> , who also teaches Lesley Garrett , as well as learning German and Italian , with the intention of moving from classical crossover towards opera . She continued to perform publicly in 2015 , singing at Wembley again in August . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith was born in Kettering , Northamptonshire , England , on 23 July 1995 . She originally attended Henry Gotch Primary School in Kettering and then became a student at Southfield School for Girls , although she received private tutoring while working . She completed her GCSEs in 2011 , and she studied for her A levels , with the intention of going to university afterwards . In 2015 , aged 20 , she started to study music at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London . 
 While at school , Smith enjoyed playing football ; she played for the Kettering Generals Under @-@ 11s girls ' team when they reached the <unk> League cup final , as well as for the club 's Under @-@ 13 girls . She attended a theatre club , played the guitar and piano and sang in two choirs , including the Masquerade Youth Choir . Smith 's father , Tony , is a health and safety inspector , and for a time worked full @-@ time overseeing Smith 's activities . Her mother , Linda , is a hairdresser , and she has an older brother , Shea . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = Episode 6 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 6 " , also known as " Realization Time " , is the seventh episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by Harley Peyton , and directed by Caleb Deschanel . " Episode 6 " features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Sherilyn Fenn and Eric Da Re , with guest appearances by Chris Mulkey and David Patrick Kelly . 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) agent Dale Cooper ( MacLachlan ) and Twin Peaks sheriff Harry Truman ( Ontkean ) continue to investigate a murder in the small mountain town of Twin Peaks ; while local businessman Benjamin Horne ( Beymer ) schemes to burn down the town 's sawmill to further his property empire . 
 Deschanel has noted that the episode , like most in the series , was filmed from a relatively short teleplay ; he feels that this has contributed to its ability to develop characterization and subtextual inferences in addition to advancing its narrative . Peyton has described writing dialogue for MacLachlan 's character Dale Cooper as being particularly tricky , though he found Fenn 's character Audrey Horne to be enjoyable to write for . First airing on May 17 , 1990 , " Episode 6 " was viewed by approximately 17 percent of the available audience during its broadcast . The episode has received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . FBI special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate , and initial suspicion has fallen upon Palmer 's boyfriend Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and the man with whom she was cheating on Briggs , James Hurley ( James Marshall ) . However , other inhabitants of the town have their own suspicions : the violent , drug @-@ dealing truck driver Leo Johnson ( Eric Da Re ) is seen as a possible suspect ; especially to his wife Shelley ( Mädchen Amick ) , who has found a bloodstained shirt among his belongings . Meanwhile , Cooper finds the possible scene of the murder , at the home of drug smuggler Jacques Renault ( Walter Olkewicz ) ; Renault 's myna bird is taken in as evidence . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Cooper returns to his hotel room to find Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) waiting in his bed ; he cautions her about being unable to get involved with her due to his position and goes to the hotel restaurant to get malts and fries for them both . The next morning he and Sheriff Truman ( Michael Ontkean ) plan to pay an undercover visit to One Eyed Jacks , a casino and brothel over the Canadian border , to which Renault is connected . They bring along Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) , with Cooper having requisitioned $ 10 @,@ 000 from the FBI to pass as high @-@ stakes gamblers . 
 Johnson , alive but injured , is spying on his own home , watching Briggs visit Shelley . Shelley is terrified that Johnson will return and kill her ; but Briggs reassures her he will take care of things . Johnson is also listening to a police radio in his truck , and hears that Renault 's myna bird is being considered a witness as its ability to mimic speech might provide a clue ; he drives off immediately . That night , he shoots the bird dead through the sheriff station 's window . However , a voice @-@ activated tape recorder had been left by the bird 's cage ; Cooper is able to find the words " Leo , no ! " among the phrases it had repeated that evening . 
 James Hurley , Donna Hayward ( Lara Flynn Boyle ) and Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) listen to cassette tapes found in Laura 's bedroom ; they are all monologues addressed to psychiatrist Laurence Jacoby ( Russ Tamblyn ) . One dated to the night of her death is missing ; the group plan to use Ferguson 's resemblance to Laura to distract Jacoby long enough to steal it from his office . Jacoby falls for the ruse long enough ; however , Hurley and Hayward are watched from afar by Briggs , who is in turn being spied on by an unseen party . Briggs hides a bag of cocaine in the gas tank of Hurley 's motorcycle . 
 Audrey , meanwhile , has begun working at her father 's department store , in a position both Laura and Pulaski occupied before their abduction . Audrey spies on another coworker being showered with gifts and offered a job in " hospitality " by the store 's manager , and later finds both Laura 's and Pulaski 's names in the manager 's private ledger . Having found an address for One Eyed Jacks , Audrey visits and applies under a false name . The brothel 's madam , Blackie O 'Reilly ( Victoria Catlin ) is hesitant to hire her but is convinced when Audrey ties a cherry stem in a knot with her tongue . 
 Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) learns that a new life insurance policy has been taken out in her name , by Josie Packard ( Joan Chen ) and Benjamin Horne ( Richard Beymer ) . Martell had been planning with Horne to burn down Packard 's sawmill in order to cheaply purchase the land it occupies . Packard speaks to Horne over the telephone , cooperating with the sawmill arson , but arranging to burn it down with Martell inside . As Packard hangs up , it is seen that the recently paroled killer Hank Jennings ( Chris Mulkey ) has been beside her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 6 " was the second of the series to be written by Harley Peyton , who had previously scripted " Episode 3 " ; Peyton returned to pen a number of other episodes across both seasons . The episode was directed by noted cinematographer Caleb Deschanel , who later helmed two episodes in the second season . 
 Each episode of Twin Peaks was written sequentially ; this allowed the overall plot to gather momentum as it progressed but allowed for the organic process of adding new elements as the writers thought of them ; a process favored by series co @-@ creator David Lynch . It also allowed Mark Frost , Lynch 's partner in creating the series , to plan ahead to ensure plot details and threads would be revisited as necessary . Deschanel recalls the teleplay for the episode being approximately 40 – 45 pages long , which he felt offered the show a " leisurely " pace compared to modern television episode , which are filmed from teleplays of up to 120 pages . This allowed the series to dwell on its subtext and unexpressed desires of its characters , rather than focusing solely on narrative action . Deschanel and Peyton have described the episode as exemplifying the need to " be a fan " of the series to fully enjoy it , as the progression and development of the characters occurs over multiple episodes and rewards the attention of a regular viewer . 
 Peyton has noted that the distinct personalities of the series ' characters meant that he considered some of them much more difficult to convincingly write for than others . He found Cooper to be particularly tricky to write for , as the character had an idiosyncratic view of the world which needed to be maintained ; but found Audrey Horne to be his favourite to work on as he considered the character — and actress Sherilyn Fenn — to be both sexy and smart , and to have developed substantially as the series progressed . The character of Madeline Ferguson was named for characters in Alfred Hitchcock 's 1958 film Vertigo — Kim Novak 's Madeleine Elster and James Stewart 's Scottie Ferguson . Ferguson 's cousin , the murdered schoolgirl Laura Palmer , was similarly named after the titular character in Otto Preminger 's 1944 film Laura ; while other characters in the series would also be named for film noir characters . 
 The popular " cherry stem " scene was inspired by an incident in Peyton 's life ; he had been dining with friends during the time he was writing the script when a female friend demonstrated to the group that she could knot a cherry stem with her tongue . Peyton immediately added this to the script , finding it fascinating that he could witness something on one day , write it the next , and two weeks later see newspapers discussing his version of it . Fenn has admitted that she was unable to actually perform the trick , simply switching the stem for a tied one already hidden in her mouth ; however , co @-@ star Mädchen Amick has since demonstrated it during television interviews . 
 Scenes filmed in the One Eyed Jacks casino and brothel were shot on location at a house on the shore of California 's <unk> Lake ; footage for several episodes were shot on the same day by different directors so as to scatter the scenes throughout the episodes that required them . Deschanel has expressed regret over the use of a " house style " in the series ' direction and cinematography , feeling that he lit certain scenes in this episode in a way he would not usually have done ; preferring to have employed a chiaroscuro use of shadow as opposed to the reddish tints used throughout . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 6 " was first broadcast on the ABC Network on May 17 , 1990 . In its initial airing , it was viewed by 10 @.@ 6 percent of US households , representing 17 percent of the available audience . This marked a slight decrease from the previous episode , which had attracted 11 @.@ 5 percent of the population and 18 percent of the available audience . " Episode 6 " was the fortieth most @-@ viewed broadcast that week , tying with Family Matters , which aired on the same network . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps rated the episode an " A − " , finding that the death of Waldo the myna bird acted as a summation of the tone of the series — noting that it " should be goofy but it 's completely chilling " . Phipps also compared the episode to Hitchcock 's Vertigo , describing it as he could " imagine Brian DePalma watching and wishing he 'd thought of first " . AllRovi 's Andrea LeVasseur awarded the episode four stars out of five . Daniel J. Blau of Television Without Pity found the scene featuring Waldo being shot to have been directed well ; Blau felt the minimal and straightforward approach taken was in stark contrast to the over @-@ the @-@ top direction taken by newer crew members in the series ' second season . 
 = Applesauce cake = 
 Applesauce cake is a dessert cake prepared using apple sauce , flour and sugar as primary ingredients . Various spices are typically used , and it tends to be a moist cake . Applesauce cake prepared with chunky @-@ style apple sauce may be less moist . Several additional ingredients may also be used in its preparation , and it is sometimes prepared and served as a coffee cake . The cake dates back to early colonial times in the United States . National Applesauce Cake Day occurs annually on June 6 in the U.S. 
 = = History = = 
 The preparation of applesauce cake dates back to early colonial times in the New England Colonies of the northeastern United States . From 1900 to the 1950s , recipes for applesauce cake frequently appeared in American cookbooks . In the United States , National Applesauce Cake Day occurs annually on June 6 . 
 = = Ingredients and preparation = = 
 Applesauce cake is a dessert cake prepared using apple sauce , flour and sugar as main ingredients . Store @-@ bought or homemade applesauce may be used in its preparation . Additional ingredients may include eggs , butter , margarine or oil , raisins and <unk> raisins , dates , chopped apple , chopped nuts ( such as walnuts and pecans ) , cocoa powder , and spices such as cinnamon , clove , nutmeg and allspice . Some versions include dried or fresh , finely grated ginger . After baking , applesauce cake is sometimes topped with an icing , frosting or glaze , such as a caramel glaze . It also may be served topped with a dusting of confectioner 's sugar or whipped cream . Gluten @-@ free applesauce cake may be prepared using rice flour . 
 Applesauce cake tends to be moist because of the liquid content present in the apple sauce . The use of a chunky @-@ style apple sauce can result in a cake with less moisture , compared to using standard apple sauce . Letting it sit for one or two days before serving can increase its flavor , as this allows time for the ingredients to intermingle within the cake . 
 It may be prepared using various types of cake pans , such as a ring @-@ shaped <unk> cake using a <unk> pan , in loaf form using a loaf pan , or as a sheet cake with a sheet cake pan . Applesauce cake is sometimes prepared in the form of cupcakes . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Applesauce cake may be prepared and served as a type of coffee cake , which may include a sweet crumb topping . Simple versions may be prepared using prepared coffee cake mix , apple sauce , and other various ingredients . Fruits such as blueberries , cranberries and raisins may also be used in applesauce coffee cake . 
 = Kelpie = 
 Kelpie , or water kelpie , is the Scots name given to a shape @-@ shifting water spirit inhabiting the lochs and pools of Scotland . It has usually been described as appearing as a horse , but is able to adopt human form . Some accounts state that the kelpie retains its hooves when appearing as a human , leading to its association with the Christian idea of Satan as alluded to by Robert Burns in his 1786 poem " Address to the <unk> " . 
 Almost every sizeable body of water in Scotland has an associated kelpie story , but the most extensively reported is that of Loch Ness . Parallels to the general Germanic neck and the Scandinavian <unk> have been observed . More widely , the <unk> of Central America and the Australian <unk> have been seen as counterparts . The origin of the belief in malevolent water horses has been proposed as originating in human sacrifices once made to appease gods associated with water , but narratives about the kelpie also served a practical purpose in keeping children away from dangerous stretches of water , and warning young women to be wary of handsome strangers . 
 Kelpies have been portrayed in their various forms in art and literature , most recently in two 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high steel sculptures in Falkirk , The Kelpies , completed in October 2013 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of the Scots word kelpie is uncertain , but it may be derived from the Gaelic <unk> or <unk> , meaning " heifer " or " colt " . The first recorded use of the term to describe a mythological creature , then spelled <unk> , appears in the manuscript of an ode by William Collins , composed some time before 1759 and reproduced in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh of 1788 . The place names Kelpie <unk> and Kelpie <unk> are reported in A Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue as appearing in the 1674 burgh records for Kirkcudbright . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 Douglas Harper , historian and founder of the Online Etymology Dictionary , defines kelpie as " the Lowland name of a demon in the shape of a horse " . It is the most common water spirit in Scottish folklore , but the name is attributed to several different forms in narratives recorded throughout the country . The late 19th century saw the onset of an interest in transcribing folklore , but the recorders were inconsistent in spelling and frequently anglicised words , which could result in differing names for the same spirits . 
 Commentators have disagreed over the kelpie 's aquatic habitat . Folklorists who define kelpies as spirits living beside rivers , as distinguished from the Celtic lakeside @-@ dwelling water horse ( each @-@ uisge ) , include 19th @-@ century minister of Tiree John Gregorson Campbell and 20th @-@ century writers Lewis Spence and Katharine Briggs . This distinction is not universally applied however ; Sir Walter Scott for instance claims that the kelpie 's range may extend to lochs . Mackillop 's dictionary reconciles the discrepancy , stating that the kelpie was " initially thought to inhabit ... streams , and later any body of water . " But the distinction should stand argues one <unk> , who suggests that people are led astray when an each uisge in a " common practice of translating " are referred to as kelpies in English accounts , and thus mistakenly attribute lake @-@ dwelling habits to the latter . 
 Others ascribe the term kelpie to a wide variety of mythical creatures . Counterparts in some regions of Scotland include the <unk> and nuggle of Shetland and the <unk> of Orkney ; in other parts of the United Kingdom they include the Welsh <unk> <unk> and the Manx <unk> @-@ ushtey . Parallels to the general Germanic neck and the Scandinavian <unk> have been observed ; Nick Middleton observes that " the kelpie of Scottish folklore is a direct parallel of the [ sic ] <unk> [ of Scandinavian folklore ] " . The <unk> of Central America and the Australian <unk> are seen as similar creatures in other parts of the world . 
 The mythological kelpie is usually described as a powerful and beautiful black horse inhabiting the deep pools of rivers and streams of Scotland , preying on any humans it encounters , One of the water @-@ kelpie 's common identifying characteristics is that its hooves are reversed as compared to those of a normal horse , a trait also shared by the <unk> of Iceland . An Aberdeenshire variation portrays the kelpie as a horse with a mane of serpents , whereas the resident equine spirit of the River Spey was white and could entice victims onto its back by singing . 
 The creature 's nature was described by Walter Gregor , a folklorist and one of the first members of the Folklore Society , as " useful " , " hurtful " , or seeking " human companionship " ; in some cases , kelpies take their victims into the water , devour them , and throw the entrails to the water 's edge . In its equine form the kelpie is able to extend the length of its back to carry many riders together into the depths , a common theme in the tales is of several children clambering onto the creature 's back while one remains on the shore . Usually a little boy , he then pets the horse but his hand sticks to its neck . In some variations the lad cuts off his fingers or hand to free himself ; he survives but the other children are carried off and drowned , with only some of their entrails being found later . Such a creature said to inhabit Glen <unk> in Perthshire is considered to be a kelpie by 20th @-@ century folklorist Katharine Mary Briggs , but a similar tale also set in Perthshire has an each uisge as the culprit and omits the embellishment of the young boy . The lad does cut his finger off when the event takes place in Thurso , where a water kelpie is identified as the culprit . The same tale set at <unk> in the Highlands gives a specific figure of nine children lost , of whom only the innards of one are recovered . The surviving boy is again saved by cutting off his finger , and the additional information is given that he had a Bible in his pocket . Gregorson Campbell considers the creature responsible to have been a water horse rather than a kelpie , and the tale " obviously a pious fraud to keep children from wandering on Sundays " . 
 Kelpie myths usually describe a solitary creature , but a fairy story recorded by John F. Campbell in Popular Tales of the West Highlands ( 1860 ) has a different perspective . Entitled Of the <unk> na <unk> or <unk> , which is given the translation of the bridge of the fairies or kelpies , it features a group of <unk> . The spirits had set about constructing a bridge over the Dornoch Firth after becoming tired of travelling across the water in <unk> . It was a magnificent piece of work resplendent with gold piers and posts , but sank into the water to become a treacherous area of quicksand after a grateful onlooker tried to bless the kelpies for their work . The same story is recorded by Folklore Society member and folklore collector Charlotte Dempster simply as The Kelpie 's Bridge ( 1888 ) with no mention of <unk> or <unk> . Quoting the same narrative Jennifer Westwood , author and folklorist , uses the descriptor water kelpies , adding that in her opinion " Kelpies , here and in a few other instances , is used in a loose sense to mean something like ' imps ' " . 
 Progeny resulting from a mating between a kelpie and a normal horse were impossible to drown , and could be recognised by their shorter than normal ears , a characteristic shared by the mythical water bull or tarbh uisge in Scottish Gaelic , similar to the Manx tarroo ushtey . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Kelpies have the ability to transform themselves into non @-@ equine forms , and can take on the outward appearance of human figures , in which guise they may betray themselves by the presence of water weeds in their hair . In their human form , kelpies are almost invariably male . One of the few stories describing the creature in female form is set at Conon House in Ross and Cromarty . It tells of a " tall woman dressed in green " , with a " withered , meagre countenance , ever distorted by a malignant scowl " , who overpowered and drowned a man and a boy after she jumped out of a stream . Gregor described a kelpie adopting the guise of a wizened old man continually muttering to himself while sitting on a bridge stitching a pair of trousers . Believing it to be a kelpie , a passing local struck it on the head , causing it to revert to its equine form and scamper back to its lair in a nearby pond . Other accounts describe the kelpie when appearing in human form as a " rough , shaggy man who leaps behind a solitary rider , gripping and crushing him " , or as tearing apart and devouring humans . 
 A folk tale from Barra tells of a lonely kelpie that transforms itself into a handsome young man to woo a pretty young girl it was determined to take for its wife . But the girl recognises the young man as a kelpie and removes his silver necklace ( his bridle ) while he sleeps . The kelpie immediately reverts to its equine form , and the girl takes it home to her father 's farm , where it is put to work for a year . At the end of that time the girl rides the kelpie to consult a wise man , who tells her to return the silver necklace . Once again transformed into the handsome young man she had first met the wise man asks the kelpie whether if given the choice it would choose to be a kelpie or a mortal . The kelpie in turn asks the girl whether , if he were a man , she would agree to be his wife . She confirms that she would , after which the kelpie chooses to become a mortal man , and the pair are married . 
 The arrival of Christianity in Scotland in the 6th century resulted in some folk stories and beliefs being recorded by scribes , usually Christian monks , instead of being perpetuated by word of mouth . Some accounts state that the kelpie retains its hooves even in human form , leading to its association with the Christian notion of Satan , just as with the Greek god Pan . Robert Burns refers to such a Satanic association in his " Address to the <unk> " ( 1786 ) : 
 = = = Capture and killing = = = 
 When a kelpie appeared in its equine persona without any tack , it could be captured using a halter stamped with the sign of a cross , and its strength could then be harnessed in tasks such as the transportation of heavy mill stones . One folk tale describes how the Laird of <unk> captured a kelpie and used it to carry stones to build his castle . Once the work was complete , the laird released the kelpie , which was evidently unhappy about its treatment . The curse it issued before leaving – " Sair back and sair <unk> / Drivin ' the Laird o ' <unk> 's <unk> , / The Laird o ' <unk> 'll never thrive / As lang 's the <unk> is alive " – was popularly believed to have resulted in the extinction of the laird 's family . Some kelpies were said to be equipped with a bridle and sometimes a saddle , and appeared <unk> ready to ride , but if mounted they would run off and drown their riders . If the kelpie was already wearing a bridle , exorcism might be achieved by removing it . A bridle taken from a kelpie was endowed with magical properties , and if brandished towards someone , was able to transform that person into a horse or pony . 
 Just as with cinematic werewolves , a kelpie can be killed by being shot with a silver bullet , after which it is seen to consist of nothing more than " turf and a soft mass like jelly @-@ fish " according to an account published by Spence . When a blacksmith 's family were being frightened by the repeated appearances of a water kelpie at their summer cottage , the blacksmith managed to render it into a " heap of starch , or something like it " by penetrating the spirit 's flanks with two sharp iron spears that had been heated in a fire . 
 = = Loch Ness = = 
 Almost every sizeable Scottish body of water has a kelpie story associated with it , but the most widely reported is the kelpie of Loch Ness . Several stories of mythical spirits and monsters are attached to the loch dating back to 6th @-@ century reports of Saint Columba defeating a monster there . The early 19th @-@ century kelpie that haunted the woods and shores of Loch Ness was tacked up with its own saddle and bridle . A fable attached to the notoriously nasty creature has the Highlander James MacGrigor taking it by surprise and cutting off its bridle , the source of its power and life , without which it would die within twenty @-@ four hours . As the kelpie had the power of speech , it attempted unsuccessfully to bargain with MacGrigor for the return of its bridle . After following MacGrigor to his home , the kelpie asserted that MacGrigor would be unable to enter his house while in possession of the bridle , because of the presence of a cross above the entrance door . But MacGrigor outwitted the creature by tossing the bridle through a window , so the kelpie accepted its fate and left , cursing and swearing . The myth is perpetuated with further tales of the bridle as it is passed down through the family . Referred to as " <unk> 's Ball and Bridle " , it had magical powers of healing ; a spell was made by placing the items in water while chanting " In the name of the Father , the Son and of the Holy Ghost " ; the water could then be used as a cure . 
 A popular and more recent explanation for the Loch Ness monster among believers is that it belongs to a line of long @-@ surviving plesiosaurs , but the kelpie myth still survives in children 's books such as Mollie Hunter 's The Kelpie 's Pearls ( 1966 ) and Dick King @-@ Smith 's The Water Horse ( 1990 ) . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Folklorist Gary R. Varner has suggested that the origin of the belief in water horses that preyed on and devoured humans may be a reflection of the human sacrifices once made to appease the gods of water . The association with horses may have its roots in horse sacrifices performed in ancient Scandinavia . Stories of malevolent water spirits served the practical purpose of keeping children away from perilous areas of water , and of warning adolescent women to be wary of attractive young strangers . The stories were also used to enforce moral standards , as they implied that the creatures took retribution for bad behaviour carried out on Sundays . The intervention of demons and spirits was possibly a way to rationalise the drowning of children and adults who had accidentally fallen into deep , fast flowing or turbulent water . 
 Historian and <unk> Charles Milton Smith has hypothesised that the kelpie myth might originate with the water spouts that can form over the surface of Scottish lochs , giving the impression of a living form as they move across the water . Sir Walter Scott alludes to a similar explanation in his epic poem The Lady of the Lake ( 1810 ) , which contains the lines 
 in which Scott uses " River Demon " to denote a " <unk> " . Scott may also have hinted at an alternative rational explanation by naming a treacherous area of quicksand " Kelpie 's Flow " in his novel The Bride of Lammermoor ( 1818 ) . 
 = = Artistic representations = = 
 Pictish stones dating from the 6th to 9th centuries featuring what has been dubbed the Pictish Beast may be the earliest representations of a kelpie or kelpie @-@ like creature . Other depictions show kelpies as poolside maidens , as in Draper 's 1913 oil on canvas . Thomas Millie Dow had also sketched the kelpie in 1895 as a melancholy dark @-@ haired maiden balanced on a rock , a common depiction for artists of the period . Folklorist Nicola Bown has suggested that painters such as Millie Dow and Draper deliberately ignored earlier accounts of the kelpie and reinvented it by altering its sex and nature . 
 Two 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high steel sculptures in Falkirk on the Forth and Clyde Canal , named The Kelpies , borrow the name of the mythical creature to associate with the strength and endurance of the horse ; designed by sculptor Andy Scott , they were built as monuments to Scotland 's horse @-@ powered industrial heritage . Construction was completed in October 2013 and the sculptures were opened for public access from April 2014 . 
 = The Boat Race 1869 = 
 The 26th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 17 March 1869 . Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes and 4 seconds . It was their ninth consecutive victory and was , at that point , the fastest time ever recorded in the event . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by six lengths in the previous year 's race and led overall with fifteen wins to Cambridge 's ten . 
 Having lost the last eight Boat Races , the Cambridge University Boat Club president William Anderson wrote to G. Morrison of Balliol College , Oxford , inviting him to coach the trials eights and the University eight . Morrison had rowed in the 1859 , 1860 and 1861 races and had also acted as a non @-@ rowing president for the 1862 race . The decision to engage a member of the opposing university was greeted with consternation and considered by many Cantabrigians as " a disgrace to the Club " . Indeed , five Old Blues refused to row , only William <unk> agreed to row again . After the usual difficulty to agree arrangements , Cambridge eventually sent the traditional challenge and the date of the race was set for 17 March 1869 . Cambridge arrived at Putney a fortnight beforehand and made several practice rows in variable conditions , the worst of which included heavy snow , three days prior to the race . 
 The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crewed weighed an average of 12 st 0 @.@ 25 lb ( 76 @.@ 1 kg ) , 2 @.@ 125 pounds ( 1 @.@ 0 kg ) more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew contained three returning Blues , William MacMichael , William Anderson ( for his third Boat Race ) and John Still ( his fourth ) , while Oxford saw the return of five rowers , including their boat club president J. C. <unk> for his third appearance and Frank Willan in his fourth Boat Race . 
 = = Race = = 
 According to The Field , " the weather was not the most agreeable for a boat @-@ race ... a raw wind ... leaden @-@ coloured clouds overhanging the river " . Oxford , who were strong pre @-@ race favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey station to Cambridge . Although the Light Blues made the faster start , Oxford soon pulled alongside them and by the London Rowing Club boathouse , held a lead of around 10 feet ( 3 m ) . Cambridge closed the gap but Oxford pulled away again . The lead was exchanged once again and Oxford took the lead at Craven Cottage . Despite erratic steering from Oxford 's cox Darbishire , Oxford held the advantage until the crews shot Hammersmith Bridge , at which point the Light Blues held the lead by one third of a length . 
 Still in the lead by The Doves pub , Cambridge steered too close to the bank and allowed Oxford to close the gap and passed Chiswick Eyot in the lead , with a half @-@ length advantage by Chiswick Church . The Dark Blues passed under Barnes Bridge with a two @-@ length lead and completed the course , passing the Ship Tavern three lengths clear in a time of 20 minutes 4 seconds . It was their ninth consecutive victory and took the overall record to 16 – 10 in their favour . The winning time was the fastest ever , beating the previous record set in 1868 by 52 seconds , although some doubt was cast over the positioning of the finish which was believed to have made the course approximately 100 yards ( 91 m ) shorter . The record would stand until the 1873 race . 
 = Black currawong = 
 The black currawong ( Strepera fuliginosa ) , also known locally as the black jay , is a large passerine bird endemic to Tasmania and the nearby islands within the Bass Strait . One of three currawong species in the genus Strepera , it is closely related to the butcherbirds and Australian magpie within the family Artamidae . It is a large crow @-@ like bird , around 50 cm ( 20 in ) long on average , with yellow irises , a heavy bill , and black plumage with white wing patches . The male and female are similar in appearance . Three subspecies are recognised , one of which , Strepera fuliginosa colei of King Island , is vulnerable to extinction . 
 Within its range , the black currawong is generally sedentary , although populations at higher altitudes relocate to lower areas during the cooler months . The habitat includes densely forested areas as well as alpine heathland . It is rare below altitudes of 200 m ( 660 ft ) . Omnivorous , it has a diet that includes a variety of berries , invertebrates , and small vertebrates . Less arboreal than the pied currawong , the black currawong spends more time foraging on the ground . It roosts and breeds in trees . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The black currawong was first described by ornithologist John Gould in 1836 as Cracticus fuliginosus , and in 1837 as <unk> fuliginosa . The specific epithet is the Late Latin adjective fuliginosus " sooty " from Latin <unk> " soot " , and refers to the black plumage . American ornithologist Dean Amadon regarded the black currawong as a subspecies of the pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) , seeing it as part of a continuum with subspecies ashbyi of the latter species , the complex having progressively less white plumage as one moves south . Subsequent authors have considered it a separate species , although Richard Schodde and Ian Mason describe it as forming a superspecies with the pied currawong . 
 Common names include black currawong , sooty currawong , black bell @-@ magpie , black or mountain magpie , black or sooty crow @-@ shrike , and <unk> . Black jay is a local name applied to the species within Tasmania . The species is often confused with the local dark @-@ plumaged subspecies of the grey currawong ( S. versicolor ) , known as the clinking currawong or hill magpie . 
 There are three subspecies of the black currawong : the nominate form Strepera fuliginosa fuliginosa of Tasmania ; Strepera fuliginosa parvior of Flinders Island , described by Schodde and Mason in 1999 ; and Strepera fuliginosa colei of King Island , described by Gregory Mathews in 1916 . The two island subspecies have identical plumage to the nominate , but are slightly smaller with shorter wings and tails , subspecies colei having a shorter tail than parvior . 
 Together with the pied and grey currawong , the black currawong forms the genus Strepera . Although crow @-@ like in appearance and habits , currawongs are only distantly related to true crows , and are instead closely related to the Australian magpie and the butcherbirds . The affinities of all three genera were recognised early on and they were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by ornithologist John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature . Ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between the woodswallows and the butcherbirds and relatives in 1985 , and combined them into a Cracticini clade , which later became the family Artamidae . 
 = = Description = = 
 The black currawong is about 50 cm ( 20 in ) long with an 80 cm ( 31 in ) wingspan . The male is slightly larger and heavier than the female ; males of the nominate subspecies average 405 g ( 14 @.@ 3 oz ) to females ' 340 g ( 12 oz ) . Male wings average around 27 cm ( 11 in ) and tails 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) , while female wings average 25 @.@ 8 cm ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) and tails 18 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 3 in ) . Data for the two island subspecies is limited , but males of subspecies colei have been measured at 360 and 398 g ( 12 @.@ 7 and 14 @.@ 0 oz ) with 26 cm ( 10 in ) wings on average , and a female at 335 g ( 11 @.@ 8 oz ) with a 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) wing , and subspecies parvior at 370 – 410 g ( 13 – 14 oz ) for males with 26 cm ( 10 in ) wings on average , and 308 g ( 10 @.@ 9 oz ) and 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) wing for a female . The sexes are similar in plumage , which is all black except for white patches at the tips of the wings and tail feathers . The bill and legs are black and the eyes bright yellow . The white tips line the trailing edges of the wings in flight , and a paler arc across the bases of the primary flight feathers is also visible on the underwing . Although there is no seasonal variation to the plumage , the black may fade a little to a dark brown with wear . Immature birds have browner @-@ tinged plumage , and a yellow gape until they are two years old . The oldest recorded age of a black currawong has been 15 years ; a bird was sighted in July 2004 near Fern Tree , Tasmania , less than 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from where it had been banded in July 1989 . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The black currawong is a loud and vocal species , and makes a variety of calls . Its main call is markedly different from the pied or grey currawongs and has been described as a combination of alternating kar and wheek sounds , <unk> <unk> , or even akin to part song and part human laughter . Although often noisy when flying in flocks , it can be silent when seeking prey or thieving food . Before or around dawn and at nightfall appear to be periods of increased calling , and birds are reported to be more vocal before rain or storms . Parents also make a long fluting whistle to summon their young . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The black currawong is commonly confused with the clinking currawong , but the latter species has a white rump and larger white wing patches . The black currawong has a heavier bill and a characteristic call unlike the clink @-@ clink call of the clinking . The forest and little ravens are similar in size but lack the white wing patches , and instead have entirely black plumage and white , rather than yellow eyes . The black currawong is unlikely to be mistaken for the closely related pied currawong as the latter does not reach Tasmania , but it has a longer and deeper bill and lacks the white rump and undertail coverts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black currawong is endemic to Tasmania where it is widespread , although it is uncommon or absent from areas below 200 m ( 660 ft ) altitude . It breeds mainly in the Central Highlands , with scattered records elsewhere in Tasmania . Reports of breeding are rare from the northeast . It is found on many islands of Bass Strait , including the Hunter and Furneaux Groups . It was recorded historically from the Kent Group , but its status there is unknown . Within its range it is largely sedentary , although some populations at higher altitudes may move to lower altitudes during winter . Flocks have also been recorded making the 20 km ( 12 mi ) long journey across water from Maria Island to the mainland in the morning and returning at nightfall , as well as moving between islands in the <unk> group . The black currawong has expanded into the northeast corner of the island , to <unk> Bay and Cape Portland . 
 The black currawong is evaluated as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . One of its subspecies , Strepera fuliginosa colei of King Island , has declined over much of its range on King Island , possibly due to clearing of its forest habitat , and has been listed as Vulnerable . There are estimated to be around 500 birds . It is unclear whether competition with the more numerous forest raven is impacting on the subspecies there . 
 The black currawong is generally found in wetter eucalypt forests , dominated by such species as alpine ash ( Eucalyptus delegatensis ) , messmate ( E. obliqua ) , and mountain gum ( E. dalrympleana ) , sometimes with a beech ( Nothofagus ) understory . It also frequents cool rainforest of beech , king billy pine ( Athrotaxis selaginoides ) . In lowlands it is more restricted to denser forests and moist gullies , while it also occurs in alpine scrubland and heathland at altitude . In dryer more open forest , it is replaced by the clinking currawong , although the two may co @-@ occur in places such as the Central Highlands and Eastern Tiers . Both the Flinders and King island subspecies are found across their respective islands , but prefer more forested habitats there . The black currawong has been recorded in gardens in Hobart in Tasmania 's southeast , and around Mount Wellington , on Hobart 's outskirts , in winter . Some remained to breed in Hobart in 1994 after a year of severe weather . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Black currawongs are found singly or in pairs , but may gather into groups of 20 to 80 birds . Birds have been observed digging wet yellow clay out of a drain and applying it all over their plumage . <unk> the carpal areas of wings in particular with their bills , they did not appear to wash afterwards , using the procedure as a form of dirt bath . The black currawong has an undulating flight pattern in time with its wing beats , and often cocks its tail in the air for balance when it lands . Play behaviour has been observed , particularly with subadult individuals . Black currawongs have been observed wrestling with each other , where a bird would attempt to force its opponent on its back , at <unk> , while others have been reported rolling on their backs and juggling with food items such as pears with their feet . 
 One species of chewing lice , <unk> <unk> , has been recovered and described from a black currawong near Launceston . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 No systematic studies have been done on the diet of the black currawong , but it is known to be omnivorous , feeding on a wide variety of foodstuffs including insects and small vertebrates , carrion , and berries . Birds forage on the ground most often , but also in tree canopies . They use their bills to probe the ground or turn over <unk> of earth or small rocks looking for food . Birds have been seen using walking tracks to forage along . A group of ten birds were observed trying to break open ice on a frozen lake . They have been recorded foraging along the beach for fly larvae in beached kelp . Most commonly , black currawongs forage in pairs , but they may congregate in larger groups — flocks of 100 birds have descended on orchards to eat apples or rotten fruit . The species has been observed in a mixed @-@ species flocks with forest ravens ( Corvus tasmanicus ) , and silver gulls ( Chroicocephalus novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ faced herons ( Egretta novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ fronted chats ( <unk> albifrons ) , and European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) on the beach at Sundown Point . They have been observed securing dead larger prey to ease subsequent dismemberment ; a parent currawong had wedged a dead chicken 's wings under a log to facilitate pulling off portions such as legs and entrails to feed to its young , and another time hooked a dead rabbit on a spur of a log to rip it into pieces . 
 The black currawong consumes the berries of the heath species <unk> juniperina , and Astroloma <unk> , and the native sedge <unk> grandis , as well as domestic pea , and apples . Invertebrates consumed include earthworms ( <unk> ) and many types of insects , such as ants , moths , flies , crickets , grasshoppers and beetles like weevils , scarabs and leaf beetles . It is adaptable , and has learnt to eat the introduced European wasp ( Vespula germanica ) . A bird that was being harassed by three scarlet robins ( Petroica boodang ) was seen to suddenly turn on them and catch and eat one . Other vertebrates recorded as prey include the house mouse ( Mus musculus ) , small lizards , tadpoles , chickens , ducklings , the young of domestic turkey , Tasmanian <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , flame robin ( Petroica phoenicea ) and rabbit . 
 It can become quite bold and tame , much like its close relative , the pied currawong on the Australian mainland , especially in public parks and gardens where people make a habit of feeding it . Black currawongs have been recorded taking young peas from pods , raiding orchards , seizing chickens from poultry yards , and entering barns in search of mice . 
 Black currawongs are very common around picnic areas in Tasmania 's two most popular National Parks , Freycinet and Cradle Mountain @-@ Lake St Clair , and are often fed by tourists there . The National Parks Authority tolerated this practice until 1995 , when they found the birds were becoming a nuisance and began discouraging people from feeding wildlife . However , the agile currawongs are adept at snatching fragments of food left by picnickers so the birds may only ultimately be discouraged by an ( impractical ) ban on food in National Parks . Birds also take other items such as soap or cutlery from campsites to examine . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding occurs from August to December . Like all currawongs , it builds a large cup @-@ nest out of sticks , lined with softer material , and placed in the fork of a tree from 3 to 20 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 65 @.@ 6 ft ) high . Old nests are sometimes tidied up and reused in following years . A typical clutch has two to four pale grey @-@ brown , purplish @-@ buff , spotted , blotched red @-@ brown or purplish @-@ brown eggs . As in all passerines , the chicks are born naked , and blind ( altricial ) , and remain in the nest for an extended period ( nidicolous ) . Both parents feed the young , but the male feeds them alone after leaving the nest and as they become more independent , and also moves from giving food directly to them to placing it on the ground near them so they learn to eat for themselves . 
 = The Curse of the Black Spot = 
 " The Curse of the Black Spot " is the third episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Written by Stephen Thompson , and directed by Jeremy Webb , the episode was first broadcast on 7 May 2011 on BBC One in the United Kingdom and on BBC America in the United States . It features the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) . 
 In the episode , the TARDIS materialises in the 17th century on board a pirate ship whose crew is being terrorised by a Siren @-@ like creature . After receiving an injury , however minor , a black spot appears on their palms and then the creature apparently disintegrates them . 
 The producers wished to develop a pirate @-@ themed episode for the sixth series and allow the protagonists to " sit back and have some fun " on the adventure . The episode was primarily filmed at a dock in Cornwall and Upper Boat Studios in Wales . " The Curse of the Black Spot " was seen by 7 @.@ 85 million viewers and received generally mixed reviews from critics . It gained an audience Appreciation Index of 86 – considered excellent . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Prequel = = = 
 On 30 April 2011 , immediately following the broadcast of " Day of the Moon " , the BBC released a " prequel " to " The Curse of the Black Spot " . The prequel consists of a short montage of atmospheric shots of the pirate ship , bridged by a narration in the form of Captain Avery 's journal for " April the first , 1699 ; the good ship Fancy . " Avery describes how his ship has been becalmed for eight days , and the crew are being taken one by one by " an enemy " ; he fears that they are all doomed to die there . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 Following a distress signal , the TARDIS lands aboard a 17th @-@ century pirate ship stranded in the middle of an ocean . The ship 's crew have been terrorised by a Siren @-@ like creature ( Lily Cole ) who marks people with black spots on their palms after they are injured . Her song then lulls victims into a trance , making them want to go to her , which apparently disintegrates them . Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) receives a cut during a tussle with the pirates , and finds a black spot on his hand , but is prevented from succumbing to the song of the Siren by Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) . 
 <unk> the Siren is using water as a portal , the Doctor instructs everyone to seek refuge in the ship 's dry magazine . There , they find Toby Avery ( Oscar Lloyd ) , the son of the ship 's captain Henry Avery ( Hugh Bonneville ) , who stowed away on the ship in order to join the crew after his mother died , unaware of his father 's illicit deeds . He too has a black spot on his palm due to a fever . In an attempt to escape , the Doctor and Avery board the TARDIS , but find it is acting haphazardly , and are forced to evacuate , and they watch as it <unk> by itself . After another shipmate is taken by the Siren in a dry room , the Doctor realises the Siren is using reflection to appear . In response they rid the ship of reflective surfaces , including the ship 's stolen treasure . 
 When a storm begins , the crew start to set sail . Toby drops a polished crown while bringing his father a coat . The Siren is summoned and takes Toby . Soon , Rory falls into the ocean , and the Doctor rationalises that the Siren has shown intelligence and will likely get to Rory before he drowns . Believing the victims are not dead , the Doctor convinces Avery and Amy to prick themselves . The Doctor 's suspicions are confirmed when the Siren 's touch actually teleports them to an alien spaceship , invisible in the same spot the pirate ship is located . 
 The Doctor finds the spaceship 's crew long dead from exposure to a human virus . The trio then discover a sickbay where Avery 's entire crew , Toby and Rory are in medical care . The Siren turns out to be the ship 's virtual doctor , caring for the injured humans ; the black spots are tissue samples used as references . Amy convinces the Siren to release Rory into her care . Using Rory 's nursing knowledge , Amy and the Doctor remove him from life support and are able to resuscitate him . Meanwhile , Avery decides to stay with his son and his crew , unable to go back to England himself while the ship will care for his crew . Avery takes the helm of the spaceship and , along with Toby and his crew , sets off to explore the stars . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The historical pirate Henry Avery was previously mentioned in the 1966 serial The Smugglers , which deals with the search for " Avery 's gold " . " The Curse of the Black Spot " re @-@ asserts unresolved plot points from the previous two episodes , " The Impossible Astronaut " and " Day of the Moon " ; Amy and Rory express concern over the Doctor 's future death , Madame Kovarian appears briefly to Amy , and the Doctor again uses the TARDIS scanner to perform a pregnancy test on Amy , the results of which remain unclear . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 In January 2011 , it was announced that Downton Abbey actor Hugh Bonneville would make a guest appearance as a " pirate captain " in an episode of the sixth series of Doctor Who . Matt Smith and Karen Gillan felt that working with the actor was " great fun . " He previously played Sir Sidney Herbert and Tzar Nicholas I of Russia in the Seventh Doctor audio drama The Angel of Scutari . Later in February 2011 , it was announced actress and model Lily Cole was cast as a sea creature . The producers were looking for an actress who is " beautiful , " " striking , " and yet somewhat " spooky . " Cole came early into the casting suggestions , and accepted the role when she was approached . 
 The episode was written by Stephen Thompson . The producers wished to develop a Doctor Who episode set on " the high seas . " The episode was also made to allow the Doctor and his companions to " kick back and have some fun . " As the episode was pirate @-@ themed , the producers wanted to fit in as many elements as possible from pirate fiction , including treasure , mutinies , a stowaway boy , walking the plank , storms , swords , and a pirate with a " good heart " who " isn 't really evil . " " The Curse of the Black Spot " was originally planned to be ninth in the series , but was moved forward prior to filming as executive producer Steven Moffat felt the first half of the series was too dark . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 Filming took place primarily in Cornwall and the Upper Boat Studios in Wales . The exterior of the pirate ship was filmed at a dock in Cornwall , while the lower decks were built from a set at the studio . The principal challenge to film at the dock was to ensure the audience would not see it . The crew set up smoke machines to simulate fog . To create the storm the crew used wind and rain machines , the latter of which went through 15 @,@ 000 litres of water . The loud noise from the wind machines caused communication difficulties during takes . Anticipating they would get soaked , the cast present on the deck wore dry suits underneath their clothes . Before filming began on the storm sequences , Darvill heard that he would perform the stunt where he is thrown into the sea , and was willing to perform it . The stunt would later be performed by a double . 
 The scenes in which Cole appeared on the ship were done by using a harness as if she was flying . Because the actress wore green dress and makeup , the normal greenscreen was replaced by bluescreens in the studio . Cole felt it was fun to fly on the harness , but found it painful after a few hours . Gillan was allowed to perform several of her own stunts in the episode . She was excited to learn that her character would fight pirates with swords , and was taught how to handle one with basic moves . Gillan was also allowed to swing across the ship . However , a stunt double was required to film the sequence where Amy is thrown across the deck by the Siren . The sickbay set was also built in a studio . Because the beds were attached to strings , they were prone to swaying . The cast members who were asked to lie on the beds were instructed to stay still and not breathe heavily to limit movement . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 " The Curse of the Black Spot " was first broadcast on BBC One in the United Kingdom on Saturday , 7 May 2011 , from 6 : 15 pm to 7pm . It was shown on BBC America in the United States the same day as the UK broadcast . In the UK , the episode received preliminary overnight ratings of 6 @.@ 21 million viewers . Based on these estimated figures , viewership was up by 800 @,@ 000 from " Day of the Moon " . Final consolidated ratings for the episode increased to 7 @.@ 85 million viewers , with a 35 @.@ 5 per cent audience share . It was the second largest audience of the night , behind Britain 's Got Talent on ITV1 . In addition nearly one million viewed the episode on BBC iPlayer . It was given an Appreciation Index of 86 , placing it in the " excellent " category . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was met with generally mixed reviews from television critics . Dan Martin of The Guardian thought that " The Curse of the Black Spot " was " a little bit anticlimactic " in comparison to the opening two @-@ part episode of the series , though it was " a nice old @-@ fashioned runaround bolstered by some high concepts and cute moments " , much like the classic episodes . He praised Lily Cole as the Siren but criticised the character of Avery . Martin later rated it the worst episode of the first twelve of the series ( the finale , which had not aired at the time , was not included in the list ) . IGN 's Matt Risley gave it an overall " good " score of 7 out of 10 , admitting that there were " some great lines " and the " Space Pirate " twist was " a refreshingly sci @-@ fi spin on the well @-@ worn genre plot " , but he criticised the Siren for lacking qualities to become " a credible and terrifying Who villain " . 
 Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph did not feel the episode was believable enough , citing Bonneville 's performance , saying he " didn 't come across as a ruthless , greedy killer despite what his crew claimed of him , " and if the crew had been " nastier , " it could have given more potency to the Siren threat . Fuller felt that Cole did " a decent enough job , " claiming that the Siren was the " best @-@ realised thing " about the episode , " only slightly ahead of Karen Gillan looking very fetching in a pirate outfit . " Simon Brew of Den of Geek started by comparing the episode to Lost 's " massive , intriguing " cliffhangers , " and then <unk> off to other less interesting stuff , " mainly criticising that the little girl 's regeneration in " Day of the Moon " was left unresolved . However , Brew " still enjoyed " " The Curse of the Black Spot " , reacting positively to the episode 's production values and the reveal of the black spots . Nick Setchfield of the science @-@ fiction based magazine SFX opined that the high points of the episode were that it was " high on shivery maritime atmosphere , " and the Doctor for not being " in instant possession of all the facts , but who reloads his thinking as events unfold . " However , Setchfield was critical of the story , claiming " pirates and Who should be as <unk> a mix as gunpowder and a trusty flintlock , but ultimately this grog @-@ time yarn falls short of its promise . " 
 Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy wrote " following on from that game @-@ changing two @-@ part premiere , this week 's Doctor Who provides us with a real change of pace , with a moody and atmospheric pre @-@ titles sequence setting the scene for a far more traditional adventure . " Jeffery praised the performance of Bonneville , but was critical of Cole 's role for her not being " given much to do except float around and look ethereal , " but added " the English model certainly looks the part , with well @-@ judged special effects aiding her performance as the beautiful yet unsettling Siren . " Jeffery also thought that Amy 's revival of Rory was " well @-@ acted by both Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill , " but criticised the series for the numerous " Rory 's dead " scenes , negatively comparing Rory with the South Park character Kenny McCormick . Jeffery rated the episode three stars out of five for being somewhat underwhelming in comparison with " The Impossible Astronaut " and " Day of the Moon " . 
 = Oxbow ( horse ) = 
 Oxbow ( foaled March 26 , 2010 ) , an American Thoroughbred racehorse , is best known for winning the second jewel in the United States Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing , the 2013 Preakness Stakes . A bay colt , sired by a winner of the Breeders ' Cup Classic and out of a full sister to another Breeders ' Cup Classic winner , Oxbow was sold as a yearling at Keeneland for $ 250 @,@ 000 and is owned by Brad Kelley of Calumet Farm . He was trained by D. Wayne Lukas and was ridden in his Triple Crown races by Gary Stevens . 
 Oxbow had a reputation as a front @-@ runner who was difficult to rate during his races . Plagued with frequent turnover in jockeys prior to the Triple Crown series , and often running from poor starting gate post positions , he had only two wins prior to his victory in the Preakness . That success was Calumet Farm 's first win in a Triple Crown race in 45 years and breeder Richard Santulli 's first win in a Triple Crown classic race . It also was Stevens ' first Triple Crown win since 2001 , following his return to riding in early 2013 after a seven @-@ year retirement , and Lukas ' first Triple Crown win since 2000 . 
 Oxbow 's second @-@ place finish in the Belmont Stakes in June made him the third horse that year to reach $ 1 million in purse wins . Following the Belmont , he was ranked the top three @-@ year @-@ old racehorse in the United States by the National Thoroughbred Racing Association ( NTRA ) . He was pulled up shortly after finishing fourth in the Haskell Invitational , and was found to have suffered a soft tissue injury , was taken out of competition for the remainder of his three @-@ year @-@ old season , and retired in October 2013 . He stands at stud for the 2015 breeding season at Calumet Farms . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oxbow is a bay horse , marked with an irregularly shaped white star on his forehead and white on his lower lip . He is 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) tall . Oxbow was bred by Richard Santulli 's New Jersey @-@ based Colts Neck Stables , and foaled in Kentucky at Burleson Farms . His sire is 1998 Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Awesome Again , and his dam is Tizamazing , an unraced full sister to the two @-@ time Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Tiznow . Oxbow 's win in the Preakness Stakes was the first win in a Triple Crown classic race for Santulli 's breeding program . 
 As a yearling , Oxbow was sent to the Keeneland sales , where he was purchased for $ 250 @,@ 000 by bloodstock agent Eddie Kane , acting on behalf of Brad M. Kelley 's Bluegrass Hall . In 2012 , the Calumet Investment Group bought Calumet Farm and leased it to Kelley , who moved his Bluegrass Hall racing operation and 200 horses from his Hurricane Hill farm to the historic Calumet property in early 2013 . Prior to 2013 , Calumet Farm had not had a winning horse in a Triple Crown race since 1968 . 
 Although officially registered with The Jockey Club as a bay , Oxbow has white hairs scattered throughout his coat , therefore his trainer , D. Wayne Lukas , describes him as a roan . Oxbow was listed as " gray / roan " when he was sold as a yearling at Keeneland . 
 = = Early racing career = = 
 = = = 2012 : Two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Oxbow 's racing career began on August 3 , 2012 , at Saratoga Race Course in an $ 80 @,@ 000 maiden race at 5 @.@ 5 furlongs ( 0 @.@ 7 mi ; 1 @.@ 1 km ) under jockey Junior Alvarado . Listed at odds of 22 – 1 , he was slow out of the gate and in sixth early on . He took an awkward step going into the turn , and as a result , his jockey pulled him up and he was taken off the track in a horse ambulance . In October , Oxbow was given another chance in a $ 50 @,@ 000 maiden race at 7 furlongs ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ; 1 @.@ 4 km ) at Keeneland Race Course . At 11 – 1 under jockey Jon Court , he broke sharply and led the field at the quarter @-@ mile post . At the top of the homestretch he was caught by Winning Cause , and ultimately finished fourth with a speed figure of 73 . On October 31 , he ran in another $ 50 @,@ 000 maiden race at seven furlongs at Lukas ' home track , Churchill Downs . At 17 – 1 under jockey Terry Thompson , Oxbow came out of the gate ninth , but as in his previous race , had the lead by the quarter @-@ mile post . He ultimately placed third , with an improved speed figure of 85 . 
 Oxbow 's first win was a month later on the undercard of the Clark Handicap , in another $ 50 @,@ 000 maiden race at Churchill Downs . He went off as the 2 – 1 favorite in a race of 7 furlongs ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ; 1 @.@ 4 km ) with jockey Joe Rocco . He started from the far outside at the tenth post position and broke from the gate in seventh but jumped out to the lead within a few strides and led going into the turn by a half length . Oxbow increased his lead throughout the race and won by almost five lengths , earning a 90 speed figure . 
 After Oxbow 's maiden win , he was flown to Hollywood Park in California to run in the Grade I CashCall Futurity at a mile and one @-@ sixteenth ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) on a synthetic surface . He was the longest shot in the field at 61 – 1 , and drew the far outside post at number eleven . Ridden by Corey <unk> , his fifth jockey in five races , Oxbow broke well coming out the gate . He ran close to the front throughout the race , despite losing ground by being four horses wide around the first turn and three wide around the final turn . Oxbow finished fourth , nine lengths back , but earned his first Road to the Kentucky Derby point , and a speed figure of 87 . 
 = = = 2013 : Three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Oxbow was moved with the rest of Lukas ' horses to winter headquarters at Oaklawn Park in Hot Springs , Arkansas . He started his Triple Crown prep season on January 19 , 2013 , with a win at the Fair Grounds Race Course in New Orleans in the mile and 70 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 672 m ) Grade III Lecomte Stakes . Ridden for the second time by Jon Court , he went off as the fourth choice at 5 – 1 and had a favorable number four post position . He came out of the gate quickly and was the front @-@ runner throughout the race . At the top of the homestretch , he was only a half length in front of the field , but then he drew away and won by more than eleven and a half lengths . Horses he beat that day included Golden Soul , who later placed second in the Kentucky Derby , and I 've Struck a Nerve , who Oxbow faced again later in the Risen Star Stakes . He earned a speed figure of 94 and an additional ten points towards qualification for the Derby . That month , Lukas also contacted veteran Hall of Fame jockey Gary Stevens , who had just returned to racing after a seven @-@ year retirement , and discussed having Stevens ride Oxbow in future races . 
 Five weeks later , Oxbow was entered in the Grade II mile and one @-@ sixteenth ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) Risen Star Stakes . Ridden for the third time by Jon Court , Oxbow was assigned the far outside post at number ten , and was the second favorite at 4 – 1 . He broke fifth from the gate , moved to third passing the stands , but lost ground by being five horses wide around the first turn . In the stretch , Oxbow took the lead but could not hold it and finished fourth , although he and the three top @-@ placed horses all ended the race within a length and a half of each other in a blanket finish . The winner was I 've Struck a Nerve , at odds of 135 – 1 . Oxbow again progressed in performance , earning a speed figure of 98 and five more points toward Derby qualification . 
 Three weeks later , Lukas entered Oxbow in Oaklawn Park 's key preparatory race for the Arkansas Derby , the Grade II Rebel Stakes . For the fourth time in five races , Oxbow started on the far outside at post ten . He went off as the favorite for the second time in his career , at 4 – 1 . Lukas switched Jon Court to ride stablemate Will Take Charge , and Oxbow was given yet another jockey , Mike Smith . Oxbow was third out of the gate . He took the lead down the backstretch and stayed in front until the end of the race where he was narrowly defeated by Will Take Charge . Oxbow lost by half a head , but earned his first triple @-@ digit speed figure at 101 , along with 20 Derby qualification points . After the Rebel Stakes , Oxbow was ranked as one of the top ten horses in some Triple Crown pre @-@ race polls , and secured eligibility to run in the Derby with 36 points . 
 Four weeks after the Rebel , Oxbow entered his last preparatory race before the Triple Crown campaign , the Grade I Arkansas Derby , held on April 13 . This race marked the first time Oxbow was ridden by 50 @-@ year @-@ old Stevens , who was Oxbow 's seventh jockey in nine races . The horse was the favorite at 3 – 1 , but once again drew an unfavorable , far @-@ outside post at ten . Oxbow came out ninth at the break and was almost seven lengths behind the leader at the start . He had developed a reputation for running in front and wearing out his exercise riders , so Stevens unsuccessfully attempted to rate Oxbow and make him run off the pace , behind other horses . Oxbow , described by observers as " very rank " , and by Stevens as " pissed off ... [ and ] upset with me that he didn 't get the running style he wanted " , was tossing his head and fighting Stevens into the clubhouse turn . After running last at one point in the race , Oxbow improved his position and finished fifth , less than a length behind second @-@ place <unk> Daddy . Oxbow earned a speed figure of 90 , the same as in his maiden win . Stevens viewed his attempt to make Oxbow run off the pace as a mistake . " It just turned out to be a nightmare trip and I take full ( responsibility ) for that " , he said . Lukas agreed , stating , " That will not be in [ Stevens ' ] grandchildren 's highlight film " . 
 = = Triple Crown Series = = 
 = = = Kentucky Derby = = = 
 Oxbow ran in the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs as a 25 – 1 long shot , ridden by Stevens , who had been on Oxbow in workouts since the Arkansas Derby , and as Lukas said , had " gotten to know the horse a little better throughout the last two weeks " . Following the scratch of Black Onyx in post position one , Oxbow had the inside number two post in the field of 19 starters and was closest to the rail . His position was further complicated by being next to Revolutionary with jockey Calvin Borel at number three . Between the size of the field and Borel 's well @-@ known preference for riding the rail , Oxbow had to use his speed early to get out front and avoid being pushed into the rail or being hemmed in behind traffic . He broke fifth and was soon close to leader Palace Malice , who ran the second fastest initial quarter- and half @-@ miles in Derby history , a pace described as " suicidal " . Oxbow maintained his position near the front , and at the top of the homestretch passed the tired @-@ out speed horses to lead the race for a sixteenth of a mile . He then faded and finished in sixth place , six lengths behind winner Orb , though his performance was still viewed as " respectable " and " promising " . Oxbow earned a speed figure of 101 , the same as he had in the Rebel , and observers noted that he was the only horse that ran near the front of the pack in the opening half @-@ mile to also finish in the top six ; none of the other horses out front early finished better than twelfth . 
 = = = Preakness Stakes = = = 
 Oxbow next went to Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore to run in the 2013 Preakness Stakes . In the week prior to the race , he had another workout with Stevens , who stated that it was the " first time [ Oxbow ] had listened to me " , later amending his comments to say , " maybe it 's the first time I 've listened to him . " 
 Oxbow drew a favorable spot in the gate at post position six , his first good draw since his win in the Lecomte , and kept the same rider for three straight races for the first time in his career . At the start of the race , Will Take Charge veered in and brushed Oxbow , who broke third but took the lead within a few strides and soon led by one and a half lengths . Once in front , Stevens got Oxbow to relax , and they ran the first quarter @-@ mile in 0 : 23 @.@ 94 , the half mile in 0 : 48 @.@ 60 , and three @-@ quarters at 1 : 13 : 26 . Despite the modest pace , what one sportswriter called " lullaby fractions " , described by Stevens as " just walking the dog " , the colt was one and a half lengths in front at the three @-@ quarter @-@ mile mark . 
 Although Steven said the horse " rated himself " , sportswriters speculated that once in front , the experienced Stevens had slowed the pace , leaving Oxbow with enough reserves for the final push . Turning for home , Oxbow " exploded off the turn " and led by three lengths . Never seriously challenged , he recorded a 15 – 1 upset victory by one and three quarter lengths in front of runner @-@ up <unk> . Mylute finished third and Derby champion Orb was fourth . Oxbow earned a career @-@ high speed figure of 112 , which was higher than Orb 's had been in the Derby . In post @-@ race interviews , Stevens said , " His mind was right " , " when I hit the half @-@ mile pole ... The race was over at that point " , and " [ t ] hey gave me a free three @-@ quarters of a mile today . " Stevens later tweeted that Oxbow was the " most intelligent horse I have ever ridden " . He noted the horse was not particularly tired after the race and described him as a " happy horse " in the winner 's circle . Lukas said , " He never even broke a sweat . " The victory was 77 @-@ year @-@ old Lukas ' sixth career Preakness win and his 14th Triple Crown win , surpassing the record of " Sunny Jim " Fitzsimmons . It was Lukas ' first win in any Triple Crown race since <unk> won the Belmont Stakes in 2000 . Oxbow 's success was Stevens ' third career Preakness win and his ninth Triple Crown win , but the first since winning the Preakness and Belmont on Point Given in 2001 . 
 = = = Belmont Stakes = = = 
 Fourteen horses started at the 2013 Belmont Stakes . Oxbow drew the number seven post position , with rival Orb at post five . There were concerns about Stevens ' fitness as he had missed races after being thrown from a horse the previous week , but medical tests showed no sign of injury . Oxbow was the third favorite at 5 – 1 on the morning line , but by race time his odds were at 10 – 1 . 
 In the race Oxbow broke third out of the gate and settled behind <unk> <unk> Daddy and Freedom Child , completing a quarter mile in 23 seconds . As usual , Oxbow wanted to run close to the front , Stevens knew better than to fight with him , and so , as in the Derby , horse and rider once again chased the speed horses at fractions described as " suicidal " . At the half @-@ mile pole Oxbow was a neck off the leader , who clocked at 0 : 46 @.@ 66 , and on the backstretch , Oxbow went to the front , reaching the three @-@ quarter mile mark at 1 : 10 @.@ 95 , running the second fastest half- and three @-@ quarter mile fractions at that point in the race since Secretariat 's 1973 record @-@ setting performance . Oxbow was still in front by a half length at the mile post . At the top of the homestretch , Palace Malice and Oxbow were nose and nose but Oxbow tired , and finished second by three lengths to Palace Malice with Kentucky Derby winner Orb third , 1 3 ⁄ 4 lengths behind Oxbow . His speed figure for the Belmont was 98 , the same as in the Risen Star Stakes . 
 The second @-@ place finish in the Belmont earned Oxbow $ 200 @,@ 000 and pushed him over the $ 1 million mark in career earnings , making him the third horse in 2013 to reach $ 1 million in purse wins , behind Orb and a fellow Awesome Again son , the six @-@ year @-@ old gelding Game On Dude . Although the $ 1 million bonus for the horse winning the highest combined Triple Crown points has long been discontinued , Oxbow would have won it over Orb owing to his win in the Preakness and second in the Belmont . Further , his placing in the Belmont put him at number one in the post @-@ Belmont June 10 NTRA poll of top three @-@ year @-@ olds , and in the top ten for race horses of all ages . 
 = = Remainder of season = = 
 Oxbow came out of the Belmont feeling good , or as Lukas put it , " full of himself . " He returned to Churchill Downs , and resumed scheduled workouts sooner than usual . Lukas then shipped Oxbow to Saratoga to prepare him to run in the Grade I , $ 1 million Haskell Invitational on July 28 , 2013 , with sportswriters hoping to see him meet up again with Orb and Palace Malice in the Travers Stakes later in the summer . In an attempt to get Oxbow past what had been described as his " one @-@ dimensional " front @-@ running style , Lukas turned to a training regimen at Saratoga where the horse had no clocked workouts , but instead was conditioned by jogging and galloping clockwise ( the " wrong way " ) on the training track for long one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to two @-@ mile trips each time out . 
 Oxbow drew post position five for the Haskell , carried the highest weight at 122 pounds , and was the second favorite in the race behind Verrazano . Leading for the early part of the race , Oxbow was challenged for the lead by Verrazano at the three @-@ quarter @-@ mile marker , then weakened and finished fourth , earning another $ 60 @,@ 000 . Stevens felt something was wrong with Oxbow at the half @-@ mile pole , later saying the horse " didn ’ t feel like he did in any of the Triple Crown races " , and Lukas stated the jockey " kind of held " Oxbow from that point on . Oxbow was pulled up soon after crossing the finish line , then his rider jumped off and removed the saddle when Oxbow failed to jog sound on the track . The horse walked back to the barn without obvious sign of injury , and radiographs of his right front ankle revealed no fracture , but he did have a soft tissue injury to the area , described as a " sprain " . Of Oxbow 's overall health , Lukas commented , " he had a pretty set of X @-@ rays . It 's amazing . For a horse with that many [ starts ] , they were really clean . " Nonetheless , as a result of the soft tissue injury , Oxbow was taken out of races for the duration of the summer , and after three weeks of hand @-@ walking at Saratoga was shipped home to Calumet in mid @-@ August , with an announcement that he was not anticipated to run again in 2013 . Lukas said : " He 's been a warrior and a hell of a nice horse for us and I don 't want to do anything to jeopardize his future down the line . " On October 25 , 2013 , Calumet Farm announced the decision to retire Oxbow . Combined with his winnings in his two @-@ year @-@ old season , his lifetime race earnings were $ 1 @,@ 243 @,@ 500 . He stood at stud for the 2014 breeding season at Taylor Made Stallions in Lexington , Kentucky , for an introductory stud fee of $ 20 @,@ 000 . He closed out the year ranked 17th in earnings with $ 1 @,@ 146 @,@ 000 won in 2013 . For the 2015 season he moves to Calumet Farms , where he joins seven other stallions , including English Channel , who sired 2014 Travers Stakes winner V.E. Day . 
 = = Racing statistics = = 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Oxbow was sired by the Canadian @-@ bred Awesome Again , winner of the 1998 Breeders ' Cup Classic . At stud , Awesome Again has sired many stakes winners , including Paynter , who placed second in the 2012 Belmont Stakes and won the 2012 Haskell Invitational ; Ghostzapper , who was 2004 American Horse of the Year and a 2004 Breeders ' Cup winner ; and Game On Dude , two @-@ time winner of the Santa Anita Handicap . Oxbow is almost a full brother to Paynter ; the two horses are out of full sisters . Oxbow 's older full brother , Awesome Patriot , won the 2011 <unk> Stakes . Oxbow 's younger full brother , Expect a Lot , is in race training . Oxbow 's dam Tizamazing was bred back to Awesome Again in 2013 , and in June 2013 was confirmed to be in foal . 
 Tizamazing is a full sister to Tiznow , who was 2000 American Horse of the Year and won the Breeders ' Cup Classic twice . Tizamazing sold for $ 1 million at Keeneland as a yearling , but owing to a training injury she never raced . Tizamazing 's dam , Cee 's Song , is credited with raising the respect breeders have for her female breeding line , Thoroughbred family 26 , as one of the top distaff lines in America . Five full siblings out of Cee 's Song were either race winners or the dams of race winners : Tiznow , <unk> and <unk> are all stakes winners , Oxbow 's dam Tizamazing and Paynter 's dam Tizso both produced stakes winners . Another offspring of Cee 's Song , the gelding <unk> , was second in the 1999 Breeders ' Cup Classic . Oxbow 's pedigree is outcrossed for four generations , with very little inbreeding . Oxbow is only inbred <unk> to Northern Dancer , meaning that this horse appears once in the fourth and twice in the fifth generation of Oxbow 's pedigree . 
 = Morchella populiphila = 
 Morchella populiphila is a species of morel fungus ( family Morchellaceae ) native to northwestern North America . Described as new to science in 2012 , its specific epithet refers to its association with black cottonwood ( Populus trichocarpa ) . The morel used to be referred to as Morchella semilibera in western North American field guides until molecular analysis established that to be a strictly European species . M. populiphila occurs in California , Nevada and Oregon . Its fruit bodies grow up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) tall with a ridged and pitted conical cap that attaches about halfway down the stipe . The cap ridges are dark brown to black in maturity , while the pits are yellowish to brownish . The fungus is edible , although not as highly valued as other morels . 
 Morchella populiphila is one of three species of fungi commonly referred to as " half @-@ free " morels , the others being Morchella punctipes in eastern North America and Morchella semilibera in Europe . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Morchella populiphila was one of 14 new Morchella species described in 2012 by Michael Kuo and colleagues as a result of the Morel Data Collection Project , which was aimed at clarifying the biology , taxonomy , and distribution of morel species in the United States and Canada . The type locality is in Jackson County , Oregon . The fungus used to be referred to as Morchella semilibera ( the " half @-@ free morel " ) in western North American field guides until molecular analysis established that to be a strictly European species . It was previously referred to as phylogenetic species Mel @-@ 5 ( i.e. , identified based on DNA sequence ) in a 2011 publication . The specific epithet populiphila refers to its association with the tree species Populus trichocarpa . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies are 4 – 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) high with a conical cap that is 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) tall and 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide at the widest point . The cap surface has pits and ridges , formed by the intersection of 12 – 20 primary vertical ridges and infrequent shorter , secondary vertical ridges and <unk> horizontal ridges . The cap is attached in a skirt @-@ like manner to the stipe , roughly halfway from the top , with a sinus 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) deep . The ridges are smooth and colored yellowish brown to honey brown when young , but darken in age to brown , dark brown or black . When young the ridges are up to 1 mm wide and flat with sharp edges but usually become rounded , sharp or eroded in age . The pits are smooth and vertically elongated . Initially whitish to pale brown when immature , they become brownish to yellowish or grayish brown at maturity . The fragile stipe measures 2 @.@ 5 – 11 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) tall by 1 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick and is roughly the same width throughout its length , or tapered towards the top . It is often hidden by the cap when young but becomes longer as it matures , often developing shallow longitudinal furrows . In warm , wet conditions the stipe sometimes becomes inflated , especially near the base . White to whitish or watery brownish in color , its texture is occasionally nearly smooth but more commonly covered with mealy whitish granules that sometimes darken to brown . Orson K. Miller likened the stipe texture to that of a cow tongue . The fragile , whitish to watery tan flesh is 1 – 2 mm thick in the hollow cap , and sometimes forms chambers or layers near the base . The whitish to brownish sterile inner surface of the cap is covered in mealy granules . 
 In deposit , the spores are bright yellowish orange . Ascospores are smooth , elliptical , and typically measure 20 – 25 by 12 – 16 µm . Asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are eight @-@ spored , cylindrical , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 225 – 325 by 15 – 22 @.@ 5 µm . Paraphyses are septate , and cylindrical with tips that are rounded to club @-@ shaped , and measure 150 – 275 by 7 – 15 µm . <unk> cells on sterile ridges are septate , measuring 100 – 175 by 10 – 25 µm . They are tightly packed in an even layer . The terminal hyphae are club @-@ shaped to somewhat rectangular with a flattened to broadly rounded tip . 
 Although Morchella populiphila is an edible species , it is not as highly valued as other morels because of its fragile nature and its inferior flavor . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Morchella populiphila is a distinct morel because of its cap attachment and its habitat , and it is unlikely to be mistaken for other species . Verpa bohemica is somewhat similar in appearance , but its cap hangs free from attachment to the stipe . The other North American half @-@ free morel , Morchella punctipes , is very similar in appearance to M. populiphila , and they cannot be reliably distinguished on morphology alone . The distribution of M. punctipes extends from the Great Plains eastward . The widespread European species Morchella semilibera is morphologically indistinguishable from M. populiphila , in both macroscopic and microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Like many morel species , the ecological mode of Morchella populiphila is not known with certainty , but it is suspected of being both saprobic ( obtaining its nourishment from nonliving or decaying organic matter ) and mycorrhizal ( symbiotic with trees ) at different stages in its life cycle . Fruit bodies grow singly , scattered , or in groups . It is found in Oregon to Nevada and northern California , where it grows on dried @-@ out riverbeds . Fruiting , which occurs in the spring , tends to occur shortly after the emergence of Verpa mushrooms , and before the appearance of other morels . 
 M. populiphila has been found in Europe , but is suspected to have been introduced with trees from North America . 
 = Rædwald of East Anglia = 
 Rædwald ( Old English : Rædwald , ' power in counsel ' ) , also written as Raedwald or <unk> , was a 7th @-@ century king of East Anglia , a long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which included the present @-@ day English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . He was the son of Tytila of East Anglia and a member of the Wuffingas dynasty ( named after his grandfather , Wuffa ) , who were the first kings of the East Angles . Details about Rædwald 's reign are scarce , primarily because the Viking invasions of the 9th century destroyed the monasteries in East Anglia where many documents would have been kept . Rædwald reigned from about 599 until his death around 624 , initially under the overlordship of Æthelberht of Kent . In 616 , as a result of fighting the Battle of the River Idle and defeating Æthelfrith of Northumbria , he was able to install Edwin , who was acquiescent to his authority , as the new king of Northumbria . During the battle , both Æthelfrith and Rædwald 's son Rægenhere were killed . 
 From around 616 , Rædwald was the most powerful of the English kings south of the River Humber . According to Bede he was the fourth ruler to hold imperium over other southern Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms : he was referred to in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , written centuries after his death , as a bretwalda ( an Old English term meaning ' Britain @-@ ruler ' or ' wide @-@ ruler ' ) . He was the first king of the East Angles to become a Christian , converting at Æthelberht 's court some time before 605 , whilst at the same time maintaining a pagan temple . In receiving the faith he helped to ensure the survival of Christianity in East Anglia during the apostasy of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms of Essex and Kent . He is generally considered by historians to be the most favoured candidate for the occupant of the Sutton Hoo ship @-@ burial , although other theories have been advanced . 
 = = The context of Rædwald 's kingdom = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxons , who are known to have included Angles , Saxons , Jutes and Frisians , began to arrive in Britain in the 5th century . By 600 , a number of kingdoms had begun to form in the conquered territories . By the beginning of the 7th century , southern England was almost entirely under their control . 
 During Rædwald 's youth , the establishment of other ruling houses was accomplished . Sometime before 588 , Æthelberht of Kent married <unk> , the Christian daughter of the Frankish ruler Charibert . As early as 568 , Ceawlin of Wessex , the most powerful ruler south of the River Humber , repulsed Æthelberht . According to later sources , Mercia was founded by <unk> in 585 , although a paucity of sources makes it difficult to know how the Mercian royal line became established . 
 North of the Humber , the kingdoms of Deira and Bernicia possessed rival royal dynasties . <unk> ruled Deira until his death in 588 , leaving his daughter Acha , his son Edwin , and another unknown sibling . The Bernician dynasty , allied by kinship to the kingdom of Wessex , gained ascendancy over Deira , forcing Edwin to live in exile in the court of Cadfan ap Iago of Gwynedd . In various wars , Æthelfrith of Bernicia consolidated the Northumbrian state , and in around 604 he was able to bring Deira under his dominion . 
 = = Family = = 
 Rædwald , which in Old English means ' power in counsel ' , was born around 560 – 580 . The son of Tytila , whom he succeeded , he was the elder brother of Eni . According to Bede , he was descended from Wuffa , the founder of the Wuffingas dynasty : ' filius <unk> , cuius pater fuit <unk> ( ' the son of Tytil , whose father was Wuffa ' ) . 
 At some time during the 590s , Rædwald married a woman whose name is unknown , though it is known from Bede that she was pagan . By her he fathered at least two sons , Rægenhere and Eorpwald . He also had an older son , Sigeberht , whose name is unlike other Wuffingas names but which is typical of the East Saxon dynasty . It has been suggested that Rædwald 's queen had previously been married to a member of the Essex royal family and that Sigeberht was Rædwald 's stepson , as was stated by William of Malmesbury in the 12th century . Sigeberht earned the enmity of his step @-@ father , who drove him into exile in Gaul , possibly to protect the Wuffingas bloodline . 
 For a family tree that includes the descendants of Eni , see Wuffingas . 
 = = Early reign and baptism = = 
 Events that occurred during the early years of Rædwald 's reign include the arrival of Augustine of Canterbury and his mission from Rome in 597 , the conversions of Æthelberht of Kent and <unk> of Essex , and the establishment of new bishoprics in their kingdoms . Bede , when relating the conversion of Rædwald 's son Eorpwald in his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , mentioned that Rædwald received the Christian sacraments in Kent . This happened in perhaps 604 or later , presumably at the invitation of Æthelberht , who may have been his baptismal sponsor . The date of his conversion is unknown , but it would have occurred after the arrival of the Gregorian mission in 597 . Since it is claimed that Augustine , who died in about 605 , dedicated a church near Ely , it may have followed Saebert 's conversion fairly swiftly . Rædwald 's marriage to a member of the royal dynasty of Essex helped form a diplomatic alliance between the neighbouring kingdoms of East Anglia and Essex . His conversion in Kent would have affiliated him with Æthelberht , bringing him directly into the sphere of Kent . 
 In East Anglia , Rædwald 's conversion was not universally accepted by his household or his own queen . According to the historian Steven Plunkett , she and her pagan teachers persuaded him to default in part from his commitment to the Christian faith . As a result , he kept in the temple two altars , one pagan and another dedicated to Christ . Bede , writing decades later , described how Ealdwulf of East Anglia , a grandson of Rædwald 's brother Eni , recalled seeing the temple when he was a boy . It was located at Rendlesham , the regio of the Wuffing dynasty , according to Plunkett . Barbara Yorke explains the dual nature of the temple by suggesting that Rædwald would have been unprepared to reject his old religion and fully embrace Christianity , as this act would have been a public acknowledgment of his inferiority to Æthelberht . Rædwald 's lack of commitment towards Christianity earned him the enmity of Bede , who regarded him as a renouncer of the faith . 
 = = Rædwald and Edwin of Northumbria = = 
 = = = Edwin 's exile = = = 
 Æthelfrith of Northumbria may have married Acha , who was the mother of his son Oswald ( born in about 604 ) , according to Bede . Æthelfrith pursued her exiled brother Edwin in an attempt to destroy him and ensure that the Bernician rulership of Northumbria would be unchallenged . Edwin found hospitality in the household of Cearl of Mercia and later married Cearl 's daughter . Edwin 's nephew <unk> , an exile in the British kingdom of Elmet , was slain there under treacherous circumstances . Edwin eventually sought the protection of Rædwald , where he was received willingly . Rædwald promised to protect him , and Edwin lived with the king amongst his royal companions . When news of Edwin reached Æthelfrith in Northumbria , he sent messengers to Rædwald offering money in return for Edwin 's death , but Rædwald refused to comply . Æthelfrith sent messengers a second and a third time , offering even greater gifts of silver and promising war if these were not accepted . Rædwald then weakened and promised either to kill Edwin or to hand him over to ambassadors . 
 When a chance arose for him to escape to a safe country , Edwin chose to remain at Rædwald 's court . He was then visited by a stranger who was aware of Rædwald 's deliberations . The source for this story , written at Whitby , stated that the stranger was Paulinus of York , a member of the Canterbury mission , who offered Edwin the hope of Rædwald 's support and held out the prospect that Edwin might someday attain greater royal power than any previous English king . Paulinus was assured by Edwin that he would accept his religious teaching . His vision of Paulinus was afterwards made the means of his decision to embrace Christianity , on the condition that he survived and achieved power . If , as is supposed by some , Paulinus appeared to him in the flesh , the bishop 's presence at Rædwald 's court would throw some light on the king 's position regarding religion . 
 Rædwald 's pagan queen admonished him for acting in a manner dishonourable for a king by betraying his trust for the sake of money and wanting to sell his imperiled friend in exchange for riches . As a result of her admonishment , once Æthelfrith 's ambassadors had gone , Rædwald resolved on war . 
 = = = The Battle of the River Idle = = = 
 In 616 or 617 , Rædwald assembled an army and marched north , accompanied by his son Rægenhere , to confront Æthelfrith . They met on the western boundary of the kingdom of Lindsey , on the east bank of the River Idle . The battle was fierce and was long commemorated in the saying , ‘ The river Idle was foul with the blood of Englishmen ’ . During the fighting , Æthelfrith and Rædwald 's son Rægenhere were both slain . Edwin then succeeded Æthelfrith as the king of Northumbria , and Æthelfrith 's sons were subsequently forced into exile . 
 A separate account of the battle , given by Henry of Huntingdon , stated that Rædwald 's army was split into three formations , led by Rædwald , Rægenhere , and Edwin . With more experienced fighters , Æthelfrith attacked in loose formation . At the sight of Rægenhere , perhaps thinking he was Edwin , Æthelfrith 's men cut their way through to him and slew him . After the death of his son , Rædwald furiously breached his lines , killing Æthelfrith amid a great slaughter of the Northumbrians . 
 D.P. Kirby has argued that the battle was more than a clash between two kings over the treatment of an exiled nobleman but was " part of a protracted struggle to determine the military and political leadership of the Anglian peoples " at that time . 
 = = Rædwald 's imperium = = 
 On 24 February 616 , the year of the Battle of the River Idle , Æthelberht of Kent died and was succeeded by his pagan son Eadbald . After the death of the Christian Saebert of Essex , his three sons shared the kingdom , returning it to pagan rule , and drove out the Gregorian missionaries led by Mellitus . The Canterbury mission had removed to Gaul before Eadbald was brought back into the fold . During this period the only royal Christian altar in England belonged to Rædwald . By the time of his death , the mission in Kent had been fully re @-@ established . 
 Rædwald 's power became great enough for Bede to recognise him as the successor to the imperium of Æthelberht . Bede also called him Rex Anglorum , the ' King of the Angles ' , a term that Rædwald 's contemporaries would have used for their overlord . It is unclear where his power was centred or even how he established his authority over the Angles of eastern England . 
 By Edwin 's debt of allegiance to him , Rædwald became the first foreign king to hold direct influence in Northumbria . He would have been instrumental in Edwin 's secure establishment as king of both <unk> and Bernicia . 
 = = The development of Gipeswic = = 
 During the first quarter of the 7th century , the quayside settlement at Gipeswic ( Ipswich ) became an important estuarine trading centre , receiving imported goods such as pottery from other trading markets situated around the coasts of the North Sea . Steven Plunkett suggests that the founding of Gipeswic took place under Wuffingas supervision . It took another hundred years for the settlement to develop into a town , but its beginnings can be seen as a reflection of the personal importance of Rædwald during the period of his supremacy . 
 The excavated grave @-@ goods of the Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery at Gipeswic , including those found in burials under small barrows , were not particularly wealthy or elaborate . They lacked the strong characterization of a neighbouring late 6th century cemetery at a higher crossing of the river . One exception was a furnished grave that it has been suggested could have been that of a visitor from the Rhineland . 
 = = Death = = 
 Rædwald is considered to have died in around 624 : his death can be located only within a few years . He must have reigned for some time after Æthelberht died , in order for him to have been noted as a bretwalda . Barbara Yorke suggests that he died before Edwin converted to Christianity in 627 and also before Paulinus became bishop of Northumbria in 625 . His death is recorded twice by Roger of Wendover , in 599 and in 624 , in a history that dates from the 13th century but appears to include earlier annals of unknown origin and reliability . Plunkett notes that the earlier date of 599 is now taken as a mistaken reference to the death of Rædwald ’ s father , Tytila , and the later date is commonly given for the death of Rædwald . 
 He was succeeded by his pagan son Eorpwald , who was later persuaded to adopt Christianity by Edwin of Northumbria . 
 = = = Sutton Hoo = = = 
 Rædwald lived at a time when eminent individuals were buried in barrows at the cemetery at Sutton Hoo , near Woodbridge , Suffolk . There , large mounds — which were originally much higher and more visible — can still be seen , overlooking the upper estuary of the River Deben . 
 In 1939 , a mound at Sutton Hoo , now known as Mound 1 , was discovered to contain an Anglo @-@ Saxon ship @-@ burial of unparalleled richness . The mound enclosed a ship , 27 metres ( 89 ft ) long , which had seen use on the seas and had been repaired . In the centre of the ship was a chamber containing a collection of jewellery and other rich grave goods , including silver bowls , drinking vessels , clothing and weaponry . One unusual item was a large ' sceptre ' in the form of a whetstone that showed no sign of previous use as a tool : it has been suggested that this was a symbol of the office of bretwalda . The gold and garnet body @-@ equipment found with the other goods was produced for a patron who employed a goldsmith the equal or better than any in Europe and was designed to project an image of imperial power . The Mediterranean silverware in the grave is a unique assemblage for its period in Europe . 
 The magnificence of the objects , both the personal possessions and those items designed to denote the authority of the dead individual , point to the death of a person connected with the royal court , according to Rupert Bruce @-@ Mitford , who regards the burial as " very likely the monument of the High King or bretwalda Raedwald " . Yorke suggests that the treasures buried with the ship reflect the size of the tribute paid to Rædwald by subject kings during his period as bretwalda . Bruce @-@ Mitford has suggested that the inclusion of bowls and spoons amongst the treasures fits with Bede 's account of Raedwald 's conversion : the spoons may have been a present for a convert from paganism and the bowls had Christian significance . Coins found in the burial have been dated to the approximate date of Rædwald 's death . The controversy surrounding the identity of the person for whom the mound was built are reflected in the comments in the article on Rædwald in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ( " It has been argued , more strongly than convincingly , that Rædwald must be the man buried in Mound 1 at Sutton Hoo " ) and by McClure and Collins , who note that the evidence for Raedwald is " almost non @-@ existent " . 
 Alternative suggestions as candidates include other East Anglian kings or a prestigious foreign visitor . There are alternative explanations : the person may have been a wealthy status @-@ seeker , rather than a king , though Rendlesham , a known residence of the East Anglian kings , is only 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) away . 
 Swedish cultural influence has been detected at Sutton Hoo : there are strong similarities in both the armour and the burial with Vendel @-@ age finds from Sweden . Bruce @-@ Mitford suggested that the connection is close enough to imply that the Wuffing dynasty came from that part of Scandinavia . There are also significant differences , and exact parallels with the workmanship and style of the Sutton Hoo artefacts cannot be found elsewhere ; as a result the connection is generally regarded as unproven . 
 It is also possible that the mound is actually a cenotaph rather than a grave , the only sign of body was a chemical stain which could have had other origins , indeed the site includes burials of both meat and companion animals . Further there is a lack of shroud ties , and no clear evidence of items which might have adorned a body being left in the expected places in relation to the stain . The cenotaph theory may be consistent with the transition from pagan burial to Christian burial , certainly as far as Rædwald is concerned , he could have received a Christian burial , and the mound , whether completed before or after his conversion being used as a memorial and as symbol of the status of the Kingship of East Anglia . 
 = William Sterling Parsons = 
 Rear Admiral William Sterling " Deak " Parsons ( 26 November 1901 – 5 December 1953 ) was an American naval officer who worked as an ordnance expert on the Manhattan Project during World War II . He is best known for being the weaponeer on the Enola Gay , the aircraft which dropped the Little Boy atomic bomb on Hiroshima , Japan in 1945 . To avoid the possibility of a nuclear explosion if the aircraft crashed and burned on takeoff , he decided to arm the bomb in flight . While the aircraft was en route to Hiroshima , Parsons climbed into the cramped and dark bomb bay , and inserted the powder charge and detonator . He was awarded the Silver Star for his part in the mission . 
 A 1922 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , Parsons served on a variety of warships beginning with the battleship USS Idaho . He was trained in ordnance and studied ballistics under L.T.E. Thompson at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia . In July 1933 , Parsons became liaison officer between the Bureau of Ordnance and the Naval Research Laboratory . He became interested in radar and was one of the first to recognize its potential to locate ships and aircraft , and perhaps even track shells in flight . In September 1940 , Parsons and Merle Tuve of the National Defense Research Committee began work on the development of the proximity fuze , a radar @-@ triggered fuze that would explode a shell in the proximity of the target . The fuze , eventually known as the VT ( variable time ) fuze , Mark 32 , went into production in 1942 . Parsons was on hand to watch the cruiser USS Helena shoot down the first enemy aircraft with a VT fuze in the Solomon Islands in January 1943 . 
 In June 1943 , Parsons joined the Manhattan Project as Associate Director at the research laboratory at Los Alamos , New Mexico under J. Robert Oppenheimer . Parsons became responsible for the ordnance aspects of the project , including the design and testing of the non @-@ nuclear components of nuclear weapons . In a reorganization in 1944 , he lost responsibility for the implosion @-@ type fission weapon , but retained that for the design and development of the gun @-@ type fission weapon , which eventually became Little Boy . He was also responsible for the delivery program , codenamed Project Alberta . He watched the Trinity nuclear test from a B @-@ 29 . 
 After the war , Parsons was promoted to the rank of rear admiral without ever having commanded a ship . He participated in Operation Crossroads , the nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll in 1946 , and later the Operation Sandstone tests at Enewetak Atoll in 1948 . In 1947 , he became deputy commander of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project . He died of a heart attack on 5 December 1953 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Sterling Parsons was born in Chicago , Illinois , on 26 November 1901 , the oldest of three children of a lawyer , Harry Robert Parsons , and his wife Clara , née Doolittle . In 1909 , the family moved to Fort Sumner , New Mexico , where William learned to speak fluent Spanish . He attended the local schools in Fort Sumner and was home schooled by his mother for a time . He commenced at Santa Rosa High School , where his mother taught English and Spanish , rapidly advancing through three years in just one . In 1917 he attended Fort Sumner High School , from which he graduated in 1918 . 
 In 1917 Parsons travelled to Roswell , New Mexico to take the United States Naval Academy exam for one of the appointments by Senator <unk> A. Jones . He was only an alternate , but passed the exam while more favored candidates did not , and received the appointment . As he was only 16 , two years younger than most candidates , he was shorter and lighter than the physical standards called for , but managed to convince the examining board to admit him anyway . He entered the Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland in 1918 , and eventually graduated 48th out of 539 in the class of 1922 , in which Hyman G. Rickover graduated 107th . At the time , it was customary for midshipmen to acquire nicknames , and Parsons was called " Deacon " , a play on his last name . This became shortened to " Deak " . 
 = = Ordnance = = 
 On graduating in June 1922 , Parsons was commissioned as an ensign and posted to the battleship USS Idaho , where he was placed in charge of one of the 14 @-@ inch gun turrets . In May 1927 , Parsons , now a lieutenant ( junior grade ) , returned to Annapolis , where he commenced a course in ordnance at the Naval Postgraduate School . He became friends with Lieutenant Jack Crenshaw , a fellow officer attending the same training course . Jack asked Parsons to be best man at his wedding to Betty Cluverius , the daughter of the Commandant of the Norfolk Navy Yard , Rear Admiral Wat Tyler Cluverius , Jr . , at the Norfolk Navy Chapel . As best man , Parsons was paired with Betty 's maid of honor , her sister Martha . Parsons and Martha got along well , and in November 1929 , they too were married at the Norfolk Navy Chapel . This time , Jack and Betty were best man and maid of honor . 
 The ordnance course was normally followed by a relevant field posting , so Parsons was sent to the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia to further study ballistics under L.T.E. Thompson . Following the usual pattern of alternating duty afloat and ashore , Parsons was posted to the battleship USS Texas in June 1930 , with the rank of lieutenant . In November , the Commander in Chief United States Fleet , Admiral Jehu V. Chase , hoisted his flag on the Texas , bringing Cluverius with him as his chief of staff . This was awkward for Parsons , but Cluverius understood , being himself the son @-@ in @-@ law of an admiral , in his case , Admiral William T. Sampson . 
 In July 1933 , Parsons became liaison officer between the Bureau of Ordnance and the Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) in Washington , DC . At the NRL he was briefed by the head of its Radio Division , A. Hoyt Taylor , who told him about experiments that had been carried out into what the Navy would later name radar . Parsons immediately recognized the potential of the new invention to locate ships and aircraft , and perhaps even track shells in flight . For this , he realized that he was going to need high frequency microwaves . He discovered that no one had attempted this . The scientists had not considered all the applications of the technology , and the Navy bureaus had not grasped their potential . He was able to persuade the scientists to establish a group to investigate microwave radar , but without official sanction it had low priority . Parsons submitted a memorandum on the subject to the Bureau of Ordnance ( BuOrd ) requesting $ 5 @,@ 000 per annum for research . To his dismay , the BuOrd and Bureau of Engineering , which was responsible for the NRL , turned his proposal down . 
 Some thought that Parsons was ruining his career with his advocacy of radar , but he acquired one powerful backer . The Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics ( BuAer ) , Rear Admiral Ernest J. King , supported the use of radar as a means of determining aircraft altitude . When the Bureau of Engineering protested that such a device would necessarily be too large to carry on a plane , King told them that it would still be worthwhile , even if the only aircraft in the Navy big enough to carry it was the airship USS Macon . 
 Parson 's marriage produced three daughters . The first , Hannah , was born in 1932 ; the second , Margaret ( Peggy ) , followed in 1934 . Hannah died of polio in April 1935 . Parsons returned to sea in June 1936 as the executive officer of the destroyer USS Aylwin . He was promoted to lieutenant commander in May 1937 . His third daughter , Clara ( Clare ) , was born the same year . On that occasion , Parsons left Martha with the newborn and three @-@ year @-@ old Peggy to care for and reported for duty the next day , believing that his first responsibility was to his ship . His skipper , Commander Earl E. Stone , did not agree , and sent him home . In March 1938 , Rear Admiral William R. Sexton had Parsons assigned to his flagship , the cruiser USS Detroit , as gunnery officer . Parson 's task was to improve the gunnery scores of his command , and in this he succeeded . 
 = = Proximity fuze = = 
 Parsons was posted back to Dahlgren in September 1939 as experimental officer . The atmosphere had changed considerably . In June 1940 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved the creation of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , under the direction of Vannevar Bush . Richard C. Tolman , dean of the graduate school at Caltech , was given responsibility for the NDRC 's Armor and Ordnance Division . Tolman met with Parsons and Thompson in July 1940 , and discussed their needs . Within the Navy , too , there was a change of attitude , with Captain William H. P. ( Spike ) Blandy as the head of BuOrd 's Research Desk . Blandy welcomed the assistance of NDRC scientists in improving and developing weapons . 
 In September 1940 , Parsons and Merle Tuve of NDRC began work on a new concept . Shooting down an aircraft with an anti @-@ aircraft gun was a difficult proposition . As a shell had to hit a speeding aircraft at an uncertain altitude , the only hope seemed to be to fill the sky with ammunition . A direct hit was not actually required ; an aircraft might be destroyed or critically damaged by a shell detonating nearby . With this in mind , anti @-@ aircraft gunners used time fuzes to increase the possibility of damage . The question then arose as to whether radar could be used to create an explosion in the proximity of an aircraft . Tuve 's first suggestion was to have an aircraft drop a radar @-@ controlled bomb on a bomber formation . Parsons saw that while this was technically feasible , it was tactically problematic . 
 The ideal solution was a proximity fuze inside an artillery shell , but there were numerous technical difficulties with this . The radar set had to be made small enough to fit inside a shell , and its glass vacuum tubes had to first withstand the 20 @,@ 000 g force of being fired from a gun , and then 500 rotations per second in flight . A special Section T of NDRC was created , chaired by Tuve , with Parsons as special assistant to Bush and liaison between NDRC and BuOrd . 
 On 29 January 1942 , Parsons reported to Blandy that a batch of fifty proximity fuzes from the pilot production plant had been test fired , and 26 of them had exploded correctly . Blandy therefore ordered full @-@ scale production to begin . In April 1942 , Bush , now the Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , placed the project directly under OSRD . The research effort remained under Tuve but moved to the Johns Hopkins University 's Applied Physics Laboratory ( APL ) , where Parsons was BuOrd 's representative . In August 1942 , a live firing test was conducted with the newly commissioned cruiser USS Cleveland . Three pilotless drones were shot down in succession . 
 Parsons had the new proximity fuzes , now known as VT ( variable time ) fuze , Mark 32 , flown to the Mare Island Navy Yard , where they were mated with 5 " / 38 caliber gun rounds . Some 5 @,@ 000 of them were then shipped to the South Pacific . Parsons flew there himself , where he met with Admiral William F. Halsey at his headquarters in Noumea . He arranged for Parsons to take VT fuzes out with him on the cruiser USS Helena . On 6 January 1943 , Helena was part of a cruiser force that bombarded Munda in the Solomon Islands . On the return trip , the cruisers were attacked by four Aichi D3A ( Val ) dive bombers . Helena fired at one with a VT fuze . It exploded close to the aircraft , which crashed into the sea . 
 To preserve the secret of the weapon , its use was initially permitted only over water , where a dud round could not fall into enemy hands . In late 1943 , the Army obtained permission for it to be used over land . It proved particularly effective against the V @-@ 1 flying bomb over England , and later Antwerp in 1944 . The use of a version fired from howitzers against ground targets was authorized in response to the German Ardennes Offensive in December 1944 , with deadly effect . By the end of 1944 , VT fuzes were coming off the production lines at the rate of 40 @,@ 000 per day . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 = = = Project Y = = = 
 Parsons returned to Dahlgren in March 1943 . Around this time , a research laboratory was established at Los Alamos , New Mexico under the direction of J. Robert Oppenheimer as Project Y , which was part of the Manhattan Project , the top @-@ secret effort to develop an atomic bomb . The creation of a practical weapon would necessarily require an expert in ordnance , and Oppenheimer tentatively pencilled in Tolman for the role , but getting him released from OSRD was another matter . Until then , Oppenheimer had to do the job himself . In May 1943 , the Manhattan Project 's director , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , took up the matter with the Military Policy Committee , the high @-@ level committee that oversaw the Manhattan Project . It consisted of Vannevar Bush as its chairman , Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer who represented the Army , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell as the Navy 's representative . 
 Groves told them that he was looking for someone with " a sound understanding of both practical and theoretical ordnance – high explosives , guns and fusing – a wide acquaintance and an excellent reputation among military ordnance people and an ability to gain their support ; a reasonably broad background in scientific development ; and an ability to attract and hold the respect of scientists . " He said that a military officer would be his ideal , as the job might involve planning and coordinating the use of the bomb , but added that he knew of no Army officer who fit the bill . Bush then suggested Parsons , a nomination supported by Purnell . The next morning , Parsons received a phone call from Purnell , ordering him to report to Admiral King , who was now the Commander in Chief , US Fleet ( Cominch ) . In a terse ten @-@ minute meeting , King briefed Parsons on the Project , which he said had his full backing . That afternoon , Parsons met with Groves , who quickly sized him up as the right man for the job . 
 Parsons was relieved of his duties at Dahlgren and officially assigned to Admiral King 's Cominch staff on 1 June 1943 , with a promotion to the rank of captain . On 15 June 1943 he arrived at Los Alamos as Associate Director . Parsons would be Oppenheimer 's second in command . Parsons and his family moved into one of the houses on " Bathtub Row " that had formerly belonged to the headmaster and staff of the Los Alamos Ranch School . Bathtub row , so @-@ called because the houses were the only ones at Los Alamos with bathtubs , was the most prestigious address at Los Alamos . Parsons became Oppenheimer 's next @-@ door neighbor , and in fact his house was slightly larger , because Parsons had two children and Oppenheimer , at this point , had only one . With two school @-@ age children , Parsons took a keen interest in the construction of the Central School at Los Alamos , and became president of the school board . Instead of the temporary two @-@ story structure that Groves had envisioned in the interest of economy and not misusing the project 's high priorities for labor and materials , Parsons had a well @-@ built , modern , single @-@ story school constructed . On seeing the result , Groves said : " I 'll hold you personally responsible for this , Parsons . " 
 Oppenheimer had already recruited key people for Parson 's Ordnance Division . Edwin McMillan was a physicist who headed the Proving Ground Group . His first task was to establish the ordnance test area . Later he became Parsons ' deputy for the gun @-@ type fission weapon . Charles Critchfield , a mathematical physicist with ordnance experience at the Army 's Aberdeen Proving Ground , was in charge of the Target , Projectile and Source Group . Kenneth Bainbridge arrived in August to take charge of the Instrumentation Group . Parsons recruited Robert Brode from the proximity fuze project to become head of the Fuze Development Group . Joseph Hirschfelder was brought in as an expert on internal ballistics , and headed the Interior Ballistics Group . From the beginning , Parsons wanted Norman Ramsey as the head of the delivery group . Edward L. Bowles , the scientific adviser to the Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , was reluctant to part with Ramsey , but gave way under pressure from Groves , Tolman and Bush . Perhaps the most controversial group head would be Seth Neddermeyer , the head of the Implosion Experimentation Group ; for the time being , Parson accorded a relatively low priority to this work . He also recruited Hazel Greenbacker as his secretary . 
 Groves , among others , felt that Parsons had a tendency to fill positions with Naval officers . There was some aspect of service parochialism , and Parsons believed that involvement in the Manhattan Project would be important for the future of the Navy , but it was also due to the difficulty of getting highly skilled people from any source in wartime . Parsons simply found it easiest to get them through Navy channels . Lieutenant Commander Norris Bradbury said that he did not wish to join Project Y , but was soon on his way to Los Alamos anyway . Parsons recruited Commander Francis Birch , who replaced McMillan at Anchor Ranch . Commander Frederick Ashworth was a Naval ordnance officer and aviator who was senior aviator at Dahlgren when he was brought in to work on the delivery side . By the end of the war , there were 41 Naval officers at Los Alamos . 
 Over the next few months , Parsons ' division designed the gun @-@ type plutonium weapon , codenamed Thin Man . It was assumed that a uranium @-@ 235 weapon would be similar in nature . Hirschfelder 's group considered various designs , and evaluated different propellants . The ordnance test area , which became known as " Anchor Ranch " , was established on a nearby ranch , where Parsons conducted test firings with a 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft gun . Work on implosion lagged by comparison , but this was not initially a major concern , because it was expected that the gun @-@ type would work with both uranium and plutonium . However , Oppenheimer , Groves and Parsons lobbied Purnell and Tolman to get John von Neumann to have a look at the problem . Von Neumann suggested the use of shaped charges to initiate implosion . 
 Oppenheimer considered that there was a " reciprocal lack of confidence " between Parsons and Neddermeyer , and in October 1943 he brought in George Kistiakowsky , who began a new attack on the implosion design . Kistiakowsky clashed with both Parsons and Neddermeyer , but felt that " my disagreements with Deak Parsons were very minor compared to my disagreements with Neddermeyer . " The implosion design acquired a new urgency in April 1944 , when studies of reactor @-@ produced plutonium confirmed that it could not be used in a gun @-@ type weapon . An accelerated effort was called for to design and build the implosion @-@ type weapon , codenamed Fat Man . Two new groups were created at Los Alamos : X ( for explosives ) Division headed by Kistiakowsky , and G ( for gadget ) Division under Robert Bacher . Parsons was placed in charge of O ( for ordnance ) Division , with responsibility for both the gun @-@ type design and delivery . 
 The uranium gun @-@ type weapon known as Little Boy did prove to be simpler than Thin Man . The gun velocity needed to be only 1 @,@ 000 feet per second ( 300 m / s ) , a third that of Thin Man . A corresponding reduction in the barrel length reduced the bomb 's overall length to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . In turn , this made it much easier to handle , and permitted a conventional bomb shape , resulting in a more predictable flight . The main concerns with Little Boy were its safety and reliability . 
 = = = Project Alberta = = = 
 The delivery program , codenamed Project Alberta , got underway under Ramsey 's direction in October 1943 . Starting in November , the Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field , Ohio , began Silverplate , the codename for the modification of B @-@ 29s to carry the bombs . Parsons arranged for a test program at Dahlgren using scale models of Thin Man and Fat Man . Test drops were carried out at Muroc Army Air Field , California and the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California using full @-@ size replicas of Fat Man known as pumpkin bombs . The ungainly and non @-@ aerodynamic shape of Fat Man proved to be the main difficulty , but many other problems were encountered and overcome . Parsons , wrote Oppenheimer , " has been almost alone in this project to appreciate the actual military and engineering problems which we would encounter . He has been almost alone in insisting on facing these problems at a date early enough so that we might arrive at their solution . " 
 In July 1944 , Parsons joined Jack Crenshaw , who was investigating the Port Chicago disaster . The two men surveyed the disaster area , where 1 @,@ 500 tons of munitions had exploded and 320 men had lost their lives . A year later , Parsons watched the Trinity nuclear test from a circling B @-@ 29 . Afterwards , Parsons flew to Tinian , where the B @-@ 29s of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets ' 509th Composite Group were preparing to deliver the weapons . En route , he stopped off in San Diego to visit his eighteen @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ brother Bob , a marine who had been badly wounded in the Battle of Iwo Jima . Parsons also met with Captain Charles B. McVay III , the skipper of the cruiser USS Indianapolis , in Purnell 's office at the Embarcadero in San Francisco and gave McVay his orders : 
 You will sail at high speed to Tinian where your cargo will be taken off by others . You will not be told what the cargo is , but it is to be guarded even after the life of your vessel . If she goes down , save the cargo at all costs , in a lifeboat if necessary . And every day you save on your voyage will cut the length of the war by just that much . 
 Parsons was in charge of scientists and technicians from Project Alberta on Tinian , who were nominally organized as the 1st Technical Service Detachment . Their role was the handling and maintenance of the nuclear weapons . Parsons was joined by Purnell , who represented the Military Liaison Committee , and Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , Groves ' Deputy for Operations . They became , informally , the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " , with decision @-@ making authority over the nuclear mission . Before Farrell left for Tinian , Groves had told him : " Don 't let Parsons get killed . We need him ! " 
 In the space of a week on Tinian , four B @-@ 29s crashed and burned on the runway . Parsons became very concerned . If a B @-@ 29 crashed with a Little Boy , the fire could cook off the explosive and detonate the weapon , with catastrophic consequences . He raised the possibility of arming the bomb in flight with Farrell , who agreed that it might be a good idea . Farrell asked Parsons if he knew how to perform this task . " No sir , I don 't " , Parsons conceded , " but I 've got all afternoon to learn . " The night before the mission , Parsons repeatedly practiced inserting the powder charge and detonator in the bomb in the poor visibility and cramped conditions of the bomb bay . 
 Parsons participated in the bombing of Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 , flying on the Enola Gay as weaponeer and Senior Military Technical Observer . Shortly after takeoff , he clambered into the bomb bay and carefully carried out the procedure that he had rehearsed the night before . It was Parsons and not Tibbetts , the pilot , who was in charge of the mission . He approved the choice of Hiroshima as the target , and gave the final approval for the bomb to be released . For his part in the mission , Parsons was awarded the Silver Star , and was promoted to the wartime rank of commodore on 10 August 1945 . For his work on the Manhattan Project , he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = Postwar career = = 
 In November 1945 , King created a new position of Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Special Weapons , which was given to Vice Admiral Blandy . Parsons became Blandy 's assistant . In turn , Parsons had two assistants of his own , Ashworth and Horacio Rivero , Jr . He also brought Greenbacker from Los Alamos to help set up the new office . Parsons was a strong supporter of research into the use of nuclear power for warship propulsion , but disagreed with Rear Admiral Harold G. Bowen , Sr. , the head of the Office of Research and Inventions , who wanted the Navy to initiate its own nuclear project . Parsons felt that the Navy should work with the Manhattan Project , and arranged for Naval officers to be assigned to Oak Ridge . The most senior of them was his former classmate Rickover , who became assistant director there . They immersed themselves in the study of nuclear energy , laying the foundations for a nuclear @-@ powered navy . 
 On 11 January 1946 , Blandy was appointed to command Joint Task Force One ( JTF @-@ 1 ) , a special force created to conduct a series of nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll , which he named Operation Crossroads , to determine the effect of nuclear weapons on warships . Parsons , who was promoted to the rank of rear admiral on 8 January 1946 , became Blandy 's Deputy Commander for Technical Direction and Commander Task Group 1 @.@ 1 . Parsons worked hard to make a success of the operation , which he described as " the largest laboratory experiment in history " . In addition to the 95 target ships , there was a support fleet of more than 150 ships , 156 aircraft , and over 42 @,@ 000 personnel . 
 Parsons witnessed the first explosion , Able , from the deck of the task force flagship , the command ship USS Mount McKinley . An airburst like the Hiroshima blast , it was unimpressive , and even Parsons thought that it must have been smaller than the Hiroshima bomb . It failed to sink the target ship , the battleship USS Nevada , mainly because it missed it by a considerable distance . This made it difficult to assess the amount of damage caused , which was the objective of the exercise . Blandy then announced that the next test , Baker , would occur in just three weeks . This meant that Parsons had to carry out the evaluation of Able simultaneously with the preparations for Baker . This time he assisted with the final preparations on USS LSM @-@ 60 before heading back to seaplane tender USS Cumberland Sound for the test . The underwater Baker explosion was no larger than Able , but the dome and water column made it look far more spectacular . The real problem was the radioactive fallout , as Colonel Stafford L. Warren , the Manhattan Project 's medical advisor , had predicted . The target ships proved impossible to decontaminate and , lacking targets , the test series had to be called off . For his part in Operation Crossroads , Parsons was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 The Special Weapons Office was abolished in November 1946 , and the Manhattan Project followed suit at the end of the year . A civilian agency , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , was created by the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project , including development , production and control of nuclear weapons . The law provided for a Military Liaison Committee ( MLC ) to advise the AEC on military matters , and Parsons became a member . A joint Army @-@ Navy organization , the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) , was created to handle the military aspects of nuclear weapons . Groves was appointed to command the AFSWP , with Parsons and Air Force Major General Roscoe C. Wilson as his deputies . In this capacity , Parsons pressed for the development of improved nuclear weapons . During the Operation Sandstone series of nuclear weapon tests at Enewetak Atoll in 1948 , Parsons once again served as deputy commander . Parsons hoped that his next posting would be to sea , but he was instead sent to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group in 1949 . He finally returned to sea duty in 1951 , this time as Commander , Cruiser Division 6 , despite having never commanded a ship . Parsons and his cruisers conducted a tour of the Mediterranean showing the flag . He then became Deputy Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance in March 1952 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Parsons remained in contact with Oppenheimer . The two men and their wives visited each other from time to time , and the Parsons family especially enjoyed visiting its former neighbors at their new home at Olden Manor , a 17th @-@ century estate with a cook and groundskeeper , surrounded by 265 acres ( 107 ha ) of woodlands at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey . Parsons was disturbed by the rise of McCarthyism in the early 1950s . In 1953 he wrote a letter to Oppenheimer expressing his hope that " the anti @-@ intellectualism of recent months may have passed its peak " . On 4 December that year , Parsons heard of President Dwight Eisenhower 's " blank wall " directive , blocking Oppenheimer from access to classified material . Parsons became visibly upset , and that night began experiencing severe chest pains . The next morning , he went to Bethesda Naval Hospital , where he died while the doctors were still examining him . He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery alongside his daughter Hannah . He was survived by his father , brother , half @-@ brother and sister , as well as his wife Martha and daughters Peggy and Clare . 
 The Rear Admiral William S. Parsons Award for Scientific and Technical Progress was established by the Navy in his memory . It is awarded " to a Navy or Marine Corps officer , enlisted person , or civilian who has made an outstanding contribution in any field of science that has furthered the development and progress of the Navy or Marine Corps . " The Forrest Sherman @-@ class destroyer USS Parsons was named in his honor . Her keel was laid down by Ingalls Shipbuilding of Pascagoula , Mississippi on 17 June 1957 and was launched by his widow Martha on 17 August 1958 . When it was rechristened as a guided missile destroyer ( DDG @-@ 33 ) in 1967 , Clare , now a Naval officer herself , represented her family . Parsons was decommissioned on 19 November 1982 , stricken from the Navy list on 1 December 1984 , and disposed of as a target on 25 April 1989 . The Deak Parsons Center , headquarters of Afloat Training Group , Atlantic , in Norfolk , Virginia , was also named for him . Parsons ' portrait is among a series of paintings related to Operation Crossroads . His papers are in the Naval Historical Center in Washington , DC . 
 = Mario Party 5 = 
 Mario Party 5 ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Mario <unk> Faibu ) is a party video game developed by Hudson Soft and published by Nintendo . It is the second game in the Mario Party series for Nintendo GameCube . It was released in North America on November 10 , 2003 ; in Japan on November 28 , 2003 ; and in Europe and Australia on December 5 , 2003 . Mario Party 5 is the fifth installment in the Mario Party series . 
 The game is set in the fictional world of the Dream Depot , consisting of seven game boards . The single @-@ player " Story " mode involves the player winning multiple games against the Koopa Kids to prevent Bowser from conquering the Dream Depot . The main multiplayer game mode consists of four characters from Mario series playing a board game , with each board having a set theme . The game also features several minigames , which are played after every set of turns . Mario Party 5 introduces the " Super Duel " mode to the franchise , which requires players to assemble and control custom made battle vehicles which can be used in combat against other machines . The game features ten playable characters , with playable debuts to the series from Toad , Boo , and Koopa Kid . 
 Mario Party 5 received " average " reviews by the media ; reviewers enjoyed the new minigames of the series , although a perceived lack of originality was criticized . The game became part of the Nintendo Player 's Choice label in 2004 , and won the Console Children 's Award at the 2004 Interactive Achievement Awards . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mario Party 5 retains the fundamental gameplay featured in previous installments , which is based upon a themed board game played by characters of the Mario series . The player 's objective is to obtain the most stars by the end of the board game , which are usually purchased when passing the designated star space on the game board . Coins are earned mainly by winning minigames , which occur after all players have rolled the die . " Party Mode " is the main multiplayer mode , and involves four characters competing in a standard board game either independently or in opposing pairs . As with its predecessors , players can adjust the number of turns in a game by multiples of five , and determine the difficulty of artificial intelligence opponents , among others . 
 Mario Party 5 features ten playable characters , including three additional characters to the series : Toad , Boo , and Koopa Kid . Hudson omitted Donkey Kong as a playable character from the series in this installment , instead featuring him in the " DK space " , which initiates an event granting the possibility of a star or coins whenever landed on . Like previous installments , blue and red spaces add or deduct three coins from players when they land on them . " Bowser spaces " return from Mario Party 4 . While the series ' predecessors used item shops as a means to obtain items , Mario Party 5 introduces the capsule system . Capsules are containers that hold a single item which are acquired when passing the " Capsule Machine " on the board . The items contained within them serve a variety of purposes , from increasing the range of the die and thus movement , to deducting ten coins from an opponent . The capsules can only be thrown up to ten spaces ahead of the current position . During a game , the gameplay is altered for the last five turns with the options selected randomly via a roulette wheel ; such changes include tripling the coin benefit or deficit from coloured spaces . 
 The game 's boards incorporate the theme of the Dream Depot , with each having " Dream " at the end of the board 's title , except for the " Bowser 's Nightmare " board . Themes of the boards include dreams of toys and treasure hunting , among others . Each board consists of multiple types of spaces , some of which grant special types of minigames that cannot be accessed regularly . Some spaces , specifically " happening " spaces , will incorporate the relevant theme ; for example , a giant robot resembling Mecha Bowser will shoot any character back to the start when landing on its " happening " space in the Toy Dream board . 
 Players can choose to play minigames separate from the board game context via " Minigame Mode " . The minigames are categorized by their character structure , with " 4 @-@ player " , " 1 vs. 3 " , and " 2 vs. 2 " available . Besides these standard versions , there are also the " DK " and " Bowser " minigames , which are themed to reflect their titular character ; " Battle " minigames are retained from the previous three Mario Party games . " Duel " minigames , which involve two players competing against each other , are re @-@ introduced . The set of minigames are available without a structure ( " Free play " ) in this mode , but can be formatted into tournaments and separate objectives like in " Mini @-@ game circuit " , involving the characters winning minigames to reach the finish line first . A total of 75 minigames can be played , but they all must be unlocked via " Party mode " and " Story mode " before they can be played in " Minigame Mode " . In " Bonus mode " , a set of three larger games that do not appear in usual play can be accessed ; this involves a card @-@ based board game ( " Card party " ) , as well as Beach volleyball and Ice hockey . 
 Mario Party 5 introduced the " Super @-@ Duel Mode " , a game involving the player assembling and controlling a combat vehicle . Each component of the vehicle can be bought separately ; these do not necessarily have to fit with other parts stylistically , and contribute to the vehicle 's general statistics regarding fields such as health and speed . Once the vehicle is assembled and named , it can engage AI or human opponents in a single match or in tournaments . Variants of this are available , including a capture the flag mode and another requiring the player to shoot mechanical rabbits . 
 = = = Plot and setting = = = 
 The story mode in Mario Party 5 is completely different from the story modes of Mario Party 3 and Mario Party 4 . Players face three Koopa Kids ( red , green , and blue ) . The only way to defeat them and clear the board is to take all their coins away , mostly by beating them in minigames . Players must take all coins from a Koopa Kid to defeat him . If players lose all of the coins or don 't defeat the Koopa Kids within fifteen turns , the game is over . After players win five boards , they face Bowser in a final stage mini @-@ game called " <unk> " , which is a one @-@ on @-@ one mini @-@ game with Bowser . There are four parts to the battle . First , players go against <unk> ( robotic versions of Koopa <unk> ) . Next , players have to move and jump around to avoid three rings of fire for a short time . Then players face Bowser directly ; they must make him jump onto a tile three times to clear the third part . The final part of the minigame is the final battle , where Bowser grows . After throwing fireballs and hitting Bowser with them five times , the game is cleared and the final board is unlocked . 
 = = Development = = 
 Like its predecessors , Mario Party 5 was published by Nintendo and developed by Hudson Soft . It is the first Mario Party game to have Donkey Kong as a non @-@ playable character . It is also the first Mario Party game to have Wario wearing his current short @-@ sleeve shirt . It is the last Mario Party game where Daisy is voiced by Jen Taylor ; for later games , Jen Taylor is replaced by Deanna Mustard . It is the fifth and final Mario Party game to have Bowser 's sound effects from the first four Mario Party games . 
 Nintendo first unveiled the game at the E3 conference of 2003 , where eight mini @-@ games were available in a playable demonstration . Following release , Nintendo announced Mario Party 5 as a " Player 's Choice " title , which is a label for Nintendo titles that had sold more than one million copies to be sold at a bargain price . Super Mario Fushigi no <unk> Party Super Mario : The Mysterious Rolling Party is an arcade version of Mario Party 5 released exclusively in Japan in 2004 . It was developed by Capcom instead of Hudson Soft . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mario Party 5 received " average " reviews according to the review aggregation website Metacritic . 
 Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner cited the example of coin redistribution in the game , which meant that " You could win every minigame and collect the most coins but still end up in last place " , when giving a second opinion of the game . While acknowledging issues relating to the waiting times during board games , IGN 's Peer Schneider praised this installment for relieving the problem slightly , specifically referring to the Mini <unk> , who all take their turns at the same time in " Story " mode . The quantity and accessibility of the minigames was lauded by GameSpot , although the reviewer Ryan Davis proceeded to note " If you bought Mario Party 4 last year , Mario Party 5 is hard to recommend . " , noting a lack of change to the series formula . Generally , critics cited having a fun experience in Mario Party 5 , although the minigames received a more enthusiastic reaction than the actual board game , with GameSpy commenting that " the sheer volume can keep you compelled . If only you didn 't have to deal with all that BS in @-@ between " when referring to gameplay of the actual board game . 
 Features introduced in the game received a mixed response . The three games in " Bonus " mode were praised , although reviewers were least enthusiastic about " Card Party " , with GameSpot commenting that " This mode is proof that the minigames are really what make Mario Party fun , as it 's pretty dull . " The capsule system was generally criticised as the pertaining animations seemed to exacerbate the game 's slow place . Despite other reviewers ' claims that the capsule system contributed to the game 's dependence on chance , IGN commended the system for contributing to a more dynamic game board experience . The " Super Duel " mode was praised as a reasonably fun feature , although the gameplay was rated as " sluggish " . GameSpy noted the seemingly increased board sizes from previous installments , which apparently made obtaining stars and using ranged items more difficult 
 The game 's graphics received a mediocre response , with GameSpot commenting that the presentation is " starting to seem a bit antiquated " when noting that the character models did not seem to have been updated from Mario Party 4 . Despite this , IGN commented that Mario Party 5 " isn 't a bad looking game " , noting the level of detail and variety given to the game 's board game 's and maps . GameSpot noted that the game 's audio did fit the game , although they commented that it " is largely recycled from Mario Party 4 " . IGN criticized the " cheesy " and unadventurous soundtrack , as well as a lack of voice acting . The game won the Console Children 's Award at the 2004 Interactive Achievement Awards . 
 = Paweł Jasienica = 
