 = = Critical reception = = 
 Curiosity received critical acclaim from contemporary critics . Bill Lamb of About.com began his review stating that it is always interesting to have new artists making music both familiar and fresh . He went to describe the six " electronic pop songs strong , almost too short to be satisfying but immensely repeatable . " Lamb also added that Jepsen 's " style is summery and bright without the emotional bogging down of [ Demi ] Lovato or the flat out drudgery of Jessie J " Allmusic critic Jon O 'Brien stated that , when compared to Jepsen 's previous effort Tug of War ( 2008 ) , the EP " unexpectedly abandons her previous singer / songwriter approach in favor of an unashamed bubblegum sound which harks back to the early 2000s pop princess glory days of Britney , Christina , Jessica , and Mandy . " Fiona Eadie of Cadence Canada described the musical style of the album as " pop . But not in the annoying , auto @-@ tune , and talentless way . Her perfectly pitched voice makes it clear that this girl has real talent . " Eadie summarized her review saying that Curiosity " is filled with music that dances . And it is your choice to listen to it with or without a hairbrush ( a.k.a. microphone ) in front of your bedroom mirror . Overall a great EP . I can ’ t wait to put the top down and blast her tunes all summer . " Jen Appel of <unk> Radio commented that , overall , Curiosity is the kind of extended play that brings attention from the teenage public due to its mainstream songs , and added , " if you are looking for fun , lovable songs to make you smile , this is your go @-@ to mix . " Appel only criticized the lyrical content , noting that it is " very childish but seem to work with the music nonetheless . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Call Me Maybe " was released as the lead single from the EP on September 20 , 2011 . After pop singers Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez tweeted about the song , Jepsen gained international attention and was signed to Schoolboy Records , releasing her single in the United States through the label . The song received generally positive reviews from contemporary critics , who praised its composition and clever lyrical content , while deeming it as the perfect pop song . " Call Me Maybe " has attained commercial success worldwide , topping the charts in several countries , and is one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time , with over 18 million copies sold . An accompanying music video portrays Jepsen trying to gain attention from her attractive neighbor , who is revealed to be gay at the close of the story . To promote the song , Jepsen has performed on several live televised shows , including on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , where she made her US television debut , and at the MTV Europe Music Awards . 
 " Curiosity " was released as the second single on May 1 , 2012 . Jepsen shot a video for the song on June 5 , 2012 with director Colin <unk> . The music video was not released , and leaked on November 25 , 2012 . According to the description of the leak , " this video was shelved because it was " too sexy " for her new tween demographic . " On March 26 , 2012 , Jepsen visited WBBM @-@ FM 's Morning Show and performed the two singles . In the last week of January 2013 , the singer filmed an acoustic performance of the song in Tokyo exclusively for Billboard . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = W. E. B. Du Bois = 
 William Edward Burghardt " W. E. B. " Du Bois ( pronounced / <unk> / doo @-@ <unk> ; February 23 , 1868 – August 27 , 1963 ) was an American sociologist , historian , civil rights activist , Pan @-@ Africanist , author , and editor . Born in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , Du Bois grew up in a relatively tolerant and integrated community . After completing graduate work at the University of Berlin and Harvard , where he was the first African American to earn a doctorate , he became a professor of history , sociology and economics at Atlanta University . Du Bois was one of the co @-@ founders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) in 1909 . 
 Du Bois rose to national prominence as the leader of the Niagara Movement , a group of African @-@ American activists who wanted equal rights for blacks . Du Bois and his supporters opposed the Atlanta compromise , an agreement crafted by Booker T. Washington which provided that Southern blacks would work and submit to white political rule , while Southern whites guaranteed that blacks would receive basic educational and economic opportunities . Instead , Du Bois insisted on full civil rights and increased political representation , which he believed would be brought about by the African @-@ American intellectual elite . He referred to this group as the Talented Tenth and believed that African Americans needed the chances for advanced education to develop its leadership . 
 Racism was the main target of Du Bois 's polemics , and he strongly protested against lynching , Jim Crow laws , and discrimination in education and employment . His cause included people of color everywhere , particularly Africans and Asians in colonies . He was a proponent of Pan @-@ Africanism and helped organize several Pan @-@ African Congresses to fight for independence of African colonies from European powers . Du Bois made several trips to Europe , Africa and Asia . After World War I , he surveyed the experiences of American black soldiers in France and documented widespread bigotry in the United States military . 
 Du Bois was a prolific author . His collection of essays , The Souls of Black Folk , was a seminal work in African @-@ American literature ; and his 1935 magnum opus Black Reconstruction in America challenged the prevailing orthodoxy that blacks were responsible for the failures of the Reconstruction Era . He wrote one of the first scientific treatises in the field of American sociology , and he published three autobiographies , each of which contains insightful essays on sociology , politics and history . In his role as editor of the NAACP 's journal The Crisis , he published many influential pieces . Du Bois believed that capitalism was a primary cause of racism , and he was generally sympathetic to socialist causes throughout his life . He was an ardent peace activist and advocated nuclear disarmament . The United States ' Civil Rights Act , embodying many of the reforms for which Du Bois had campaigned his entire life , was enacted a year after his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Edward Burghardt Du Bois was born on February 23 , 1868 , in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , to Alfred and Mary Silvina ( née Burghardt ) Du Bois . Mary Silvina Burghardt 's family was part of the very small free black population of Great Barrington and had long owned land in the state . She was descended from Dutch , African and English ancestors . William Du Bois 's maternal great @-@ great @-@ grandfather was Tom Burghardt , a slave ( born in West Africa around 1730 ) , who was held by the Dutch colonist <unk> Burghardt . Tom briefly served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , which may have been how he gained his freedom during the 18th century . His son Jack Burghardt was the father of Othello Burghardt , who was the father of Mary Silvina Burghardt . 
 William Du Bois 's paternal great @-@ grandfather was James Du Bois of Poughkeepsie , New York , an ethnic French @-@ American who fathered several children with slave mistresses . One of James ' mixed @-@ race sons was Alexander . He traveled and worked in Haiti , where he fathered a son , Alfred , with a mistress . Alexander returned to Connecticut , leaving Alfred in Haiti with his mother . 
 Sometime before 1860 , Alfred Du Bois emigrated to the United States , settling in Massachusetts . He married Mary Silvina Burghardt on February 5 , 1867 , in Housatonic . Alfred left Mary in 1870 , two years after their son William was born . Mary Burghardt Du Bois moved with her son back to her parents ' house in Great Barrington until he was five . She worked to support her family ( receiving some assistance from her brother and neighbors ) , until she suffered a stroke in the early 1880s . She died in 1885 . 
 Great Barrington had a majority European American community , who treated Du Bois generally well . He attended the local integrated public school and played with white schoolmates . As an adult , he wrote about racism which he felt as a fatherless child and the experience of being a minority in the town . But , teachers recognized his ability and encouraged his intellectual pursuits , and his rewarding experience with academic studies led him to believe that he could use his knowledge to empower African Americans . Du Bois graduated from the town 's Searles High School . When Du Bois decided to attend college , the congregation of his childhood church , the First Congregational Church of Great Barrington , raised the money for his tuition . 
 = = = University education = = = 
 Relying on money donated by neighbors , Du Bois attended Fisk University , a historically black college in Nashville , Tennessee , from 1885 to 1888 . His travel to and residency in the South was Du Bois 's first experience with Southern racism , which at the time encompassed Jim Crow laws , bigotry , suppression of black voting , and lynchings ; the lattermost reached a peak in the next decade . After receiving a bachelor 's degree from Fisk , he attended Harvard College ( which did not accept course credits from Fisk ) from 1888 to 1890 , where he was strongly influenced by his professor William James , prominent in American philosophy . Du Bois paid his way through three years at Harvard with money from summer jobs , an inheritance , scholarships , and loans from friends . In 1890 , Harvard awarded Du Bois his second bachelor 's degree , cum laude , in history . In 1891 , Du Bois received a scholarship to attend the sociology graduate school at Harvard . 
 In 1892 , Du Bois received a fellowship from the John F. Slater Fund for the Education of Freedmen to attend the University of Berlin for graduate work . While a student in Berlin , he traveled extensively throughout Europe . He came of age intellectually in the German capital , while studying with some of that nation 's most prominent social scientists , including Gustav von Schmoller , Adolph Wagner , and Heinrich von Treitschke . After returning from Europe , Du Bois completed his graduate studies ; in 1895 he was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. from Harvard University . 
 = = = Wilberforce and Philadelphia = = = 
 In the summer of 1894 , Du Bois received several job offers , including one from the prestigious Tuskegee Institute ; he accepted a teaching job at Wilberforce University in Ohio . At Wilberforce , Du Bois was strongly influenced by Alexander <unk> , who believed that ideas and morals are necessary tools to effect social change . While at Wilberforce , Du Bois married Nina Gomer , one of his students , on May 12 , 1896 . 
 After two years at Wilberforce , Du Bois accepted a one @-@ year research job from the University of Pennsylvania as an " assistant in sociology " in the summer of 1896 . He performed sociological field research in Philadelphia 's African @-@ American neighborhoods , which formed the foundation for his landmark study , The Philadelphia Negro , published in 1899 while he was teaching at Atlanta University . It was the first case study of a black community in the United States . By the 1890s , Philadelphia 's black neighborhoods had a negative reputation in terms of crime , poverty , and mortality . Du Bois 's book undermined the stereotypes with experimental evidence , and shaped his approach to segregation and its negative impact on black lives and reputations . The results led Du Bois to realize that racial integration was the key to democratic equality in American cities . 
 While taking part in the American Negro Academy ( ANA ) in 1897 , Du Bois presented a paper in which he rejected Frederick Douglass 's plea for black Americans to integrate into white society . He wrote : " we are Negroes , members of a vast historic race that from the very dawn of creation has slept , but half awakening in the dark forests of its African fatherland " . In the August 1897 issue of Atlantic Monthly , Du Bois published " <unk> of the Negro People " , his first work aimed at the general public , in which he enlarged upon his thesis that African Americans should embrace their African heritage while contributing to American society . 
 = = Atlanta University = = 
 In July 1897 , Du Bois left Philadelphia and took a professorship in history and economics at the historically black Atlanta University in Georgia . His first major academic work was his book The Philadelphia Negro ( 1899 ) , a detailed and comprehensive sociological study of the African @-@ American people of Philadelphia , based on the field work he did in 1896 – 1897 . The work was a breakthrough in scholarship , because it was the first scientific study of African Americans and a major contribution to early scientific sociology in the U.S. In the study , Du Bois coined the phrase " the submerged tenth " to describe the black underclass . Later in 1903 he popularized the term , the " Talented Tenth " , applied to society 's elite class . Du Bois 's terminology reflected his opinion that the elite of a nation , both black and white , was critical to achievements in culture and progress . Du Bois wrote in this period in a dismissive way of the underclass , describing them as " lazy " or " unreliable " , but he – in contrast to other scholars – he attributed many of their societal problems to the ravages of slavery . 
 Du Bois 's output at Atlanta University was prodigious , in spite of a limited budget : He produced numerous social science papers and annually hosted the Atlanta Conference of Negro Problems . Du Bois also received grants from the U.S. government to prepare reports about African @-@ American workforce and culture . His students considered him to be a brilliant , but aloof and strict , teacher . 
 = = = First Pan @-@ African Conference = = = 
 In 1900 Du Bois attended the First Pan @-@ African Conference , held in London from July 23 to 25 . ( This was just prior to the Paris Exhibition of 1900 " in order to allow tourists of African descent to attend both events . " ) It was organized by men from the Caribbean : Haitians Anténor Firmin and <unk> Sylvain and Trinidadian barrister Henry Sylvester Williams . Du Bois played a leading role , drafting a letter ( " Address to the Nations of the World " ) to European leaders appealing to them to struggle against racism , to grant colonies in Africa and the West Indies the right to self @-@ government and to demand political and other rights for African Americans . By this time , southern states were passing new laws and constitutions to <unk> most African Americans , an exclusion from the political system that lasted into the 1960s . 
 At the conclusion of the conference , delegates unanimously adopted the " Address to the Nations of the World " , and sent it to various heads of state where people of African descent were living and suffering oppression . The address implored the United States and the imperial European nations to " acknowledge and protect the rights of people of African descent " and to respect the integrity and independence of " the free Negro States of Abyssinia , Liberia , Haiti , etc . " It was signed by Bishop Alexander Walters ( President of the Pan @-@ African Association ) , the Canadian Rev. Henry B. Brown ( Vice @-@ President ) , Williams ( General Secretary ) and Du Bois ( Chairman of the Committee on the Address ) . The address included Du Bois 's observation , " The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the colour @-@ line . " He used this again three years later in the " <unk> " of his book , The Souls of Black Folk ( 1903 ) . 
 = = = Booker T. Washington and the Atlanta Compromise = = = 
 In the first decade of the new century , Du Bois emerged as a spokesperson for his race , second only to Booker T. Washington . Washington was the director of the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama , and wielded tremendous influence within the African @-@ American and white communities . Washington was the architect of the Atlanta Compromise , an unwritten deal he struck in 1895 with Southern white leaders who dominated state governments after Reconstruction . Essentially the agreement provided that Southern blacks , who lived overwhelmingly in rural communities , would submit to the current discrimination , segregation , disenfranchisement , and non @-@ unionized employment ; that Southern whites would permit blacks to receive a basic education , some economic opportunities , and justice within the legal system ; and that Northern whites would invest in Southern enterprises and fund black educational charities . 
 Despite initially sending congratulations to Washington for his Atlanta Exposition Speech , Du Bois later came to oppose Washington 's plan , along with many other African Americans , including Archibald H. Grimke , Kelly Miller , James Weldon Johnson and Paul Laurence Dunbar – representatives of the class of educated blacks that Du Bois would later call the " talented tenth " . Du Bois felt that African Americans should fight for equal rights and higher opportunities , rather than passively submit to the segregation and discrimination of Washington 's Atlanta Compromise . 
 Du Bois was inspired to greater activism by the lynching of Sam Hose , which occurred near Atlanta in 1899 . Hose was tortured , burned and hung by a mob of two thousand whites . When walking through Atlanta to discuss the lynching with newspaper editor Joel Chandler Harris , Du Bois encountered Hose 's burned knuckles in a storefront display . The episode stunned Du Bois , and he resolved that " one could not be a calm cool , and detached scientist while Negroes were lynched , murdered , and starved . " Du Bois realized that " the cure wasn 't simply telling people the truth , it was inducing them to act on the truth . " 
 In 1901 , Du Bois wrote a review critical of Washington 's autobiography Up from Slavery , which he later expanded and published to a wider audience as the essay " Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others " in The Souls of Black Folk . Later in life , Du Bois regretted having been critical of Washington in those essays . One of the contrasts between the two leaders was their approach to education : Washington felt that African @-@ American schools should focus primarily on industrial education topics such as agricultural and mechanical skills , to prepare southern blacks for the opportunities in the rural areas where most lived . Du Bois felt that black schools should focus more on liberal arts and academic curriculum ( including the classics , arts , and humanities ) , because liberal arts were required to develop a leadership elite . However , as sociologist E. Franklin Frazier and economists Gunnar Myrdal and Thomas Sowell have argued , such disagreement over education was a minor point of difference between Washington and Du Bois ; both men acknowledged the importance of the form of education that the other emphasized . Sowell has also argued that , despite genuine disagreements between the two leaders , the supposed animosity between Washington and Du Bois actually formed among their followers , not between Washington and Du Bois themselves . Du Bois himself also made this observation in an interview published in the The Atlantic Monthly in November 1965 . 
 = = = Niagara Movement = = = 
 In 1905 , Du Bois and several other African @-@ American civil rights activists – including Fredrick L. McGhee , Jesse Max Barber and William Monroe Trotter – met in Canada , near Niagara Falls . There they wrote a declaration of principles opposing the Atlanta Compromise , and incorporated as the Niagara Movement in 1906 . Du Bois and the other " <unk> " wanted to publicize their ideals to other African Americans , but most black periodicals were owned by publishers sympathetic to Washington . Du Bois bought a printing press and started publishing Moon Illustrated Weekly in December 1905 . It was the first African @-@ American illustrated weekly , and Du Bois used it to attack Washington 's positions , but the magazine lasted only for about eight months . Du Bois soon founded and edited another vehicle for his polemics , The Horizon : A Journal of the Color Line , which debuted in 1907 . 
 The <unk> held a second conference in August 1906 , in celebration of the 100th anniversary of abolitionist John Brown 's birth , at the West Virginia site of Brown 's raid on Harper 's Ferry . Reverdy C. Ransom spoke and addressed the fact that Washington 's primary goal was to prepare blacks for employment in their current society : " Today , two classes of Negroes , [ ... ] are standing at the parting of the ways . The one counsels patient submission to our present humiliations and degradations ; [ ... ] The other class believe that it should not submit to being humiliated , degraded , and remanded to an inferior place [ ... ] it does not believe in bartering its manhood for the sake of gain . " 
 = = = The Souls of Black Folk = = = 
 In an effort to portray the genius and humanity of the black race , Du Bois published The Souls of Black Folk ( 1903 ) , a collection of 14 essays . James Weldon Johnson said the book 's effect on African Americans was comparable to that of Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The introduction famously proclaimed that " [ ... ] the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color line . " Each chapter begins with two epigraphs – one from a white poet , and one from a black spiritual – to demonstrate intellectual and cultural parity between black and white cultures . A major theme of the work was the double consciousness faced by African Americans : Being both American and black . This was a unique identity which , according to Du Bois , had been a handicap in the past , but could be a strength in the future : " Henceforth , the destiny of the race could be conceived as leading neither to assimilation nor separatism but to proud , enduring hyphenation . " 
 Jonathon S. Kahn in Divine Discontent : The Religious Imagination of Du Bois shows how Du Bois in his The Souls of Black Folk , represents an exemplary text of pragmatic religious naturalism . On page 12 Kahn writes : " Du Bois needs to be understood as an African American pragmatic religious naturalist . By this I mean that , like Du Bois the American traditional pragmatic religious naturalism , which runs through William James , George Santayana and John Dewey , seeks religion without metaphysical foundations . " Kahn 's interpretation of religious naturalism is very broad but he relates it to specific thinkers . Du Bois 's anti @-@ metaphysical viewpoint places him in the sphere of religious naturalism as typified by William James and others . 
 = = = Racial violence = = = 
 Two calamities in the autumn of 1906 shocked African Americans , and contributed to strengthening support for Du Bois 's struggle for civil rights to prevail over Booker T. Washington 's <unk> . First , President Teddy Roosevelt dishonorably discharged 167 black soldiers because they were accused of crimes as a result of the Brownsville Affair . Many of the discharged soldiers had served for 20 years and were near retirement . Second , in September , riots broke out in Atlanta , precipitated by unfounded allegations of black men assaulting white women . This was a catalyst for racial tensions based on a job shortage and employers playing black workers against white workers . Ten thousand whites rampaged through Atlanta , beating every black person they could find , resulting in over 25 deaths . In the aftermath of the 1906 violence , Du Bois urged blacks to withdraw their support from the Republican Party , because Republicans Roosevelt and William Howard Taft did not sufficiently support blacks . Most African Americans had been loyal to the Republican Party since the time of Abraham Lincoln . 
 Du Bois wrote the essay , " A Litany at Atlanta " , which asserted that the riot demonstrated that the Atlanta Compromise was a failure . Despite upholding their end of the bargain , blacks had failed to receive legal justice in the South . Historian David Lewis has written that the Compromise no longer held because white patrician planters , who took a paternalistic role , had been replaced by aggressive businessmen who were willing to pit blacks against whites . These two calamities were watershed events for the African @-@ American community , marking the ascendancy of Du Bois 's vision of equal rights . 
 = = = Academic work = = = 
 In addition to writing editorials , Du Bois continued to produce scholarly work at Atlanta University . In 1909 , after five years of effort , he published a biography of abolitionist John Brown . It contained many insights , but also contained some factual errors . The work was strongly criticized by The Nation , which was owned by Oswald Villard , who was writing his own , competing biography of John Brown . Du Bois 's work was largely ignored by white scholars . After publishing a piece in Collier 's magazine warning of the end of " white supremacy " , Du Bois had difficulty getting pieces accepted by major periodicals . But he did continue to publish columns regularly in The Horizon magazine . 
 Du Bois was the first African American invited by the American Historical Association ( AHA ) to present a paper at their annual conference . He read his paper , Reconstruction and Its Benefits , to an astounded audience at the AHA 's December 1909 conference . The paper went against the mainstream historical view , promoted by the Dunning School of scholars at Columbia University , that Reconstruction was a disaster , caused by the ineptitude and sloth of blacks . To the contrary , Du Bois asserted that the brief period of African @-@ American leadership in the South accomplished three important goals : democracy , free public schools , and new social welfare legislation . He asserted that it was the federal government 's failure to manage the Freedmen 's Bureau , to distribute land , and to establish an educational system , that doomed African @-@ American prospects in the South . When Du Bois submitted the paper for publication a few months later in the American Historical Review , he asked that the word Negro be capitalized . The editor , J. Franklin Jameson , refused , and published the paper without the capitalization . The paper was mostly ignored by white historians . Du Bois later developed his paper as his ground @-@ breaking 1935 book , Black Reconstruction , which marshaled extensive facts to support his assertions . The AHA did not invite another African @-@ American speaker until 1940 . 
 = = NAACP era = = 
 In May 1909 , Du Bois attended the National Negro Conference in New York . The meeting led to the creation of the National Negro Committee , chaired by Oswald Villard , and dedicated to campaigning for civil rights , equal voting rights , and equal educational opportunities . The following spring , in 1910 , at the second National Negro Conference , the attendees created the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) . At Du Bois 's suggestion , the word " colored " , rather than " black " , was used to include " dark skinned people everywhere . " Dozens of civil rights supporters , black and white , participated in the founding , but most executive officers were white , including Mary Ovington , Charles Edward Russell , William English Walling , and its first president Moorfield Storey . 
 = = = The Crisis = = = 
 NAACP leaders offered Du Bois the position of Director of Publicity and Research . He accepted the job in the summer of 1910 , and moved to New York after resigning from Atlanta University . His primary duty was editing the NAACP 's monthly magazine , which he named The Crisis . The first issue appeared in November 1910 , and Du Bois pronounced that its aim was to set out " those facts and arguments which show the danger of race prejudice , particularly as manifested today toward colored people . " The journal was phenomenally successful , and its circulation would reach 100 @,@ 000 in 1920 . Typical articles in the early editions included one that inveighed against the dishonesty and parochialism of black churches , and one that discussed the Afrocentric origins of Egyptian civilization . 
 An important Du Bois editorial from 1911 helped initiate a nationwide push to induce the Federal government to outlaw lynching . Du Bois , employing the sarcasm he frequently used , commented on a lynching in Pennsylvania : " The point is he was black . Blackness must be punished . Blackness is the crime of crimes [ ... ] It is therefore necessary , as every white scoundrel in the nation knows , to let slip no opportunity of punishing this crime of crimes . Of course if possible , the pretext should be great and overwhelming – some awful stunning crime , made even more horrible by the reporters ' imagination . Failing this , mere murder , arson , barn burning or impudence may do . " 
 The Crisis carried editorials by Du Bois that supported the ideals of unionized labor but excoriated the racism demonstrated by its leaders , who systematically excluded blacks from membership . Du Bois also supported the principles of the Socialist Party ( he was briefly a member of the party from 1910 to 1912 ) , but he denounced the racism demonstrated by some socialist leaders . Frustrated by Republican president Taft 's failure to address widespread lynching , Du Bois endorsed Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson in the 1912 presidential race , in exchange for Wilson 's promise to support black causes . 
 Throughout his writings , Du Bois supported women 's rights , but he found it difficult to publicly endorse the women 's right @-@ to @-@ vote movement because leaders of the suffragism movement refused to support his fight against racial injustice . A Crisis editorial from 1913 broached the taboo subject of interracial marriage : Although Du Bois generally expected persons to marry within their race , he viewed the problem as a women 's rights issue , because laws prohibited white men from marrying black women . Du Bois wrote " [ anti @-@ miscegenation ] laws leave the colored girls absolutely helpless for the lust of white men . It reduces colored women in the eyes of the law to the position of dogs . As low as the white girl falls , she can compel her seducer to marry her [ ... ] We must kill [ anti @-@ miscegenation laws ] not because we are anxious to marry the white men 's sisters , but because we are determined that white men will leave our sisters alone . " 
 During the years 1915 and 1916 , some leaders of the NAACP – disturbed by financial losses at The Crisis , and worried about the inflammatory rhetoric of some of its essays – attempted to oust Du Bois from his editorial position . Du Bois and his supporters prevailed , and he continued in his role as editor . In a 1919 column titled " The True Brownies " , he announced the creation of The Brownies ' Book , the first magazine published for African American children and youth , which he founded with Augustus Granville Dill and Jessie Redmon Fauset . 
 = = = Historian and author = = = 
 The 1910s were a productive time for Du Bois . In 1911 he attended the First Universal Races Congress in London and he published his first novel , The Quest of the Silver Fleece . Two years later , Du Bois wrote , produced , and directed a pageant for the stage , The Star of Ethiopia . In 1915 , Du Bois published The Negro , a general history of black Africans , and the first of its kind in English . The book rebutted claims of African inferiority , and would come to serve as the basis of much Afrocentric historiography in the 20th century . The Negro predicted unity and solidarity for colored people around the world , and it influenced many who supported the Pan @-@ African movement . 
 In 1915 , Atlantic Monthly carried an essay by Du Bois , " The African Roots of the War " , which consolidated Du Bois 's ideas on capitalism and race . In it , he argued that the scramble for Africa was at the root of World War I. He also anticipated later Communist doctrine , by suggesting that wealthy capitalists had pacified white workers by giving them just enough wealth to prevent them from revolting , and by threatening them with competition by the lower @-@ cost labor of colored workers . 
 = = = Combating racism = = = 
 Du Bois used his influential role in the NAACP to oppose a variety of racist incidents . When the silent film The Birth of a Nation premiered in 1915 , Du Bois and the NAACP led the fight to ban the movie , because of its racist portrayal of blacks as brutish and lustful . The fight was not successful , and possibly contributed to the film 's fame , but the publicity drew many new supporters to the NAACP . 
 The private sector was not the only source of racism : under President Wilson , the plight of African Americans in government jobs suffered . Many federal agencies adopted whites @-@ only employment practices , the Army excluded blacks from officer ranks , and the immigration service prohibited the immigration of persons of African ancestry . Du Bois wrote an editorial in 1914 deploring the dismissal of blacks from federal posts , and he supported William Monroe Trotter when Trotter brusquely confronted Wilson about Wilson 's failure to fulfill his campaign promise of justice for blacks . 
 The Crisis continued to wage a campaign against lynching . In 1915 , it published an article with a year @-@ by @-@ year tabulation of 2 @,@ 732 lynchings from 1884 to 1914 . The April 1916 edition covered the group lynching of six African Americans in Lee County , Georgia . Later in 1916 , the " Waco Horror " article covered the lynching of Jesse Washington , a mentally impaired 17 @-@ year @-@ old African American . The article broke new ground by utilizing undercover reporting to expose the conduct of local whites in Waco , Texas . 
 The early 20th century was the era of the Great Migration of blacks from the Southern United States to the Northeast , Midwest and West . Du Bois wrote an editorial supporting the Great Migration , because he felt it would help blacks escape Southern racism , find economic opportunities , and assimilate into American society . 
 Also in the 1910s the American eugenics movement was in its infancy , and many leading eugenicists were openly racist , defining Blacks as " a lower race " . Du Bois opposed this view as an unscientific aberration , but still maintained the basic principle of eugenics : That different persons have different inborn characteristics that make them more or less suited for specific kinds of employment , and that by encouraging the most talented members of all races to procreate would better the " stocks " of humanity . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 As the United States prepared to enter World War I in 1917 , Du Bois 's colleague in the NAACP , Joel Spingarn , established a camp to train African Americans to serve as officers in the United States military . The camp was controversial , because some whites felt that blacks were not qualified to be officers , and some blacks felt that African Americans should not participate in what they considered a white man 's war . Du Bois supported Spingarn 's training camp , but was disappointed when the Army forcibly retired one of its few black officers , Charles Young , on a pretense of ill health . The Army agreed to create 1 @,@ 000 officer positions for blacks , but insisted that 250 come from enlisted men , conditioned to taking orders from whites , rather than from independent @-@ minded blacks that came from the camp . Over 700 @,@ 000 blacks enlisted on the first day of the draft , but were subject to discriminatory conditions which prompted vocal protests from Du Bois . 
 After the East St. Louis Riot occurred in the summer of 1917 , Du Bois traveled to St. Louis to report on the riots . Between 40 and 250 African Americans were massacred by whites , primarily due to resentment caused by St. Louis industry hiring blacks to replace striking white workers . Du Bois 's reporting resulted in an article " The Massacre of East St. Louis " , published in the September issue of The Crisis , which contained photographs and interviews detailing the violence . Historian David Levering Lewis concluded that Du Bois distorted some of the facts in order to increase the propaganda value of the article . To publicly demonstrate the black community 's outrage over the St Louis riot , Du Bois organized the Silent Parade , a march of around 9 @,@ 000 African Americans down New York 's Fifth avenue , the first parade of its kind in New York , and the second instance of blacks publicly demonstrating for civil rights . 
 The Houston riot of 1917 disturbed Du Bois and was a major setback to efforts to permit African Americans to become military officers . The riot began after Houston police arrested and beat two black soldiers ; in response , over 100 black soldiers took to the streets of Houston and killed 16 whites . A military court martial was held , and 19 of the soldiers were hung , and 67 others were imprisoned . In spite of the Houston riot , Du Bois and others successfully pressed the Army to accept the officers trained at Spingarn 's camp , resulting in over 600 black officers joining the Army in October 1917 . 
 Federal officials , concerned about subversive viewpoints expressed by NAACP leaders , attempted to frighten the NAACP by threatening it with investigations . Du Bois was not intimidated , and in 1918 he predicted that World War I would lead to an overthrow of the European colonial system and to the " liberation " of colored people world @-@ wide – in China , in India , and especially in America . NAACP chairman Joel Spingarn was enthusiastic about the war , and he persuaded Du Bois to consider an officer 's commission in the Army , contingent on Du Bois writing an editorial repudiating his anti @-@ war stance . Du Bois accepted this bargain and wrote the pro @-@ war " Close Ranks " editorial in June 1918 and soon thereafter he received a commission in the Army . Many black leaders , who wanted to leverage the war to gain civil rights for African Americans , criticized Du Bois for his sudden reversal . Southern officers in Du Bois 's unit objected to his presence , and his commission was withdrawn . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 When the war ended , Du Bois traveled to Europe in 1919 to attend the first Pan @-@ African Congress and to interview African @-@ American soldiers for a planned book on their experiences in World War I. He was trailed by U.S. agents who were searching for evidence of treasonous activities . Du Bois discovered that the vast majority of black American soldiers were relegated to menial labor as stevedores and laborers . Some units were armed , and one in particular , the 92nd Division ( the Buffalo soldiers ) , engaged in combat . Du Bois discovered widespread racism in the Army , and concluded that the Army command discouraged African Americans from joining the Army , discredited the accomplishments of black soldiers , and promoted bigotry . 
 After returning from Europe , Du Bois was more determined than ever to gain equal rights for African Americans . Black soldiers returning from overseas felt a new sense of power and worth , and were representative of an emerging attitude referred to as the New Negro . In the editorial " Returning Soldiers " he wrote : " But , by the God of Heaven , we are cowards and <unk> if , now that the war is over , we do not marshal every ounce of our brain and brawn to fight a sterner , longer , more unbending battle against the forces of hell in our own land . " Many blacks moved to northern cities in search of work , and some northern white workers resented the competition . This labor strife was one of the causes of the Red Summer of 1919 , a horrific series of race riots across America , in which over 300 African Americans were killed in over 30 cities . Du Bois documented the atrocities in the pages of The Crisis , culminating in the December publication of a gruesome photograph of a lynching that occurred during the Omaha , Nebraska race riot . 
 The most egregious episode during the Red Summer was a vicious attack on blacks in Elaine , Arkansas , in which nearly 200 blacks were murdered . Reports coming out of the South blamed the blacks , alleging that they were conspiring to take over the government . Infuriated with the distortions , Du Bois published a letter in the New York World , claiming that the only crime the black sharecroppers had committed was daring to challenge their white landlords by hiring an attorney to investigate contractual irregularities . Over 60 of the surviving blacks were arrested and tried for conspiracy , in the case known as Moore v. Dempsey . Du Bois rallied blacks across America to raise funds for the legal defense , which , six years later , resulted in a Supreme Court victory authored by Oliver Wendell Holmes . Although the victory had little immediate impact on justice for blacks in the South , it marked the first time the Federal government used the 14th amendment guarantee of due process to prevent states from shielding mob violence . 
 In 1920 , Du Bois published <unk> : Voices From Within the Veil , the first of three autobiographies he would write . The " veil " was that which covered colored people around the world . In the book , he hoped to lift the veil and show white readers what life was like behind the veil , and how it distorted the viewpoints of those looking through it – in both directions . The book contained Du Bois 's feminist essay , " The Damnation of Women " , which was a tribute to the dignity and worth of women , particularly black women . 
 Concerned that textbooks used by African @-@ American children ignored black history and culture , Du Bois created a monthly children 's magazine , The Brownies ' Book . Initially published in 1920 , it was aimed at black children , who Du Bois called " the children of the sun . " 
 = = = Pan @-@ Africanism and Marcus Garvey = = = 
 Du Bois traveled to Europe in 1921 to attend the second Pan @-@ African Congress . The assembled black leaders from around the world issued the London Resolutions and established a Pan @-@ African Association headquarters in Paris . Under Du Bois 's guidance , the resolutions insisted on racial equality , and that Africa be ruled by Africans ( not , as in the 1919 congress , with the consent of Africans ) . Du Bois restated the resolutions of the congress in his Manifesto To the League of Nations , which implored the newly formed League of Nations to address labor issues and to appoint Africans to key posts . The League took little action on the requests . 
 Another important African American leader of the 1920s was Marcus Garvey , promoter of the Back @-@ to @-@ Africa movement and founder of the Universal Negro Improvement Association ( UNIA ) . Garvey denounced Du Bois 's efforts to achieve equality through integration , and instead endorsed racial separatism . Du Bois initially supported the concept of Garvey 's Black Star Line , a shipping company that was intended to facilitate commerce within the African diaspora . But Du Bois later became concerned that Garvey was threatening the NAACP 's efforts , leading Du Bois to describe him as fraudulent and reckless . Responding to Garvey 's slogan " Africa for the Africans " slogan , Du Bois said that he supported that concept , but denounced Garvey 's intention that Africa be ruled by African Americans . 
 Du Bois wrote a series of articles in The Crisis between 1922 and 1924 , attacking Garvey 's movement , calling him the " most dangerous enemy of the Negro race in America and the world . " Du Bois and Garvey never made a serious attempt to collaborate , and their dispute was partly rooted in the desire of their respective organizations ( NAACP and UNIA ) to capture a larger portion of the available philanthropic funding . 
 Harvard 's decision to ban blacks from its dormitories in 1921 was decried by Du Bois as an instance of a broad effort in the U.S. to renew " the Anglo @-@ Saxon cult ; the worship of the Nordic totem , the disfranchisement of Negro , Jew , Irishman , Italian , Hungarian , Asiatic and South Sea Islander – the world rule of Nordic white through brute force . " When Du Bois sailed for Europe in 1923 for the third Pan @-@ African Congress , the circulation of The Crisis had declined to 60 @,@ 000 from its World War I high of 100 @,@ 000 , but it remained the preeminent periodical of the civil rights movement . President Coolidge designated Du Bois an " Envoy Extraordinary " to Liberia and – after the third congress concluded – Du Bois rode a German freighter from the Canary Islands to Africa , visiting Liberia , Sierra Leone and Senegal . 
 = = = Harlem Renaissance = = = 
 Du Bois frequently promoted African @-@ American artistic creativity in his writings , and when the Harlem Renaissance emerged in the mid @-@ 1920s , his article " A Negro Art Renaissance " celebrated the end of the long hiatus of blacks from creative endeavors . His enthusiasm for the Harlem Renaissance waned as he came to believe that many whites visited Harlem for voyeurism , not for genuine appreciation of black art . Du Bois insisted that artists recognize their moral responsibilities , writing that " a black artist is first of all a black artist . " He was also concerned that black artists were not using their art to promote black causes , saying " I do not care a damn for any art that is not used for propaganda . " By the end of 1926 , he stopped employing The Crisis to support the arts . 
 = = = Socialism = = = 
 When Du Bois became editor of the Crisis magazine in 1911 , he joined the Socialist Party of America on the advice of NAACP founders Mary Ovington , William English Walling and Charles Edward Russell . However , he supported the Democrat Woodrow Wilson in the 1912 presidential campaign , a breach of the rules , and was forced to resign from the Socialist Party . Du Bois remained : " convinced that socialism was an excellent way of life , but I thought it might be reached by various methods . " 
 Nine years after the 1917 Russian Revolution , Du Bois extended a trip to Europe to include a visit to the Soviet Union . Du Bois was struck by the poverty and disorganization he encountered in the Soviet Union , yet was impressed by the intense labors of the officials and by the recognition given to workers . Although Du Bois was not yet familiar with the communist theories of Karl Marx or Vladimir Lenin , he concluded that socialism may be a better path towards racial equality than capitalism . 
 Although Du Bois generally endorsed socialist principles , his politics were strictly pragmatic : In 1929 , Du Bois endorsed Democrat Jimmy Walker for mayor of New York , rather than the socialist Norman Thomas , believing that Walker could do more immediate good for blacks , even though Thomas ' platform was more consistent with Du Bois 's views . Throughout the 1920s , Du Bois and the NAACP shifted support back and forth between the Republican Party and the Democratic Party , induced by promises from the candidates to fight lynchings , improve working conditions , or support voting rights in the South ; invariably , the candidates failed to deliver on their promises . 
 A rivalry emerged in 1931 between the NAACP and the Communist Party , when the Communists responded quickly and effectively to support the Scottsboro Boys , nine African @-@ American youth arrested in 1931 in Alabama for rape . Du Bois and the NAACP felt that the case would not be beneficial to their cause , so they chose to let the Communist Party organize the defense efforts . Du Bois was impressed with the vast amount of publicity and funds the Communists devoted to the partially successful defense effort , and he came to suspect that the Communists were attempting to present their party to African Americans as a better solution than the NAACP . Responding to criticisms of the NAACP from the Communist Party , Du Bois wrote articles condemning the party , claiming that it unfairly attacked the NAACP , and that it failed to fully appreciate racism in the United States . The Communist leaders , in turn , accused Du Bois of being a " class enemy " , and claimed that the NAACP leadership was an isolated elite , disconnected from the working @-@ class blacks they ostensibly fought for . 
 = = Return to Atlanta = = 
 Du Bois did not have a good working relationship with Walter Francis White , president of the NAACP since 1931 . That conflict , combined with the financial stresses of the Great Depression , precipitated a power struggle over The Crisis . Du Bois , concerned that his position as editor would be eliminated , resigned his job at The Crisis and accepted an academic position at Atlanta University in early 1933 . The rift with the NAACP grew larger in 1934 when Du Bois reversed his stance on segregation , stating that " separate but equal " was an acceptable goal for African Americans . The NAACP leadership was stunned , and asked Du Bois to retract his statement , but he refused , and the dispute led to Du Bois 's resignation from the NAACP . 
 After arriving at his new professorship in Atlanta , Du Bois wrote a series of articles generally supportive of Marxism . He was not a strong proponent of labor unions or the Communist Party , but he felt that Marx 's scientific explanation of society and the economy were useful for explaining the situation of African Americans in the United States . Marx 's atheism also struck a chord with Du Bois , who routinely criticized black churches for dulling blacks ' sensitivity to racism . In his 1933 writings , Du Bois embraced socialism , but asserted that " [ c ] <unk> labor has no common ground with white labor " , a controversial position that was rooted in Du Bois 's dislike of American labor unions , which had systematically excluded blacks for decades . Du Bois did not support the Communist Party in the U.S. and did not vote for their candidate in the 1932 presidential election , in spite of an African American on their ticket . 
 = = = Black Reconstruction in America = = = 
 Back in the world of academia , Du Bois was able to resume his study of Reconstruction , the topic of the 1910 paper that he presented to the American Historical Association . In 1935 , he published his magnum opus , Black Reconstruction in America . The book presented the thesis , in the words of the historian David Levering Lewis , that " black people , suddenly admitted to citizenship in an environment of feral hostility , displayed admirable volition and intelligence as well as the indolence and ignorance inherent in three centuries of bondage . " Du Bois documented how black people were central figures in the American Civil War and Reconstruction , and also showed how they made alliances with white politicians . He provided evidence that the coalition governments established public education in the South , and many needed social service programs . The book also demonstrated the ways in which black emancipation – the crux of Reconstruction – promoted a radical restructuring of United States society , as well as how and why the country failed to continue support for civil rights for blacks in the aftermath of Reconstruction . 
 The book 's thesis ran counter to the orthodox interpretation of Reconstruction maintained by white historians , and the book was virtually ignored by mainstream historians until the 1960s . Thereafter , however , it ignited a " revisionist " trend in the historiography of Reconstruction , which emphasized black people 's search for freedom and the era 's radical policy changes . By the 21st century , Black Reconstruction was widely perceived as " the foundational text of revisionist African American historiography . " 
 In the final chapter of the book , " XIV . The Propaganda of History " , Du Bois evokes his efforts at writing an article for the Encyclopædia Britannica on the " history of the American Negro " . After the editors had cut all reference to Reconstruction , he insisted that the following note appear in the entry : " White historians have ascribed the faults and failures of Reconstruction to Negro ignorance and corruption . But the Negro insists that it was Negro loyalty and the Negro vote alone that restored the South to the Union ; established the new democracy , both for white and black , and instituted the public schools . " The editors refused and , so , Du Bois withdrew his article . 
 = = = Projected encyclopedia = = = 
 In 1932 , Du Bois was selected by several philanthropies – including the Phelps @-@ Stokes Fund , the Carnegie Corporation , and the General Education Board – to be the managing editor for a proposed Encyclopedia of the Negro , a work Du Bois had been contemplating for 30 years . After several years of planning and organizing , the philanthropies cancelled the project in 1938 , because some board members believed that Du Bois was too biased to produce an objective encyclopedia . 
 = = = Trip around the world = = = 
 Du Bois took a trip around the world in 1936 , which included visits to Nazi Germany , China and Japan . While in Germany , Du Bois remarked that he was treated with warmth and respect . After his return to the United States , he expressed his ambivalence about the Nazi regime . He admired how the Nazis had improved the German economy , but he was horrified by their treatment of the Jewish people , which he described as " an attack on civilization , comparable only to such horrors as the Spanish Inquisition and the African slave trade . " 
 Following the 1905 Japanese victory in the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Du Bois became impressed by the growing strength of Imperial Japan . He considered the victory of Japan over Tsarist Russia as an example of colored peoples defeating white peoples . A representative of Japan 's " Negro Propaganda Operations " traveled to the United States during the 1920s and 1930s , meeting with Du Bois and giving him a positive impression of Imperial Japan 's racial policies . In 1936 , the Japanese ambassador arranged a trip to Japan for Du Bois and a small group of academics . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Du Bois opposed the U.S. intervention in World War II , particularly in the Pacific , because he believed that China and Japan were emerging from the clutches of white imperialists . He felt that the European Allies waging war against Japan was an opportunity for whites to reestablish their influence in Asia . He was deeply disappointed by the US government 's plan for African Americans in the armed forces : Blacks were limited to 5 @.@ 8 % of the force , and there were to be no African @-@ American combat units – virtually the same restrictions as in World War I. With blacks threatening to shift their support to President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Republican opponent in the 1940 election , Roosevelt appointed a few blacks to leadership posts in the military . Dusk of Dawn , Du Bois 's second autobiography , was published in 1940 . The title refers to Du Bois 's hope that African Americans were passing out of the darkness of racism into an era of greater equality . The work is part autobiography , part history , and part sociological treatise . Du Bois described the book as " the autobiography of a concept of race [ ... ] elucidated and magnified and doubtless distorted in the thoughts and deeds which were mine [ ... ] Thus for all time my life is significant for all lives of men . " 
 In 1943 , at age 76 , Du Bois was abruptly fired from his position at Atlanta University by college president Rufus Clement . Many scholars expressed outrage , prompting Atlanta University to provide Du Bois with a lifelong pension and the title of professor emeritus . Arthur Spingarn remarked that Du Bois spent his time in Atlanta " battering his life out against ignorance , bigotry , intolerance and slothfulness , projecting ideas nobody but he understands , and raising hopes for change which may be comprehended in a hundred years . " 
 Turning down job offers from Fisk and Howard , Du Bois re @-@ joined the NAACP as director of the Department of Special Research . Surprising many NAACP leaders , Du Bois jumped into the job with vigor and determination . During the 10 years while Du Bois was away from the NAACP , its income had increased fourfold , and its membership had soared to 325 @,@ 000 members . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = United Nations = = = 
 Du Bois was a member of the three @-@ person delegation from the NAACP that attended the 1945 conference in San Francisco at which the United Nations was established . The NAACP delegation wanted the United Nations to endorse racial equality and to bring an end to the colonial era . To push the United Nations in that direction , Du Bois drafted a proposal that pronounced " [ t ] he colonial system of government [ ... ] is undemocratic , socially dangerous and a main cause of wars " . The NAACP proposal received support from China , Russia and India , but it was virtually ignored by the other major powers , and the NAACP proposals were not included in the United Nations charter . 
 After the United Nations conference , Du Bois published Color and Democracy : Colonies and Peace , a book that attacked colonial empires and , in the words of one reviewer , " contains enough dynamite to blow up the whole vicious system whereby we have comforted our white souls and lined the pockets of generations of free @-@ booting capitalists . " 
 In late 1945 , Du Bois attended the fifth , and final , Pan @-@ African Congress , in Manchester , England . The congress was the most productive of the five congresses , and there Du Bois met Kwame Nkrumah , the future first president of Ghana who would later invite Du Bois to Africa . 
 Du Bois helped to submit petitions to the UN concerning discrimination against African Americans . These culminated in the report and petition called " We Charge Genocide " , submitted in 1951 with the Civil Rights Congress . " We Charge Genocide " accuses the US of systematically sanctioning murders and inflicting harm against African Americans and therefore committing genocide . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 When the Cold War commenced in the mid @-@ 1940s , the NAACP distanced itself from Communists , lest its funding or reputation suffer . The NAACP redoubled their efforts in 1947 after Life magazine published a piece by Arthur Schlesinger , Jr. claiming that the NAACP was heavily influenced by Communists . Ignoring the NAACP 's desires , Du Bois continued to <unk> with communist sympathizers such as Paul Robeson , Howard Fast and Shirley Graham ( his future second wife ) . Du Bois wrote " I am not a communist [ ... ] On the other hand , I [ ... ] believe [ ... ] that Karl Marx [ ... ] put his finger squarely upon our difficulties [ ... ] " . In 1946 , Du Bois wrote articles giving his assessment of the Soviet Union ; he did not embrace communism and he criticized its dictatorship . However , he felt that capitalism was responsible for poverty and racism , and felt that socialism was an alternative that might ameliorate those problems . The soviets explicitly rejected racial distinctions and class distinctions , leading Du Bois to conclude that the USSR was the " most hopeful country on earth . " Du Bois 's association with prominent communists made him a liability for the NAACP , especially since the FBI was starting to aggressively investigate communist sympathizers ; so – by mutual agreement – he resigned from the NAACP for the second time in late 1948 . After departing the NAACP , Du Bois started writing regularly for the leftist weekly newspaper the National Guardian , a relationship that would endure until 1961 . 
 = = = Peace activism = = = 
 Du Bois was a lifelong anti @-@ war activist , but his efforts became more pronounced after World War II . In 1949 , Du Bois spoke at the Scientific and Cultural Conference for World Peace in New York : " I tell you , people of America , the dark world is on the move ! It wants and will have Freedom , Autonomy and Equality . It will not be diverted in these fundamental rights by dialectical splitting of political hairs [ ... ] Whites may , if they will , arm themselves for suicide . But the vast majority of the world 's peoples will march on over them to freedom ! " 
 In the spring of 1949 , he spoke at World Congress of the Partisans of Peace in Paris , saying to the large crowd : " Leading this new colonial imperialism comes my own native land built by my father 's toil and blood , the United States . The United States is a great nation ; rich by grace of God and prosperous by the hard work of its humblest citizens [ ... ] Drunk with power we are leading the world to hell in a new colonialism with the same old human slavery which once ruined us ; and to a third World War which will ruin the world . " Du Bois affiliated himself with a leftist organization , the National Council of Arts , Sciences and Professions , and he traveled to Moscow as its representative to speak at the All @-@ Soviet Peace Conference in late 1949 . 
 = = = McCarthyism and Trial = = = 
 During the 1950s , the U.S. government 's anti @-@ communist McCarthyism campaign targeted Du Bois because of his socialist leanings . Historian Manning Marable characterizes the government 's treatment of Du Bois as " ruthless repression " and a " political assassination " . 
 The FBI began to compile a file on Du Bois in 1942 , but the most aggressive government attack against Du Bois occurred in the early 1950s , as a consequence of Du Bois 's opposition to nuclear weapons . In 1950 Du Bois became chairman of the newly created Peace Information Center ( PIC ) , which worked to publicize the Stockholm Peace Appeal in the United States . The primary purpose of the appeal was to gather signatures on a petition , asking governments around the world to ban all nuclear weapons . 
 The U.S. Justice department alleged that the PIC was acting as an agent of a foreign state , and thus required the PIC to register with the federal government . Du Bois and other PIC leaders refused , and they were indicted for failure to register . After the indictment , some of Du Bois 's associates distanced themselves from him , and the NAACP refused to issue a statement of support ; but many labor figures and leftists – including Langston Hughes – supported Du Bois . 
 He was finally tried in 1951 represented by civil rights attorney Vito Marcantonio . The case was dismissed before the jury rendered a verdict as soon as the defense attorney told the judge that " Dr. Albert Einstein has offered to appear as character witness for Dr. Du Bois " . Du Bois 's memoir of the trial is In Battle for Peace . Even though Du Bois was not convicted , the government confiscated Du Bois 's passport and withheld it for eight years . 
 = = = Communism = = = 
 Du Bois was bitterly disappointed that many of his colleagues – particularly the NAACP – did not support him during his 1951 PIC trial , whereas working class whites and blacks supported him enthusiastically . After the trial , Du Bois lived in Manhattan , writing and speaking , and continuing to associate primarily with leftist acquaintances . His primary concern was world peace , and he railed against military actions , such as the Korean War , which he viewed as efforts by imperialist whites to maintain colored people in a submissive state . 
 In 1950 , at the age of 82 , Du Bois ran for U.S. Senator from New York on the American Labor Party ticket and received about 200 @,@ 000 votes , or 4 % of the statewide total . Du Bois continued to believe that capitalism was the primary culprit responsible for the subjugation of colored people around the world , and therefore – although he recognized the faults of the Soviet Union – he continued to uphold communism as a possible solution to racial problems . In the words of biographer David Lewis , Du Bois did not endorse communism for its own sake , but did so because " the enemies of his enemies were his friends " . The same ambiguity characterized Du Bois 's opinions of Joseph Stalin : in 1940 he wrote disdainfully of the " Tyrant Stalin " , but when Stalin died in 1953 , Du Bois wrote a eulogy characterizing Stalin as " simple , calm and courageous " , and lauding him for being the " first [ to ] set Russia on the road to conquer race prejudice and make one nation out of its 140 groups without destroying their individuality " . 
 The U.S. government prevented Du Bois from attending the 1955 Bandung conference in Indonesia . The conference was the culmination of 40 years of Du Bois 's dreams – a meeting of 29 nations from Africa and Asia , many recently independent , representing most of the world 's colored peoples . The conference celebrated their independence , as the nations began to assert their power as non @-@ aligned nations during the cold war . In 1958 , Du Bois regained his passport , and with his second wife , Shirley Graham Du Bois , he traveled around the world , visiting Russia and China . In both countries he was celebrated and given guided tours of the best aspects of communism . Du Bois later wrote approvingly of the conditions in both countries . He was 90 years old . 
 Du Bois became incensed in 1961 when the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 1950 McCarran Act , a key piece of McCarthyism legislation which required communists to register with the government . To demonstrate his outrage , he joined the Communist Party in October 1961 , at the age of 93 . Around that time , he wrote : " I believe in communism . I mean by communism , a planned way of life in the production of wealth and work designed for building a state whose object is the highest welfare of its people and not merely the profit of a part . " 
 = = = Death in Africa = = = 
 Ghana invited Du Bois to Africa to participate in their independence celebration in 1957 , but he was unable to attend because the U.S. government had confiscated his passport in 1951 . By 1960 – the " Year of Africa " – Du Bois had recovered his passport , and was able to cross the Atlantic and celebrate the creation of the Republic of Ghana . Du Bois returned to Africa in late 1960 to attend the inauguration of Nnamdi Azikiwe as the first African governor of Nigeria . 
 While visiting Ghana in 1960 , Du Bois spoke with its president about the creation of a new encyclopedia of the African diaspora , the Encyclopedia Africana . In early 1961 , Ghana notified Du Bois that they had appropriated funds to support the encyclopedia project , and they invited Du Bois to come to Ghana and manage the project there . In October 1961 , at the age of 93 , Du Bois and his wife traveled to Ghana to take up residence and commence work on the encyclopedia . In early 1963 , the United States refused to renew his passport , so he made the symbolic gesture of becoming a citizen of Ghana . While it is sometimes stated that he renounced his U.S. citizenship at that time , and he did state his intention to do so , Du Bois never actually did . His health declined during the two years he was in Ghana , and he died on August 27 , 1963 , in the capital of Accra at the age of 95 . Du Bois was buried in Accra near his home , which is now the Du Bois Memorial Centre . A day after his death , at the March on Washington , speaker Roy Wilkins asked the hundreds of thousands of marchers to honor Du Bois with a moment of silence . The Civil Rights Act of 1964 , embodying many of the reforms Du Bois had campaigned for his entire life , was enacted a year after his death . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Du Bois was organized and disciplined : His lifelong regimen was to rise at 7 : 15 , work until 5 , eat dinner and read a newspaper until 7 , then read or socialize until he was in bed , invariably before 10 . He was a meticulous planner , and frequently mapped out his schedules and goals on large pieces of graph paper . Many acquaintances found him to be distant and aloof , and he insisted on being addressed as " Dr. Du Bois " . Although he was not gregarious , he formed several close friendships with associates such as Charles Young , Paul Laurence Dunbar , John Hope and Mary Ovington . His closest friend was Joel Spingarn – a white man – but Du Bois never accepted Spingarn 's offer to be on a first name basis . Du Bois was something of a dandy – he dressed formally , carried a walking stick , and walked with an air of confidence and dignity . He was relatively short 5 feet 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 166 cm ) and always maintained a well @-@ groomed mustache and goatee . He was a good singer and enjoyed playing tennis . 
 Du Bois was married twice , first to Nina Gomer ( m . 1896 , d . 1950 ) , with whom he had two children , a son Burghardt ( who died as an infant ) and a daughter Yolande , who married Countee Cullen . As a widower , he married Shirley Graham ( m . 1951 , d . 1977 ) , an author , playwright , composer and activist . She brought her son David Graham to the marriage . David grew close to Du Bois and took his stepfather 's name ; he also worked for African @-@ American causes . The historian David Levering Lewis wrote that Du Bois engaged in several extramarital relationships . But the historian Raymond Wolters cast doubt on this , based on the lack of corroboration from Du Bois 's alleged lovers . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Although Du Bois attended a New England Congregational church as a child , he abandoned organized religion while at Fisk College . As an adult , Du Bois described himself as agnostic or a freethinker , but at least one biographer concluded that Du Bois was virtually an atheist . However , another analyst of Du Bois 's writings concluded that he had a religious voice , albeit radically different from other African @-@ American religious voices of his era , and inaugurated a 20th @-@ century spirituality to which Ralph Ellison , Zora Neale Hurston , and James Baldwin also belong . 
 When asked to lead public prayers , Du Bois would refuse . In his autobiography , Du Bois wrote : " When I became head of a department at Atlanta , the engagement was held up because again I balked at leading in prayer [ ... ] I flatly refused again to join any church or sign any church creed . [ ... ] I think the greatest gift of the Soviet Union to modern civilization was the dethronement of the clergy and the refusal to let religion be taught in the public schools . " Du Bois accused American churches of being the most discriminatory of all institutions . He also provocatively linked African @-@ American Christianity to indigenous African religions . Du Bois occasionally acknowledged the beneficial role religion played in African @-@ America life – as the " basic rock " which served as an anchor for African @-@ American communities – but in general disparaged African @-@ American churches and clergy because he felt they did not support the goals of racial equality and hindered activists ' efforts . 
 Although Du Bois was not personally religious , he infused his writings with religious symbology , and many contemporaries viewed him as a prophet . His 1904 prose poem , " Credo " , was written in the style of a religious creed and widely read by the African @-@ American community . Moreover , Du Bois , both in his own fiction and in stories published in The Crisis , often analogized lynchings of African Americans to Christ 's crucifixion . Between 1920 and 1940 , Du Bois shifted from overt black messiah symbolism to more subtle messianic language . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The NAACP awarded the Spingarn Medal to Du Bois in 1920 . 
 Du Bois was awarded the International Lenin Peace Prize by the USSR in 1959 . 
 The site of the house where Du Bois grew up in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1976 . 
 In 1992 the United States Postal Service honored Du Bois with his portrait on a postage stamp . A second stamp of face value 32 ¢ was issued on February 3 , 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series . 
 In 1994 , the main library at the University of Massachusetts Amherst was named after Du Bois . 
 The Du Bois center at Northern Arizona University is named in his honor . 
 A dormitory was named after Du Bois at the University of Pennsylvania , where he conducted field research for his sociological study " The Philadelphia Negro " . 
 A dormitory is named after Du Bois at Hampton University . 
 Africana : The Encyclopedia of the African and African @-@ American Experience was inspired by and dedicated to Du Bois by its editors Kwame Anthony <unk> and Henry Louis Gates , Jr . 
 Humboldt University in Berlin hosts a series of lectures named in Du Bois 's honor . 
 Scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Du Bois in his 2002 list of the 100 Greatest African Americans . 
 In 2005 , Du Bois was honored with a medallion in The Extra Mile , Washington DC 's memorial to important American volunteers . 
 The liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church remembers Du Bois annually on August 3 . 
 Du Bois was appointed Honorary Emeritus Professor at the University of Pennsylvania in 2012 . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = Sectionals = 
 " Sectionals " is the thirteenth episode of the American television series Glee . It premiered on the Fox network on December 9 , 2009 . The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk , and serves as the mid @-@ season finale for the show 's first season . " Sectionals " sees the glee club win the sectionals round of competition , advancing on to regionals . Glee club member Finn ( Cory Monteith ) discovers he is not the father of his girlfriend Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) baby . Football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) plans his wedding with Emma ( Jayma Mays ) on the same day as the sectionals competition . Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is unable to take the students to sectionals and Emma offers to take them . The episode sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba . 
 The episode features covers of six songs , studio recordings of four of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . " Sectionals " was watched by 8 @.@ 127 million U.S. viewers , and received mostly positive reviews from critics . The episode 's musical performances attracted praise , as did the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , though Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly suggested it may have been preferable to leave their romance unresolved . James Poniewozik of Time felt that by concluding the pregnancy storyline in " Sectionals " , Glee was able to " clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As a result of a technicality in the show choir competition rules , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is not allowed to accompany New Directions to sectionals . Guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) postpones her own wedding by a few hours so that she can take the club in his place , although her fiancé , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , feels she is choosing Will over him . 
 Most of the glee club has learned that Puck ( Mark Salling ) , not Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , is the father of Quinn 's baby . They hide this fact from Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , believing that she will tell Finn . Emma takes over as faculty advisor of the club as they start working on their set list for sectionals . With two group songs selected , Rachel says that she 'll sing the solo ballad ; Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) strenuously objects to this , and sings " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " to wild applause . Rachel agrees that Mercedes deserves to sing the solo and the two hug . Meanwhile , Rachel has deduced that Puck impregnated Quinn and tells Finn ; he attacks Puck and confronts Quinn , who tearfully admits the truth . Angered by their betrayal , Finn quits the club on the eve of sectionals , and has to be replaced by school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) . New Directions arrive at the event to discover their competitors have received an advance copy of their set list , and are performing all three of their chosen songs . Emma calls Will , who convinces Finn to help his New Directions teammates . Will finds Finn in the locker room , and talks to him about how special he is and that the club needs him . 
 Emma confronts rival choir directors Grace Hitchens ( Eve ) and Dalton Rumba ( Michael Hitchcock ) , while New Directions chooses new performance pieces for their set list at the last minute . Rachel asks Mercedes to perform another ballad , but Mercedes insists , with the rest of the club agreeing , that Rachel is the best choice to perform " on the fly " . They also decide to include " Somebody to Love " as their closer , but are stuck for a third piece until Finn arrives with new sheet music for the group , ready to perform with them . Rachel gives a solo performance of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " , receiving a standing ovation after finishing . The group then performs " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " by the Rolling Stones , to the applause and cheers of the audience . After their performance , Grace attempts to confess her duplicity to the judges , but they have already unanimously decided that New Directions has won the competition . 
 Having previously discovered that his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) was faking her pregnancy , Will tells her he no longer feels the same way he did when they first fell in love . He later attends Ken and Emma 's delayed wedding , only to find that Ken has ended the relationship as a result of Emma 's feelings for Will . She announces her intention to leave McKinley High School , explaining that it will be too painful for her to carry on working with Will and Ken . Back at school , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) suspends cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) for leaking the glee club 's set list , and has Will reinstated as the director of New Directions . The glee club members show Will their trophy and perform " My Life Would Suck Without You " for him . As Emma prepares to leave the school , Will chases after her and stops her with a kiss . Both are happy , but uncertain of what will happen next . 
 = = Production = = 
 Glee was originally commissioned by Fox for a thirteen episode run , culminating with " Sectionals " . On September 21 , 2009 , the network announced an extension of the first season , ordering a further nine episodes . " Sectionals " therefore serves as the mid @-@ season finale , with the remainder of the season airing from April 13 , 2010 . Events in " Sectionals " are influenced by the season 's eleventh episode " Hairography " , in which cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester gave New Directions ' competition set @-@ list to their rival glee clubs . Morrison explained that the clubs perform New Directions ' songs first , making it appear that they are copying them , so New Directions " have to do this impromptu thing and fly by the seat of [ their ] pants . " Morrison has called " Sectionals " " the best episode " of the series . 
 " Sectionals " was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk . Recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) and local news anchor Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) . Anna Camp and Patricia Forte guest star as sectionals judges Candace Dykstra and Donna <unk> , Peter Choi is the Emcee , and <unk> Gross plays Perfect <unk> , a member of the Jane Addams Academy glee club . " Sectionals " also sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba . Eve was offered the role of Grace after Whitney Houston declined to appear . 
 The episode features cover versions of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " by Barbra Streisand , " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " by The Rolling Stones , " My Life Would Suck Without You " by Kelly Clarkson , " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " from Dreamgirls , " Don 't Stop Believin ' " by Journey and " Proud Mary " by Creedence Clearwater Revival . Studio recordings of " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " , " Don 't Rain on My Parade " , " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " and " My Life Would Suck Without You " were released as singles in December 2009 , available for download . They are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " charted at number 85 in Canada and 94 in the US , while " Don 't Rain on My Parade " charted at number 59 in Canada and 53 in the US . " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " charted at number 51 in Canada and 71 in the US , and " My Life Would Suck Without You " charted at number 66 in Australia , 40 in Canada and 51 in the US . Jenna Ushkowitz named " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " one of her favorite songs on the album , deeming the original " a classic " and the Glee cover " emotional " as one of the final songs of the original run of episodes . The performance of " My Life Would Suck Without You " showcased choreography from numerous performances from earlier episodes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 127 million US viewers . It was the show 's highest @-@ rated episode ever with teenagers , and its season high in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , with a rating / share of 3 @.@ 7 / 9 . In Canada , it was the tenth most watched show for the week of broadcast , attaining 1 @.@ 64 million viewers . 
 " Sectionals " received mostly positive reviews from critics . TV Guide 's Natalie Abrams felt it ended the beginning of the season on a " high note " , while Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal commented : " You couldn ’ t have asked for a better cliffhanger of a fall finale " . IGN 's Eric Goldman rated the episode 9 / 10 , calling it " very satisfying " , and Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times commended it as " fine television . " James Poniewozik of Time wrote : " I 'm not sure I expected or wanted a feel @-@ good ending out of the first half of Glee . But what we got from " Sectionals " left me feeling very good about where the show is going this spring . " In contrast , Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger , felt that the episode brought too many storylines to a head at once , " not allowing all to have as much impact as they might have had the big developments been spaced out " . Sepinwall commented , however , that the acting and especially singing performances were " uniformly strong . " 
 Musical performances in the episode attracted praise . Aly Semigran of MTV called Riley 's rendition of " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " " goose bump @-@ inducing " , while Goldman commended : " Riley absolutely killed it as Mercedes belted out that song " . In contrast , Poniewozik wrote that it was the one song choice he didn 't like , feeling that it is overused , thus diminishing its impact . Abrams deemed Rachel 's solo performance at sectionals " amazing " , and Flandez recommended : " Watch it again if you ever want to take back three minutes of your life that you ’ ve wasted on something else . " Pardue called the group performance of " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " " energetic [ ... ] casual [ ... ] and very Glee " , but felt it " would have been nice " to feature different singers . Dan Snierson for Entertainment Weekly similarly noted that he would have preferred " more vocal interplay between all group members " . In December 2012 , TV Guide named the rendition of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " one of Glee 's best performances , commenting : " Glee has done Broadway many times , but rarely better than this . " 
 Critics also commented positively on the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , with Abrams noting that she had been waiting for them to kiss since the pilot episode , and Goldman deeming their coming together " very hard to not feel good about " . Snierson , however , wrote that although there was satisfaction in the episode ending on the kiss , it may have been " more intriguing " to conclude with Will finding Emma 's office empty , questioning whether it was too soon for the two of them to begin a relationship . The end of Quinn 's pregnancy secret was also well received . Poniewozik wrote that the pregnancy storyline had felt as though " the early Glee wasn 't confident that people would be interested in it without these over @-@ the @-@ top soap opera twists . " He noted that in concluding the pregnancy deception in " Sectionals " , Glee : " seemed to clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is . " 
 = Theodore N. Kaufman = 
 Theodore Newman Kaufman ( February 22 , 1910 – April 1 , 1986 ) , sometimes given incorrectly as Theodore Nathan Kaufmann , was an American Jewish businessman and writer known for his <unk> views on Germans . 
 In 1939 , he published pamphlets as chairman of the American Federation of Peace that argued that Americans should be sterilized so that their children will no longer have to fight in foreign wars . 
 In 1941 , he wrote and published Germany Must Perish ! which called for the sterilization of the German people and the distribution of the German lands . The text was used extensively in Nazi propaganda , often as a justification for the persecution of Jews and was specifically cited as a reason to round up the Jews of Hanover , Germany . 
 = = Early life = = 
 He was born in Manhattan , New York City on February 22 , 1910 to Anton Kaufman and Fannie Newman . His parents had married on March 14 , 1909 . His father had been a reporter for the Berliner <unk> @-@ Zeitung in Berlin , Germany before emigrating to the United States in 1905 . Theodore 's three brothers were Herbert , Julian , and Leonard . 
 He attended South Side High School in Newark , New Jersey and graduated around 1928 . 
 In 1934 he was arrested along with his father , Anton Kaufman , for the robbery of Sandor Alexander Balint of Budapest . Balint had developed a process to speed the aging of wine . The <unk> had purchased this formula from Balint , but later came to believe that the formula was " worthless " . Theodore Kaufman 's mother died in 1939 . 
 Kaufman traveled to the Sahara Desert and wrote : " you look at the horizon all day long and feel that you are staring at eternity . " In <unk> he met Clare Sheridan . 
 Kaufman became the owner of a small advertising agency and ticket agency in South Orange , New Jersey . He published the New Jersey Legal Record . Kaufman founded the Argyle Press of Newark , New Jersey to publish his political pamphlets . 
 = = Life during World War II = = 
 Kaufman was a radical intent on preventing American involvement in future wars in Europe . In 1939 , under the auspices of the " American Federation of Peace " , an unknown entity of which he was the president and probably only member , Kaufman produced several publications . One pamphlet , titled " Passive Purchase " advocated the establishment of a two @-@ week period during which Americans would curtail their spending in order to demonstrate public opposition to American intervention in European conflicts . In a section of the pamphlet on the American Federation of Peace 's beliefs , Kaufman advocated for " the strongest possible military defense of the United States " and stated that " by keeping absolutely aloof from foreign wars and entanglements the American People face a truly great future . " That same year , the group also issued publications with more contentious messages , one of which read : 
 " A possible plea to Congress . ... Have Us All <unk> ! ... If You Plan On Sending Us To A Foreign War ... Spare Us Any Possibility Of Ever Bringing Children Into This World — Into This Country Of Ours ! " 
 Two years later he shifted his focus to the forced mass @-@ sterilization of all German men under 65 and the sterilization of most German women under 45 . This would eliminate " inbred Germanism , " he proposed , thus solving a great deal of humanity 's problems . He also promoted the distribution of Germany 's lands among the neighboring countries . His effort was spearheaded by the self @-@ publication of the book Germany Must Perish ! 
 " Since Germans are the perennial <unk> of the world 's peace ... they must be dealt with like any homicidal criminals . But it is unnecessary to put the whole German nation to the sword . It is more humane to sterilize them . The army groups , as organized units , would be the easiest and quickest to deal with . ... The population of Germany , excluding conquered and annexed territories , is about 70 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , almost equally divided between male and female . To achieve the purpose of German extinction it would be necessary to only sterilize some 48 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 -- a figure which excludes , because of their limited power to procreate , males over 60 years of age , and females over 45 . ... Taking 20 @,@ 000 surgeons as an arbitrary number and on the assumption that each will perform a minimum of 25 operations daily , it would take no more than one month , at the maximum , to complete their sterilization . ... The balance of the male civilian population of Germany could be treated within three months . Inasmuch as sterilization of women needs somewhat more time , it may be computed that the entire female population of Germany could be sterilized within a period of three years or less . Complete sterilization of both sexes , and not only one , is to be considered necessary in view of the present German doctrine that so much as one drop of true German blood constitutes a German . Of course , after complete sterilization , there will cease to be a birth rate in Germany . At the normal death rate of 2 per cent per annum , German life will diminish at the rate of 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 yearly . Accordingly in the span of two generations that which cost millions of lives and centuries of useless effort , namely , the elimination of Germanism and its carriers , will have been an accomplished fact . By virtue of its loss of self @-@ perpetuation German Will will have atrophied and German power reduced to negligible importance . " 
 Although Kaufman 's book had a minimal impact in the United States , it achieved notoriety in Nazi Germany , where propagandists used it as evidence of an international Jewish plan to destroy the German people . On July 24 , 1941 , the Nazi Party 's newspaper , Völkischer Beobachter , published a front @-@ page article on the book titled : " The Product of Criminal Jewish Sadism : Roosevelt Demands the Sterilization of the German People . " The newspaper alleged that Kaufman was a close ally of Samuel Irving Rosenman , a well @-@ known advisor to Franklin Delano Roosevelt and that : " Given the close relationship of the writer to the White House , this monstrous war program can be seen as a synthesis of genuine Talmudic hatred and Roosevelt ’ s views on foreign policy . " At the time , the German leadership was engaged in a propaganda campaign designed to rally popular support for the German invasion of the Soviet Union . Antisemitism in general , and Kaufman 's ideas in particular , became a focus of this campaign . 
 Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels read the book in early August and immediately grasped its value , writing in his diary : " This Jew did a real service for the enemy [ German ] side . Had he written this book for us , he could not have made it any better . " Under Goebbels ' direction , Germany Must Perish ! continued to receive significant media attention in Germany . Portions of the book were read on national radio , and Goebbels ordered the printing of five million copies of a pamphlet that summarized Kaufman 's ideas . 
 Nazi propaganda often used Kaufman 's pamphlet as a justification for the persecution of Jews . When the Nazis required German Jews to wear a yellow badge on their clothing on September 1 , 1941 , they published a flyer explaining to the German people that those individuals wearing the star were conspiring to implement Kaufman 's plan for the destruction of Germany . When the Jews of Hanover were forced from their homes on September 8 , 1941 , German authorities cited Kaufman 's book as one of the reasons . Kaufman responded by saying : 
 " This is just a flimsy pretext for another of the innate cruelties of the German people ... I don 't think it was my book that prompted this barbarity . They employed every possible German cruelty against the Jews long before my book was published . " 
 The Nazi propaganda ministry continued to publish pamphlets , posters and flyers on Kaufman 's ideas through the end of the war , and also urged newspapers and public speakers to remind Germans of Kaufman 's book . Kaufman 's last major appearance in Nazi propaganda occurred in late 1944 , when a five @-@ page section on him was included in the widely published booklet Never ! , which described a number of alleged plots to destroy Germany . Randall <unk> , an historian of communications at Calvin College , concluded that " [ a ] German at the time could not have missed encountering " propaganda about Kaufman . 
 His final publication through Argyle Press was the March 1942 brochure titled " No More German Wars ! Being an outline for their permanent cessation " . It contained no more writing on the sterilization of Germans or discussion of German land distribution , but made very moderate proposals for democratic re @-@ education of the German population . 
 He enlisted in the US Army in New Mexico on April 24 , 1942 . His three brothers also served . 
 Few Americans have ever heard of a prominent fellow @-@ citizen named Kaufmann ... In Germany every child has known of him for a long time . Germans are so well informed about Mr. Kaufmann that the mere mention of his name recalls what he stands for . In one of his recent <unk> Dr. Goebbels wrote , " Thanks to the Jew Kaufmann , we Germans know only too well what to expect in case of defeat . " 
 = = Post @-@ war years and death = = 
 After World War II , Kaufman disappeared entirely from public life . One scholar , <unk> Lang , a Visiting Professor of Philosophy and Letters at Wesleyan University , failed to locate Kaufman in the records of the city of Newark and in other sources . 
 He died in April 1986 in East Orange , New Jersey . 
 = = Writings = = 
 " Life Liberty Pursuit of Happiness - Where ? In The Graves of European Battle Fields ? " American Federation of Peace , Newark , NJ , ( circa 1938 @-@ 1942 ) 
 A Will and Way to Peace : Passive Purchase Theodore N. Kaufman , American Federation of Peace , Newark , NJ , 1939 , 10 @-@ page pamphlet 
 Germany Must Perish ! , Argyle Press , Newark , NJ , 1941 , 104 @-@ page brochure 
 No More German Wars ! Being An Outline For Their Permanent Cessation Argyle Press , Newark , NJ , 1942 , 16 @-@ page brochure alternate link 
 = Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down = 
 Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down is the fourteenth studio album by American musician Ry Cooder . Following his 2008 album I , Flathead , Cooder pursued a more political direction with his songwriting , inspired by the late @-@ 2000s economic crisis and protest songs of the past . Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was written and produced by Cooder , who recorded its songs at Drive @-@ By Studios , Ocean Studios , and Wireland Studios in California . He played various instruments and worked with musicians such as Flaco Jiménez , Juliette <unk> , Robert Francis , and Jim Keltner . 
 Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down features topical songs with socio @-@ political subject matter about 21st @-@ century America , including economic disparity , social injustice , politics , war . Its music is rooted in Americana and incorporates traditional styles and musical language from historical sources such as country blues , <unk> , and American roots music . The record has been noted by critics for its eclectic musical range , allegorical songs , working @-@ class perspective , and Cooder 's sardonic lyrics . 
 When Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was released by Nonesuch Records on August 30 , 2011 , it charted modestly in the United States but relatively higher in Europe . Cooder expressed disillusionment with the music industry in response to the record 's poor commercial performance . Critically , the album was a success , earning him widespread acclaim and comparisons to folk singer @-@ songwriter Woody Guthrie . According to Slant Magazine 's Joseph Jon Lanthier , " the orchestrated indignation of [ the album ] incorporated a protean Greek chorus of economic victims and beat Occupy Wall Street to the punch by several weeks . " 
 = = Background = = 
 After an 18 @-@ year hiatus from solo projects , Cooder returned with a trilogy of sociopolitical , Southern California @-@ themed albums , comprising Chávez Ravine ( 2005 ) , My Name Is Buddy ( 2007 ) , and I , Flathead ( 2008 ) . The albums examined various disenfranchised peoples through humorous , scholarly lyrics and esoteric musical styles . After completing the trilogy with I , Flathead in 2008 , Cooder worked on The Chieftains ' 2010 album San Patricio . Cooder became inspired to record Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down by the late @-@ 2000s economic crisis and past protest songs . In interviews prior to the album 's release , Cooder expressed strong anti @-@ Republican and anti @-@ banker sentiments in discussion about the political and economic climate . Before conceiving the album , he wrote and recorded the song " Quicksand " in 2010 , as a response to the controversy spurred by Arizona Senate Bill 1070 and other anti @-@ illegal immigration measures in the United States . In an interview for The Australian , Cooder said of his decision to pursue a more political direction with his songwriting : 
 I was still working on the Flathead record ; that was during [ George ] Bush 's time . I was looking at things and paying attention to events , politically . So I started trying to write political songs because it 's good to have something you can do other than just sit and fume about everything . After Barack Obama got elected I started thinking about other stories that might be good to do . It occurred to me that the social and political problems that we 've been having , well [ ... ] it 's deja vu all over again , as the man said . 
 In early 2011 , Cooder was inspired to write the song " No Banker Left Behind " , and subsequently the rest of the album , by a headline about bankers and other affluent people who had profited from the bank bailouts and resulting recession during the late @-@ 2000s . In an interview with Kai Ryssdal on Marketplace , Cooder cited the song as the starting point for writing the album and stated , " ' No Banker Left Behind ' originated with a line from Robert Scheer 's <unk> blog . I read this pretty regularly , and when I saw this , this metric I thought ' no banker left behind . ' " He compared the album 's content to Woody Guthrie 's songs about the Dust Bowl era during the Great Depression and said of his own songs , " What I like in the idea of these songs is if you follow the logic of each tune — this happened and this happened and you can see that at the end , this is the result , you just didn 't see it this way before , you never thought of Wall Street in terms of Jesse James and bilingual heft . " 
 Recording sessions for Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down took place at Drive @-@ By Studios in North Hollywood , Ocean Studios in Burbank , and Wireland Studios in Chatsworth , California . The album was written and produced entirely by Cooder , except " Lord Tell Me Why " , which was co @-@ written by session drummer Jim Keltner . Cooder also worked with vocalist Juliette <unk> , accordionist Flaco Jiménez , bassist Robert Francis , vocalist Arnold McCuller , and drummer Joachim Cooder , Cooder 's son . Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was mixed by Martin Pradler and mastered by recording engineer Bernie Grundman at his Hollywood studio Grundman Mastering . Most of the album was engineered in Pradler 's living room . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down 's music is rooted in Americana and draws on a number of styles , including blues , folk , ragtime , norteño , rock , and country music . For the songs , Cooder adapted musical language from historical sources and incorporated styles from both North and South American traditions . In his interview on Marketplace , he explained his stylistic approach for Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down , stating " to me , these musical styles and sounds are narratives as well . I mean everything about them — if it 's an accordion , horns , the banda horns for the immigrant tunes — they all are part of the story . And you can see it then , you can imagine the Arizona border that 's hot , 120 degrees in the shade , dusty . The banda horns are coming from some truck over there . " According to him , musical settings for certain songs were decided based on their respective compositions , such as when " the words would come to me in ¾ time , that meant corrido , that means accordion ; banda horns because they ’ re exciting . " 
 Cooder wanted the music of each song to complement the stories in his lyrics and to serve as homages to particular traditional styles . Cooder said that he did not want to " over @-@ think it " and said of his creative process for each song 's distinct style , " It ’ s taken a long time , but it becomes natural to combine an idea you have or a story you want to tell with whatever seems conducive . " Graham Reid of The New Zealand Herald writes that the music " refers to the dustbowl era , rural blues , Tex @-@ Mex ( with accordionist Flaco Jimenez ) and old @-@ time folk . " The Observer 's Neil Spencer comments that it is " grounded in the blues , folk and Tex @-@ Mex the guitarist explored in the 1970s , but its songs belong to modern times . " 
 Lyrically , the album focuses on socio @-@ political themes of power and its abuses , the struggle for democracy , the trials of the working class , and the goal of equality , with songs composed as either first @-@ person narratives or allegories . The songs deal with contemporary subject matter and topics such as immigration legislation , the emotional and physical effects of war , the <unk> of politics , social class and race division , and white flight . Cooder 's songwriting is characterized by sardonic lyrics , satire , mordant humor , and wry observations on figures such as bankers , politicians , and militarists . Allmusic 's Thom Jurek characterizes it as " overtly political " and comments that " the depth of Cooder 's rage is quieter but more direct as the album draws to a close . " According to Bud Scoppa of Uncut , the album expands on Cooder 's previous trilogy of sociopolitical albums and their " scholarly but humour @-@ laced examinations " and " arcane musical modes " . Journalist Alec Wilkinson comments that " what [ the album ] shares with them is an indignation over the economic and ethical disparities of American life and the destructive and <unk> meanness of the privileges given to the rich . " 
 Nick Cristiano of The Philadelphia Inquirer writes of the lyrics , " Cooder takes deadly aim at rapacious bankers , warmongers , land barons , and the like , showing the devastating impact of their actions on ordinary folk " , adding that " He does this in a manner that mixes the scrappy populism of Woody Guthrie with the first @-@ person narratives of Springsteen in <unk> Ghost of Tom Joad mode . " Robin Denselow of The Guardian notes " bleak or thoughtful lyrics [ set ] against jaunty melodies " and " no elaborate narratives " in the songs , while interpreting the album 's motif to be that of " a broken , divided society and the gap between rich and poor , but with the anger matched against humour . " Neil Spencer of Uncut calls Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down " an impassioned portrait of 21st century America and its injustices " , adding that " like Guthrie , [ Cooder ] nails his targets with droll humour while empathising with society 's underdogs . " 
 Allmusic 's Steve Huey asserts that the album " <unk> [ s ] all the way back to his earliest recordings for musical inspiration while telling topical stories about corruption — political and social — the erasure and the rewriting of American history , and an emerging class war . " Peter Kane of Q compares it to Cooder 's 1971 album Into the Purple Valley , which featured Dust Bowl @-@ era songs , and writes that this album 's " protest songs for today 's messed @-@ up world " are " sly and humorous " . Philip <unk> of PopMatters compares the album to other songwriters ' " substantial statements " about the American zeitgeist , including Randy Newman 's Harps and Angels ( 2008 ) , Paul Simon 's So Beautiful or So What ( 2011 ) , and Bob Dylan 's Modern Times ( 2006 ) . However , he distinguishes Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down as " an attempt at the existential , providing an everyman 's view of struggle during economic downturn , class disparity , injustice , and abuse of power " , calling him " a direct voice of protest , both musically and lyrically , that will not be mistaken for being impressionistic . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The opening track " No Banker Left Behind " references the financial bailout of 2007 and criticizes bankers and government . Alec Wilkinson of The New Yorker writes that the song " ridicules the considerations extended to the prosperous men and women who grabbed everything not nailed down during the last few years . " It features marching rhythms , mandolin and banjo riffs , and electric guitar . Cooder has described the song 's rhythm as " a kind of clog @-@ dance beat " . " El <unk> Jesse James " is played in waltz time with a horn section and accordion by Flaco Jiménez . The lyrics express a fictitious narrative by American outlaw Jessie James in Heaven , who claims to have never " turned a family from their house " when he was a bank robber . He asks God for his " trusty .44 " to persuade bankers to " put that bonus money back where it belongs " . Cooder discussed the character 's perspective in an interview on BBC Radio 4 's Today , stating : 
 [ T ] he point here is that Jesse James was a primitive white man from the 19th Century . And in those days the hero was a one @-@ man , one @-@ gun hero . It 's a very popular American myth . But what Jesse doesn 't realise [ in the song ] is that while he 's been up in heaven , the forces massed against him [ ... ] He can 't overcome the growth of the corporate , military @-@ industrial equation . He can 't walk down Wall Street and shoot up the place . No @-@ one would even pay attention to him . The hero is outnumbered and outgunned . The wagons are circling , but what 's he going to do ? What 's anyone going to do ? 
 " Quick Sand " is a shuffling rock song that addresses the plight of illegal immigrants to Arizona . It depicts six migrants travelling through extreme climates in the Sonoran Desert to reach Devil 's Highway in an attempt to cross the Mexico – United States border . They journey from Tamaulipas and through the mountains along Devil 's Highway . Partway into the journey , the migrants are abandoned by their coyote guide and subsequently lose one another one by one . They experience thirst , hunger , injury , and fear , culminating with the only two surviving migrants being turned away by a vigilante at the border . Cooder said of the route 's background and the narrative in an interview , " [ I ] t 's been a migrant trail for 200 years . People go out there and try to do it on foot , but if you make one mistake and go five minutes out of your way , you become disorientated and dehydrated . And they find these mummified bodies out there . The heat has just baked them through . And the people who live through it often refer to having a vision of the Virgin of Guadalupe flying overhead . This is a very common vision when the dehydration sets in . " 
 " Humpty Dumpty World " incorporates the marimba with light reggae and Mariachi influences . The song 's lyrics are sung from the perspective of God , who deplores the world He created . He makes note of <unk> politicians and craven television commentators , and views it as " a ball of confusion " in the chorus line , " I thought I had built upon a solid rock / But it ’ s just a Humpty Dumpty World " . " Christmas Time This Year " is an anti @-@ war song with a Mexican polka style , with Flaco Jiménez on accordion and Cooder on bajo <unk> . Composed as a corrido , the song is about wounded soldiers returning home for Christmas , with dismal lyrics set incongruously to an upbeat Mexican melody . Cooder wrote the song in response to the Walter Reed Army Medical Center neglect scandal and previous stories of neglected soldiers returning from the Iraq War . In " Baby Joined the Army " , a young man laments the departure of his girlfriend , who became uninterested in her town and enlisted in the army with the assurance that " If I get killed in battle , I still get paid . " 
 " Lord Tell Me Why " is a gospel song with a rolling funk groove , sung from the perspective of a lower class White man who has become disillusioned with the American dream . His ironic lyrics ask in the chorus , " Lord tell me why a white man / Ain 't worth nothin ' in this world no more . " The guitar @-@ based " I Want My Crown " was recorded with an 11 @-@ piece band and has an aggressive blues style , rumba @-@ rock groove , and growling vocals . The song is an indictment of politicians as " Judas men " who sided with oil barons and Republicans , and their greed that leads to war . " I Want My Crown " has been described by one writer as a " Mephistopheles @-@ as @-@ Right @-@ winger character study " . 
 " John Lee Hooker for President " is a blues song in which Cooder narrates as American blues musician John Lee Hooker visiting the White House . Adopting Hooker 's style and laconic vocal tone , he decides to run for the presidency after disliking what he observed in his visit , naming Jimmy Reed as Vice President , Little Johnny Taylor as Secretary of State , and proposing to have " nine fine @-@ lookin ' <unk> on the Supreme Court " . According to Cooder , the song was inspired by blues musician Gus Cannon 's 1927 song " Can You Blame the Colored Man " , a satirical piece about Booker T. Washington 's invitation to the White House by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1901 . 
 " Simple Tools " is a Tex @-@ Mex ballad about the contentment of leading a simple lifestyle , with references to the decline in traditional manual skills and the view of automated work as unfulfilling . Featuring a resounding mix of mandolin and guitar , " If There Is a God " is a satirical narrative about an afterlife in which Heaven is restricted by a government bill to the wealthy . Its lyrics criticize redistricting and Republican Party legislature . The song references " The Bourgeois Blues " by blues and folk musician Lead Belly . In " No Hard Feelings " , Cooder sings from the perspective of a lowly prospector who scolds businessmen for dealing with land exclusively in business terms . He dismisses the rich and elite as " ripples " in history and is willing to tolerate them provided that they avoid conflict . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was released by Nonesuch Records on August 30 , 2011 , in the United States . It was released in the United Kingdom on September 5 , and on September 9 in other European countries . Its vinyl LP release was on September 13 . The album 's lead single , " Quicksand " , had been released as a digital download on June 29 , 2010 . Cooder donated the proceeds from its sales to the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund . The single 's cover artwork , a piece called Nuthin ' to See Here , Keep on Movin ' ! , was designed by visual artist Vincent Valdez , a frequent collaborator with Cooder . Valdez contributed photography to the album 's liner booklet . Cooder performed with a 17 @-@ piece band at the Great American Music Hall in San Francisco , California on August 31 and September 1 , 2011 , to promote the album . He was not satisfied with the promotional aspect of the shows , however , and it contributed to his general disillusionment with the music industry , which he reflected on in an interview for The Australian : 
 We had a 16 @-@ piece band and we played great shows to 700 people a night . But none of them bought CDs . None of them . They had a good time but they weren 't motivated to buy CDs . I don 't understand it because I came up in the time of records . Back then the business ran . You still got the tunes out . It was a crooked business , you could get cheated and there could be crooked accounting , but I still prefer it to this new thing where there is no connection to the audience through radio or retail . 
 In the week of September 24 , 2011 , Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down debuted at number five on the US Billboard Top Folk Albums chart , on which it went on to spend seven weeks . The record also charted at number 123 on the Billboard 200 , number 28 on the Top Rock Albums , number 15 on the Tastemaker Albums , a chart that ranks top @-@ selling albums " based on an influential panel of indie stores and small regional chains . " In the United Kingdom , Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down debuted at number 26 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 6 @,@ 000 copies in its first week there ; it spent two weeks on the chart . 
 Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 92 , based on 14 reviews . It was called one of Cooder 's best records by Uncut magazine 's Nigel Williamson and Martin Chilton of The Daily Telegraph . AllMusic editor Thom Jurek deemed it Cooder 's " most overtly political album ... and one of his funniest , most musically compelling ones , too " , while Daniel Paton from musicOMH said much of the record was " highly satisfying satire ( although also often sensitive and affecting ) , combining Cooder ’ s transparent love for a wide range of roots music with his engagement with politics . " Andy Gill of The Independent was impressed by how Cooder used similar characters throughout the songs in new ways , calling the album his best since 2005 's Chávez Ravine . Cooder received comparisons to Woody Guthrie in reviews written by Phil Sutcliffe of Mojo , who found the lyrics sharply written , and Neil Spencer from The Observer , who called Cooder " a Woody Guthrie for our times " and the record " a fierce state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ nation album " . In the opinion of PopMatters critic Philip <unk> , the record would not have a significant impact because of the public 's predominantly commercial tastes and a " cynical " cultural climate , but concluded , " Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down could have tremendous cathartic power for [ those ] who are aware of history and its knack for repeating itself . For those who are willing , this is a good place to start an education . " 
 At the end of 2011 , Uncut named Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down the year 's 20th best album , while Robert Christgau ranked it number 37 on his list for The Barnes & Noble Review . The record was also nominated for the 2012 Grammy Award for Best Americana Album , while Cooder was nominated in the category of Best Artist for the 2012 Songlines Music Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ry Cooder . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Losing My Religion ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Losing My Religion " is the twenty @-@ seventh and final episode of the second season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 36th episode overall . Written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Mark Tinker , the episode was originally broadcast with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " , in a two @-@ hour season finale event on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on May 15 , 2006 . Grey 's Anatomy centers around a group of young doctors in training . In this episode , Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and her fellow interns have to plan a prom for Dr. Richard Webber 's ( James Pickens , Jr . ) niece Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) . Further storylines include Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) recovering from his gunshot wound and Denny Duquette 's ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) death following his seemingly successful heart transplant surgery . 
 The episode marked Sara Ramirez 's ( Dr. Callie Torres ) final appearance with recurring billing , as she would be upgraded to a series regular in season three . Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Brooke Smith , Sarah Utterback , Loretta Devine , and Chris O 'Donnell reprised their roles as guest stars , while Hallee Hirsh and Tiffany Hines made their first and only appearances . The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics , who disapproved of the storyline involving Grey and Shepherd and the show 's lack of repercussions for the interns , but lauded Dr. Cristina Yang 's ( Sandra Oh ) storyline along with Heigl 's performance . " Losing My Religion " was also included in several " best episodes " lists . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed 22 @.@ 50 million Americans , garnered an 8 @.@ 0 / 22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest @-@ rated drama . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) finish Dr. Preston Burke 's ( Isaiah Washington ) surgery to remove a pseudo @-@ aneurysm in the subclavian artery that threatened the functioning of his arm and which was caused by a gunshot wound . At the same time , Dr. Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) successfully transplants a heart into Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) . The interns face Webber , who orders them to plan a prom for his dying niece , Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) , until the one who cut Duquette 's left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) comes forward . With the instructions of Camille 's friends , Claire ( Hallee Hirsh ) and Natalie ( Tiffany Hines ) , they prepare the prom as they each struggle with their own personal problems . Trying to recover from his injury , Burke finds a tremor in his right hand . 
 Dr. Meredith Grey 's ( Ellen Pompeo ) love interest Dr. Finn Dandrige ( Chris O 'Donnell ) , the vet of Doc — the dog she shares with Shepherd — informs her that Doc has had several seizures due to his bone cancer and that she and Shepherd have to make a decision . Webber interrogates the interns individually about Duquette 's LVAD wire , but only learns about their personal problems instead . Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) finally accepts Duquette 's marriage proposal . At Dandridge 's office , Grey and Shepherd , joined by Dr. Addison Montgomery @-@ Shepherd ( Kate Walsh ) , decide to put Doc to sleep . 
 The hospital staff begins to arrive at the prom and Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Dr. George O 'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) discuss the status of their relationship , which leads to the former admitting her love and commitment . During the dance , Grey and Shepherd escape Dandridge and Montgomery to have a heated argument that leads to sexual intercourse . In the meantime , as Duquette waits for Stevens alone in his room , he experiences a sudden sense of pain , and unexpectedly dies . While Webber is sitting in the operating room gallery and reflecting on his career , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) announces Duquette 's death . 
 News of the death spreads , and the interns hurry to his room to find a shocked Stevens , lying on the bed , clinging to his still form . As they each try to comfort her , the cause of his death is revealed to have been a blood clot that led to a fatal stroke . Stevens says that if she had taken less time to dress , she would have arrived at his room sooner and could have been with him while he died . Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) then talks to Stevens , picking her up and hugging her . Afterward , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , who did not know how to handle Burke 's situation , goes to his room and puts her hand on his to show him her support . As the episode ends , Stevens confesses to Webber that she was the one responsible for the LVAD wire cut , and claiming she cannot be a surgeon , quits the program . After everyone begins going their separate ways , Grey remains torn on who she should follow : Shepherd or Dandridge . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Shonda Rhimes and directed by filmmaker Mark Tinker , while Ed Ornelas edited it . It was the last episode to feature Sara Ramirez as a guest star , as she began receiving star billing in the season three premiere . Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Smith , Utterback , Devine , and O 'Donnell reprised their roles as Duquette , Torres , Travis , Hahn , Harper , Adele , and Dandridge , respectively , while Hirsh and Hines made their first and only appearances as Claire and Natalie , respectively . The soundtrack of the episode consisted of Pete <unk> 's " Under the Waves " , Dressy Bessy 's " Side 2 " , Amos Lee 's " Colors " , Masha <unk> 's " Destination Vertical " , Kate Havnevik 's " Grace " , and Snow Patrol 's " Chasing Cars " . The American profile of Northern Irish band Snow Patrol increased after their single was used in this episode . Lead singer Gary Lightbody was initially uncertain about licensing a song for the soundtrack , but has since admitted that the publicity had a positive effect . 
 Rhimes entitled the episode " Losing My Religion " because she felt " that is what happens to each intern in this episode . Each intern lets go of the things they 've held onto all season . George lets go of loving Meredith . Cristina lets go of her well @-@ checked emotions . Izzie is forced to let go of her idealism . And that leads to her letting go of medicine . Alex lets go of his rage against Izzie . And Meredith ... well , Meredith just lets go . " The costumes were designed by Mimi Melgaard ; Rhimes noted that everyone was dressed in dark funeral colors to the prom , except Stevens who was dressed in pink . Stevens ' dress was an <unk> creation . Monologues done by the five main characters were used in this episode . Rhimes commented : " this was something we 'd never done and I wasn 't sure would work . But you place those pages into the hands of the actors and each and every one of them layered their characters ' souls right into the dialogue . " The episode 's theme was the prom ; Rhimes said she wanted to do it since the beginning of the season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Losing My Religion " was originally broadcast on May 15 , 2006 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , along with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " . The episodes were watched by a total of 22 @.@ 50 million Americans . It represents a slight decrease in comparison to the episode airing the previous night , " 17 Seconds " , which garnered 22 @.@ 60 million viewers . The episode received an 8 @.@ 0 / 22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest @-@ rated drama . The episode 's rating outranked CBS 's The New Adventures of Old Christine and CSI : Miami , the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) ' s The Apprentice , and the Fox Broadcasting Company 's 24 . 
 The episode received mixed to negative reviews among critics . Joel Keller of The Huffington Post expressed mixed opinions on the episode , putting the emphasis on Yang 's development , whom he deemed " transformed " by the end of the episode . He applauded Torres ' evolution throughout the episode , and also praised Heigl 's performance and dress . Keller criticized the non @-@ realism of the punishment the interns received , Grey and Shepherd 's storyline being tiresome , and the cliffhanger , calling it a " lame cliché " . Writing for the Chicago Tribune , Maureen Ryan gave a negative review of the episode , stating : " overall , the whole thing just fell a little flat . " Though Ryan appreciated the scene of Doc 's death , she was critical of Torres ' underdevelopment , the lack of chemistry with O 'Malley , and her prom dress . Abigail Chao of Television Without Pity was also critical of Torres ' dress , but liked Heigl 's pink dress . She also applauded Karev 's intervening to calm Stevens down , and agreed that Grey 's cliffhanger was not good . 
 Eyder Peralta of The Houston Chronicle criticized Stevens ' ethics for cutting Duquette 's LVAD wire , writing that she " should not be practising medicine " . Alan Sepinwall , a former television columnist for The Star @-@ Ledger , commented favorably on Karev " finally displaying some humanity " in the scene following Duquette 's death . He was critical of Shepherd 's arc , however , and on the absence of severe consequences for Stevens having cut the LVAD wire , an action he called " insane and dangerous " . This episode was included on the list for the " 25 Sexiest TV Shows on DVD " by magazine Entertainment Weekly . It was also listed in Entertainment Weekly 's " 20 Unforgettable Proms " and in Starpulse 's " Top Ten TV Proms " . AOL TV placed the hook @-@ up scene involving Grey and Shepherd on its Top 20 of TV 's Sexiest Scenes . In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " Losing My Religion " # 63 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes . In 2013 , the magazine named Duquette 's death one of TV 's Most <unk> Deaths . In December 2011 , Wetpaint named " Losing My Religion " one of the five best episodes of the series . 
 = M @-@ 44 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 44 is a 37 @.@ 463 @-@ mile ( 60 @.@ 291 km ) state trunkline highway in the western region of the US state of Michigan . It runs northward from the intersection of M @-@ 11 ( 28th Street ) and M @-@ 37 toward the Rockford area . The highway then turns eastward to Belding , and it ends six miles ( 10 km ) north of Ionia at M @-@ 66 . M @-@ 44 is known in Grand Rapids as the " East Beltline " and intersects with its related highway , Connector M @-@ 44 , in Plainfield Township . This highway runs concurrently with M @-@ 37 between M @-@ 11 and Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) . 
 As a state highway , M @-@ 44 dates back to around July 1 , 1919 , and it was routed along a section of its modern route at that time . The eastern end was altered in the late 1920s , and the western end was extended to the Grand Rapids area in the 1970s . For over 20 years , M @-@ 44 was truncated to remove the M @-@ 37 concurrency . Since 2003 though , the highway has terminated at the intersection with 28th Street . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 44 starts at the intersection of 28th Street and East Beltline Avenue in Kentwood . M @-@ 11 runs east and west along 28th Street and M @-@ 37 runs south along Broadmoor Avenue as the continuation of East Beltline . M @-@ 44 and M @-@ 37 run together on East Beltline Avenue north from this intersection , which is also the location of the Woodland Mall in Kentwood . From here north , M @-@ 37 / M @-@ 44 runs along a four @-@ lane divided boulevard through the campus of Calvin College . East Beltline passes through suburban residential areas near the east end of Reeds Lake and M @-@ 21 's western terminus at Fulton Street . Just north of this intersection is an interchange with I @-@ 96 at exit 38 . M @-@ 37 leaves the roadway to run along I @-@ 96 while M @-@ 44 continues northward along East Beltline Avenue . All of M @-@ 44 to this point is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roadways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 North of the interchange , M @-@ 44 passes the Frederik Meijer Gardens and Sculpture Park and the campus of Cornerstone University . The area around the highway is mixed businesses and office parks north to Knapp Street , and then residential north of there . At Plainfield Avenue , M @-@ 44 meets Conn . M @-@ 44 and crosses the Grand River . M @-@ 44 turns eastward near the south side of Rockford and runs through suburban residential areas near Lake Bella Vista , Silver and Bostwick lakes . East of here , the environs transition to rural farmland and the highway crosses the Kent – Ionia county line between Grattan and Cooks Corners , where it meets M @-@ 91 west of Belding . The highway continues east through town , where it crosses the Flat River , and ends at M @-@ 66 north of Ionia . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 44 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 beginning at M @-@ 13 ( later US 131 ) from Rockford to Belding . Near Orleans , M @-@ 44 turned south into town and ended at M @-@ 21 in Ionia . The segment near Orleans was realigned to end at M @-@ 14 ( now M @-@ 66 ) in Woods Corners in 1929 . M @-@ 44 was extended concurrently along US 131 to end at the intersection of the East Beltline and 28th Street near Grand Rapids . Two other highways were also routed on the East Beltline : M @-@ 21 south of Fulton Street and M @-@ 37 south of Cascade Road . The US 131 , M @-@ 21 and M @-@ 37 concurrencies only lasted until 1964 when M @-@ 21 was moved to I @-@ 196 and M @-@ 37 was shifted to the new US 131 freeway . 
 US 131 was moved to its freeway north of Grand Rapids in 1969 . The Northland Drive segment of US 131 / M @-@ 44 was redesignated as only M @-@ 44 , and the Plainfield Avenue segment became Conn . M @-@ 44 . M @-@ 37 was rerouted as well up East Beltline from M @-@ 11 concurrently with M @-@ 44 to I @-@ 96 . In 1977 , this junction at I @-@ 96 became the official western terminus of M @-@ 44 , with the M @-@ 44 signs along East Beltline Avenue removed . Then in 2003 , the signs along the East Beltline were restored and the route extended back to its former terminus . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Connector route = = 
 M @-@ 44 Connector , or Conn . M @-@ 44 , is a 4 @.@ 185 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 735 km ) connector route state trunkline highway running along Plainfield Avenue in the Grand Rapids area . It connects I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 near Lamberton Lake with M @-@ 44 running along East Beltline Avenue near the Grand River . In between , the highway passes through a commercial area . North of 5 Mile Road , Plainfield Avenue takes on a more suburban residential character . There are more business again at the northern end by <unk> Lake . Conn . M @-@ 44 was formed in 1969 when the US 131 freeway was completed from I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 to 14 Mile Road near Rockford . US 131 along Plainfield Avenue was redesignated as Conn . M @-@ 44 to connect I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 with M @-@ 44 . 
 = Road to Rhode Island = 
 " Road to Rhode Island " is the 13th episode of the second season and the first episode of the ' Road To ... ' series of the American animated television series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 30 , 2000 . In the episode , Brian volunteers to bring Stewie home from his grandparents ' house in California , but the two miss their plane and must travel on foot for a cross @-@ country journey back home . Meanwhile , Peter becomes addicted to watching a collection of marriage counseling videos hosted by a <unk> . 
 The episode was directed by Dan Povenmire and was written by Gary Janetti . It guest starred Victoria Principal as Dr. Amanda Rebecca , Danny Smith and Wally Wingert as various characters . Series creator Seth MacFarlane conceived the idea for this episode , and was inspired by the 1940s Road to ... series of comedy films which starred Bing Crosby , Bob Hope , and Dorothy Lamour . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . It was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Behind the Laughter " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a flashback set seven years ago , where it is revealed that Brian was born in a puppy mill and taken from his mother . Back in the present , Brian tells his psychiatrist about the experience . Afterwards , Brian volunteers to pick up Stewie from his vacation at his grandparents ' summer home in Palm Springs , California , where Stewie frames a maid for stealing to amuse himself at dinner . At the airport bar , Brian gets very drunk and , when Stewie comes to retrieve him , their plane tickets are stolen . They stop at a rundown motel , where Stewie tries calling home , but fails because he believes his phone number is 867 @-@ <unk> . The next day , they have to escape and <unk> a car because their credit card was rejected . To get home , Stewie and Brian masquerade as crop dusters to steal a plane , which they immediately wreck . As the pair continue hitchhiking back to Quahog , they pass by a puppy mill near Austin , Texas , Brian 's birthplace . Upon arrival , they discover that Brian 's mother was taxidermied and turned into a table by the puppy mill owners as a memorial . With Stewie 's reluctant help , Brian gives his mother a proper burial . The pair eventually complete their journey home by riding in an open boxcar , where Brian attempts to apologize to Stewie for all of the trouble he has put both of them through , only to have Stewie reply that he actually enjoyed it . Reconciled , they perform a musical duet " Off On the Road to Rhode Island " as the train takes them home . When Stewie and Brian return home , Lois asks Stewie about the trip , and Stewie covers up for Brian by saying the trip was " Smooth sailing through calm seas " . Lois leaves and Brian tells Stewie that he is thankful to Stewie for covering for him , and asks Stewie if there 's anything he can do to repay him . At first it appears that Stewie wishes to make him his servant by providing an example with an episode of The Brady Bunch , although it turns out that Stewie wants Brian to tape that episode for him . 
 Meanwhile , Lois urges Peter to watch relationship videos with her , but the videos turn out to be pornography hosted by Dr. Amanda Rebecca , who strips after asking the women to leave the room . Peter becomes addicted to the videos , much to Lois ' chagrin . She gets herself on the end of one of the tapes in black lingerie and entices Peter . While kissing , Peter rewinds the tape , playing the part of Lois taking her robe off over and over . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Road to Rhode Island " was directed by Dan Povenmire and was written by Gary Janetti . It featured guest appearances from Victoria Principal as Dr. Amanda Rebecca , Danny Smith and Wally Wingert as various characters . This was the first episode directed by Povenmire . Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane granted Povenmire substantial creative freedom for directing episodes . Povenmire said that MacFarlane would tell him , " We 've got two minutes to fill . Give me some visual gags . Do whatever you want . I trust you . " Povenmire praised MacFarlane 's management style for letting him have fun . Several years after the episode was written , in DVD commentary for the eighth and ninth season of the show , Gary Janetti , the writer of the episode , recalled that the original title of the episode was intended to be simply " Brian & Stewie " , but was changed by series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , who wanted there to be a " Road to " episode each season . The name of the episode was then changed to " Road to Rhode Island " , with the original name later being used for the landmark 150th episode of the show , also entitled " Brian & Stewie " , and written by Janetti . 
 This is the first episode of the " Road to " episodes of the series which air through various seasons of the show . The episodes are a parody of the seven " Road to " comedy films starring Bing Crosby , Bob Hope , and Dorothy Lamour . MacFarlane , a fan of the film series , came up with the idea . The musical number in the episode is sung to the tune of " ( We 're Off on the ) Road to Morocco " from the film Road to Morocco . 
 = = = Edits = = = 
 During the airport section of the episode , there is a scene that has subsequently cut from some editions / airings of the show , involving Osama bin Laden . In the scene , Stewie , when approaching airport security , realizes that his bag is full of weapons . He then breaks into song , singing " On the Good Ship Lollipop " to distract the X @-@ ray scanners . He then says , " Let 's hope Osama bin Laden doesn 't know show tunes . " At that time , Osama is pictured in another line , distracting the scanners by singing " I hope I get it " from A Chorus Line . Even though the episode was made a year and a half before 9 / 11 , it was still controversial , and was left out of the original DVD release in the US . However , the scene was left intact on the " Freakin ' Sweet Collection . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his 2009 review , Ahsan Haque of IGN , rating the episode 10 / 10 , praised the episode , saying : " Great writing , hilarious jokes , a catchy musical , and a story that 's both hilarious and touching at the same time – Family Guy doesn 't get much better than this . " It is one of the only two Family Guy episodes that has ever been given a " Masterpiece " ( 10 / 10 ) rating by IGN , leading many to consider this episode as the greatest in Family Guy 's history . IGN also placed the episode at the top of their list of " Stewie and Brian 's Greatest Adventures " . 
 The episode was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Behind the Laughter " . 
 = Pilot ( Millennium ) = 
 " Pilot " is the pilot episode of the crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on October 25 , 1996 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter , and directed by David Nutter . " Pilot " featured guest appearances by Paul Dillon , April <unk> and Stephen J. Lang . 
 Offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , retires to Seattle with his family after a breakdown caused him to quit working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Using his incredible profiling skills , Black helps in an effort to catch a vicious murderer who believes he is fulfilling apocalyptic prophecies . 
 " Pilot " was filmed over the course of a month in Vancouver , British Columbia , and was inspired by the writings of Nostradamus and William Butler Yeats . Airing in the timeslot previously occupied by Carter 's first series , The X @-@ Files , the episode received a high Nielsen household and syndication rating and was generally positively received by fans and critics alike . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a strip club in downtown Seattle , an unnamed man known to the club workers as " The Frenchman " ( Paul Dillon ) is mumbling poetic phrases and hallucinating blood pouring over a blonde stripper , with a wall of fire surrounding her . Later that night , the stripper is murdered . Just arriving in Seattle is Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and his family . Frank spots a newspaper about the local murder , and immediately contacts his old colleague Bob Bletcher . Frank joins the investigation as an advisor of the Millennium Group , a private investigative group composed of retired law enforcement agents . 
 When he views the body , Frank gets various vivid visions of the crime . His knowledge of various details unknown to the others unsettles Bletcher . Frank and a fellow member of the Millennium Group named Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) officially join the investigation . 
 In the meantime , the killer is hunting for his next victim . While unknown to him , the murderer is trapped in a world of grotesque hallucinations . Later that night , local police officers spot his latest victim . Frank visits the crime scene , which gives him a vision of the crime , again startling his colleague Bletcher . Later on , Frank presents his finding to the local homicide department , saying that the murderer is obsessed with apocalyptic prophecies and maddened by twisted sexual guilt . 
 After Frank presents his finding , Bletcher demands Frank give him the stripper girl 's " rape & murder on VHS . " . Frank tells him he can see what the killer sees . After telling him , Frank rushes to hospital when his daughter , Jordan Black ( Brittany Tiplady ) is stricken with a high fever . Getting another vision , Frank leaves the hospital and gathers local law enforcement officers to another victim . 
 This follows with Frank tracking down the killer to the local police department 's own evidence lab . In a mad rage the killer attacks Frank , but Bletcher shows up and shoots the killer , saving Frank 's life . After clearing up the case with the local authorities , Frank returns home and opens up a newly arrived anonymous piece of mail containing pictures of his family . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pilot " was written by series creator Chris Carter . Beyond creating the concept for Millennium , Carter would write a total of six other episodes for the series in addition to " Gehenna " — three in the first season , and a further three in the third season . Director David Nutter would also go on to direct several episodes in the first season of the series — " Gehenna " , " 522666 " and " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " . 
 " Pilot " was filmed over the course of a month , which was an unheard @-@ of length of time for a single television episode . The episode was shot in Vancouver , British Columbia in early spring to give it a " gray " and " bleak " look . The decision to film in Vancouver was to give the show the same dark feel as its sister show The X @-@ Files , which had also been created by Carter . The strip club , Ruby Tip , was inspired by a club in Seattle named the Lusty Lady , which is located on that city 's main street . Director David Nutter had been a long @-@ time staff member of The X @-@ Files crew . Carter said the episode was " directed beautifully by David Nutter who added to the project in so many ways , even as it came on , things that he saw visually that were able to actually change and make the script more concise " . Although " Pilot " did not open with a literary quote as the series would do from the next episode onwards , its plot heavily features the 1919 poem " The Second Coming " by Irish poet William Butler Yeats . 
 Carter called it a " pleasure " to cast Kate <unk> and April <unk> , because they were " good " -looking , which he felt was a refreshing change from frequently casting " character actors " on The X @-@ Files . <unk> would later make an appearance on The X @-@ Files and played a prominent role on Harsh Realm . The idea behind the character " The Frenchman " came from a prophecy by Nostradamus . According to Carter , " the idea that there is something approaching at the millennium , this series being produced I think four years before the end of the century , that we were headed toward something grave and foreboding " . The name of recurring character Bob Bletcher came from an attorney Carter had worked with previously . Another name , Giebelhouse was another name Carter had gotten from his childhood years . Carter said " This idea of the hard @-@ boiled detective is a kind of cliché " . But felt that the characters came " very real to life " , when compared to real law enforcement personnel . 
 Millennium was given the Friday night timeslot previously occupied by The X @-@ Files , prompting Carter to quip that his earlier series was " being abducted " . However , Millennium received higher viewing figures during its first season than The X @-@ Files had done , while the latter show 's fourth season , the one airing concurrently to Millennium , saw its ratings reach their highest to that point . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Pilot " was first broadcast on the Fox network on October 25 , 1996 ; and gathered a total viewership of 17 @.@ 72 million in the United States . In the " adults 18 – 49 " demographic , the episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 , with a 27 share ; meaning it was viewed by nine percent of television @-@ equipped households and 27 percent of those actively watching television . The rating across all demographics was 11 @.@ 9 . The episode 's broadcast set the record at the time for the most @-@ watched program on Fox . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack <unk> rated the episode a B , finding it to be " weirdly prescient of the crime dramas we wallow in today " . Handlen felt that episode 's tone was so " overwrought " as to be " hilarious " , but still found the series to be " uncompromising " and " compelling " . Handlen also noted similarities to the films Manhunter and Seven in both the episode 's plot and the series ' premise . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 5 / 5 , calling it " perhaps the most perfect opening episode to a one @-@ hour suspense thriller ... ever conceived " . Gibron also praised the casting of Henriksen and O 'Quinn in the series . An Entertainment Weekly preview for the episode noted that some of its scenes were " the grimmest ... in prime @-@ time history " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , calling it " bleak and confrontational " though finding that its symbolism was " too boldly stated " . Comparing the series to its sister show , The X @-@ Files , Shearman and Pearson noted that Henriksen portrays his role " with a confidence that makes him immediately a more credible character than Mulder or Scully would be for an entire season " . Writing for The Register @-@ Guard , Renee Graham called the episode " as lurid a television show as you 're ever going to see " , adding that it seemed " just too horrific to be enjoyable " . However , Graham noted that the episode was " by far the superior show " compared to the similar series Profiler , which aired around the same time . 
 = Flag of Japan = 
 The national flag of Japan is a white rectangular flag with a large red disc representing the sun in the center . This flag is officially called <unk> ( <unk> , " sun @-@ mark flag " ) in Japanese , but is more commonly known as Hinomaru ( <unk> , " circle of the sun " ) . 
 The <unk> flag is designated as the national flag in the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem , which was promulgated and became effective on August 13 , 1999 . Although no earlier legislation had specified a national flag , the sun @-@ disc flag had already become the de facto national flag of Japan . Two proclamations issued in 1870 by the <unk> @-@ kan , the governmental body of the early Meiji period , each had a provision for a design of the national flag . A sun @-@ disc flag was adopted as the national flag for merchant ships under Proclamation No. 57 of Meiji 3 ( issued on February 27 , 1870 ) , and as the national flag used by the Navy under Proclamation No. 651 of Meiji 3 ( issued on October 27 , 1870 ) . Use of the Hinomaru was severely restricted during the early years of the American occupation after World War II ; these restrictions were later relaxed . 
 The sun plays an important role in Japanese mythology and religion as the Emperor is said to be the direct descendent of the sun goddess Amaterasu and the legitimacy of the ruling house rested on this divine appointment and descent from the chief deity of the predominant Shinto religion . The name of the country as well as the design of the flag reflect this central importance of the sun . The ancient history <unk> Nihongi says that Emperor <unk> used a flag representing the sun in his court in 701 , and this is the first recorded use of a sun @-@ motif flag in Japan . The oldest existing flag is preserved in <unk> @-@ ji temple , <unk> , Yamanashi , which is older than the 16th century , and an ancient legend says that the flag was given to the temple by Emperor Go @-@ Reizei in the 11th century . During the Meiji Restoration , both the sun disc and the Rising Sun Ensign of the Imperial Japanese Navy became major symbols in the emerging Japanese Empire . Propaganda posters , textbooks , and films depicted the flag as a source of pride and patriotism . In Japanese homes , citizens were required to display the flag during national holidays , celebrations and other occasions as decreed by the government . Different tokens of devotion to Japan and its Emperor featuring the Hinomaru motif became popular during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War and other conflicts . These tokens ranged from slogans written on the flag to clothing items and dishes that resembled the flag . 
 Public perception of the national flag varies . Historically , both Western and Japanese sources claimed the flag was a powerful and enduring symbol to the Japanese . Since the end of World War II ( the Pacific War ) , the use of the flag and the national anthem Kimigayo has been a contentious issue for Japan 's public schools . Disputes about their use have led to protests and lawsuits . The flag is not frequently displayed in Japan due to its association with <unk> . To Okinawans , the flag represents the events of World War II and the subsequent U.S. military presence there . For some nations that have been occupied by Japan , the flag is a symbol of aggression and imperialism . The Hinomaru was used as a tool against occupied nations for purposes of intimidation , asserting Japan 's dominance , or subjugation . Several military banners of Japan are based on the Hinomaru , including the <unk> Naval Ensign . The Hinomaru also serves as a template for other Japanese flags in public and private use . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before 1900 = = = 
 The exact origin of the Hinomaru is unknown , but the rising sun seems to have had some symbolic meaning since the early 7th century ( the Japanese archipelago is east of the Asian mainland , and is thus where the sun " rises " ) . In 607 , an official correspondence that began with " from the Emperor of the rising sun " was sent to Chinese Emperor Yang of Sui . Japan is often referred to as " the land of the rising sun " . In the 12th @-@ century work , The Tale of the Heike , it was written that different samurai carried drawings of the sun on their fans . One legend related to the national flag is attributed to the Buddhist priest Nichiren . Supposedly , during a 13th @-@ century Mongolian invasion of Japan , Nichiren gave a sun banner to the shogun to carry into battle . The sun is also closely related to the Imperial family , as legend states the imperial throne was descended from the sun goddess Amaterasu . 
 One of Japan 's oldest flags is housed at the <unk> @-@ ji temple in Yamanashi Prefecture . Legend states it was given by Emperor Go @-@ Reizei to Minamoto no Yoshimitsu and has been treated as a family treasure by the Takeda clan for the past 1 @,@ 000 years , and at least it is older than 16th century . 
 The earliest recorded flags in Japan date from the unification period in the late 16th century . The flags belonged to each Daimyo and were used primarily in battle . Most of the flags were long banners usually charged with the mon ( family crest ) of the Daimyo lord . Members of the same family , such as a son , father , and brother , had different flags to carry into battle . The flags served as identification , and were displayed by soldiers on their backs and horses . Generals also had their own flags , most of which differed from soldiers ' flags due to their square shape . 
 In 1854 , during the Tokugawa shogunate , Japanese ships were ordered to hoist the Hinomaru to distinguish themselves from foreign ships . Before then , different types of Hinomaru flags were used on vessels that were trading with the Americans and Russians . The Hinomaru was decreed the merchant flag of Japan in 1870 and was the legal national flag from 1870 to 1885 , making it the first national flag Japan adopted . 
 While the idea of national symbols was strange to the Japanese , the Meiji Government needed them to communicate with the outside world . This became especially important after the landing of U.S. Commodore Matthew Perry in Yokohama Bay . Further Meiji Government implementations gave more identifications to Japan , including the anthem Kimigayo and the imperial seal . In 1885 , all previous laws not published in the Official Gazette of Japan were abolished . Because of this ruling by the new cabinet of Japan , the Hinomaru was the de facto national flag since no law was in place after the Meiji Restoration . 
 = = = Early conflicts and the Pacific War = = = 
 The use of the national flag grew as Japan sought to develop an empire , and the Hinomaru was present at celebrations after victories in the First Sino @-@ Japanese and Russo @-@ Japanese Wars . The flag was also used in war efforts throughout the country . A Japanese propaganda film in 1934 portrayed foreign national flags as incomplete or defective with their designs , while the Japanese flag is perfect in all forms . In 1937 , a group of girls from Hiroshima Prefecture showed solidarity with Japanese soldiers fighting in China during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , by eating " flag meals " that consisted of an <unk> in the middle of a bed of rice . The Hinomaru <unk> became the main symbol of Japan 's war mobilization and solidarity with her soldiers until the 1940s . 
 Japan 's early victories in the Sino @-@ Japanese War resulted in the Hinomaru again being used for celebrations . It was seen in the hands of every Japanese during parades . 
 Textbooks during this period also had the Hinomaru printed with various slogans expressing devotion to the Emperor and the country . Patriotism was taught as a virtue to Japanese children . Expressions of patriotism , such as displaying the flag or worshiping the Emperor daily , were all part of being a " good Japanese . " 
 The flag was a tool of Japanese imperialism in the occupied Southeast Asian areas during Second World War : people had to use the flag , and schoolchildren sang Kimigayo in morning flag raising ceremonies . Local flags were allowed for some areas such as the Philippines , Indonesia , and Manchukuo . In Korea which was part of the Empire of Japan , the Hinomaru and other symbols were used to declare that the Koreans were subjects of the empire . 
 To the Japanese , the Hinomaru was the " Rising Sun flag that would light the darkness of the entire world . " To Westerners , it was one of the Japanese military 's most powerful symbols . 
 = = = U.S. occupation = = = 
 The Hinomaru was the de facto flag throughout World War II and the occupation period . During the occupation of Japan after World War II , permission from the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers ( <unk> ) was needed to fly the Hinomaru . Sources differ on the degree to which the use of the Hinomaru flag was restricted ; some use the term " banned ; " however , while the original restrictions were severe , they did not amount to an outright ban . 
 After World War II , an ensign was used by Japanese civil ships of the United States Naval Shipping Control Authority for Japanese Merchant Marines . Modified from the " E " signal code , the ensign was used from September 1945 until the U.S. occupation of Japan ceased . U.S. ships operating in Japanese waters used a modified " O " signal flag as their ensign . 
 On May 2 , 1947 , General Douglas MacArthur lifted the restrictions on displaying the Hinomaru in the grounds of the National Diet Building , on the Imperial Palace , on the Prime Minister 's residence and on the Supreme Court building with the ratification of the new Constitution of Japan . Those restrictions were further relaxed in 1948 , when people were allowed to fly the flag on national holidays . In January 1949 , the restrictions were abolished and anyone could fly the Hinomaru at any time without permission . As a result , schools and homes were encouraged to fly the Hinomaru until the early 1950s . 
 = = = Postwar to 1999 = = = 
 Since World War II , Japan 's flag has been criticized for its association with the country 's militaristic past . Similar objections have also been raised to the current national anthem of Japan , Kimigayo . The feelings about the Hinomaru and Kimigayo represented a general shift from a patriotic feeling about " Dai Nippon " – Great Japan – to the pacifist and anti @-@ militarist " Nihon " . Because of this ideological shift , the flag was used less often in Japan directly after the war even though restrictions were lifted by the <unk> in 1949 . 
 As Japan began to re @-@ establish itself diplomatically , the Hinomaru was used as a political weapon overseas . In a visit by the Emperor Hirohito and the Empress <unk> to the Netherlands , the Hinomaru was burned by Dutch citizens who demanded that either he be sent home to Japan or tried for the deaths of Dutch prisoners of war during the Second World War . Domestically , the flag was not even used in protests against a new Status of Forces Agreement being negotiated between U.S. and Japan . The most common flag used by the trade unions and other protesters was the red flag of revolt . 
 An issue with the Hinomaru and national anthem was raised once again when Tokyo hosted the 1964 Summer Olympic Games . Before the Olympic Games , the size of the sun disc of the national flag was changed partly because the sun disc was not considered striking when it was being flown with other national flags . Tadamasa <unk> , a color specialist , chose to set the sun disc at two thirds of the flag 's length . <unk> also chose the flag colors for the 1964 as well as the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano . 
 In 1989 , the death of Emperor Hirohito once again raised moral issues about the national flag . Conservatives felt that if the flag could be used during the ceremonies without reopening old wounds , they might have a chance to propose that the Hinomaru become the national flag without being challenged about its meaning . During an official six @-@ day mourning period , flags were flown at half staff or draped in black bunting all across Japan . Despite reports of protesters vandalizing the Hinomaru on the day of the Emperor 's funeral , schools ' right to fly the Japanese flag at half @-@ staff without reservations brought success to the conservatives . 
 = = = Since 1999 = = = 
 The Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem was passed in 1999 , choosing both the Hinomaru and Kimigayo as Japan 's national symbols . The passage of the law stemmed from a suicide of the principal of Sera High School in Sera , Hiroshima , Ishikawa Toshihiro , who could not resolve a dispute between his school board and his teachers over the use of the Hinomaru and Kimigayo . The Act is one of the most controversial laws passed by the Diet since the 1992 " Law Concerning Cooperation for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and Other Operations " , also known as the " International Peace Cooperation Law " . 
 Prime Minister Keizō Obuchi of the Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) decided to draft legislation to make the Hinomaru and Kimigayo official symbols of Japan in 2000 . His Chief Cabinet Secretary , Hiromu Nonaka , wanted the legislation to be completed by the 10th anniversary of Emperor Akihito 's enthronement . This is not the first time legislation was considered for establishing both symbols as official . In 1974 , with the backdrop of the 1972 return of Okinawa to Japan and the 1973 oil crisis , Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei hinted at a law being passed enshrining both symbols in the law of Japan . In addition to instructing the schools to teach and play Kimigayo , Kakuei wanted students to raise the Hinomaru flag in a ceremony every morning , and to adopt a moral curriculum based on certain elements of the Imperial Rescript on Education pronounced by the Meiji Emperor in 1890 . Kakuei was unsuccessful in passing the law through the Diet that year . 
 Main supporters of the bill were the LDP and the Komeito ( <unk> ) , while the opposition included the Social Democratic Party ( <unk> ) and Communist Party ( JCP ) , who cited the connotations both symbols had with the war era . The CPJ was further opposed for not allowing the issue to be decided by the public . Meanwhile , the Democratic Party of Japan ( DPJ ) could not develop party consensus on it . DPJ President and future prime minister Naoto Kan stated that the DPJ must support the bill because the party already recognized both symbols as the symbols of Japan . Deputy Secretary General and future prime minister Yukio Hatoyama thought that this bill would cause further divisions among society and the public schools . Hatoyama voted for the bill while Kan voted against it . 
 Before the vote , there were calls for the bills to be separated at the Diet . Waseda University professor Norihiro Kato stated that Kimigayo is a separate issue more complex than the Hinomaru flag . Attempts to designate only the Hinomaru as the national flag by the DPJ and other parties during the vote of the bill were rejected by the Diet . The House of Representatives passed the bill on July 22 , 1999 , by a 403 to 86 vote . The legislation was sent to the House of Councilors on July 28 and was passed on August 9 . It was enacted into law on August 13 . 
 On August 8 , 2009 , a photograph was taken at a DPJ rally for the House of Representatives election showing a banner that was hanging from a ceiling . The banner was made of two Hinomaru flags cut and sewn together to form the shape of the DPJ logo . This infuriated the LDP and Prime Minister Tarō Asō , saying this act was unforgivable . In response , DPJ President Yukio Hatoyama ( who voted for the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem ) said that the banner was not the Hinomaru and should not be regarded as such . 
 = = Design = = 
 Passed in 1870 , the Prime Minister 's Proclamation No. 57 had two provisions related to the national flag . The first provision specified who flew the flag and how it was flown ; the second specified how the flag was made . The ratio was seven units width and ten units length ( 7 : 10 ) . The red disc , which represents the sun , was calculated to be three @-@ fifths of the hoist width . The law decreed the disc to be in the center , but it was usually placed one @-@ hundredth ( 1 ⁄ 100 ) towards the hoist . On October 3 of the same year , regulations about the design of the merchant ensign and other naval flags were passed . For the merchant flag , the ratio was two units width and three units length ( 2 : 3 ) . The size of the disc remained the same , however the sun disc was placed one @-@ twentieth ( 1 ⁄ 20 ) towards the hoist . 
 When the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem passed , the dimensions of the flag were slightly altered . The overall ratio of the flag was changed to two units width by three units length ( 2 : 3 ) . The red disc was shifted towards dead center , but the overall size of the disc stayed the same . The background of the flag is white and the sun disc is red ( <unk> , beni <unk> ) , but the exact color shades were not defined in the 1999 law . The only hint given about the red color that it is a " deep " shade . 
 Issued by the Japan Defense Agency ( now the Ministry of Defense ) in 1973 ( Showa 48 ) , specifications list the red color of the flag as 5R 4 / 12 and the white as N9 in the <unk> color chart . The document was changed on March 21 , 2008 ( Heisei 20 ) to match the flag 's construction with current legislation and updated the <unk> colors . The document lists acrylic fiber and nylon as fibers that could be used in construction of flags used by the military . For acrylic , the red color is <unk> 3 @.@ 7 / 15 @.@ 5 and white is <unk> ; nylon has <unk> 4 / 15 @.@ 2 for red and <unk> for white . In a document issued by the Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) , the red color for the Hinomaru and the ODA logo is listed as DIC 156 and CMYK 0 @-@ 100 @-@ 90 @-@ 0 . During deliberations about the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem , there was a suggestion to either use a bright red ( <unk> , aka <unk> ) shade or use one from the color pool of the Japanese Industrial Standards . 
 = = Use and customs = = 
 When the Hinomaru was first introduced , the government required citizens to greet the Emperor with the flag . There was some resentment among the Japanese over the flag , resulting in some protests . It took some time for the flag to gain acceptance among the people . 
 During World War II in Japanese culture , it was a popular custom for friends , classmates , and relatives of a deploying soldier to sign a Hinomaru and present it to him . The flag was also used as a good luck charm and a prayer to wish the soldier back safely from battle . One term for this kind of charm is Hinomaru <unk> ( <unk> ) . One tradition is that no writing should touch the sun disc . After battles , these flags were often captured or later found on deceased Japanese soldiers . While these flags became souvenirs , there has been a growing trend of sending the signed flags back to the descendants of the soldier . 
 The tradition of signing the Hinomaru as a good luck charm still continues , though in a limited fashion . The Hinomaru <unk> could be shown at sporting events to give support to the Japanese national team . Another example is the hachimaki headband , which was white in color and had the red sun in the middle . During World War II , the phrases " Certain Victory " ( <unk> , <unk> ) or " Seven Lives " was written on the hachimaki and worn by kamikaze pilots . This denoted that the pilot was willing to die for his country . 
 Before World War II , all homes were required to display Hinomaru on national holidays . Since the war , the display of the flag of Japan is mostly limited to buildings attached to national and local governments such as city halls ; it is rarely seen at private homes or commercial buildings , but some people and companies have advocated displaying the flag on holidays . Although the government of Japan encourages citizens and residents to fly the Hinomaru during national holidays , they are not legally required to do so . Since the Emperor 's 80th Birthday on December 23 , 2002 , the Kyushu Railway Company has displayed the Hinomaru at 330 stations . 
 Starting in 1995 , the ODA has used the Hinomaru motif in their official logo . The design itself was not created by the government ( the logo was chosen from 5 @,@ 000 designs submitted by the public ) but the government was trying increase the visualization of the Hinomaru through their aid packages and development programs . According to the ODA , the use of the flag is the most effective way to symbolize aid provided by the Japanese people . 
 = = Culture and perception = = 
 According to polls conduced by mainstream media , most Japanese people had perceived the flag of Japan as the national flag even before the passage of the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem in 1999 . Despite this , controversies surrounding the use of the flag in school events or media still remain . For example , liberal newspapers such as Asahi Shimbun and Mainichi Shimbun often feature articles critical of the flag of Japan , reflecting their readerships ' political spectrum . To other Japanese , the flag represents the time where democracy was suppressed when Japan was an empire . 
 The display of the Hinomaru at homes and businesses is also debated in Japanese society . Because of the association of the Hinomaru with <unk> <unk> ( right wing ) activists , reactionary politics , or hooliganism , some homes and businesses do not fly the flag . There is no requirement to fly the flag on any national holiday or special events . The town of Kanazawa , Ishikawa , has proposed plans in September 2012 to use government funds to buy flags with the purpose of encouraging citizens to fly the flag on national holidays . The Japanese Communist Party is vocally against the flag . 
 Negative perceptions of the Hinomaru exist in former colonies of Japan as well as within Japan itself , such as in Okinawa . In one notable example of this , on October 26 , 1987 , an Okinawan supermarket owner burned the Hinomaru before the start of the National Sports Festival of Japan . The flag burner , Shōichi <unk> , burned the Hinomaru not only to show opposition to atrocities committed by the Japanese army and the continued presence of U.S. forces , but also to prevent it from being displayed in public . Other incidents in Okinawa included the flag being torn down during school ceremonies and students refusing to honor the flag as it was being raised to the sounds of Kimigayo . In the capital city of Naha , Okinawa , the Hinomaru was raised for the first time since the return of Okinawa to Japan to celebrate the city 's 80th anniversary in 2001 . In the People 's Republic of China and South Korea , both of which had been occupied by the Empire of Japan , the 1999 formal adoption of the Hinomaru was met with reactions of Japan moving towards the right and also a step towards re @-@ militarization . The passage of the 1999 law also coincided with the debates about the status of the Yasukuni Shrine , US @-@ Japan military cooperation and the creation of a missile defense program . In other nations that Japan occupied , the 1999 law was met with mixed reactions or glossed over . In Singapore , the older generation still harbors ill feelings toward the flag while the younger generation does not hold similar views . The Philippines government not only believed that Japan was not going to revert to militarism , but the goal of the 1999 law was to formally establish two symbols ( the flag and anthem ) in law and every state has a right to create national symbols . Japan has no law criminalizing the burning of the Hinomaru , but foreign flags cannot be burned in Japan . Some people have humorously drawn an analogy between the Japanese flag and the appearance of a menstruation stain on a white bedsheet . 
 = = Protocol = = 
 According to protocol , the flag may fly from sunrise until sunset ; businesses and schools are permitted to fly the flag from opening to closing . When flying the flags of Japan and another country at the same time , the Japanese flag takes the position of honor and the flag of the guest country flies to its right . Both flags must be at the same height and of equal size . When more than one foreign flag is displayed , Japan 's flag is arranged in the alphabetical order prescribed by the United Nations . When the flag becomes unsuitable to use , it is customarily burned in private . The Law Regarding the National Flag and Anthem does not specify on how the flag should be used , but different prefectures came up with their own regulations to use the Hinomaru and other prefectural flags . 
 = = = Mourning = = = 
 The Hinomaru flag has at least two mourning styles . One is to display the flag at half @-@ staff ( <unk> , Han @-@ ki ) , as is common in many countries . The offices of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also hoist the flag at half @-@ staff when a funeral is performed for a foreign nation 's head of state . 
 An alternative mourning style is to wrap the spherical finial with black cloth and place a black ribbon , known as a mourning flag ( <unk> , Chō @-@ ki ) , above the flag . This style dates back to the death of Emperor Meiji on July 30 , 1912 , and the Cabinet issued an ordinance stipulating that the national flag should be raised in mourning when the Emperor dies . The Cabinet has the authority to announce the half @-@ staffing of the national flag . 
 = = = Public schools = = = 
 Since the end of World War II , the Ministry of Education has issued statements and regulations to promote the usage of both the Hinomaru and Kimigayo at schools under their jurisdiction . The first of these statements was released in 1950 , stating that it was desirable , but not required , to use both symbols . This desire was later expanded to include both symbols on national holidays and during ceremonial events to encourage students on what national holidays are and to promote defense education . In a 1989 reform of the education guidelines , the LDP @-@ controlled government first demanded that the flag must be used in school ceremonies and that proper respect must be given to it and to Kimigayo . Punishments for school officials who did not follow this order were also enacted with the 1989 reforms . 
 The 1999 curriculum guideline issued by the Ministry of Education after the passage of the Law Regarding the National Flag and Anthem decrees that " on entrance and graduation ceremonies , schools must raise the flag of Japan and instruct students to sing the " Kimigayo " ( national anthem ) , given the significance of the flag and the song . " Additionally , the ministry 's commentary on the 1999 curriculum guideline for elementary schools note that " given the advance of internationalization , along with fostering patriotism and awareness of being Japanese , it is important to nurture school children 's respectful attitude toward the flag of Japan and Kimigayo as they grow up to be respected Japanese citizens in an internationalized society . " The ministry also stated that if Japanese students cannot respect their own symbols , then they will not be able to respect the symbols of other nations . 
 Schools have been the center of controversy over both the anthem and the national flag . The Tokyo Board of Education requires the use of both the anthem and flag at events under their jurisdiction . The order requires school teachers to respect both symbols or risk losing their jobs . Some have protested that such rules violate the Constitution of Japan , but the Board has argued that since schools are government agencies , their employees have an obligation to teach their students how to be good Japanese citizens . As a sign of protest , schools refused to display the Hinomaru at school graduations and some parents ripped down the flag . Teachers have unsuccessfully brought criminal complaints against Tokyo Governor Shintarō Ishihara and senior officials for ordering teachers to honor the Hinomaru and Kimigayo . After earlier opposition , the Japan Teachers Union accepts the use of both the flag and anthem ; the smaller All Japan Teachers and Staffs Union still opposes both symbols and their use inside the school system . 
 = = Related flags = = 
 = = = Military flags = = = 
 The Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces ( JSDF ) and the Japan Ground Self @-@ Defense Force use a version of the sun disc design with eight red rays extending outward , called Hachijō @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . A gold border lies partially around the edge . 
 A well @-@ known variant of the sun disc design is the sun disc with 16 red rays in a Siemens star formation , which was also historically used by Japan 's military , particularly the Imperial Japanese Army and the Imperial Japanese Navy . The ensign , known in Japanese as the <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ ki ( <unk> ) , was first adopted as the War flag on May 15 , 1870 , and was used until the end of World War II in 1945 . It was re @-@ adopted on June 30 , 1954 , and is now used as the war flag and naval ensign of the Japan Ground Self @-@ Defense Force ( JGSDF ) and the Japan Maritime Self @-@ Defense Force ( JMSDF ) . In the surrounding Asian countries that were occupied by Japan , this flag still carries a negative connotation . The JMSDF also employs the use of a masthead pennant . First adopted in 1914 and readopted in 1965 , the masthead pennant contains a simplified version of the naval ensign at the hoist end , with the rest of the pennant colored white . The ratio of the pennant is between 1 : 40 and 1 : 90 . 
 The Japan Air Self @-@ Defense Force ( JASDF ) , established independently in 1952 , has only the plain sun disc as its emblem . This is the only branch of service with an emblem that does not invoke the rayed Imperial Standard . However , the branch does have an ensign to fly on bases and during parades . The ensign was created in 1972 , which was the third used by the JASDF since its creation . The ensign contains the emblem of the branch centered on a blue background . 
 Although not an official national flag , the Z signal flag played a major role in Japanese naval history . On May 27 , 1905 , Admiral Heihachirō Tōgō of the Mikasa was preparing to engage the Russian Baltic Fleet . Before the Battle of Tsushima began , Togo raised the Z flag on the Mikasa and engaged the Russian fleet , winning the battle for Japan . The raising of the flag said to the crew the following : " The fate of Imperial Japan hangs on this one battle ; all hands will exert themselves and do their best . " The Z flag was also raised on the aircraft carrier Akagi on the eve of the Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , in December 1941 . 
 = = = Imperial flags = = = 
 Starting in 1870 , flags were created for the Japanese Emperor ( then Emperor Meiji ) , the Empress , and for other members of the imperial family . At first , the Emperor 's flag was ornate , with a sun resting in the center of an artistic pattern . He had flags that were used on land , at sea , and when he was in a carriage . The imperial family was also granted flags to be used at sea and while on land ( one for use on foot and one carriage flag ) . The carriage flags were a monocolored chrysanthemum , with 16 petals , placed in the center of a monocolored background . These flags were discarded in 1889 when the Emperor decided to use the chrysanthemum on a red background as his flag . With minor changes in the color shades and proportions , the flags adopted in 1889 are still in use by the imperial family . 
 The current Emperor 's flag is a 16 @-@ petal chrysanthemum , colored in gold , centered on a red background with a 2 : 3 ratio . The Empress uses the same flag , except the shape is that of a swallow tail . The crown prince and the crown princess use the same flags , except with a smaller chrysanthemum and a white border in the middle of the flags . The chrysanthemum has been associated with the Imperial throne since the rule of Emperor Go @-@ Toba in the 12th century , but it did not become the exclusive symbol of the Imperial throne until 1868 . 
 = = = <unk> flags = = = 
 The 47 prefectures of Japan each have a flag resembling the national flag insofar as consisting of a symbol , called a mon , charged on a monocolored field ( with the exception of Ehime , which uses a symbol on a bicolor background ) . There are several prefecture flags , such as Hiroshima 's , that match their specifications to the national flag ( 2 : 3 ratio , mon placed in the center and is 3 ⁄ 5 the length of the flag ) . Some of the mon display the name of the prefecture in Japanese characters ; others are stylized depictions of the location or another special feature of the prefecture . An example of a prefectural flag is that of Nagano , where the orange katakana character <unk> ( na ) appears in the center of a white disc . One interpretation of the mon is that the na symbol represents a mountain and the white disc , a lake . The orange color represents the sun while the white color represents the snow of the region . 
 Municipalities can also adopt flags of their own . The designs of the city flags are similar to the prefectural flags : a mon on a monocolored background . An example is the flag of Amakusa in Kumamoto Prefecture : the city symbol is composed of the Katakana character <unk> ( a ) and surrounded by waves . This symbol is centered on a white flag , with a ratio of 2 : 3 . Both the city emblem and the flag were adopted in 2006 . 
 = = = Derivatives = = = 
 In addition to the flags used by the military , several other flag designs were inspired by the national flag . The former Japan Post flag consisted of the Hinomaru with a red horizontal bar placed in the center of the flag . There was also a thin white ring around the red sun . It was later replaced by a flag that consisted of the <unk> postal mark in red on a white background . 
 Two recently designed national flags resemble the Japanese flag . In 1971 , Bangladesh gained independence from Pakistan , and it adopted a national flag that had a green background , charged with an off @-@ centered red disc that contained a golden map of Bangladesh . The current flag , adopted in 1972 , dropped the golden map and kept everything else . The Government of Bangladesh officially calls the red disc a circle ; the red color symbolizes the blood that was shed to create their country . The island nation of Palau uses a flag of similar design , but the color scheme is completely different . While the Government of Palau does not cite the Japanese flag as an influence on their national flag , Japan did administer Palau from 1914 until 1944 . The flag of Palau is an off @-@ centered golden @-@ yellow full moon on a sky blue background . The moon stands for peace and a young nation while the blue background represents Palau 's transition to self @-@ government from 1981 to 1994 , when it achieved full independence . 
 The Japanese naval ensign also influenced other flag designs . One such flag design is used by the Asahi Shimbun . At the bottom hoist of the flag , one quarter of the sun is displayed . The kanji character <unk> is displayed on the flag , colored white , covering most of the sun . The rays extend from the sun , occurring in a red and white alternating order , culminating in 13 total stripes . The flag is commonly seen at the National High School Baseball Championship , as the Asahi Shimbun is a main sponsor of the tournament . The rank flags and ensigns of the Imperial Japanese Navy also based their designs on the naval ensign . 
 = = Similar flags = = 
 Australian Aboriginal Flag 
 Flag of Bangladesh 
 Flag of Greenland 
 Flag of Laos 
 Flag of Macedonia 
 Flag of Niger 
 Flag of Palau 
 Flag of Zaire 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 Flag protocol 
 Website on the standards of the Imperial family 
 = Construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System = 
 The construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System included over 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) of oil pipeline , 12 pump stations , and a new tanker port . Built largely on permafrost during 1975 – 77 between Prudhoe Bay and Valdez , Alaska , the $ 8 billion effort required tens of thousands of people , often working in extreme temperatures and conditions ; the invention of specialized construction techniques ; and the construction of a new road , the Dalton Highway . 
 The first section of pipe was laid in 1975 after more than five years of legal and political arguments . Allegations of faulty welds drew intense scrutiny from local and national observers . A culture grew around the unique working conditions involved in constructing the pipeline , and each union that worked on the project had a different function and stereotype . Thirty @-@ two Alyeska Pipeline Service Company employees and contract workers were killed during the project . The main construction effort lasted until 1977 ; the first barrel of oil was delivered on July 28 of that year . Several more pump stations , added as oil flow increased , were completed through 1980 . 
 = = Survey and design = = 
 Intensive geological sampling and survey work of the pipeline route started in spring 1970 . Aerial photograph were taken , examined , and a preliminary route was detailed . Small survey parties physically visited the route and hammered stakes into the ground . The work was difficult ; animal dangers forced the crews to be armed , and they also had to cope with the remote area and limited infrastructure . In places , the foliage was so dense that trees had to be cut down and progress was limited to 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) per day . The surveyed route passed through several mountain passes : Atigun Pass , Isabel Pass , Thompson Pass , and Keystone Canyon . In the latter location , surveyors had to rappel down cliffs in order to perform their work . 
 Surveyors and planners also had to deal with the Denali Fault , a major cause of earthquakes , and with large amounts of permafrost . In 1969 , the unincorporated Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System group drilled a series of core samples north of the Brooks Range that demonstrated how ubiquitous the permafrost was along the route . This forced the design of an elevated pipeline , which was tested in a 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) loop built near Barrow . This elevation required the pipeline to be insulated , since extreme cold temperatures caused the metal to become brittle , even when hot oil was being pumped through the pipeline . 
 After ecological objections forced subterranean pipeline crossings ( in order to allow caribou to cross ) , engineers developed a system by which the ground near the pipeline would be refrigerated by chilled brine . These refrigerated sections also would be placed in Styrofoam @-@ lined trenches and covered with gravel for their insulation value . Altogether , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) of the pipeline was designed to be built underground in this way . In other places , a lack of permafrost meant it could simply be placed underground without a special refrigeration plant . Large amounts of gravel were needed for all sections of the pipeline as insulation to keep the heat of above @-@ ground structures from melting the permafrost . Gravel also was needed to build the construction and maintenance road , and surveyors located 470 sites across Alaska where the needed 65 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of gravel could be located . 
 The Pipeline Authorization Act required the pipeline to be able to withstand the maximum earthquake ever recorded in the area it was built . When crossing the Denali Fault , Teflon @-@ coated sliders were designed to allow the pipeline to move side @-@ to @-@ side in an earthquake . To protect against forward @-@ and @-@ backward shocks and to allow for thermal expansion , the pipeline wasn 't designed as a straight line . Instead , it was intended to be laid in an S @-@ shape , and the bends would allow for expansion and movement without breaking . 
 Because most of the pipeline was built above permafrost , each of the pipes holding up the raised sections of pipeline contained a sealed tube of ammonia . As the permafrost below the pipeline warms , the ammonia absorbs the heat and rises to a radiator on top of each stanchion . The ammonia is cooled by the outside air , condenses , and falls back to the bottom of the tube , where the process repeats . 
 The surveyed route crossed hundreds of streams and rivers . To cross these with the pipeline , engineers designed concrete " jackets " to surround the pipe and weight it down so it would sink to the bottom of the stream or river . Because oil is lighter than water , the pipeline would float without the concrete jackets . Dredging rivers and burying the pipeline in the streambed was not allowed due to environmental concerns . In several places — either out of fear of disturbing the river or because of the river 's characteristics — pipeline bridges were constructed . The most notable of these are over the Yukon River and the Tanana River . To protect against corrosion in these wet environments , the pipeline was designed with cathodic protection . 
 In terms of spill prevention , the pipeline was designed with one @-@ way valves ( so oil moving ahead could not leak out of a hole behind a certain point ) , computer @-@ aided leak detection , and other features . The pipeline was designed to be pressurized , so any leak would be instantly detected by a loss of pressure at one of the pump stations , which could sound an alarm and halt the flow of oil quickly . 
 When it was proposed , the pipeline was scheduled to start at a capacity of 0 @.@ 6 million barrels per day ( 95 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) , with capacity to be expanded to 1 @.@ 2 million barrels per day ( 190 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) in two years , and to 2 million barrels per day ( 320 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) at an indeterminate time . The oil embargo scrapped these plans , and it was intended that the pipeline be built with an initial capacity of 1 @.@ 2 million barrels per day ( 190 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) . This required eight pumping stations ( instead of five ) to be ready at startup , greatly increasing the manpower required . 
 = = = Valdez Marine Terminal = = = 
 The Valdez Marine Terminal , the southern end of the pipeline , was planned for a site across the Port Valdez fjord from Valdez proper . Initial studies predicted bedrock would be six feet below the surface of the ground , but when excavation began , it was discovered that bedrock actually was sixty feet down , requiring the removal of 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of overburden . The terminal itself was designed to be built with four tanker berths and space for a fifth , should it become necessary . Holding tanks were planned that had a capacity equal to that of the pipeline , allowing the whole pipeline to be emptied if required . As required by the Pipeline Authorization Act , a ballast @-@ water filtration system had to be designed as well . This system removes oil from tankers ' ballast water so it is not released into Prince William Sound — something fishermen feared when the pipeline was proposed . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Shortly after the permit was signed , convoys of equipment on snow tractors began heading north , using hardened snow roads and an ice bridge over the Yukon River to reach the seven construction camps that had been dormant since 1970 . In the 83 days from mid @-@ January to the time the snow and ice melted in mid @-@ April , 680 workers moved 34 @,@ 000 short tons ( 31 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) to the seven camps , and built five more camps and five temporary airstrips . 
 In February , as the ice bridge and snow road were carrying tracked vehicles north , Alyeska awarded a contract to design the construction and maintenance road . Michael Baker , Jr . , Inc . , a firm in Pennsylvania , was awarded the contract . To cross the Yukon River , the state of Alaska designed a bridge and paid two @-@ thirds of its cost . The remaining third was paid by Alyeska , and the bridge was built by Manson @-@ Osberg @-@ <unk> . On April 5 , the contracts to build the road were picked . In total , the new Dalton Highway cost $ 185 million to build , and four companies shared that cost . Construction of the Dalton Highway started on April 29 , and at the peak of the effort , Alyeska and the four subcontractors had more than 3 @,@ 400 workers deployed from the Yukon River to Prudhoe Bay . A massive airlift was created to supply the road construction effort ; more than 700 flights per day — 170 @,@ 000 in total — were required before the road was finished on September 29 . In just 154 days , a 360 @-@ mile gravel road had been built . Final grading had to be done and more than 20 small permanent bridges had to be built , but by November , the road was open to traffic crossing the Yukon River on another ice bridge . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 To supervise the construction of the pipeline , Alyeska appointed two construction management contractors to oversee all the other subcontractors in the project . Bechtel Corporation , from San Francisco , was named the management contractor for the pipeline itself . Fluor Alaska Inc . , a division of Fluor Corp. , was named the management contractor for the pumping stations and Valdez Marine Terminal , which was the most complex single section of the pipeline , since it involved the transfer of oil from the pipeline to seagoing oil tankers . 
 Neither of those two companies actually did the construction work . That job was handed off to a series of subcontractors , each of whom had responsibility on one ( or two ) of six sections of the pipeline ( seven , if the marine terminal is included ) . Bidding on the subcontracting jobs opened at the end of March , and the contracts were announced on June 12 , 1974 . 
 On Section One , which ran 153 miles ( 246 km ) from Valdez to the Sourdough pipeline camp , River Construction Corporation , a division of Morrison @-@ Knudsen , was given the contract . For Section Two , which covered 149 miles ( 240 km ) from Sourdough to north of Delta Junction , Perini Arctic Associates , a joint venture of Perini Corporation , Majestic Construction , Wiley Oilfield Hauling Ltd . , and McKinney Drilling Company . Section Three covered 144 miles ( 232 km ) from Delta Junction , past Fairbanks , and almost to the Yukon . The contract for this section was given to H.C. Price , a group formed by H.C. Price Company ( usually known as <unk> ) , R.B. Potashnick , <unk> Construction Company , and Oman Construction Company . 
 Section Four was 143 miles ( 230 km ) from south of the Yukon to Coldfoot . It was contracted to Associated @-@ Green , a group formed by Associated Pipeline Contractors , Inc. and Green Construction Company . The group also was one of the main contractors for construction of the Dalton Highway . Section Five covered the distance from Coldfoot to <unk> pipeline camp , and Section Six went from <unk> to Prudhoe Bay . Together , the two sections covered 210 miles ( 340 km ) , and they both were under the supervision of Arctic Constructors , a venture of Brown & Root Inc . , Ingram Corporation , Peter Kiewit Sons Inc . , Williams Brothers Alaska , Inc . , and H.B. <unk> Company . 
 In Valdez , where Fluor had supervision , the work also was divided among several contractors . Site preparation work was done by Morrison @-@ Knudsen . Chicago Bridge & Iron Company built the tank farms , the tanker berths were built by <unk> ( a venture of Peter Kiewit Sons and Willamette @-@ Western Corporation ) , and General Electric insulated the pipes . Fluor also had supervision of the construction of the pumping stations , which were generally built by the contractors working on a specific section of the pipeline . 
 = = = Pipeline camps = = = 
 When the contracts were announced , Alyeska already had 12 pipeline construction camps either built or under construction . These camps were all north of the Yukon , however , and camps had to be built along the entire length of the project . Alyeska planned for 29 construction camps , but 31 were created . Seven were built along the pipeline south of the Yukon , and one was built at each of the 12 pump stations along the length of the route . 
 The camps were built on thick beds of gravel laid down to insulate the underlying permafrost and to prevent pollution . At the conclusion of the construction project , the gravel was removed , theoretically removing oil leaks and other pollution with it . Atop the gravel were prefabricated modular buildings either flown to the site or trucked across the Dalton Highway . The standardized structures could house 28 people , and two typically were bolted together to create two " wings " . All were one @-@ story , except at Valdez and at the pump station camps , where modules were laid atop one another because of space concerns . In addition to the gravel insulation , both buildings and utility conduits were raised above the ground to avoid heating permafrost . 
 The camps housed from 250 people ( at each pump station ) to 3 @,@ 500 people ( at Valdez ) . A typical pump station camp cost $ 6 million to build , while the typical mainline camps cost about $ 10 million to build . The camps had beds for 16 @,@ 500 workers and were collectively referred to as " Skinny City " by workers . The name came from the fact that the " city " was 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) long , but only a few hundred feet wide . 
 Overall construction headquarters was at Fort Wainwright near Fairbanks , where Alyeska leased land and buildings from the U.S. Army . Vacant barracks were converted into housing , and vacant offices were given to oil workers . As air traffic increased , Alyeska arranged for the use of Fort Wainwright 's airfield to relieve the burden on Fairbanks International Airport . The camp at Wainwright was the only one that did not use prefabricated buildings . 
 = = Workers = = 
 The Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System was built entirely with unionized labor . Because construction was slumping in the United States at large , the pipeline drew workers from across the country . These workers had to follow a strict hiring process based on union seniority and the labor that was needed . Priority was given to hiring Alaska residents and Alaska Natives , and no strikes were permitted by a labor agreement between Alyeska and the unions . In exchange for abiding by these restrictions , workers were paid extremely well and received fringe benefits . According to the labor contract , every worker was guaranteed 40 hours ' pay per week , even if weather made work impossible . In addition , subcontractors had cost @-@ plus contracts with Alyeska for staffing , so there was no incentive to keep staffing levels low . These factors often led to more people being assigned to a job than there was work to do in an attempt to make up time lost to weather delays . At the peak of construction in fall 1975 , more than 28 @,@ 000 people were working on the pipeline . Fourteen to 19 percent of the workers were minorities , and 5 to 10 percent were women . Because of the high turnover on the project , more than 70 @,@ 000 people worked on at least a part of the pipeline . 
 = = = Welders = = = 
 The welders who worked on the pipeline itself came from <unk> Local 798 out of Tulsa , Oklahoma , which specialized in providing welders for large @-@ scale pipeline projects . Members of the Plumbers and Steamfitters Union performed all welding that was not a part of the pipeline itself , including pump stations , feeder pipelines , and work at the Valdez Marine Terminal . The welders were the highest paid of all the workers on the pipeline , with a normal rate of $ 18 @.@ 25 per hour . To be hired on the pipeline project , welders had to go through an intensive certification process that involved a series of test welds . If a welder failed any of the test welds , he was not hired and was not allowed to try again for several weeks . 
 Most <unk> were characterized by a Southern accent , cowboy boots , and unique welder 's hats . They were the only people to weld the 48 @-@ inch ( 120 cm ) pipe of the main pipeline , and outside observers characterized them as arrogant and " redneck " . As a fellow welder stated at the time , " Take your typical 798 pipeline welder and feed him a few drinks , and he 'll probably tell you that he 's God 's greatest gift to welding . " This attitude generated resentment from other pipeline workers , and the conflict caused large @-@ scale brawls . In some instances , Alaska State Troopers had to be flown to pipeline camps in order to break up small riots . Toward the end of the pipeline project , a series of bumper stickers was produced with the slogan " Happiness is 10 @,@ 000 Okies going south with a Texan under each arm . " 
 = = = Teamsters = = = 
 The Teamsters Union was by far the largest and most notable contributor of workers to the pipeline project . Teamsters worked in the transportation and supply aspects of the project . All trucks were driven by Teamsters , supply warehouses were run by Teamsters , and the buses that transported workers from camps to job sites were run by Teamsters . Teamsters Local 959 , with more than 23 @,@ 000 employees at its peak , was by far the most dominant labor force on the pipeline project . There were frequent allegations of corruption by Teamsters on the project , and the Anchorage Daily News won a Pulitzer Prize for a 15 @-@ part series on the rise of Local 959 and its influence on state politics . Repeated allegations of links to organized crime were never backed up by evidence , but two Teamsters leaders were murdered in 1976 while investigating drug activity on the pipeline project . Teamsters workers strongly denied any involvement with organized crime , and pointed to the fact that 80 percent of the Teamsters in the project had college degrees or professional and management experience . 
 The Teamsters ' control of tools and equipment in warehouses they ran led to conflicts with other workers . In a few instances , Teamsters were assaulted by workers from other unions . In other instances , the Teamsters used their position to extract concessions from Alyeska and the subcontractors . Although they were forbidden from striking , they were allowed to halt work for safety meetings , and this excuse was used on a handful of occasions . The most notable of these was in February 1975 , after a series of serious truck accidents on the Elliott Highway , which connected to the newly built Dalton . The Elliott , which had not been upgraded , was a treacherous drive for trucks hauling 80 feet ( 24 m ) of pipe . After his attempts to get Alyeska to upgrade the road were rebuffed , Teamster leader Jesse Carr stopped all truck traffic in the state for four days of safety meetings . Alyeska and the state promised upgrades to the road , and the traffic resumed . 
 = = = Operators = = = 
 The International Union of Operating Engineers ( called Operators for short ) represented the men and women who sat at the controls of the heavy equipment used on the construction of the pipeline . This equipment included bulldozers , cranes , drilling rigs , and <unk> — a cross between a bulldozer and a crane that could lay a section of pipe in a trench parallel to its tracks . Because most of the heavy equipment was unheated , six operators were typically assigned to each piece of equipment , allowing for frequent breaks . A popular joke on the pipeline was that the sole qualification to be an Operator was , " Must be able to sit on a <unk> at 40 below and not freeze up . " More seriously , one laborer wrote , was that there was nothing more terrifying than to be in a trench and have a drunken or unskilled Operator handling the pipe that was being laid in the trench . 
 = = = Laborers = = = 
 The Laborers International Union represented the bulk of the less @-@ skilled labor on the project . Laborers , as they were commonly known , did most of the odd jobs on the project : digging trenches in areas inaccessible by heavy equipment , drilling holes for the pipeline 's Vertical Support Members , spreading gravel , crushing rock , and moving supplies by hand . Laborers Local 942 out of Fairbanks was the most prominent Laborers group on the project , and because no special skills were required for the jobs it filled , the Laborers Union attracted most of the people who came to Alaska specifically for the pipeline project . As one Laborer put it , they were people " simply looking for the easiest way possible of getting through the day . " 
 Because the Laborers had more applicants than jobs available , the process for getting a job on the pipeline through Laborers Local 942 was a multi @-@ tiered process . There were multiple levels of eligibility , based on the amount of seniority a person had . A @-@ level members had the first pick of jobs , but they had to have worked at least 800 hours with the union in the previous year . B @-@ level members had to have worked between 100 and 800 hours with the union . C @-@ level members had to have at least two years of experience outside of Alaska or be an Alaska resident for at least one year . D @-@ level was for everyone else , and D @-@ level people rarely got jobs . That didn 't stop people from trying . At 11 a.m. on January 1 , 1974 , shortly before the pipeline right @-@ of @-@ way was signed , more than 100 people spent the night outside the Fairbanks office of the Laborers Union , waiting for the first choice of jobs when the office opened . 
 = = = Pipeline life = = = 
 Life during the pipeline construction project was characterized by long hours , poor conditions , and limited entertainment compensated by excellent benefits and pay . Each worker was handed a small booklet of 23 camp rules , but the rules ( including no alcohol or smoking ) were frequently broken and became the target of ribald humor . 
 Within the living quarters , the atmosphere resembled that of a college dormitory . Housekeeping and laundry services were provided , but the quarters were small and little entertainment was available . Television broadcasts were delayed two days because of the need to fly tapes from California , and most workers had to develop their own forms of entertainment . In the winter , some took to skiing or sightseeing ; in the summer , some went hiking . In general , however , little time was available for recreation because of the long hours worked by most people . 
 In the first years of the project , workers were regularly treated to prime rib , steak dinners , and other exotic fare due to a cost @-@ plus contract between the food <unk> and the subcontractors . In later years , these cost @-@ plus contracts were replaced , and institutional cooking and box lunches became common , but the food on the project was prized by many workers . As soon as the haul road , later named the Dalton Highway , was built , the food and the overtime for some unions changed . The highway construction was charged to the federal and state governments and was supposed to be cost plus . There were no more steak nights one to two times a week and the Australian rock lobster tails disappeared . The International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers ( <unk> ) LU 1547 was one union that had overtime on Sundays changed from double time to time @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half upon completion of the haul road . 
 In 1976 , workers ' pay averaged between $ 11 and $ 18 per hour , depending on the position . With <unk> averaging between 70 and 84 hours per week , the problem for many workers became what to do with so much extra money . Teamster Jerry Thornhill , a typical worker , wrote to Money magazine , asking for advice . Thornhill detailed a pay rate of $ 57 @,@ 000 per year at a time when members of Congress earned $ 42 @,@ 500 annually , professional football players averaged $ 40 @,@ 000 , and U.S. vice president Nelson Rockefeller earned $ 62 @,@ 500 . The large amounts of money in the pipeline camps and a lack of entertainment caused frequent gambling games that sometimes involved tens of thousands of dollars . Instead of gambling , other workers saved their money for <unk> vacations to Hawaii or other warm climates , then returned to work with no money remaining . 
 = = Laying pipe = = 
 The first section of the Trans @-@ Alaska pipeline was laid on March 27 , 1975 , in the <unk> River . Several forty @-@ foot sections of pipe were welded together and coated in concrete prior to the ceremony . Twelve <unk> ( bulldozers with side @-@ mounted cranes ) together lifted 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 580 m ) of pipe , which was laid in a trench dug perpendicular to the riverbed . Bulldozers filled in the exposed trench with gravel , restoring the river 's original contours . This process was repeated a few miles south , where the pipeline crossed the Little <unk> River . By the end of April , the first 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) of elevated pipeline also was built in the same area . 
 In 1975 , the first year of pipelaying , Alyeska set a goal of completing 45 percent of the 800 @-@ mile route . This would not be laid in a straight line , since it was expected that river crossings would take longer to complete than portions of the pipeline on dry land . Work on the pumping stations and the Valdez Marine Terminal , which had begun in the fall of 1974 , also was expected to take longer than laying pipe . Conversely , work on those two projects could proceed during the winter , when pipelaying could not take place due to the frozen ground . 
 Laying pipe took several stages . First , the right of way had to be cleared with chainsaws , bulldozers , and scrapers who followed the rough route laid out by the initial surveyors . These crews were followed by another group of surveyors and engineers who determined whether the pipeline could be laid in the planned spot , or if it had to be moved because of permafrost , soft ground , or other considerations . State and federal surveillance officers , working with the engineers , could give the OK to move the path of the pipeline as much as 200 feet to the right or left in order to avoid obstacles . 
 After the path was finalized came the augers and drillers for the holes that served as foundations for the Vertical Support Members that held up the pipe . These holes were drilled and filled with a mix of water , gravel and dirt before a VSM was dropped into each hole . Because of the frozen ground , the gravel and dirt froze as hard as concrete , sealing the <unk> in place . The <unk> were laid in parallel , two at a time , and each had a semicircular rest for the pipeline segments . These were carried in 40 @-@ foot or 80 @-@ foot segments by crane or <unk> to the appropriate location , lowered into place , then welded together . The welds were then inspected via X @-@ ray by quality control engineers who followed the welders . 
 The construction progressed under the management of Frank Moolin , Jr . , an engineer who had worked on refinery projects in Singapore and the construction of the Bay Area Rapid Transit system prior to being named senior project manager . Moolin became known for his work ethic and his hard @-@ driving style . It was said that he was the first person in the office and the last to leave at the end of the day . The Engineering News @-@ Record reported " He demands total dedication , saying , ' Your wife had a baby ; so what ? ' " when it named him the construction industry 's Man of the Year in 1976 . To spur progress on the pipeline , he started the " Alyeska Sweepstakes , " in which each of the five contractors working on the pipeline were compared to each other based on how much of their share they completed on time . In his biggest decision , he canceled Bechtel 's contract as management contractor because he felt the company was adding too much bureaucracy between Alyeska and the pipeline contractors . A historian later called the decision " one of the most humiliating defeats " in the history of Bechtel . 
 In October , snow and cold weather brought most of the pipeline laying to a halt for the year . Employment rose from 12 @,@ 000 workers in the spring to more than 21 @,@ 000 in the summer and down to 7 @,@ 000 at Christmas . Alyeska estimated that the pipeline laying was about 50 percent complete : 390 miles ( 630 km ) of pipeline were welded and in place . But work on the pump stations and in Valdez lagged ; the project as a whole was only 35 percent complete when the pumps were factored in . 
 = = Speeding up construction = = 
 During the winter of 1975 – 1976 , Moolin pronounced himself dissatisfied with progress , but promised improvements . " We 've learned an awful lot . This year ( 1975 ) was a pull @-@ ourselves @-@ up @-@ by @-@ our @-@ <unk> operation . We didn 't really have our organization set until July , and it wasn 't working at top effectiveness until October . " To take advantage of that " top effectiveness " , Moolin set an ambitious goal for 1976 construction : " We 're expecting to have all of the line installed , insulated , and hydro @-@ tested by November 1 , " he said in January . That goal was ambitious , because most of the work that had been done to that point was on floodplains and flat terrain . Still left to tackle were difficult construction projects in Atigun Pass and Keystone Canyon . " In some areas , we did eat our cake last year , " Moolin said . 
 Even though winter shut down all pipelaying on the right of way , work on the pump stations and in Valdez continued without stop . At Pump Station 1 , in Prudhoe Bay , temperatures reached lower than − 70 ° F ( − 57 ° C ) , but the work continued . Because the pump station was the origin point for the main pipeline , it also had to process the feeder lines coming from oil wells . The pump station camp had a population of 270 workers through the winter , and it would peak in the summer with 430 workers . 
 = = = Welding controversy = = = 
 As the weather warmed and work resumed on the main pipeline , Alyeska administrators were distracted by a controversy about pipeline welds that had been done the previous year . In September 1975 , a former employee of Ketchbaw Industries filed suit against the company , alleging that he had been laid off because he would not participate in a conspiracy to falsify quality control X @-@ Rays of pipeline welds . The Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline was unique among pipeline projects to that point in that it required all welds of the main pipeline to be verified by X @-@ Ray . This was a time @-@ consuming process , and the quality @-@ control procedures continually lagged behind the welders . 
 At the end of 1975 , Alyeska terminated Ketchbaw 's contract and took responsibility for analyzing weld X @-@ Rays itself . The controversy continued , however , as Kelley 's lawsuit moved forward , a Ketchbaw manager was found dead of cyanide poisoning , and photographs of welds were stolen from a pump station construction camp . Alyeska began a review of all 30 @,@ 800 welds that had been done in 1975 , and submitted its report to the Interior Department in April 1976 . In May , it submitted its technical analysis and a report on repair work under way . The review produced a list of 3 @,@ 955 questionable welds — 10 percent of 1975 's work . 
 Alyeska reported that about half were too minor to affect the running of the pipeline , but questions lay with more than a thousand welds that might be dangerous . Re @-@ examining the welds would be extremely difficult , since those sections of pipeline were sealed ( and in many cases buried ) . By July , the U.S. Congress began holding hearings into the welding problems . President Gerald Ford sent a team to Alaska to oversee and examine Alyeska 's work . At the recommendations of this team and to avoid further investigations , Alyeska began repairing the welds on its own . By September , more than 3 @,@ 000 of the questionable welds had been redone or certified as safe . Alyeska asked for waivers on the remaining 612 welds , and more hearings resulted . By the end of November , only 34 welds were still at issue . The leader of Ford 's team ordered 31 of the welds to be dug up and re @-@ done . <unk> were granted for only three welds , all of which were buried 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) under the Koyukuk River south of the Brooks Range . Proof of the integrity of questionable welds were evaluated by a unique solution in Section Five north of the Brooks Range . On either side of the Sagavanirktok River , the above ground pipeline was cut upon and 48 inch fans installed to circulate air . Then a team of 12 men and inspectors riding on wheeled sleds pulled by a modified John Deere lawnmower entered the pipe . <unk> were counted during the passage . After arriving at the questionable weld under the Sagavanirktok River , an ultrasound was taken on the inside of the pipe . Then the team exited the pipe on the opposite side and the ultrasound was taken back to camp for evaluation . Alyeska estimated the total cost of redoing the welds to be $ 55 million . 
 = = = Atigun , Keystone , and Sag River = = = 
 Many of the suspected faulty welds were in Section Five of the pipeline construction project — the northernmost 200 miles ( 320 km ) . This area also included two of the major problems encountered during the 1976 construction season : Atigun Pass and the Sagavanirktok River ( also known as Sag River ) . The pipeline had been laid in a trench beneath the river in the late fall of 1975 . Because it had been laid so late in the season , the trench fill material had frozen and it was impossible to fill the submerged trench containing the pipeline . Spring snowmelt flooded the river and battered the submerged portion of pipe . In June , the battered pipeline broke free of its moorings and a 1 @,@ 700 @-@ foot ( 518 m ) section of concrete @-@ coated pipe floated to the surface of the river . Because doing repair work would interfere with the migration of Arctic char , the Alaska Department of Fish and Game allowed only 24 hours for the project . After preparing the site , it took just four hours for a replacement trench to be dug , a pipe welded and laid in the trench , and the trench to be filled in . 
 At Atigun Pass , to the south of the Sag River , workers had to deal with a different set of challenges . In 1975 , surveyors discovered the pass was filled with permafrost and glacial soils . But because the pass is the site of frequent avalanches , an elevated pipeline was not possible . The solution was to design a reinforced , insulated ditch to lay the pipeline in . The result was a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 83 km ) long concrete box lined with 21 inches ( 53 cm ) of Styrofoam . The problem then became one of building it before the first snow started falling in October . 
 At the opposite end of the pipeline , just north of Valdez , engineers coped with the difficulties posed by Keystone Canyon . The canyon was the only route to Valdez , but it was occupied by the Richardson Highway and the Lowe River ; no room was available for the pipeline . The only solution was to avoid the canyon by building the pipeline through the Chugach Mountains and at the rim of the canyon . Winter work was made impossible by the more than 300 inches ( 760 cm ) of snow that fell in the winter of 1975 @-@ 1976 , and when the snow melted , construction workers had to figure out how to travel up a 60 percent grade , then lay the pipeline on it . A rock @-@ crushing plant was built at the canyon 's rim to avoid the need to carry gravel up the steep grade , but problems still persisted . Not even bulldozers could traverse the grade without a team of two helping each up the grade in turn . A bulldozer had to be modified to carry 80 @-@ foot ( 20 @.@ 4 @-@ meter ) sections of pipe up the grade , but even then , most of the sections and equipment had to be lifted by helicopter to the canyon rim . Similar techniques had to be used at nearby Thomson Pass , and both sections required the entire 1976 construction season to complete . 
 = = = Pump stations and marine terminal = = = 
 Work at the pump stations and marine terminal , which had not stopped during the winter , continued throughout the 1976 construction season . Pump Station 6 , just south of the Yukon River , had to be redesigned after excavation revealed ice @-@ rich permafrost below the site . Five pump stations needed at startup ( when throughput was lower ) received their pumps , turbines , and piping . As they were completed , the pump stations received hydrostatic testing , in which portions of pipe were filled with water and subjected to pressures in excess of the eventual operating conditions . Following this testing , the initial five pump stations were disconnected from the main pipeline and had oil run through them on a continuous loop . " It 's very similar to your new automobile , " one worker said . " You drive it around for ten days so that any components that are going to fail are given time to fail . " Work on additional pump stations , which would not be needed until the pipeline was brought to full capacity , was not pressed forward . 
 At Valdez , construction was two @-@ thirds complete by September as 4 @,@ 200 workers hurried to complete the marine terminal . Because of loose soil found at the job site , enormous retaining walls had to be constructed to secure the ground below some of the 58 structures that were completed by the end of the year . During the first week of November , the first ship docked at the newly built Valdez quays . It was not a tanker but a ship bringing more construction material . In December , the first signal was sent from the Valdez operations center — where two new control computers had been installed — to Pump Station 2 on the North Slope . 
 Although the project made strides toward completion in 1976 , it did not meet Moolin 's goal of having all pipe installed , insulated , and tested by winter . The final section of main pipeline was welded in place on December 6 , but not all of the pipeline was tested before winter set in . At the end of 1976 , the project was 92 percent complete . The pipeline was 97 @.@ 5 percent complete , the pump stations were 92 percent done , and the marine terminal stood at 83 percent . Because the terminal was the lagging portion of the project , its full work crew continued operations through the winter and into 1977 . 
 = = Finishing the line = = 
 Few tasks were left to complete when the 1977 construction season began . Most of the pump stations had been turned over to operating personnel by construction workers , and environmental mitigation and cleanup was in full swing as Alyeska repaired tundra damage caused by construction . Associated @-@ Green , which had performed its construction tasks well , was assigned the job of finishing the final touches on the main pipeline . The last 160 miles of hydrostatic testing were done , 33 remedial welds were completed , and 45 miles of pipe were insulated , among other tasks . Because the pace of construction was much slower than in 1976 , fewer workers were needed . Fewer than 11 @,@ 000 were employed at the peak of 1977 work , about half of 1976 's total . On May 31 , the final pipeline weld took place . 
 Additional tasks remained still to be completed , but the pipeline could be put into operation without them . The 2 @,@ 290 @-@ foot ( 700 m ) E. L. Patton Yukon River Bridge was not completed until October 1979 ; until then , traffic utilized a series of ferries across the river . Additional pump stations also were constructed between 1977 and 1980 , as oil flow increased . 
 = = = Camp cleanup = = = 
 As part of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act , Alyeska was required to remove most traces of the 31 pipeline construction camps . Seven camps closed in November 1976 , and six more closed before the 1977 construction season started . All told , 20 camps went up for sale . One was sold to the University of Alaska for use as an Arctic research facility , while another was converted for use as a truck stop and motel . 
 In addition to removing its camps , Alyeska also had to dispose of the heavy equipment used to build the pipeline . In January 1977 , Alyeska listed more than 20 @,@ 000 pieces of equipment for sale . The New York Times called the auction of surplus equipment " one of the biggest going @-@ out @-@ of @-@ business sales in history . " 
 = = Turning on TAPS = = 
 In April 1977 , Alyeska filed a notice that it intended to start filling the pipeline sometime between June 20 and July 1 . Engineers had to face several problems when filling the pipeline . First was the need to balance temperatures : Filled by air , the steel pipeline was about 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) degrees . The oil emerging from wells at Prudhoe Bay was more than 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) degrees , and there was a danger that if it was introduced before intermediate warming , the pipeline could crack because of thermal expansion . The second problem came when the pipeline needed to be purged of air in order to reduce the danger of fire or explosion . Usually , a pipeline is filled with water first , and the oil pushes the water ahead of it , purging the pipeline as it goes . In Alaska , there was a fear that the water would freeze in the pipeline , damaging it . This problem was solved when pressurized nitrogen was used instead of water . 
 On June 20 , 1977 , the first section of pipeline was pressurized with nitrogen , and oil was introduced behind it . Because of the cold temperature of the pipeline and the slow rate at which oil was introduced , it took 31 days for the first oil to travel from Prudhoe to Valdez . " As oil cools down , it becomes thicker , " explained one worker . " Our oil at first had a viscosity very similar to asphalt . Another problem was faced when the oil traveled downslope from Atigun Pass . To avoid a situation where the oil front could gain momentum from the downhill slope and rapidly crash into a pipeline section or pump and damage it , regulator valves were used to slow the rate at which the nitrogen ahead of the oil could move . This procedure was used at the other downhill slopes at startup . 
 As the oil advanced through the pipeline , it was paced by a series of inspectors who traveled along the pipeline route to ensure the weight of the oil did not cause the pipeline to settle or create problems on bridges as the unbalanced weight of the oil front passed over them . This first inspection crew was followed by a second , and others patrolled the pipeline regularly as the oil front passed down the line . The first oil arrived in Valdez on July 28 , 1977 , at 11 : 02 p.m. The oil was only 45 ° F ( 7 ° C ) , but it gradually warmed as the system reached a thermal equilibrium . After the initial startup , the pipeline was intended to run continuously . Said an engineer : " We start up this pipeline once ... It will stay <unk> then forever ... ' forever ' being the life of the oil field . " 
 The startup was not without incident . On July 4 , a nitrogen leak was detected at milepost 489 @.@ 2 . The flow of oil stopped for three days as workers repaired a pipe elbow that cracked because of the temperature difference between the pipe and the supercooled nitrogen . On July 8 , oil flowed through a shut @-@ off pump at Pump Station 8 as workers replaced a strainer . The resulting spray mixed with ambient air and was ignited by a stray spark . One worker was killed and five others were injured in the resulting explosion , which also shut down the station until March 1978 . On July 19 , a heavy equipment accident caused a pipeline break that leaked 1 @,@ 800 barrels per day ( 290 m3 / d ) of oil . 
 The startup process and construction as a whole came to an end on August 1 , 1977 when the tanker ARCO Juneau sailed out of Valdez with the first load of oil from the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System . 
 = = Cost = = 
 When the TAPS group initially proposed the pipeline in 1969 , the proposed cost was $ 900 million , and the pipeline would be completed by 1972 . By January 1970 , the projected cost had risen from $ 900 million to $ 2 billion . In October 1973 , Alyeska further refined its figures and anticipated a cost of between $ 3 @.@ 1 billion and $ 3 @.@ 5 billion , with the potential for a billion more . One year later , Alyeska released its most detailed cost estimate to that point : $ 5 @.@ 982 billion . By June 1975 , that figure had again risen to $ 6 @.@ 4 billion . At the time , it was estimated that $ 3 billion of the cost rise to that point was due to inflation , while another $ 2 billion was due to environmental costs . In July 1976 , amid the second year of construction , the project 's cost was raised to $ 7 @.@ 7 billion . The increase , Alyeska reported , was due to material and freight costs , repairs needed to poorly built sections of pipeline , and contingency estimates . 
 The final construction cost was tallied at $ 8 billion , but this figure does not include interest on investment loans or the cost of improvements and repairs after 1977 . The Valdez Marine Terminal alone cost $ 1 @.@ 4 billion . The percentage of the pipeline owned by various companies has changed over time , but as of 2009 , the primary owner was BP , which controls 46 @.@ 93 percent of the pipeline . Second is ConocoPhillips Transportation Alaska Inc. with 28 @.@ 29 percent , followed in order by ExxonMobil ( 20 @.@ 34 percent ) , Koch Alaska Pipeline Company ( 3 @.@ 08 percent ) , and Unocal Pipeline Company ( 1 @.@ 36 percent ) . 
 The pipeline also has had a human toll . Thirty @-@ two Alyeska or contract workers were killed during the construction project . That figure does not include common carrier fatalities . Since the pipeline began operating in 1977 , 10 people have been killed while working for Alyeska or one of its contractors . 
 = = Additional sources = = 
 Allen , Lawrence J. The Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . Vol 1 : The Beginning . Vol 2 : South to Valdez . Seattle ; Scribe Publishing Co . 1975 and 1976 . 
 Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . Alyeska : A 30 @-@ Year Journey . Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . , 2007 . 
 Dobler , Bruce . The Last Rush North . Boston ; Little , Brown and Co . , 1976 . 
 Fineberg , Richard A. A Pipeline in Peril : A Status Report on the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . Ester , Alaska ; Alaska Forum for Environmental Responsibility , 1996 . 
 Hanrahan , John and <unk> , Peter . Lost Frontier : The Marketing of Alaska . New York ; W.W. Norton , 1977 . 
 Kruse , John A. Fairbanks Community Survey . Fairbanks ; Institute of Social and Economic Research , 1976 . 
 <unk> , Terry F. The Management , Planning and Construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System . Washington , D.C. ; Report to the Alaska Pipeline Commission . 
 <unk> , Joe . Going to Extremes . New York ; Alfred A. Knopf , 1980 . 
 McPhee , John . Coming Into the Country . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux , 1976 . 
 Romer , John and Elizabeth . The Seven Wonders of the World : A History of the Modern Imagination . New York ; Henry Holt and Co . , 1995 . 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Armstrong , John . Pipeline Alaska . Pelican Films , 1977 . 
 Davis , Mark . The American Experience : The Alaska Pipeline . PBS , Season 18 , Episode 11 . April 24 , 2006 . 
 World 's Toughest Fixes : Alaska Oil Pipeline . National Geographic Channel . Season 2 , Episode 10 . August 20 , 2009 . 
 = Diolkos = 
 The Diolkos ( <unk> , from the Greek <unk> , dia " across " and <unk> , <unk> " portage machine " ) was a paved trackway near Corinth in Ancient Greece which enabled boats to be moved overland across the Isthmus of Corinth . The shortcut allowed ancient vessels to avoid the long and dangerous circumnavigation of the Peloponnese peninsula . The phrase " as fast as a Corinthian " , penned by the comic playwright Aristophanes , indicates that the trackway was common knowledge and had acquired a reputation for swiftness . 
 The main function of the Diolkos was the transfer of goods , although in times of war it also became a preferred means of speeding up naval campaigns . The 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) long roadway was a rudimentary form of railway , and operated from c . 600 BC until the middle of the 1st century AD . The scale on which the Diolkos combined the two principles of the railway and the overland transport of ships remained unique in antiquity . 
 = = Function = = 
 The Diolkos saved ships sailing from the Ionian Sea to the Aegean Sea a dangerous sea journey round the Peloponnese , whose three headlands had a reputation for gales , especially Cape Matapan and Cape Malea . By contrast , both the Gulf of Corinth and the Saronic Gulf were relatively sheltered waters . In addition , the overland passage of the Isthmus , a neck of land 6 @.@ 4 km ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) wide at its narrowest , offered a much shorter route to Athens for ships sailing to and from the Ionian coast of Greece . 
 = = History = = 
 Ancient literature is silent on the date of the construction of the Diolkos . For Thucydides ( 460 BC – 395 BC ) the Diolkos already seemed to be something ancient . Excavated letters and associated pottery found at the site indicate a construction date at the end of the 7th or beginning of the 6th century BC , that is around the time when <unk> was tyrant of Corinth . The Diolkos remained reportedly in regular service until at least the middle of the 1st century AD , after which no more written references appear . Possibly the trackway was put out of use by Nero 's abortive canal works in 67 AD . Much later transports of warships across the Isthmus in the late 9th century and around 1150 are assumed to have used a route other than the Diolkos due to the extensive time lag . 
 = = = Role in warfare = = = 
 The Diolkos played an important role in ancient naval warfare . Greek historians note several occasions from the 5th to the 1st century BC when warships were hauled across the Isthmus in order to speed up naval campaigning . In 428 BC , the Spartans planned to transport their warships over the Diolkos to the Saronic Gulf to threaten Athens , while later in the Peloponnesian War , in 411 BC , they carted over a squadron heading quickly for operations at Chios . In 220 BC , Demetrius of Pharos had a fleet of about fifty vessels dragged across the Isthmus to the Bay of Corinth by his men . Three years later , a Macedonian fleet of 38 vessels was sent across by Philip V , while the larger warships sailed around Cape Malea . After his victory at Actium in 31 BC , Octavian advanced as fast as possible against Marc Antony by ordering part of his 260 <unk> to be carried over the Isthmus . In 868 AD , the Byzantine admiral Niketas Oryphas had his whole fleet of one hundred dromons dragged across the Isthmus in a quickly executed operation , but this took place most likely on a different route . 
 = = = Role in commerce = = = 
 Despite the frequent mentioning of the Diolkos in connection with military operations , modern scholarship assumes that the prime purpose of the trackway must have been the transport of cargo , considering that warships cannot have needed transporting very often , and ancient historiography was always more interested in war than commerce . Comments by Pliny the Elder and Strabo , which described the Diolkos as being in regular service during times of peace , also imply a commercial use of the trackway . Coinciding with the rise of monumental architecture in Greece , the construction of the Diolkos may have initially served particularly for transporting heavy goods like marble , monoliths and timber to points west and east . It is not known what tolls Corinth could extract from the Diolkos on its territory , but the fact that the trackway was used and maintained long after its construction indicates that it remained for merchant ships an attractive alternative to the trip around Cape Malea for much of antiquity . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Course = = = 
 The Diolkos ran across the narrowest part of the Isthmus , where the trackway followed the local topography in a curved course in order to avoid steeper gradients . The roadway passed the Isthmus ridge at c . 79 m ( 259 ft ) height with an average gradient of 1 : 70 , while the steepest sections rose up to 6 % . Its total length is estimated at 6 – 7 km ( 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 3 mi ) , 8 km ( 5 mi ) or 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) depending on the number of supposed bends taken into account . A total of 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 609 ft ) has been archaeologically traced , mainly at its western end close to the Bay of Corinth . There the known trackway began at a mooring place south of the more recent canal and ran parallel to the waterway for a few hundred meters , after which it switched to the north side , running in a slight bend a similar distance along the canal . From there on , the Diolkos either followed in a straight line the course of the modern canal , or swung south in a wide arc . The roadway ended at the Saronic Gulf at the village <unk> , modern @-@ day Kalamaki , described by Strabo as the trackway 's eastern terminal . Sections of the Diolkos have been destroyed by the 19th @-@ century Corinth Canal and other modern installations . 
 = = = Track and transport = = = 
 The Diolkos was a trackway paved with hard limestone with parallel grooves running about 1 @.@ 60 metres ( 63 in ) apart . The roadway was 3 @.@ 4 to 6 metres ( 11 to 20 ft ) wide . Since ancient sources tell little about how the ships were hauled across , the mode of ship transport has largely to be reconstructed from the archaeological evidence . The tracks indicate that transport on the Diolkos was done with some sort of wheeled vehicle . Either vessel and cargo were hauled across on separate vehicles , or only the cargo was taken across and reloaded on a different ship at the other side of the Isthmus . Although a technical analysis has shown that the transport of triremes ( 25 t , 35 metres ( 115 ft ) long , 5 metres ( 16 ft ) beam ) , albeit difficult , was technically feasible , it is assumed that the vessels were usually smaller boats rather than ships . To avoid damaging the keel during transport , <unk> , thick ropes running from bow to stern , to reduce sagging and hogging of the hull , must have been used . Ship and cargo were presumably pulled by men and animals with ropes , tackles and possibly also capstans . 
 The scientist Tolley aimed to establish the manpower needed to haul the vessels over the isthmus ridge . Assuming that a trireme soaked with water weighed 38 tons including its trolley , and that a man can exert a force of 300 N over an extended period of time , the pulling teams — depending on the slope and the surface of the cart track — must have numbered between 112 and 142 people , with a combined exertion of force of 33 to 42 kN , or around 3 @.@ 8 tons weight . Bringing the trolley up to speed may have required as many as 180 men . Assuming a speed of 2 km per hour over an estimated length of 6 kilometres , the transfer from sea to sea would have taken three hours to complete . 
 Assuming less load and rolling friction , <unk> , in contrast , calculates a maximum pulling force of 27 kN , which would have needed a slightly smaller towing crew . Under these circumstances , the use of harnessed oxen — which has been refuted by Tolley on the basis of their relatively diminished pulling capabilities — would have become feasible . However , the necessary expenditure of energy at the Diolkos must be regarded in both scenarios as considerable . 
 = = = Ancient railway = = = 
 According to the British historian of science <unk> Lewis , the Diolkos represented a railway , in the basic sense of a prepared track which so guides the vehicles running on it that they cannot leave the track . Measuring between 6 km ( 4 mi ) and 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 3 mi ) , remaining in regular and frequent service for at least 650 years , and being open to all on payment , it constituted even a public railway , a concept which according to Lewis did not recur until c . 1800 . Also , its average gauge of around 160 cm ( 63 in ) is similar to modern standards . 
 However , a close examination of the excavated tracks may give a more differentiated picture . While there is agreement that the grooves in the eastern part were cut deliberately into the stone slabs to guide cart wheels , those in the western section are interpreted by some authors as a result of wear or do not appear at all . On the other hand , the marked <unk> of this road section may point at deliberate tracks as well . Generally , varying forms of the grooves can also be explained by the long period of operation of the Diolkos , during which modifications and repairs must have significantly changed the appearance of the trackway . 
 = = = Modern exploration = = = 
 The chief engineer of the Corinth Canal , Béla <unk> , conducted extensive research on the topography of the Isthmus , but did not discover the Diolkos . Remains of the ship trackway were probably first identified by the German archaeologist Habbo Gerhard <unk> in the 1883 Baedeker edition . In 1913 , James George Frazer reported in his commentary on Pausanias on traces of an ancient trackway across the Isthmus , while parts of the western quay were discovered by Harold North Fowler in 1932 . 
 Systematic excavations were finally undertaken by the Greek archaeologist Nikolaos Verdelis between 1956 and 1962 , and these uncovered a nearly continuous stretch of 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) and traced about 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 600 ft ) in all . Even though Verdelis ' excavation reports continue to provide the basis for modern interpretations , his premature death prevented full publication , leaving many open questions concerning the exact nature of the structure . Additional investigations in situ , meant to complement Verdelis ’ work , were later published by Georges <unk> and Walter Werner . 
 Today , erosion caused by ship movements on the nearby Canal has left considerable portions of the Diolkos in a poor state , particularly at its excavated western end . Critics who blame the Greek Ministry of Culture for continued inactivity have launched a petition to save and restore the registered archaeological site . 
 = = Ancient sources = = 
 The following ancient writers mention the transfer of ships across the Isthmus ( in chronological order ) : 
 Thucydides 3 @.@ 15 @.@ 1 , 8 @.@ 7 , 8 @.@ 8 @.@ 3 – 4 
 Aristophanes , <unk> 647 – 648 
 Polybius 4 @.@ 19 @.@ 7 – 9 [ 318 ] , 5 @.@ 101 @.@ 4 [ 484 ] , <unk> . 162 ( ed . M. Buettner @-@ <unk> ) 
 Livy 42 @.@ 16 @.@ 6 
 Strabo 8 @.@ 2 @.@ 1 [ <unk> ] , 8 @.@ 6 @.@ 22 [ <unk> ] , 8 @.@ 6 @.@ 4 [ <unk> ] 
 Pliny the Elder , Natural History , 4 @.@ 9 – 11 , 18 @.@ 18 
 Cassius Dio 51 @.@ 5 
 Hesychius ( ed . Schmidt , I , p . 516 @.@ 80 ) 
 Suidas 2 @.@ 92 
 George Sphrantzes 1 @.@ 33 
 al @-@ Idrisi ( Joubert , P.A. : Géographie d <unk> 2 , Paris 1840 , p . 123 ) 
 = = Other ship trackways = = 
 Apart from the Diolkos at Corinth , there is scant literary evidence for two more ship trackways by that name in antiquity , both in Roman Egypt : The physician <unk> ( c . 320 – 400 AD ) records two passages from his 1st century AD colleague Xenocrates , in which the latter casually refers to a <unk> close to the harbor of Alexandria which may have been located at the southern tip of the island of Pharos . Another <unk> is mentioned by Ptolemy ( 90 – 168 AD ) in his book on geography ( IV , 5 , 10 ) as connecting a false mouth of a partly silted up Nile branch with the Mediterranean Sea . Neither Xenocrates nor Ptolemy offers any details on his trackway . 
 = Xue Susu = 
 Xue Susu ( Chinese : <unk> ; also known as Xue Wu , <unk> , <unk> among other pen names ) ( <unk> – 1650 ? C.E. ) was a Chinese courtesan . Known as one of the " Eight Great <unk> of the Ming Dynasty " , she was an accomplished painter and poet , and was noted for her skill at mounted archery . She was particularly noted for her figure paintings , which included many Buddhist subjects . Her works are held in a number of museums both in China and elsewhere . Her archery was commented upon by a number of contemporary writers , as were her masculine , martial tendencies ; these were regarded as an attractive feature by the literati of the period . 
 She lived in Eastern China , residing for most of her life in the Zhejiang and Jiangsu districts . After a career as a celebrated courtesan in Nanjing , Xue married several times , but none of these unions lasted . During her later life , she eventually opted for the life of a Buddhist recluse . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Xue was born in either Suzhou or Jiaxing ( contemporary sources disagree ) . According to the historian Qian <unk> she spent at least some of her childhood in Beijing . She spent her professional life in the <unk> pleasure quarter of Nanjing in the 1580s , where she became something of a celebrity among the literati and government officials who frequented the " flower houses " there . She was highly selective in her clientele , accepting only learned and scholarly men as her lovers and declining to proffer her affections for mere financial gain ; suitors might spend thousands of taels on her to no avail . 
 In the 1590s she returned to Beijing , where the parties and literary gatherings that she hosted , as well as her archery demonstrations , further cemented her reputation . Xue referred to herself as " a female knight @-@ errant " , and took her name from a famous woman warrior from history ; she also chose the sobriquet <unk> <unk> ( " fifth young gentleman " ) as a nickname . The " female knight @-@ errant " epithet was reiterated by both the bibliophile Hu Yinglin and Fan Yulin , Secretary to the Ministry of War . Apparently fond of martial causes , she was not above using her position to influence military affairs , on one occasion abandoning her lover Yuan <unk> when he refused to fund an expedition against the Japanese in Korea . 
 At some point after 1605 her career as a courtesan came to an end when she married the playwright and bureaucrat Shen <unk> . She was married several times ( making many of the proposals herself ) but none of these unions lasted . As well as Shen <unk> , her husbands included General Li <unk> , art critic Li <unk> and , in later life , an unnamed ( but wealthy ) merchant from Suzhou . Although she wanted children , she was never able to have any . 
 In later life she converted to Buddhism and remained single thereafter , largely retiring from the world . Even in her eighties , however , she was still active in the literary world , entertaining female artists such as Huang <unk> and Yi Lin at her home on the West Lake after the collapse of the Ming Dynasty . With her Buddhist friend Yang <unk> ( the sister of Xue 's fellow courtesan Liu Yin ) , she made pilgrimages to sacred sites such as Mount Lu and Mount Emei . The date of her death is uncertain ; some sources suggest that she may have lived into the 1650s whilst others put her death in the late 1630s or early 1640s . Qian <unk> mentions her death in a work published in 1652 , so it is evident that she must have died before this date . 
 = = Paintings = = 
 Already an accomplished painter in her teenage years , Xue was well known for her artistic talent . Her work was considered similar to that of Chen Chun . One of her paintings was considered " the most accomplished work of its kind in the whole of the Ming period " , and contemporary art critics regarded her as " a master of technique " . Hu Yinglin considered her to be at the pinnacle of contemporary painting , asking , " What famous painter with skilled hands can surpass her ? " and claiming that " ... [ she ] surpasses anyone in the painting of bamboo and orchids . " She was also keenly admired by eminent painter and art critic Dong <unk> , who was inspired to copy the entire Heart Sutra in response to Xue 's painting of the bodhisattva Guanyin ; he claimed that " None [ of Xue Susu 's works ] lacks an intention and spirit that approaches the divine . " Although she painted the standard subjects of landscapes , bamboo and blossoms ( being particularly fond of orchids ) , Xue was noted for her work in figure painting , which was a comparatively unusual artistic topic for courtesans to address . Examples of her paintings are displayed at the Honolulu Museum of Art and the San Francisco Asian Art Museum . 
 = = Poetry = = 
 Xue regularly accented her paintings with her own poems , and published two volumes of writing , only one of which is still extant . Hua suo shi Chinese : <unk> ( <unk> about Flowers ) is a collection of short prose essays and anecdotes about various flowers , whilst Nan you cao Chinese : <unk> ( Notes from a Journey to the South ) , which has been lost , apparently contained a selection of her poems regarding life as a courtesan . A number of these were collected in various anthologies from the late Ming and early Qing dynasties . 
 Hu Yinglin wrote that " Her poetry , although lacking in freedom , shows a talent rare among women . " Moving in literary circles , Xue also provided the subject matter for many contemporary poets . Xu Yuan , another female poet of the period , describes Xue 's allure : 
 Hu Yinglin wrote of Xue : 
 Xue 's own works deal with a variety of themes , from the <unk> erotic : 
 to the romantic : 
 to the whimsically philosophical : 
 Xue often exchanged poems and paintings with her clientele , receiving their own artworks in exchange . 
 = = Archery = = 
 Whilst she excelled at poetry , painting and embroidery , the skill that set Xue apart from other courtesans and created a cult of celebrity around her was her talent for archery . Her mastery of a traditionally masculine art gave her an air of androgyny that was considered highly attractive by the literati of the time . Having practiced in Beijing as a child she furthered her skills during a sojourn in the company of a military officer in the outlying regions of China . The horsemen of the local tribes there were impressed with her shooting , and she became something of a local celebrity . Later in life she gave public demonstrations in Hangzhou , which drew large audiences . Hu Yinglin describes one such performance : 
 " She is able to shoot two balls from her crossbow one after another and make the second ball strike the first and break it in mid @-@ air . Another trick she can do is to place a ball on the ground , and , by pulling the bow backwards with her left hand , while her right hand draws the bow from behind her back , hit it . Out of a hundred shots , she does not miss a single one . 
 The poet Lu Bi recalls another trick shot performed by Xue : " When the servant girl takes a ball in her hand and places it on top of her head / She [ Xue ] turns around , hits it with another ball , and both balls fall to the ground . " 
 = 5th Avenue Theatre = 
 The 5th Avenue Theatre ( often referred to as 5th Avenue or the 5th ) is a landmark theatre building located in Seattle , Washington . It has hosted a variety of theatre productions and motion pictures since it opened in 1926 . The building and land is owned by the University of Washington and was once part of the original campus . It is operated as a venue for nationally touring Broadway and original shows by the non @-@ profit 5th Avenue Theatre Association . The theatre , located at 1308 Fifth Avenue in the historic Skinner Building , has been listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places since 1978 . 
 The 2 @,@ 130 @-@ seat theatre is the resident home to the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company , and employs over 600 actors , musicians , directors , choreographers , designers , technicians , stage hands , box office staff , and administrators , making it the largest theatre employer in the Puget Sound region . A non @-@ profit , the theatre company is supported by individual and corporate donations , government sources , and box office ticket sales . 
 The 5th 's subscriber season programming includes six to seven shows per year , a mix of locally produced revivals of musical theatre classics , and premieres of bound @-@ for @-@ Broadway shows , and national touring musicals . The 5th Avenue Theatre has established a tradition of being a " testing ground " for new musicals before they make their debut on Broadway , launching hits such as Jekyll & Hyde , Hairspray , and The Wedding Singer . The theatre also hosts a variety of special events , and offers education and outreach programs to school @-@ age children and adults reaching over 61 @,@ 000 students , professional performers , and audiences each year . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Located in the Skinner Building , a historic office block ranging from five to eight stories with retail shops on the ground level , the theatre is surrounded on three sides , with its entry facing its namesake avenue . In addition to an auditorium with an original seating capacity of 3 @,@ 000 , the theatre contains a grand entry hall , and a mezzanine that once featured a tea room in addition to a waiting room and women 's lounge . 
 The interior design of the 5th Avenue Theatre was modeled to reproduce some of the features of historic and well @-@ known Beijing landmarks . The Norwegian artist Gustav <unk> executed the design based on his visit to China , and on <unk> <unk> , published in 1925 , an illustrated account of Ernst <unk> 's travels in China . 
 The ornate historical Chinese style of the theatre distinguishes itself from the Neo @-@ Renaissance exterior of the Skinner Building . Only at the street entry under the marquee does the viewer get a preview of the interior design . Here , adorning the ceiling are plaster representations of wood brackets , beams , and carved reliefs painted in a polychromatic scheme and decorated with stenciled dragons and flower patterns . Carved cloud shapes screen light fixtures to create an indirect lighting effect as the viewer approaches the wooden , brass knobbed entry doors . The original central free @-@ standing box office was replaced by the current box office located to the side of the entry as part of a 1979 renovation . The original Imperial guardian lions ( <unk> Shī ) , commonly called foo dogs or foo lions , originally located outside the entry were moved inside as part of the 1979 renovation . 
 The interior architecture of the theatre is an " excellent imitation of Chinese wooden temple construction " . The two story rectangular lobby features red , stenciled columns wrapped in plaster rising to a timbered roof structure of decoratively painted beams supporting a canopy of bamboo , also imitated in plaster . The original pair of guardian lions , both male , guard the stairway to a second level gallery that serves the theatre balcony . In addition to the Imperial guard lions , other original furnishings , light fixtures , and decoration remain intact . 
 The decorative details continue in the 2 @,@ 130 @-@ seat auditorium , but the highlight and focal decorative feature is the octagonal caisson from which a sculpted five @-@ toed Imperial Chinese dragon springs . A large chandelier of glass hangs from the dragon 's mouth , in reference to the Chinese symbol of a dragon disgorging flaming pearls . One claim puts the size of this caisson at twice the size of the model on which it was based in the throne room of the Hall of Supreme Harmony in the Forbidden City . The opening night program spoke effusively of it : 
 ... Its most imposing feature is the great dome ... its symbolic themes borrowed from Chinese legends , its motifs from Chinese poetry . Coiled within an azure sphere and surrounded by glowing hues of cloud red , emblematic of calamity and welfare ; blue of rain ; green symbolic of plaque ; black of flood ; and gold of prosperity — is the Great Dragon , guardian genius of the place , his presence shadowed and multiplied in varying forms throughout the structure . On the huge beams surrounding and supporting the dome are five @-@ clawed dragons — the Emperor 's emblem — spitting fire in pursuit of the Jewel , rendered in the shape of a disc emitting effulgent rays , and symbolic of Omnipotence . 
 The dragon motif is repeated in the radial coffers of the caisson and the timbered coffers throughout the theatre . The Imperial dragon is accompanied by the symbol of the Empress , the Chinese phoenix ( <unk> <unk> ) , sometimes called Ho @-@ Ho or Ho @-@ Oh Bird from the Japanese . This personal symbol of the Empress is also repeated throughout the theatre , but most prominently in relief as part of the grills above false balconies that once screened organ pipes . In addition to these symbols , orange blossoms , chrysanthemums , and lotus flowers appear throughout the theatre . The highly decorated proscenium arch and safety curtain maintain the Chinese design influence . 
 Beyond the decorative features of the building , the 5th Avenue Theatre also contained notable technical features when originally built . An ascending orchestra pit and independent Wurlitzer organ platform allowed the musicians to be raised up to main stage height or to orchestra pit level from the basement below . The ventilation system had <unk> controls throughout the building , and allowed the air to be ' washed ' prior to its introduction into the venue at outlets under every third seat . 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 Preceding Grauman 's Chinese Theater in Hollywood , the 5th Avenue Theatre " has been called the largest and most authentic example of traditional Chinese timber architecture and decoration outside of Asia . " In addition , its association with architect Robert Reamer , whose other notable works include the nationally known Old Faithful Inn in Yellowstone National Park , as well as many important buildings in the Art Deco style add to its significance . The Fifth Avenue Theatre was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on November 28 , 1978 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 The president and general manager of Pacific Northwest Theatres , Inc . , Harry C. Arthur , believed Seattle to be a place of growing importance in the motion picture industry in the mid @-@ 1920s , and consequently as the place to invest for the long term . Arthur 's company absorbed a competing chain of 40 theatres by 1926 , and sought further expansion . A large holder of the theatre company 's stock and debt was C. D. Stimson who sat on the board of directors of both Pacific Northwest Theatres and the Metropolitan Building Company , developer of what became known as the Metropolitan Tract . Stimson promoted the establishment of a theatre district like that which had developed around a theatre he had built in Los Angeles , California . The planned Skinner Building with a theatre owned by Arthur 's company would complete the Stimson development of the Metropolitan Tract . 
 The architect , Robert Reamer , had joined the Metropolitan Building Company after World War I and as their house architect designed the Skinner Building and the 5th Avenue Theatre . In creating the 5th Avenue Theatre , Reamer was joined by his colleague , Joseph <unk> , of Reamer 's office and Gustav <unk> , of the S. & G. Gump Company of San Francisco . 
 Construction began in October 1925 with construction taking 11 months and costing $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = Grand opening = = = 
 The theatre celebrated its grand opening on September 24 , 1926 with an opening unit program that included both film and live vaudeville performances . The opening program included the silent film Young April , <unk> and Marco 's stage presentation The Night Club , and <unk> and his <unk> Soloists . Oliver Wallace , a popular local musician and composer , returned from Portland , Oregon to be the accompanying organist for opening night . Wallace had been the first theatre organist in a Seattle motion picture house . 
 Opening night was also marked by festivities outside the theatre . Seven blocks of downtown Seattle around the theatre were closed to street car and automobile traffic . Lured by free street car , bus , and taxicab rides , thousands of people packed Fifth Avenue between Seneca Street and Pike Street , University and Union Streets . The Seattle Times reported : 
 It is doubtful that any Friday night in Seattle 's history saw more people circulating through all the downtown streets than were there last night . The density in the center of the activities was such that street cars were diverted ... 
 In the street outside the theatre a street carnival took place . Living up to the moniker for the theater 's marquee , “ the Magic Sign of a Wonderful Time , ” spotlights scanned the night sky , banks of <unk> lights illuminated the streets outside the theater , and flares were shot from the roofs of nearby buildings . Additionally , dance bands were placed at the closed intersections to provide entertainment and , using giant screens to project the words , a sing @-@ along was orchestrated on Fifth Avenue in front of the theatre . An estimated crowd of between 50 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 people participated in the events . 
 = = = Decline and restoration = = = 
 Following the grand opening , the theatre served as a venue for vaudeville and film , and following the decline of vaudeville as a movie palace until the 1970s . With the economic recession , the advent of television , and movie complex development in the suburbs , crowds dwindled and the theatre struggled to stay open . It was forced to close its doors in 1978 along with the nearby Orpheum theatre . A variety of re @-@ use possibilities were proposed for the theatre including a Chinese restaurant , a triplex movie theater , an office building , or a shopping center . The city of Seattle was unable to protect the theatre as a designated landmark because of its unique position on the site of the original territorial university grounds owned by the state of Washington . 
 In 1979 , 43 business leaders formed the non @-@ profit 5th Avenue Theatre Association and underwrote a US $ 2 @.@ 6 million loan to save the theatre . Among these was Ned Skinner of the shipbuilding family who was an active patron of the theatre . Architect Richard McCann oversaw the restoration efforts . 
 Several changes were made during the renovation . The vertical marquee which had marked the theatre 's presence from 1926 to 1980 , was removed , the orchestra pit and auditorium seating were rebuilt , the dressing rooms moved , and the technical systems updated . However , the furniture , fixtures and interior signage were retained . Even the paint was carefully restored to its original luster . The renovation made it suitable again for live performances and filled Seattle 's need for a touring Broadway musical venue . Renovation work was completed without federal , state , or local funds . 
 June 16 , 1980 marked the theater ’ s rebirth and a new chapter in Seattle ’ s arts community . At the Grand Opening Gala for the renovated theatre , actress Helen Hayes christened the stage with a kiss and declared the 5th “ a national treasure . ” Beginning on July 3 the 5th presented Annie , the first touring Broadway musical to appear at the theatre . The sold @-@ out show ran for 10 weeks with a total of 77 performances . 
 The 5th Avenue Theatre continues to thrive with the assistance of many generous donors and volunteers . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1980 history = = = 
 Since the renovation , the 5th Avenue Theatre has become one of Seattle 's most established theatres . In 1989 , The 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company was established as the resident non @-@ profit theatre company . 
 On February 28 , 2001 , the Nisqually earthquake rocked the 5th Avenue Theatre . At the time , actors were on stage rehearsing the musical 1776 . The theatre suffered minimal damages with no structural damage from the quake . Earthquake repairs included removal and replacement of 72 plaster ceiling supports and the repair of numerous cracks and damaged decorative plaster pieces in the ceiling . Contractors had to install scaffolding tall enough to reach the highest interior crevice in the ceiling eight stories up — the first time that area had been reached in 75 years . The chandeliers had to be lowered for repair and maintenance . As part of the repair work , Turner Construction provided services for seismic upgrades to the Skinner Building . 
 In November 2009 a new vertical marquee , similar to the sign that was removed as part of the 1980 renovation , was installed . The marquee was made possible through a donation from Christabel Gough , daughter of Broadway producer and early 5th Avenue promoter Roger L. Stevens . The new sign features a design inspired by both earlier marquees and the theatre 's interior , uses LED lights for energy conservation , and includes a revolving " 5th " sign at the marquee 's top . 
 = = The 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company = = 
 = = = Genesis = = = 
 From the renovation in 1980 until 1985 the non @-@ profit 5th Avenue Theatre successfully operated as a venue for touring Broadway shows . As the United States went through an economic downturn from 1985 to 1989 there was a shortage of touring shows for venues like the 5th . Consequently , many of the country 's Broadway houses went unused for extended periods of time . However , the 5th remained open during these years with a reduced staff and was used for community events and local promoters . 
 This situation forced the theatre to move beyond merely being a presenter of touring musicals . In 1989 , the non @-@ profit 5th Avenue Theatre established a resident theatre company , dubbed The 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company , to produce musicals locally . Since the theatre company 's establishment , the 5th 's yearly subscriber season programming has included 6 to 7 shows : national touring musicals , locally produced revivals of musical theatre classics , and premieres of bound @-@ for @-@ Broadway shows . With 150 musical theater performances each fall @-@ to @-@ spring subscriber season which attract over 30 @,@ 000 subscribers and average ticket sales of 300 @,@ 000 tickets annually , the 5th ranks among the nation 's largest musical theater companies . 
 The musical company employs over 600 actors , musicians , directors , choreographers , designers , technicians , stage hands , box office staff , and administrators , making the 5th the largest theatre employer in the Puget Sound region . A non @-@ profit , the theatre company is supported by individual and corporate donations , government sources , and box office ticket sales . 
 = = = TUTS partnership = = = 
 Frank M. Young was the first executive director of the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company . From 1989 to 1999 a collaborative partnership existed between the 5th and Houston 's Theatre Under the Stars ( TUTS ) where Young also served as executive director . This partnership produced 10 seasons of musical theater , including both national tours and self @-@ produced musicals . On October 17 , 1989 the first 5th Avenue / TUTS self @-@ produced musical was presented : Mame , starring Juliet Prowse . In 1995 , after premiering at the 5th , Jekyll & Hyde became the first 5th Avenue Theatre production to open on Broadway in April 1997 . The show was produced in cooperation with Houston 's Alley Theatre and TUTS . 
 In August 2000 the 5th ’ s partnership with TUTS ended as David Armstrong joined the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company becoming its first resident Producing Artistic Director launching a new era of collaboration with leading musical theater companies and producers across the country . 
 = = = Broadway " testing ground " = = = 
 Since the creation of the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company in 1989 , the 5th has established a tradition of being a " testing ground " for new musicals before they make their debut on Broadway . Since 2000 the 5th has produced one pre @-@ Broadway world premiere every 2 to 3 years . 
 We 've become a very sought @-@ after partner for developing Broadway musicals . 
 Some notable musicals shown to Seattle audiences at the 5th Avenue Theatre prior to their success on Broadway include : Jekyll & Hyde in 1995 which was nominated for 4 Tony Awards , Hairspray in 2002 which won 8 Tony Awards , and The Wedding Singer in 2006 which had 4 Tony Award nominations . The film adaptation of Hairspray premiered at the 5th on July 16 , 2007 ( 4 days prior to its nationwide release ) as an acknowledgement of the 5th 's role in the musical 's success on Broadway . The " testing ground " tradition continued in the 2008 – 2009 season with the pre @-@ Broadway world premieres of Shrek the Musical , and Memphis . Both went on to win Tony awards , Shrek winning one in 2009 and Memphis winning four , including Best Musical , in 2010 . In the 2009 – 2010 season , they premiered Catch Me If You Can , which premiered on Broadway in the spring of 2011 . In their 2010 – 2011 season , they premiered A Christmas Story : The Musical , based on the film of the same name , and more recently the premiere of Aladdin , based on the Disney film " Aladdin " . 
 Along with their successful pre @-@ Broadway tryouts , the 5th Avenue Theatre has also performed two musicals , Princesses in 2005 and Lone Star Love in 2007 , which were originally scheduled to go to Broadway , but did not due to poor reviews . They also announced the premiere of a musical adaptation of Cry @-@ Baby , in 2007 , but it was later replaced with Buddy : The Buddy Holly Story . 
 = = = Community outreach programs = = = 
 The theatre also hosts a variety of special events , and offers a number of education and outreach programs to school @-@ age children and adults reaching over 61 @,@ 000 students , professional performers , and audiences each year . One example of this is the 5th Avenue High School Musical Theatre Awards which evaluate and honor the performances of student actors and stage hands in Washington state high school productions . At the end of each school year , a Tony Awards @-@ style ceremony is held which includes high @-@ profile presenters , performances by nominees , and acceptance speeches by the award recipients . The awards ceremony has become a useful scouting event for colleges looking to recruit talent for their drama departments . 
 = = Productions by season = = 
 = Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) = 
 " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " is a song by Powderfinger from their sixth album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . It is the fourth single from the album and was released in Australia in March 2008 . The band 's publicist , Ms. Fanclub , announced on 27 February that the single would be released to radioplay in the following week , without specifying a date . In her announcement , she also noted that a music video will be released at about the same time . The music video was then released in mid @-@ March ; however , the single 's release was then announced as 31 March . 
 A music video was released for the song ; however , it features the live version of the song taken from the DVD for the Across the Great Divide tour , whereas the radio single for the song is a radio edit of the studio album version . The music video is directly taken from the DVD ; however , it is altered optically with filters and converted into black and white . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " was recorded by Powderfinger for their 2007 album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence at Sunset Sound Studio , Los Angeles , California , in early 2007 with producer Rob Schnapf . The part of the title " Featuring the Sound of Insanity " refers to a sound just after the bridge in which a sitar is played with synthesised effects overlaid . Prior to its release as a single , a live version of " Who Really Cares " appeared on the earlier Dream Days at the Hotel Existence single , " I Don 't Remember " . Another live version also appears on the group 's 2007 DVD Across the Great Divide tour . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 Though the single was never a physical CD release , artwork was created for it . The artwork featured the headless man who is otherwise seen throughout the releases for other singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , however on this cover , the area where his head would be is a fireball , and he appears to be holding a briefcase while walking down the hallway of a hotel , another common theme throughout the artwork for the album . Unlike the last two singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , the artwork doesn 't follow the picture @-@ in @-@ picture theme . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Who Really Cares " is a live performance of the song by Powderfinger for their Across the Great Divide tour in 2007 . The music video contains the performance featured on the DVD for the Across the Great Divide tour , filmed in Melbourne in 2007 . The performance features a piano solo by the pianist Lachlan Doley , who performed keyboards and piano throughout the tour . The music video , produced by PVC as part of the tour DVD , is completely in black and white and throughout features optical filters that warp and alter the visual display . These filters intensify from the bridge and continue until the end of the clip . The music is performed differently from the original studio recording , with improvised solos , including Ian Haug playing the sitar part on a double necked guitar with synthesised effects to emulate the sitar sound , and the performance of the song ends with a <unk> , where the tempo slows to an end . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Prior to being released as a single , " Who Really Cares " received a mixed response by reviewers when commenting on Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . Melbourne based webzine <unk> reviewer Andrew Weaver comments on the song 's musical layering , coupling the song with " Wishing on the Same Moon " and comments that the layering in the two songs gives the music " genuine depth of sound and taking the veteran group to new places " . CitySearch Sydney also made reference to the likeness to " Wishing on the Same Moon " , but notes that what sets the two songs apart is " a serviceable fade @-@ out cacophony of keys and guitar " . Music journalist Chris Leonard of UK magazine Rock Louder praises the live performance of the song while Powderfinger performed in Glasgow on 11 December 2007 . J. Watson of <unk> comments that the song , when performed live at The Sydney Opera House Forecourt for charity on 31 October 2007 , was " another highlight of the evening " . Fellow reviewer from <unk> , <unk> , comments on the song 's " sparse Pink Floyd @-@ esque sound which echoes through " Who Really Cares " , as clever a rock ballad as the band have ever written . " Andrew <unk> of Mess + Noise echoed the comments of similarities to Pink Floyd , and also Neil Young , stating " where psych @-@ gospel organ and wailing guitar billow around Fanning ’ s vocals like a lost track from Dark Side of the Moon " . Though most of the critical response has been positive , the song has also received criticism from UK reviewer Matthias Scherer of Noize Makes Enemies . Scherer notes that the song 's title " Who Really Cares " is a question that " should have been asked before recording , not during " , though this comment refers both to the song itself , and the whole album of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 The song 's critical response has been mostly positive , though so too were the two prior singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , which both performed poorly in the charts . Like these two , " Who Really Cares " was released to radioplay and music video stations , but with little inclusion in circulation , leading speculators to believe the single will follow " I Don 't Remember " and " Nobody Sees " with poor charting performance . This speculation proved to be accurate , leading to " Who Really Cares " to be the first single by Powderfinger since their 2004 release " Bless My Soul " to fail to achieve a position on the ARIA Charts . Although B @-@ side " One More Kiss As You Fly Away " was the number 81 on the ARIA Charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " 
 " One More Kiss as You Fly Away " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max ( 1865 ) = 
 SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was the lead ship of the Erzherzog Ferdinand Max class of broadside ironclads built for the Austrian Navy in the 1860s . She was built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino , with her keel laying in October 1863 , launching in May 1865 , and commissioning in June 1866 at the outbreak of the Third Italian War of Independence and the Austro @-@ Prussian War , fought concurrently . The ship was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder guns , though the rifled guns originally intended , which had been ordered from Prussia , had to be replaced with old smoothbore guns until after the conflicts ended . 
 Stationed in the Adriatic Sea , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max served as the flagship of the Austrian fleet under Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff . She saw action at the Battle of Lissa in July 1866 , where she rammed and sank the Italian ironclad Re d 'Italia . Slightly damaged in the collision , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max had her bow repaired in Malta after the war . She remained in the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet for the next twenty years , but severely reduced naval budgets owing to Hungarian disinterest in naval matters led to an uneventful career . She was rearmed with newer guns in 1874 and again in 1882 . Stricken from the naval register in May 1886 , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was employed as a tender to the gunnery training school from 1889 to 1908 . She remained in the inventory until 1916 when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was 83 @.@ 75 meters ( 274 @.@ 8 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 96 m ( 52 @.@ 4 ft ) and an average draft of 7 @.@ 14 m ( 23 @.@ 4 ft ) . She displaced 5 @,@ 130 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 050 long tons ; 5 @,@ 650 short tons ) . She had a crew of 511 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine , manufactured by the Stabilimento Tecnico shipyard in Fiume , that drove a single screw propeller . The number and type of her coal @-@ fired boilers have not survived . Her engine produced a top speed of 12 @.@ 54 knots ( 23 @.@ 22 km / h ; 14 @.@ 43 mph ) from 2 @,@ 925 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 181 kW ) . 
 Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder muzzle @-@ loading guns . She also carried several smaller guns , including four 8 @-@ pounder guns and two 3 @-@ pounders . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 123 mm ( 5 in ) thick on the battery and reduced to 87 mm ( 3 @.@ 4 in ) at the bow and stern . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was laid down at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste on 6 May 1863 . She was launched on 24 May 1865 ; the builders were forced to complete fitting @-@ out work quickly , as tensions with neighboring Prussia and Italy erupted into the concurrent Austro @-@ Prussian War and the Third Italian War of Independence in June 1866 . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max 's rifled heavy guns were still on order from Krupp , and they could not be delivered due to the conflict with Prussia . Instead , the ship was armed with old smooth @-@ bore guns . Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , the commander of the Austrian Fleet , immediately began to mobilize his fleet . As the ships became fully manned , they began to conduct training exercises in Fasana . With his flag aboard Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on 26 June in an attempt to draw out the Italians , but the Italian commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , refused to engage Tegetthoff . Tegetthoff made another sortie on 6 July , but again could not bring the Italian fleet to battle . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet , with twelve ironclads , out of Ancona , bound for the island of Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers . Persano then spent the next two days bombarding the Austrian defenses of the island and unsuccessfully attempting to force a landing . Tegetthoff received a series of telegrams between the 17 and 19 July notifying him of the Italian attack , which he initially believed to be a feint to draw the Austrian fleet away from its main bases at Pola and Venice . By the morning of the 19th , however , he was convinced that Lissa was in fact the Italian objective , and so he requested permission to attack . As Tegetthoff 's fleet arrived off Lissa on the morning of 20 July , Persano 's fleet was arrayed for another landing attempt . The latter 's ships were divided into three groups , with only the first two able to concentrate in time to meet the Austrians . Tegetthoff had arranged his ironclad ships into a wedge @-@ shaped formation , leading with Erzherzog Ferdinand Max at the center ; the wooden warships of the second and third divisions followed behind in the same formation . 
 While he was forming up his ships , Persano transferred from his flagship , Re d 'Italia to the turret ship Affondatore . This created a gap in the Italian line , and Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to divide the Italian fleet and create a melee . He made a pass through the gap , but failed to ram any of the Italian ships , forcing him to turn around and make another attempt . During the second attempt , Austrian gunfire had disabled Re d 'Italia 's rudder , leaving her incapable of maneuvering . Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to ram the Italian vessel , and ordered his ship to maximum speed . After two collisions that occurred at angles too oblique to inflict serious damage , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max struck the ship more directly . The Austrian ship 's ram tore a gaping hole in Re d 'Italia 's hull on the port side , though Erzherzog Ferdinand Max sustained no significant damage herself . Tegetthoff reversed course , allowing the Italian ironclad to lurch back to port and quickly sink . Tegetthoff initially ordered his crew to lower boats to pick up the Italians struggling in the water , but the Italian ironclad San Martino was approaching , and he could not allow his ship to become a stationary target . Instead , he ordered the aviso Kaiserin Elizabeth to remain behind and pick up the survivors while Erzherzog Ferdinand Max engaged San Martino . The other Italian ships , however , did not realize Kaiserin Elizabeth was attempting to pick up the Italian survivors , and so opened fire on her , driving her away from the men in the water . 
 By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk and the coastal defense ship Palestro was burning badly , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , he refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . In addition , the fleet was low on coal and ammunition . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; Tegetthoff , having gotten the better of the action , kept his distance so as not to risk his success . Additionally , the Austrian ships were slower than their Italian counterparts , and so they could not force a second engagement . As night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max had fired 156 shells in the course of the battle . She had kept boarding parties on her deck , ready to attack Italian vessels , but the opportunity had not presented itself in the engagement ; steam powered ships could simply reverse course and disengage before a boarding party could cross over . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was not significantly damaged by Italian fire or the ramming attempts . A few armor plates were slightly dislodged , the paint had been stripped from the hull where she had collided with Re d 'Italia , and she had a minor leak from the concussion , but she was otherwise unscathed . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After returning to Pola , Tegetthoff kept his fleet in the northern Adriatic , where it patrolled against a possible Italian attack . The Italian ships never came , and on 12 August , the two countries signed the Armistice of Cormons ; this ended the fighting and led to the Treaty of Vienna . Though Austria had defeated Italy at Lissa and on land at the Battle of Custoza , the Austrian army was decisively defeated by Prussia at the Battle of Königgrätz . With the war over , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max went into the British Royal Navy shipyard in Malta to have her bow repaired . As a result of Austria 's defeat , Kaiser Franz Joseph was forced to accede to Hungarian demands for greater autonomy , and the country became Austria @-@ Hungary in the Ausgleich of 1867 . The two halves of the Dual Monarchy held veto power over the other , and Hungarian disinterest in naval expansion led to severely reduced budgets for the fleet . 
 In 1869 , Kaiser Franz Joseph took a tour of the Mediterranean Sea in his imperial yacht Greif ; Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , her sister ship Habsburg , and a pair of paddle steamers escorted the Kaiser for the trip to Port Said at the mouth of the Suez Canal . The two ironclads remained in the Mediterranean while the other vessels passed through the Canal into the Red Sea in company with Empress Eugenie of France aboard her own yacht . The Austro @-@ Hungarian ships eventually returned to Trieste in December . In 1874 she was rearmed with a battery of fourteen 7 in ( 180 mm ) muzzle @-@ loading Armstrong guns and four light guns . Her battery was revised again in 1882 , with the addition of four 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) breech @-@ loader guns , two 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) breech @-@ loaders , a pair of 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) quick @-@ firing revolver guns , and three 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) auto @-@ cannons . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was stricken from the naval register on 19 May 1886 and her armament was reduced to eight 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns . The following year , these were removed and a single 26 cm ( 10 in ) gun and a 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) gun were installed . From 1889 to 1908 , she served as a tender to the gunnery training school . The ship was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1916 during World War I. 
 = Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show = 
 The Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show is an annual fashion show sponsored by and featuring Victoria 's Secret , a brand of lingerie and sleepwear . Victoria 's Secret uses the show to promote and market its goods in high @-@ profile settings . The show features some of the world 's leading fashion models such as current Victoria 's Secret Angels Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , <unk> Prinsloo , Candice Swanepoel , and Lily Aldridge . 
 American network television broadcasts the show during prime time . The first few shows in the 1990s were held in the days preceding Valentine 's Day to promote the brand for this holiday . They were not aired on national television . In 1999 and 2000 the show was webcast . Beginning in 2001 , the shows were moved ahead of the Christmas holiday season . Also in 2001 , the show made its network television broadcast on ABC , though in all subsequent years , it has been broadcast on CBS . The show has been held at a variety of locations in different cities including Miami , Los Angeles , and Cannes . The first four shows were held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City , but since it has become a televised event it has most often been held at the 69th Regiment Armory in New York City . 
 The show is a lavish event with elaborate costumed lingerie , varying music by leading entertainers , and set design according to the different themes running within the show . The show attracts hundreds of celebrities and entertainers , with special performers and acts every year . Each year , twenty to forty of the world 's top fashion models are selected to perform in the fashion show . In a typical year , this includes about a half dozen women under contract to the company , known as Victoria 's Secret Angels , who help publicize the event . The giant angel wings worn by the models , as well as other wings of various forms and sizes such as butterfly , peacock , or devil wings , have become emblematic of the Victoria 's Secret brand . 
 = = History = = 
 The first fashion show extravaganza , introduced by Stephanie Seymour , was held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City in August 1995 . The show also featured Beverly Peele and <unk> van der Wal . This first fashion show occurred two months before The Limited , parent company of Victoria 's Secret owner Intimate Brands , sold an initial public offering of a 16 percent stake in the company and almost had Seymour make an appearance at the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) for the opening bell . She actually did ring the closing bell at the NYSE as part of the publicity campaign . The subsequent three annual shows were also held at the Plaza . 
 In 1999 , during Super Bowl XXXIII , Victoria 's Secret announced a 72 @-@ hour countdown to the Internet webcast of the Victoria 's Secret fashion show , which resulted in over 2 million internet viewers of the show . Parent company Intimate Brands bought a $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( $ 2 @.@ 1 million today ) 30 @-@ second television advertisement during the Super Bowl broadcast and spent an additional $ 4 million ( $ 5 @.@ 7 million ) for subsequent international newspaper advertisements to publicize the event . The show , which was aired by <unk> , featured Tyra Banks , Laetitia Casta , Heidi Klum , Karen Mulder , Daniela <unk> , Inés Rivero , and Seymour . In 1999 and 2000 , the show was broadcast live on the internet , but the 2000 show was moved for a year from the usual February event at the Plaza to a May event in concert with the Cannes Film Festival in France to raise money for the Cinema Against AIDS charity ; it raised $ 3 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 2001 , the show , which was hosted by Rupert Everett , returned to the New York City but at Bryant Park instead of the Plaza . That year , the show made its broadcast debut on ABC , drawing millions of viewers as well as some middle @-@ brow controversy ; the Federal Communications Commission received many complaints about the broadcast every year . The show has continued to be broadcast on network television every year since . 
 From 2002 through 2005 , it was held at the Lexington Avenue Armory in New York City . The 2004 show was canceled due to a widespread crackdown on perceived indecency in broadcasting stemming from the Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy , in which Jackson encountered a breast @-@ revealing " wardrobe malfunction " . Before the 2005 show , Banks announced her retirement from modeling and embarkation on a television career with The Tyra Banks Show , making the 2005 show a farewell to her decade of fashion shows for the company . 
 In 2004 , instead of the annual fashion show , the Angels ( Tyra Banks , Heidi Klum , Gisele Bündchen , Adriana Lima , and Alessandra Ambrosio ) did an Angels Across America Tour , a grassroots campaign for the brand visiting four major cities : New York City , Miami , Las Vegas , and Los Angeles . 
 The 2006 and 2007 shows were held at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles . On November 13 , 2007 , the Victoria 's Secret Angels were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk Of Fame right outside the Kodak Theatre . The 2007 Angels honored in this celebration to mark Victoria 's Secret 's 25th anniversary on Hollywood Boulevard were Heidi Klum , Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , Karolina <unk> , Selita Ebanks , Izabel Goulart , Marisa Miller , and Miranda Kerr . The other models , who also appeared in that year 's fashion show , were in attendance that day . The 2008 show coincided with the grand re @-@ opening of the Fontainebleau Miami Beach hotel . 
 In 2006 , Victoria 's Secret sub @-@ brand PINK made its debut on the runway . Justin Timberlake opened the show with his popular song " Sexy Back " . This year fashion show was the final walk of Gisele Bündchen . 
 The 2007 show featured a performance by the Spice Girls and gained prominence as the first American TV debut of the band after their comeback . Kanye West was also scheduled to perform at the event , but cancelled his appearance due to his mother 's <unk> will.i.am was called to perform in his place . 
 The 2008 show was held at <unk> Miami Beach , Florida . Usher was appeared on the show as well as opened it . Unlike the other shows , the runway was designed parallel with the audience seats . 
 In 2009 , the fashion show took place in New York City at the Lexington Avenue Armory , where it was last held in 2005 . The 2009 show was notable for featuring the results of a competition , called the Victoria 's Secret Model Search , to find a new Victoria 's Secret " runway Angel . " The winner was announced as Kylie <unk> . 
 The 2010 Victoria 's Secret Fashion show aired on November 30 , 2010 on CBS , and featured performances by Katy Perry and Akon . A promotional ad featured a <unk> for Katy Perry 's " Firework " . As of 2010 , 152 models have walked the show . 
 In 2011 , Kanye West started his song " Stronger " with a tribute to his mother who had died before his scheduled performance four years before , saying : " In 2007 , I was supposed to perform this song on this show ... and I lost my superhero . Now she 's my super @-@ angel . " 
 In 2012 , an outfit worn by model <unk> Kloss , which was reminiscent of Native American attire , sparked controversy due to its alleged stereotypical depiction of Native Americans . Victoria 's Secret released a statement of apology shortly after , saying that they will remove it from future advertisements and the broadcast . Kloss apologized on her Twitter account for the outfit and expressed her support for the outfit 's removal in the broadcast . 
 In 2013 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift , A Great Big World , Neon Jungle and Fall Out Boy . Taylor Swift performed " I Knew You Were Trouble " , A Great Big World performed " Say Something " , UK 's Neon Jungle made their US television debut with " Trouble " , and Fall Out Boy performed with Taylor Swift in " My Songs Know What You Did In The Dark " and later performed " The Phoenix " . 
 In 2014 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift ; for the second year in a row , Ed Sheeran , Ariana Grande , and Hozier . Taylor Swift performed " Blank Space " and " Style " . Ed Sheeran performed " Thinking Out Loud " . Ariana Grande performed " Love Me Harder " , " Bang Bang " , " Break Free " , and " Problem " . Hozier performed " Take Me to Church " . During the show , Ariana Grande was performing and was hit by accident with an angel 's wings . 
 = = Critical review = = 
 The early webcasts were criticized for poor connection , and users that could connect were subjected to low video quality . One critic from The New York Times described the initial 20th @-@ century webcast experience as having felt like he was " watching a striptease through a keyhole " . 
 Some critics have described the 21st @-@ century televised editions of the show as pornographic , while others have described it as both " outright commercialism " and an infomercial . The Federal Communications Commission has received complaints regarding the broadcast , but no fines have been imposed , with the FCC , following the 2001 airing , citing the First Amendment and stating that " sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium " were not broadcast . In the initial 2001 airing ABC blurred the screen on particularly sheer lingerie . This enabled the show to pass muster with its internal Broadcast Standards and Practices department and to achieve the TV @-@ 14 rating . In 2002 , the National Organization for Women protested the show calling it a " soft @-@ core porn infomercial . " They were joined in protest by the Parents Television Council and other watchdog organizations . CBS has given past shows TV @-@ 14 ratings , which is a warning that the show may contain material unsuitable for children age 14 and under . Nonetheless some affiliates have chosen not to air the show in past years including Fisher Broadcasting affiliates in Idaho . In 2009 , the American Decency Association organized email letters of protests to sponsors of the show including AT & T , Kentucky Fried Chicken , Netflix , Nikon , and Reebok . CBS has described the event to as " the Super Bowl of fashion " . 
 = = Summary table = = 
 = = Fantasy Bra = = 
 Typically , one model is chosen among the Angels to wear a bejeweled bra dubbed the " Fantasy Bra " . It was first advertised in the Victoria 's Secret catalog , but since 2001 has been worn in the Fashion Shows . Prior to each Fashion Show , Victoria 's Secret contracts a renowned jewelry designer to craft the bra to be used as a focal point for promoting the fashion show and as a centerpiece within it . The company offers the Fantasy Bra for sale as " the ultimate holiday " gift . However , only the centerpiece from the 2004 Heavenly " 70 " Fantasy Bra and the 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra and Gift Set have found a buyer . If not bought , the bras are dismantled after a year . 
 Heidi Klum and Adriana Lima have worn the Fantasy Bra in three different years . Gisele Bündchen , Tyra Banks , Karolina <unk> , and Alessandra Ambrosio have each worn two Fantasy Bras . 
