 The conspiracy influenced several aspects of Great Britain 's international relations , most of all Anglo @-@ American relations during the war , as well as , to some extent , Anglo @-@ Chinese relations . After the war , it was one of the issues that influenced Anglo @-@ Japanese relations . 
 At the start of the war , the American government 's refusal to check the Indian seditionist movement was a major concern for the British government . By 1916 , a majority of the resources of the American department of the British Foreign Office were related to the Indian seditionist movement . Before the outbreak of the war , the political commitments of the Wilson Government , ( especially of Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan who had eight years previously had authored " British Rule in India " , a highly critical pamphlet , that was classified as seditionist by the Indian and Imperial governments ) , and the political fallouts of the perception of persecution of oppressed people by Britain prevented the then ambassador Cecil Spring Rice from pressing the issue diplomatically . After Robert Lansing replaced Bryan as Secretary of State in 1916 , Secretary of State for India Marquess of Crewe and Foreign Secretary Edward Grey forced Spring Rice to raise the issue and the evidences obtained in Lahore Conspiracy trial were presented to the American government in February . The first investigations were opened in America at this time with the raid of the Wall Street office of Wolf von <unk> , resulting in seizures of papers that were later presented as evidence in the Hindu – German Conspiracy Trial . However , a perceptibly slow and reluctant American investigation triggered an intense neutrality dispute through 1916 , aggravated by belligerent preventive measures of the British Far @-@ Eastern fleet on the high seas that threatened the sovereignty of American vessels . German and Turkish passengers were seized from the American vessel China by HMS <unk> at the mouth of the Yangtze River . Several incidents followed , including the SS Henry S , which were defended by the British government on grounds that the seized ship planned to foment an armed uprising in India . These drew strong responses from the US government , prompting the US Atlantic Fleet to dispatch destroyers to the Pacific to protect the sovereignty of American vessels . Authorities in the Philippines were more cooperative , which assured Britain of knowledge of any plans against Hong Kong . The strained relations were relaxed in May 1916 when the Britain released the China prisoners and relaxed its aggressive policy seeking co @-@ operation with the United States . However , diplomatic exchanges and relations did not improve before November that year . 
 The conspiracy issue was ultimately addressed by William G. E. Wiseman , head of British intelligence in the United States , when he passed details of a bomb plot directly to the New York Police bypassing diplomatic channels . This led to the arrest of Chandra Kanta <unk> . As the links between <unk> 's papers and the <unk> papers became apparent , investigations by federal authorities expanded to cover the entire conspiracy . Ultimately , the United States agreed to forward evidence so long as Britain did not seek admission of liability for breaches of neutrality . At a time that diplomatic relations with Germany were deteriorating , the British Foreign Office directed its embassy to co @-@ operate with the investigations resolving the Anglo @-@ American diplomatic disputes just as the United States entered the war . 
 Through 1915 – 16 , China and Indonesia were the major bases for the conspirators , and significant efforts were made by the British government to coax China into the war to attempt to control the German and Ghadar intrigues . This would also allow free purchase of arms from China for the Entente powers . However , Yuan 's proposals for bringing China into the war were against Japanese interests and gains from the war . This along with Japanese support for Sun Yat Sen and rebels in southern China laid the foundations for deterioration of Anglo @-@ Japanese relations as early as 1916 . After the end of the Great War , Japan increasingly became a haven for radical Indian nationalists in exile , who were protected by patriotic Japanese societies . Notable among these were Rash Behari Bose , Tarak Nath Das , and A. M. Sahay . The protections offered to these nationalists , most notably by Toyama Mitsuru 's Black Dragon Society , effectively prevented British efforts to repatriate them and became a major policy concern . 
 = = = Ghadar Party and IIC = = = 
 The IIC was formally disbanded in November 1918 . Most of its members became closely associated with communism and the Soviet Union . <unk> Dutta and Virendranath Chattopadhyay alias Chatto arrived in Moscow in 1920 . Narendranath Bhattacharya , under a new identity of M. N. Roy , was among the first Indian communists and made a memorable speech in the second congress of the Communist International that rejected Leninist views and foreshadowed Maoist peasant movements . Chatto himself was in Berlin until 1932 as the general secretary of the League Against Imperialism and was able to convince Jawaharlal Nehru to affiliate the Indian National Congress with the league in 1927 . He later fled Nazi Germany for the Soviet Union but disappeared in 1937 under Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge . 
 The Ghadar Party , suppressed during the war , revived itself in 1920 and openly declared its communist beliefs . Although sidelined in California , it remained relatively stronger in East Asia , where it allied itself with the Chinese Communist Party . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Although the conspiracy failed during World War I , the movement being suppressed at the time and several of its key leaders hanged or incarcerated , several prominent Ghadarites also managed to flee India to Japan and Thailand . The concept of a revolutionary movement for independence also found a revival amongst later generation Indian leaders , most notably Subhas Chandra Bose who , towards the mid @-@ 1930s , began calling for a more radical approach towards colonial domination . During World War II , several of these leaders were instrumental in seeking Axis support to revive such a concept . Bose himself , from the very beginning of World War II , actively evaluated the concept of revolutionary movement against the Raj , interacting with Japan and subsequently escaping to Germany to raise an Indian armed force , the Indische Legion , to fight in India against Britain . He later returned to Southeast Asia to take charge of the Indian National Army which was formed following the labour of exiled nationalists , efforts from within Japan to revive a similar concept , and the direction and leadership of people like Mohan Singh , Giani Pritam Singh , and Rash Behari Bose . The most famous of these saw the formation of the Indian Independence League , the Indian National Army and ultimately the <unk> <unk> @-@ e @-@ Azad Hind in Southeast Asia . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The Ghadar Memorial Hall in San Francisco honours members of the party who were hanged following the Lahore conspiracy trial , and the Ghadar Party Memorial Hall in Jalandhar , Punjab commemorates the Ghadarites who were involved in the conspiracy . Several of those executed during the conspiracy are today honoured in India . Kartar Singh is honoured with a memorial at his birthplace of the Village of Sarabha . The Ayurvedic Medicine College in Ludhiana is also named in his honour . The Indian government has produced stamps honouring several of those involved in the conspiracy , including Har Dayal , Bhai <unk> , and Rash Behari Bose . Several other revolutionaries are also honoured through India and the Indian American population . A memorial plaque commemorating the Komagata Maru was unveiled by Jawaharlal Nehru at Budge Budge in Calcutta in 1954 , while a second plaque was unveiled in 1984 at Gateway Pacific , Vancouver by the Canadian government . A heritage foundation to commemorate the passengers from the Komagata Maru excluded from Canada was established in 2005 . In Singapore , two memorial tablets at the entrance of the Victoria Memorial Hall and four plaques in St Andrew 's Cathedral commemorate the British soldiers and civilians killed during the Singapore Mutiny . In Ireland , a memorial at the Glasnevin Cemetery in Dublin commemorates the dead from the Jalandhar mutiny of the Connaught Rangers . The Southern Asian Institute of Columbia University today runs the Taraknath Das foundation to support work relating to India . Famous awardees include R. K. Narayan , Robert Goheen , Philip Talbot , Anita Desai and <unk> and Joseph Elder . 
 = = Note on the name = = 
 The conspiracy is known under several different names , including the ' Hindu Conspiracy ' , the ' Indo @-@ German Conspiracy ' , the ' Ghadar conspiracy ' ( or ' <unk> conspiracy ' ) , or the ' German plot ' . The term Hindu – German Conspiracy is closely associated with the uncovering of the Annie Larsen plot in the United States , and the ensuing trial of Indian nationalists and the staff of the German Consulate of San Francisco for violating American neutrality . The trial itself was called the Hindu – German Conspiracy Trial , and the conspiracy was reported in the media ( and later studied by several historians ) as Hindu – German Conspiracy . However , the conspiracy involved not only Hindus and Germans , but also substantial numbers of Muslims and Punjabi Sikhs , and strong Irish support that pre @-@ dated German and Turkish involvement . The term Hindu was used commonly in opprobrium in America to identify Indians regardless of religion . Likewise , conspiracy was also a term with negative connotations . The term Hindu Conspiracy was used by the government to actively discredit the Indian revolutionaries at a time the United States was about to join the war against Germany . 
 The term ' Ghadar Conspiracy ' may refer more specifically to the mutiny planned for February 1915 in India , while the term ' German plot ' or ' Christmas Day Plot ' may refer more specifically to the plans for shipping arms to Jatin Mukherjee in Autumn 1915 . The term Indo @-@ German conspiracy is also commonly used to refer to later plans in Southeast Asia and to the mission to Kabul which remained the remnant of the conspiracy at the end of the war . All of these were parts of the larger conspiracy . Most scholars reviewing the American aspect use the name Hindu – German Conspiracy , the Hindu @-@ Conspiracy or the Ghadar Conspiracy , while most reviewing the conspiracy over its entire span from Southeast Asia through Europe to the United States more often use the term Indo @-@ German conspiracy . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 105 ( 1940 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 105 was a Type IXB U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine . She was ordered in May 1938 as part of Germany 's naval rearmament program . Her keel was laid down in Bremen in November 1938 . After roughly seven months of construction , she was launched in June 1940 and formally commissioned into the Kriegsmarine in September 1940 . 
 During her three @-@ year career , U @-@ 105 sank 23 vessels for a total loss of 125 @,@ 470 gross register tons ( GRT ) before being sunk by the Free French Forces off the coast of Dakar ( Senegal ) in June 1943 . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 105 was ordered by Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine on 24 May 1938 ; her keel was laid down on 16 November 1938 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser in Bremen as yard number 968 . She was launched on 15 June 1940 and commissioned on 10 September under the command of Kapitänleutnant Georg Schewe . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 German Type IXB submarines were slightly larger than the original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA . U @-@ 105 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 051 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 034 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 178 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 159 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 76 m ( 22 ft 2 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 60 m ( 31 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 3 knots ( 13 @.@ 5 km / h ; 8 @.@ 4 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 64 nautical miles ( 119 km ; 74 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 105 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Under the command of Kapitänleutnant Georg Schewe , U @-@ 105 left Kiel on 24 December 1940 . She spent 39 days in the North Sea . During this patrol , she sank the British ship Bassano on 9 January 1941 , and <unk> , part of Convoy SL @-@ 61 , on 26 January 1941 , totalling 8 @,@ 407 GRT . Five days later , on 31 January , U @-@ 105 arrived at the German @-@ occupied port of Lorient , France , which would remain her home port for the rest of her career . 
 = = = 1941 = = = 
 U @-@ 105 left Lorient on her second patrol on 22 February 1941 and underwent a 112 @-@ day voyage in the Atlantic Ocean . Along with U @-@ 124 , she was directed by the Oberkommando der Marine ( Supreme naval headquarters ) , to attack Convoy SL @-@ 67 . During this attack , U @-@ 105 sank the merchant ship <unk> , on 8 March . Collectively , the two U @-@ boats sank a total of 28 @,@ 148 tons . <unk> then stalked Convoy SL @-@ 68 , sinking <unk> on 18 March , <unk> on 19 March and Clan Ogilvy , <unk> and Jhelum , all on the 21st . U @-@ 105 went on to score Nazi Germany 's first kill off the coast of South America when she sank Ena de <unk> on 5 April 1941 . Later during the patrol she sank <unk> , part of Convoy OG @-@ 59 . On 6 May , <unk> , part of Convoy OB @-@ 312 ; on the 13th , <unk> part of Convoy OB @-@ 314 and on the 15th , Rodney Star on 16 May and Scottish Monarch on 1 June as part of Convoy OB @-@ 319 . This was the second most successful U @-@ boat patrol of the entire Second World War , with 12 ships sunk for a total of 71 @,@ 450 GRT . On 5 May 1941 , the 105mm deck gun exploded , wounding six crew members . U @-@ 105 returned to Lorient on 13 June , and remained there until 3 August , when she departed on her third war patrol . 
 On 5 August she was assigned to wolfpack ' Hammer ' and remained with it until it was disbanded on 12 August , when she was reassigned to wolfpack ' Grönland ' , with which she remained until its disbanding on 27 August . She was then assigned to wolfpack ' Margrave ' , and sank the Panamanian merchant ship Montana , part of Convoy SC @-@ 42 , on 11 September . She returned to Lorient nine days later . U @-@ 105 left Lorient on her fourth patrol on 8 November 1941 and spent 36 days in the North Atlantic . On 14 November she was assigned to wolfpack ' Steuben ' and remained with it until 2 December . Having sunk no ships during the patrol , she returned to Lorient on 13 December 1941 . Georg Schewe left the boat shortly after this patrol , and was replaced as commander by Heinrich Schuch . 
 = = = 1942 = = = 
 On 25 January 1942 U @-@ 105 left Lorient on her fifth patrol . On 31 January she sank the British warship HMS Culver , part of Convoy SL @-@ 98 , south @-@ west of Ireland , and , on 5 February 1942 , she rescued seven men from a crashed German Dornier Do 24 350 miles off the coast of France . U @-@ 105 returned to Lorient on 8 February . Seventeen days later , on 25 February , U @-@ 105 left Lorient . Between 25 and 27 March , she sank the British merchant ship Narragansett and the Norwegian merchant ship <unk> off the east coast of the United States . U @-@ 105 returned to Lorient on 15 April after spending 50 days in the North Atlantic , and left on another patrol on 7 June . While crossing the Bay of Biscay , she was attacked by an Australian Short Sunderland aircraft from No. 10 Squadron RAAF . U @-@ 105 sought shelter in Ferrol , Spain and did not leave until 28 June , when she departed for Lorient , which she reached on the 30th . The attack apparently caused serious damage , as she did not sail again until 23 November . During this period , Oberleutnant zur See Hans @-@ Adolf <unk> was put in command of the boat , but did not undertake any patrols and was replaced by Oberleutnant zur See Jürgen Nissen , under whose command U @-@ 105 left Lorient . 
 While patrolling the North Atlantic she succeeded in sinking three British merchant ships ; <unk> on 14 December 1942 , C.S. Flight on 12 January 1943 , and British Vigilance , part of Convoy TM @-@ 1 , on 24 January , as well as the American freighter Cape Decision on the 27th . U @-@ 105 returned to Lorient on 14 February , and remained there until 16 March . During this patrol , ( on 1 April ) , the boat 's commander , Jürgen Nissen , was promoted to Kapitänleutnant . On 15 May 1943 U @-@ 105 sank the Greek merchant ship <unk> Logothetis 250 miles southwest of Freetown . On 2 June 1943 , while passing close to Dakar , U @-@ 105 was attacked and sunk by a Potez @-@ CAMS 141 flying boat " <unk> " from Free French Squadron 141 . All 53 crew members were killed . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 * Sailing vessel 
 = Maddy Young = 
 Madeleine " Maddy " Young is a fictional character in the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by actress Nadine Lewington . The character first appeared on @-@ screen on 16 January 2007 , in episode " Face Value " - series 9 , episode 15 of the programme . Her final appearance in the show was in the Series 11 episode " Just A Perfect Day " when her character was fatally stabbed . Her role in the show is that of a Senior House Officer undergoing her general surgical rotation in Holby 's acute admissions unit . Described by the BBC as " enthusiastic [ ... ] fun " and " dedicated to her job " , Maddy was created alongside fellow new character General Surgical Consultant Dan Clifford . Her major storylines have centered on their friendship and relationship , as well as her troubled family background and her continual rule @-@ breaking . 
 The character has proven popular with viewers , seeing Lewington long @-@ listed for the ' Most Popular Newcomer ' award at the 2007 National Television Awards for her portrayal of the character , and Maddy voted by Holby City fans ' Favourite Newcomer ' of series 9 . However , in October 2007 , the character also came under heavy criticism from drinks industry body the Portman Group , resulting from an incident of on @-@ screen binge drinking broadcast without showing any negative effects , which the group lambasted as " highly irresponsible . " 
 In May 2009 , Maddy died after being stabbed by disturbed patient Chantelle Tanner . After the attack , a full episode misled viewers by showing what would have happened if Maddy had been saved , before revealing at the end that Maddy had actually died . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Maddy was created by Holby City 's executive producer Tony McHale as an SHO level doctor who would work on the hospital 's Acute Assessment Unit . The character was conceived alongside fellow series 9 newcomer Dan Clifford ( Peter Wingfield ) , who arrived as the new General Surgical Consultant of the hospital 's Keller Ward , in episode " It 's Been a Long Day " - eight weeks before the introduction of Maddy . BBC Publicity explained at the time : " Maddy is good friends with Clifford ( Peter Wingfield ) and has saved him from trouble on a few occasions " . In the closing credits of the character 's first two appearances - episodes " Face Value " and " Feast or Famine " - her name was given as " Maddie Young " . In every subsequent episode , the character has been credited by the altered spelling of " Maddy Young " . 
 On 4 October 2006 , it was announced that actress Nadine Lewington had been cast in the role of Maddy . Lewington had made a previous appearance in series 20 , episode 22 of Holby City 's sister show Casualty . Lewington recalls of her role : " I was a young married mum of one with another on the way . I loved my little bump . My reckless <unk> had had a motorbike accident , in which a baby was injured , after promising to give the bikes up . I threatened to leave him , Charlie Fairhead gave him what for and told him how lucky he was to have me and he promised to be model father after all . Happily ever after . It was a really sweet little story actually . Very touching " . 
 On joining the cast of Holby City , Lewington commented : " I 've been on cloud nine since receiving that all @-@ important phone call . My parents are surprised to suddenly have a doctor in the family but are thrilled nonetheless ! I 'm just really looking forward to being part of an incredible cast in such a successful show – I can 't wait ! " A spokesperson for BBC Publicity added : " We are delighted to have Nadine on board to play the part of Maddy , she 's a great addition to the show and her character will be involved in some dramatic storylines . " Discussing her casting a year into her time on the show , Lewington assessed : " I enjoy it more as I wade through the years . As with any ensemble work , the more time spent as a team , working together and discovering each others rhythms , dynamics and struggles , the better . And because of that , more fun . I certainly feel more settled and confident . Part of something . It was all a bit daunting for a while . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Upon announcing the character 's creation , BBC Publicity initially stated of her personality : " Maddy 's enthusiasm and ability speaks for itself . She 's a young SHO who loves her job and is fun to be around . " Expanding , it was added that : " Maddy 's young , fun and up for a laugh while , at the same time , dedicated to her job . She 's definitely not going to be single for very long , but there 's a family secret she 's harbouring which could just get in the way ... " The BBC Holby City homepage describes Maddy as : " enthusiastic and eager to learn . Being with her is fun . She doesn 't moan , she loves her job and gets on with it . She just wants to be happy " . Comparing the character 's personality to her own , Lewington commented : " My good pal , Sir Robert Powell ( Mark Williams ) has said that a character is often only yourself turned 3 degrees . I think this to be true of Maddy and I. There are similarities . Although she 's smarter than me , she does the daftest things ! She 's says things I wouldn 't . But when she cries , I cry and when she smiles , I smile " . 
 Throughout the show 's ninth series , Maddy maintained a close relationship with General Surgical Consultant Dan Clifford . It was revealed in her first episode that she had previously worked alongside him in Middlesex . It later came to light that she once covered for him when he attempted an operation drunk - going so far as to date the lesbian anesthetist present during the surgery in order to buy her silence . Shortly before his departure from Holby City , Dan and Maddy briefly became romantically involved . However , Dan was also in love with his sister @-@ in @-@ law Louise and ultimately departed for a new job in France , leaving Maddy behind . Peter Wingfield ( Dan ) has said of the relationship : 
 " There was a line in one of the last episodes , " one of them seems perfect for you " and I always thought that summed it up . Dan and Maddy have always been incredibly close without becoming lovers , but it is obvious that they are great together , so when it happens it is effortless and joyous and has wonderful potential . But Dan 's private demons prevent it from being allowed to live and grow . I always thought it might be great for him , if only he could have let it be . " 
 Lewington 's own assessment of the relationship is that : " Maddy doesn 't have anyone in her life that she can count on . Dan was her family and that 's what hurt so bad . I guess to have Dan as a lover would mean that he would never go away . She wouldn 't have to share him . Dan loved Maddy sincerely which is why he didn 't want to risk hurting her anymore than he already had . He was too messed up to be good for anyone and he knew it . " 
 The character also had a brief sexual relationship with hospital Lothario Sam Strachan . She and Sam had a one night stand in episode " The Borders of Sleep " , and went on to become close friends , with Maddy assisting Sam in caring for a teenage prostitute he felt responsible for . She also supported him through his Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis , and enlisting his support in illegally proving a patient 's death through negligence . In the show 's tenth series , Maddy also formed a fast respect for the new head of the hospital 's Acute Assessment Unit , Linden Cullen ( Duncan Pow ) . Pow ruled out a romance between the two characters , however , stating : " They 're protective of each other , but they 're more like brother and sister than anything else . I don 't think he 's ready for the relationship merry @-@ go @-@ round at Holby just yet " . He added that : " Any man would be a fool to turn down Maddy , but Linden wants his wife back " . Similarly , Lewington has assessed that neither Sam nor Linden are Maddy 's ideal man , and instead she is " waiting for a new hunk ! " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Maddy arrives at Holby City Hospital in episode " Face Value " . It is revealed that she has a history with General Surgical Consultant Dan Clifford , and that the pair are good friends . The pre @-@ existing relationship between Maddy and Dan initially makes some staff wary of her , especially on the hospital 's Acute Assessment Unit , where she is assigned . However , she quickly strikes up a friendship with <unk> Matt Parker and Dean West , and Senior Staff Nurse Donna Jackson . 
 Maddy engages in a one night stand with Cardiothoracic Surgical Registrar Sam Strachan in episode " The Borders of Sleep " , and later bends the rules to help him take care of underage prostitute patient Jade MacGuire . In episode " What Lies Beneath " , Maddy 's father arrives in Holby having escaped from prison . She treats him for an injury he sustained prior to escaping , and , aided by Dan , helps him avoid the police when they arrive searching for him . Her father reveals to Dan that Maddy once stole pharmacy drugs and planted them on the abusive boyfriend of her twin sister , Hannah . She discusses her past with Dan , mentioning the fact she once covered for him when he operated drunk . Maddy gets into further trouble when she poses as Cardiothoracic Consultant Elliot Hope , attending a racial awareness course under the guise of " Ellie " , only to be caught out by the hospital 's Chief Executive Officer Jayne Grayson . 
 Maddy 's sister Hannah arrives at Holby with an abscess in episode " Guilt by Association " . Maddy convinces her to have an operation by illegally stopping her pain medication , in order to emphasize how badly she needs surgery . In the following episode , Hannah seeks out Maddy 's help when she accidentally gives her daughter , Sunny , a methadone overdose . Although Maddy again breaks the rules and the law to help them , Sunny dies while being treated from an exacerbated pre @-@ existing cardiac problem . The police are suspicious of Sunny 's death , but Dan blackmails fellow Consultant Ric Griffin into covering up for Maddy . Dan and Maddy go on to share a short @-@ lived romantic relationship before his departure in October 2007 . She is hurt by Dan 's love for his sister @-@ in @-@ law Louise , and left heartbroken when Dan departs Holby for a prestigious job in France . In episode " Love Will Tear Us Apart " , Maddy makes an error in the middle of an operation after Dan calls her out of the blue to arrange a meeting . She is devastated when he later stands her up . 
 Following Dan 's departure , Maddy goes on to support Sam through his battle with Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma , and form a professional relationship with the new head of the AAU , Linden Cullen . When Linden is suspended following the death of a patient , Maddy breaks the law by stealing samples from the hospital 's morgue to prove his innocence . She is severely reprimanded by Jayne Grayson , although Linden is eventually cleared . When Linden becomes involved with a case of conjoined twins , Maddy is temporarily placed in charge of the AAU in his absence . 
 Maddy had recently been transferred to Keller on surgical rotation . She <unk> tried to impress Ric . But Ric kept taking his frustrations out on her because she was friends with Tom O ' Dowd . But Ric was impressed in the end and offered her a promotion and told she could be a great surgeon one day . 
 In " Mirror , Mirror " Maddy 's sister Hannah , having been released from prison , arrives at Holby with her cellmate Chantelle , who has been stabbed , in her car . Because Chantelle refuses treatment in the hospital , believing they will send her back to jail for being in a fight , Maddy agrees to treat Chantelle in secret . Linden finds out and tries to help and they operate on her but Ric finds out and tells her to report it to the police . She refuses as doing so would cause Chantelle to run away , leaving her with a potentially fatal stab wound . As a consequence Ric withdraws her from the promotion interview . 
 In " Seeing Other People " Chantelle stabs Maddy in the back , whilst she was on her way to Ric Griffin to talk about the promotion . 
 In " Just a Perfect Day " Maria finds Maddy stabbed and bleeding out on the floor in the Keller ward toilets . She immediately starts trying to resuscitate her . Linden rushes in to help . Three weeks have passed since Maddy was stabbed . She is in Holby Care and we hear her thinking about a letter she has written to her sister Hannah . She seems to be fully recovered and is desperately trying to get back to work and be interviewed for the <unk> job . Ric held the interviews open until Maddy was well enough , and today she 's going to make sure she gets the job . Maddy 's going to show them that they can throw anything at her and she 'll cope ... even after being stabbed . Linden wants Maddy to be careful and take things easy , as she nearly died , but Maddy wants to get back to work . 
 Meanwhile Maddy receives a visit from Dan Clifford , who she has not seen for over 18 months since he took his job abroad . After hearing about Maddy 's attack he has arrived to see how she is doing and to offer her a research position with him at his new hospital . Maddy decides to try for the position at Holby before making any decisions . 
 Back on the ward , a father and his two daughters have been brought in , one with a stab wound and one badly burnt . The father only has minor injuries but the police seem to believe he had something to do with the incident . Maddy tries to find out what is happening from the father , who is not talking to the police . She seems to have some connection with him but can 't seem to put her finger on what it is . 
 Ric is having second thoughts about allowing Maddy to be interviewed . He explains to Michael that he doesn 't think that she is ready for the position . Maria overhears the pair 's conversation and chips in saying that she feels that Maddy is perfect . Michael knows Maria is right but Ric thinks he might have made a mistake and he explains to Maddy that he is withdrawing her interview offer . Maddy is devastated . 
 Clifford comforts Maddy and explains that the board have now asked him to move back to Holby and there is a position waiting for him . After advice from Linden Maddy decides to stay at Holby . Her aim is to show Ric what she is capable of achieving . Determined to show Ric her skill she takes a leading role in the procedure on the stab victim . Ric is impressed but explains that he would like to see more before she gets an interview . Her plan has failed . 
 Maddy overhears Ric and Clifford talking about her . Clifford explains that Ric might be hit with a lawsuit if he denies Maddy an interview and suggests that he interviews her without giving her the job . 
 The stab victim dies and Maddy blames herself , even though there was nothing she could have done . But Ric tells Maddy he has reconsidered and she can have an interview . Although she 's happy to have this opportunity she knows that Ric is only doing it to avoid a court case . 
 She heads into the interview , bold and honest about her work . She impresses the board and they give her the position . She can 't believe it . She heads out to tell Dan Clifford the news , who then tells her that the board have offered that he can move his entire work to Holby and he tell her that the reason he wants to stay is that he loves her . Maddy is overjoyed and they kiss passionately against the bonnet of his car . She heads back to the ward to find the father of the stab victim missing . She finds him in the basement , confused and he speaks to Maddy as if she is his dead daughter . Maddy tries to help but he keeps referring to Maddy as his daughter . At the end of the episode , it is revealed that everything that happened since Maddy was stabbed was actually a dream and that Maddy actually died in Chantelle 's attack . This whole episode was Maddy living out her perfect day in her head . On October 21 , 2009 , Chantelle was admitted to AAU , pregnant after her boyfriend kicked her in the stomach . Despite telling Maria she didn 't kill Maddy , she actually confessed to the murder after Mark told her of the consequences about her lying about her boyfriend abusing her and killing Maddy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Within six months of arriving at Holby City , Lewington was long @-@ listed for the ' Most Popular Newcomer ' award at the 2007 National Television Awards , for her portrayal of the character . In the 2007 official fan awards , Maddy was voted fans ' ' Favourite Newcomer of series 9 ' , as well as third ' Favourite Female of series 9 ' , fourth ' Favourite All @-@ Time Female ' and fifth ' Favourite series 9 Storyline ' , for the plot strand with her twin sister . Informed of Maddy 's strong fan base , Lewington commented : " How lovely ! I think it 's because she 's identifiable . People understand her motives and see that she has no hidden agenda . She 's emotional but strong , cheeky but kind . I rather like her so I 'm glad others do to ! " 
 In October 2007 , drinks ' industry body the Portman Group made an official complaint to communications regulator Ofcom about a scene in Holby City episode " Trial and Retribution " , which depicted the characters Maddy and Sam Strachan each taking five shots of tequila following a stressful day at work . The body 's chief executive David Poley claimed that in failing to show the negative consequences of this action , the series was presenting a " highly irresponsible portrayal of excessive and rapid drinking " . The Daily Telegraph noted that the complaint came shortly after Home Secretary Jacqui Smith expressed concern about televisual glorification of drunkenness , having told the Labour Party conference such a thing would be branded unacceptable as part of a " zero @-@ tolerance " approach to anti @-@ social behaviour . In response to the Portman Group 's accusation that " We would expect the BBC to take greater care with the portrayal of alcohol in programmes " , the BBC released a statement explaining that : " Holby City takes the issue of the negative effects of alcohol abuse very seriously . On occasions when our continuing drama series deal with alcohol within a storyline we always seek to handle the issue sensitively " . 
 The series 10 episode " Love Will Tear Us Apart " , which saw Maddy stood up by Dan on a return visit from France , was selected as a televisual pick of the day by The Guardian , the Daily Mirror , and the Birmingham Mail . The Guardian critic Gareth McLean was critical of the episode , writing : " Now here 's an idea for another Holby spin @-@ off - one set in the hospital 's STD clinic . Of course , given the ceaseless intra @-@ departmental shagging that goes on in that hospital , there might be too much crossover with existing shows , with not a look @-@ in for characters who aren 't actually on staff . Here , sexist surgeon Clifford returns to complicate Maddy 's life , though since she 's been sleeping with Sam , who 's slept with Connie , Chrissie and Faye , she appears to need no help in that <unk> 's going to die . " The Sun journalist Anita Baig has also commented critically on the character , noting that when it comes to medicine , Maddy " always seems to be having difficulties . " Daily Mirror critic Jim Shelley has discussed the outlandish nature of the character 's storylines , dubbing the line " I don 't know why people complain about the NHS " from a 2007 episode his ' Naive statement of the week ' , explaining : " <unk> let 's see . Abra covering up that he was operating on his arms @-@ dealer father . Maddy hiding the fact she killed her junkie sister 's daughter . And secret <unk> Jesus Of Nazareth ( Robert Powell ) keeping quiet about counselling Elliot 's son for heroin addiction . Oh yeah , and in Casualty , in Holby 's A & E department , nurse Ruth Winters secretly fixed her dad 's breathalyser test . Anyone detect a theme emerging ? " Shelley has , however , also deemed Maddy to be one of Holby City 's " few really good , realistic , characters " . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The 17 November 2006 Children in Need charity telethon included a segment featuring the Holby City cast performing a version of Hung Up by Madonna . Although the character had not yet made her on @-@ screen debut in the programme , Lewington as Maddy appeared in the sketch - as did fellow newcomers Peter Wingfield ( Dan Clifford ) and Phoebe Thomas ( Maria Kendall ) who also had yet to arrive in the show itself . The 16 November 2007 Children in Need appeal again contained a musical performance from Holby City cast members . Lewington , alongside Rakie Ayola ( Kyla Tyson ) and Phoebe Thomas ( Maria Kendall ) provided backing vocals for Sharon D Clarke ( Lola Griffin ) , who performed a soul version of Aretha Franklin 's signature song , Respect . Lewington said of these appearances : " I had the time of my life ... Woo hoo ! Loved every second . Although I was a gibbering wreck before the live performance of ' Respect ' . Sharon D Clarke was amazing , not a whisper of fear . I however was convinced that I was going to forget everything and stare blankly into the eyes of 14 million viewers or however many <unk> there were watching . All went well though and I 've got a little bit of history in my <unk> collection ready for the grand kiddies ! " Lewington has also appeared in a Holby City vs. Casualty special episode of BBC Two quiz show The Weakest Link , alongside co @-@ stars Phoebe Thomas , Tom Chambers ( Sam Strachan ) , Duncan Pow ( Linden Cullen ) and Robert Powell ( Mark Williams ) . 
 = Adam Mitchell ( Doctor Who ) = 
 Adam Mitchell is a fictional character in the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , played by Bruno Langley . Adam is introduced in the first series of the programme 's revival as the second television companion of the Ninth Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) . However unlike the Ninth Doctor 's primary companion , Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) , who provided an effective human contrast to the Doctor 's centuries @-@ old alien , Adam was created to provide an example of an inept time traveller . 
 The character is introduced as a boy genius from the year 2012 who attracts the attention of the Doctor 's traveling companion Rose after she and the Doctor meet him in his place of work . Despite Rose 's willingness to accept Adam as a fellow traveller , the Doctor is skeptical . After Adam attempts to use information from the future for his own gain he throws Adam out of his time machine , the TARDIS . This was the first example of the Doctor forcing a companion to leave because of negative behaviour . 
 Adam was created during executive producer Russell T Davies original pitch to the BBC as part of his plans to revive Doctor Who for the channel . Though established early in the series ' planning , Adam was always intended to be a short @-@ term character . Though reviewers generally reacted negatively to the character , Adam 's role as a foil to the stock companion figure has been praised alongside the moral lessons of his departure . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Adam first appears in the first series episode " Dalek " as a young researcher under the employ of Henry van Statten ( Corey Johnson ) , who is the owner of a museum of extraterrestrial artefacts in an underground bunker in Utah . Adam mentions that he is a genius , having successfully hacked into the United States Department of Defense computers when he was eight years old . He quickly forms a mutual attraction with the Doctor 's companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) and informs her of his desire to see the stars . When a live Dalek manages to break free and slaughter its way through the base , Adam finds himself fleeing along with Rose . At the end of the episode , when van Statten 's museum is closed down , Rose asks the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) to take Adam along with them in the TARDIS . The Doctor is reluctant , but Rose convinces him to let Adam follow them into the TARDIS . 
 In the next episode , " The Long Game " , the Doctor , Rose , and Adam arrive on a space station in the year 200 @,@ 000 , and Adam is overwhelmed by culture shock . Tempted by the wealth of information and technology available to him , he has an advanced computer interface port , activated by a click of the fingers , installed in his head that allows him to access the future 's computer system . He attempts to transmit information back to 21st century Earth using Rose 's modified mobile phone , but this backfires when the villains running the station attempt to extract information on the Doctor directly from Adam 's brain . As punishment of Adam 's breach of trust , the Doctor returns him home , despite his pleading , and destroys his answering machine . When Adam 's mother ( Judy Holt ) returns home , she reacts with shock and horror after inadvertently activating the implant installed in his forehead . 
 In the comic book series Prisoners of Time , released to celebrate the 50th anniversary , Adam is the main antagonist . After his mother dies he acquires a Vortex Manipulator and plans to kidnap the Doctor 's companions for revenge due to the Doctor preventing him from acquiring technology that could have saved her , tracking down all eleven Doctors and abducting their companions at various points in their lives . At the end of the story , Adam is revealed to have allied himself with a past version of the Master as the two confront the Eleventh Doctor , Adam offering to spare one companion of the Doctor 's choice while killing the others . However , the Doctor turns the tables on Adam by summoning his past selves to aid him , as well as arranging for Frobisher to be captured while posing as Peri , allowing him to escape captivity and sabotage Adam 's equipment . When the Master reveals his true goal of channeling <unk> energy through the TARDIS to destroy the universe , Adam is given a unique chance at redemption as he sacrifices himself to destroy the Master 's equipment . In his last moments , he is reconciled with the Ninth , Tenth and Eleventh Doctors and fellow companion Rose Tyler and acknowledged as a " true companion " on his gravestone , receiving posthumous validation by the eleven Doctors and his fellow companions . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 The character of Adam Mitchell was first conceived , along with Henry van Statten , during Russell T Davies ' 2003 pitch to the BBC , in a story heavily based on Robert Shearman 's audio play Jubilee , which would later form the base for the episode " Dalek " . It was always the intention of the production team for Adam to join the TARDIS after Rose developed a liking for him . To play this role Langley was chosen , mostly because of his role on Coronation Street as Todd Grimshaw . He had auditioned for the role on the same day as doing publicity for his leaving storyline in Coronation Street . Reacting to his casting Langley , remarked that " I couldn 't have asked for a better next role because Doctor Who is another great institution . " Langley describes Adam as " a bit nerdy " and states of his character 's attraction to Rose that " she 's a very pretty girl and Adam hasn 't seen any girls for a long time . " 
 Since 1963 , the perennial companion figure in Doctor Who generally serves to remind the Doctor of his " moral duty " . However , Adam was never meant to be a long @-@ term companion . In the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes book Doctor Who : The Inside Story Davies explains that he " always wanted to do a show with someone who was a rubbish companion " and dubs Adam " the companion that couldn 't " . In an episode of Doctor Who Confidential he characterised Adam as " a little bit ambitious and " a little bit too clever for his own good . " Langley added that the character ends up " on the wrong side of the tracks " because he likes " meddling with things " and that " him thinking he 's a genius gets him into bother " . Explaining Adam 's downfall , Davies states that he " doesn 't realize he 's out for his own good until he 's put in a situation of temptation , where knowledge , information and power are put in front of him . " Davies felt that Adam 's story provided " a chance to see someone starting on that path " before the Doctor cuts his ambitions short . 
 Originally , there were several aspects of the character that were cut before appearing on screen : in early drafts , he was the son of Henry van Statten . In the DVD commentary for " The Long Game " director Brian Grant and actor Bruno Langley discuss Adam 's scripted motive of bringing future medical knowledge back home to cure his father , who was suffering from ill health , though this motive did not remain in the final episode . To promote the character during the week " The Long Game " was first broadcast , the in @-@ universe tie @-@ in website " Who is Doctor Who ? " announced that " 14 year @-@ old Adam Mitchell from Nottingham " had won a competition arranged by van Statten the previous week . Adam 's winning essay on " Why I Want To Meet An Alien " mentions a desire to acquire advanced knowledge from them with the explanation " I don 't think it 's cheating , really . It 's just a shortcut " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dek Hogan of Digital Spy reacted negatively to Adam 's introduction in " Dalek " stating he " didn ’ t really see the point of Todd Grimshaw out of Corrie popping up . " He suggested it would have been more entertaining had the episode featured Langley 's screen mother from Coronation Street instead . Ian Hyland of the Sunday Mirror also disliked Adam 's introduction , describing " the introduction of a puppy @-@ love sequence between Rose and a cute English boy " as " very , very irritating " . SFX Magazine commented on the similarity between Adam 's introduction to the future and that of Rose in " The End of the World " stating " it was clearly a deliberate parallel on Russell 's part , as part of his scheme to contrast and compare the reactions of Rose and Adam " . Their website reviewer observed that Adam 's " comedy faint " marked him out as an unsuitable traveller . Marc Edward <unk> of the University of Oklahoma notes that Adam 's role in " The Long Game " is to provide satire on the media and to function as " a condemnation of those who cannot stop immersing themselves in television , the Internet , iPods , and other nonstop broadcasters of what the Doctor calls " useless information . " " Fraser McAlpine , reviewing Adam 's appearances as companion for BBC America 's <unk> blog describes him as a " craven <unk> " and a " social climber " . By virtue of his failures , Adam becomes " the companion that proves the worth of all of the other companions " . 
 In their book Who is the Doctor , Graeme Burk and Robert Smith described Adam in " Dalek " as " somewhat annoying " . Burk referred to him in " The Long Game " as " arrogant and narcissistic " , which made Rose appear shallow for insisting he travel with them , but felt that Langley did " a superb job " conveying the character 's flaws . He stated that it was " a shame " that the backstory of Adam 's motivations were cut from the script , as it would have made his character more believable . The two found a logical flaw in the Doctor 's decision to drop Adam off , as it was a possibility that someone could get their hands on the future technology . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern gave a positive overview of Adam , describing the character as " bumptious yet likeable " and his departure as " literary precision " . He commented that Adam " adds an interesting dynamic , subtly different " from Mickey Smith and Captain Jack Harkness , who also worked with Rose and the Ninth Doctor . Instead of threatening the Doctor and Rose 's relationship , Adam " serves to strengthen it " . In 2010 Mark Harrison of Den of Geek listed the character 's exit from the TARDIS as the tenth greatest companion farewell scene stating that it was " great to get a glimpse of the Doctor outright booting someone out . " He felt that the character " struck out in spectacular fashion " by attempting to steal future technology and that his eventual fate was an example of poetic justice . Charlie Jane Anders also praised the concept of Adam 's story arc positioning his departure as the seventh most depressing exit from a companion in Doctor Who 's history . She felt that to have " a companion who <unk> out " was one of Davies ' " cleverest ideas " as executive producer of the series and that Adam 's human flaws made him relatable . In 2010 readers of the Radio Times voted Adam the 45th most popular companion , out of forty @-@ eight viable options . 
 = Armageddon ( 2008 ) = 
 Armageddon ( 2008 ) was a professional @-@ wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) promotion and presented by Ubisoft 's Prince of Persia . It took place on December 14 , 2008 , at the HSBC Arena in Buffalo , New York . It featured professional wrestlers and other talent from all WWE 's three brands : Raw , SmackDown and ECW . The ninth and final event within the Armageddon chronology , it featured on its card seven professional wrestling matches . 
 During the SmackDown main event , Jeff Hardy defeated Triple H and WWE Champion Edge in a Triple Threat match to win the championship . The Raw main event featured the World Heavyweight Championship contested in a standard wrestling match , in which John Cena defeated Chris Jericho to retain the title . The undercard featured several matches , including CM Punk against Rey Mysterio in the finals of a tournament to determine the number @-@ one contender to the WWE Intercontinental Championship , and Randy Orton versus Batista in a standard wrestling match . 
 Armageddon helped WWE earn US $ 15 @.@ 9 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events , thanks to an attendance of approximately 12 @,@ 500 and 193 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . When the 2008 event was released on DVD it reached a peak position of second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event a perfect 10 out of 10 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Armageddon featured seven professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines that had played out on Raw , SmackDown , and ECW on Sci Fi — WWE 's television programs . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or heroes in the scripted events that built tension and culminated into a wrestling match or series of matches and competed either under their real names or stage names . The event featured wrestlers from WWE 's Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands — a storyline division in which WWE employees are assigned to the television program of the same name . 
 The main rivalry heading into Armageddon on the SmackDown brand was a match involving three competitors , known as a Triple Threat match in WWE , for the WWE Championship between Edge , Triple H , and Jeff Hardy . At Survivor Series , Jeff Hardy was out of action after being found unconscious in the stairwell of his Boston hotel earlier in the morning . This resulted to Hardy being removed from the WWE title match , leaving Triple H and Vladimir Kozlov battling each other one @-@ on @-@ one . Just when it looked like Triple H had Kozlov beat after nailing him with a hard @-@ hitting Pedigree , SmackDown 's primary authority figure Vickie Guerrero interrupted the match to announce that it would indeed be Triple Threat match – with Edge as the last minute third competitor . Edge made his way to the ring and nailed Triple H with a vicious Spear . Next , Hardy surprisingly ran into the ring and attacked Edge . Hardy then grabbed a steel chair , returned to the ring and knocked both Triple H and Kozlov with each chair shot to the head . As Hardy was about to nail Edge with the chair , Edge countered by spearing Hardy then capitalized , by covering Triple H for the win and won his 6th World Championship . SmackDown general manager , Vickie Guerrero announced on the November 28 , 2008 episode of SmackDown that Triple H , Hardy , and Vladimir Kozlov would compete in a " Beat the Clock " challenge to gain the opportunity to face Edge at Armageddon for the title . In a Beat the Clock challenge , wrestlers compete in separate individual matches and whoever wins their match in the fastest time wins the competition . The first contest saw Hardy defeat The Brian Kendrick in 12 : 13 . Kozlov fought in the second encounter against Matt Hardy , but failed to defeat him in under 12 : 13 , thus being eliminated from the challenge . The last match @-@ up pitted Triple H against Shelton Benjamin , which ended with Triple H gaining the fall at exactly 12 : 13 . As a result of the tie , neither man was announced as the contender for the championship . One week later on the December 5 , 2008 episode of SmackDown , it was announced that the WWE board of directors had decided Edge would have to defend the title against both Triple H and Hardy at Armageddon . 
 John Cena and Chris Jericho were involved in the main rivalry on the Raw brand over the World Heavyweight Championship . At WWE 's November Survivor Series , Cena returned to the WWE after a legitimate neck injury ( that he sustained at SummerSlam ) and defeated Jericho to win the championship . On the November 24 episode of Raw , Jericho defeated Randy Orton and Batista in a Triple Threat match to earn a title match against Cena at Armageddon . Later that night , Chris Jericho attempted to steal Cena 's thunder , claiming that he plans on winning back the title at Armageddon . When World Champion , John Cena could even make his much anticipated return to Raw , he then gave Jericho an opportunity to confront him face @-@ to @-@ face , Cena explained the difference between himself and Jericho , stating that he actually cares about the many members of the WWE Universe . After Jericho once again stated his intention to beat Cena at Armageddon and continued to belittle the WWE Universe , Cena snapped . He proceeded to brutalize Jericho , throwing him against the announce table , bludgeoning him with the steel stairs and locking him into an STFU . On the following week 's episode of Raw , Jericho made his presence known in much the same way as Cena did the week before , addressing the audience as he made his way through the crowd down to the ring . The difference however , was that while Cena welcomed his fans , Jericho made pains to ignore them . He then went on to explain his resentment toward Cena , stating that while away from the WWE since August 2005 , Jericho 's son grew to be a fan , not of his father , but of John Cena . Now , Jericho hopes to show his son and all of the WWE what a real hero is , by beating Cena for the World Heavyweight Title at Armageddon . Later that night , Cena fought Kane in Raw 's main event . Though Jericho attempted to become involved , Cena managed to fight off and then go on to defeat Kane . After the match , Cena chased Jericho , who was attempting to escape . The tables turned , however , when Randy Orton , Cody Rhodes and Manu emerged to attack Cena , allowing Jericho to lock Cena in the Walls of Jericho . 
 On the November 24 episode of Raw , Raw 's primary authority figure Stephanie McMahon announced an eight @-@ man single @-@ elimination tournament to determine the number @-@ one contender to the WWE Intercontinental Championship , which William Regal held . The first round saw four standard matches , in which Kofi Kingston , CM Punk , John Morrison , and Rey Mysterio were the victors . In the second round , Punk defeated Morrison and Mysterio defeated Kingston , resulting in Mysterio and Punk both qualifying for the finals at Armageddon . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ show = = = 
 Before Armageddon began , a non @-@ televised match took place between the team of John Morrison and The Miz and the team of Jesse and Festus , which Morrison and The Miz won . The DVD release omitted this match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match of the event was between ECW Champion Matt Hardy and Vladimir Kozlov . The match lasted for a few minutes before Kozlov delivered a chokeslam to gain the pinfall victory . 
 The second match was the finals of the Intercontinental Championship contender tournament between Rey Mysterio and CM Punk . Near the end of the match , Mysterio tried to perform his signature 619 maneuver , however , Punk countered by performing a Go To Sleep . Punk then pinned Mysterio to gain the victory and a match against William Regal for the Intercontinental Championship . 
 Finlay was pitted against Mark Henry , who was accompanied by Tony Atlas , in a match with no disqualifications billed as a Belfast Brawl . In the final moments of the match , Finlay left the ring and grabbed the steel steps at one of the four corners . He then re @-@ entered the ring to only have Henry kick him in the face and grab the makeshift weapon . Finlay followed by retrieving a shillelagh he had brought with him to the ring and used it to bash Henry over the head before Henry could use the steel steps . Finlay then pinned Henry to become the winner . 
 Batista versus Randy Orton was next , with Orton being accompanied to the ring by Cody Rhodes and Manu . The match started with Orton taking control and knocking Batista to the outside . The end came when Batista executed the Batista Bomb . Batista then pinned Orton to win the encounter . 
 The fifth match was an Eight Woman Santa 's Little Helper Tag Team match where all eight competitors were dressed in Christmas outfits . It pitted two teams of four against each other : Michelle McCool , Maria , Kelly Kelly , and Mickie James versus Maryse , Jillian Hall , Victoria , and <unk> . The match ended quickly with McCool getting a pinfall victory over Hall after the <unk> . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 John Cena defended the World Heavyweight Championship against Chris Jericho in the next encounter . The match started off with Cena trying to lift Jericho on his shoulders in an early attempt to execute his finishing maneuver called the FU , only to have Jericho escape and perform his maneuver a double knee to the face and chest area called the Codebreaker . Cena became the victor in the encounter after making Jericho submit to his STFU submission hold by trapping Jericho 's leg underneath with his , wrapping his arms around Jericho 's neck , and pulling back . 
 The main event contest saw Jeff Hardy and Triple H challenging Edge for the WWE Championship in a Triple Threat match . Hardy won the contest after Triple H performed a Pedigree on Edge , followed by Hardy executing a Swanton Bomb onto Edge . Hardy followed by quickly pinning Edge and winning the match and his first World Championship . This marked Hardy 's first WWE Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Armageddon on the January 2 , 2009 episode of SmackDown , Vickie Guerrero announced that Jeff Hardy would defend the WWE Championship against Edge at the WWE 's Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view . At the Royal Rumble , Edge defeated Hardy to regain the WWE Championship with the unexpected help from Matt Hardy . 
 The rivalry between Batista and Orton continued until the December 15 , 2008 , episode of Raw , when Orton punted Batista in the head , giving him a storyline concussion , causing him to take time off indefinitely . WWE.com later reported that Batista elected to undergo surgery to repair a legitimate hamstring tear ( that he suffered during his match with John Cena at SummerSlam ) . 
 CM Punk received his match for the Intercontinental title on the January 5 , 2009 episode of Raw against William Regal , but failed to win due to Regal getting himself disqualified . Two weeks later , Punk and Regal had another match this time under no disqualifications rules , which Punk won to claim the title . 
 The rivalry between Michelle McCool and Maryse continued on the following edition of SmackDown when Maryse defeated Maria to earn another shot at Michelle 's Divas Championship . On the December 26 edition of SmackDown , Maryse defeated Michelle to win the Divas Championship in a match that Maria officiated . After the match ended , Michelle turned into a villainess and attacked Maria ; blaming her for the loss . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The HSBC Arena has a maximum capacity of 19 @,@ 200 , however Armageddon only had an attendance of 12 @,@ 500 . It received 193 @,@ 000 buys , which was less than the 237 @,@ 000 buys the previous year 's event received . Armageddon helped World Wrestling Entertainment earn $ 15 @.@ 9 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events , but this was less than the $ 19 @.@ 9 million earned the previous year ; Linda McMahon , the CEO of WWE , confirmed this statement on February 24 , 2009 in a quarterly financial report . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event a perfect ten out of ten . Wade Keller of the PWTorch rated the main event match for the WWE Championship 4 and a quarter stars out of 5 . He went on to state that the match was a " really satisfying main event and it 's the finish WWE dared not do for a long time . " He rated the match for the World Heavyweight Championship 3 and a quarter stars out of 5 and proclaimed he thought it was a " good match " . Sony Music Entertainment released the event on DVD on January 13 , 2009 , and it reached second place on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreation . 
 = = Results = = 
 Number one contender for the Intercontinental Championship Tournament 
 = M @-@ 33 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 33 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs from Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) at Alger in Arenac County north to M @-@ 27 near Cheboygan . In between , the trunkline runs through rural sections of the northeastern Lower Peninsula including state and national forest areas . M @-@ 33 connects to a handful of parks and crosses several of the rivers in that section of the state . It runs concurrently with three other state highways , sharing pavement to connect through several small communities of Northern Michigan . 
 M @-@ 33 was designated by 1919 along a section of the current highway between Mio and Atlanta . The highway also included roadway segments south of Mio that are now parts of other trunklines . The portion south of Mio was rerouted in the mid @-@ 1920s , transferring sections to M @-@ 72 in the process . The state started extending M @-@ 33 in both directions in 1930s . The current highway segment between Onaway and Cheboygan was the former route of US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) until 1940 when the latter highway was realigned onto an alignment that runs along Lake Huron . Several minor changes have been made to M @-@ 33 's routing since the 1950s to straighten out curves or finish paving the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 33 starts at exit 202 on I @-@ 75 near Alger . From there it crosses a branch of the Lake State Railway and Old 76 Road before turning north . The highway runs north parallel to the Rifle River across the Arenac – Ogemaw County line . It meets the eastern terminus of F @-@ 18 and continues through woodland to an intersection with M @-@ 55 east of West Branch . North of the junction , the environment transitions to farm land that borders the edge of the Au Sable State Forest to the Rose City area . North of Rose City , M @-@ 33 crosses into the Huron National Forest as the highway continues due north into Oscoda County , passing Mack Lake campground . 
 M @-@ 33 follows Morenci Avenue into the center of Mio where the highway joins M @-@ 72 south of Mio Pond , and they run concurrently together across the Mio Pond section of the Au Sable River out of town . On the north side of the river , F @-@ 32 merges in from the east and the three roadway designations run concurrently north . The highway continues to a sweeping 90 ° turn east near Smith Lake . F @-@ 32 separates to turn west and M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 72 turns eastward . The trunkline continues to Fairview where M @-@ 33 turns north , leaving the M @-@ 72 concurrency to continue northward . M @-@ 33 crosses into the Mackinaw State Forest and passes through Comins . North of that unincorporated community , the highway curves northeast , east and back north to cross into Montmorency County . Before reaching M @-@ 32 , M @-@ 33 crosses the Thunder Bay River . After the river , M @-@ 33 turns westward along M @-@ 32 to the community of Atlanta . The highway passes near the Atlanta Municipal Airport as it enters the community . In the middle of town , M @-@ 33 turns back north . The highway provides access to the Clear Lake State Park in northern Montmorency County before crossing into Presque Isle County . 
 M @-@ 33 parallels the Cheboygan – Presque Isle county line as it runs northward along the Black River to Onaway . Once in town , M @-@ 33 turns west with M @-@ 68 toward Cheboygan County . The highway passes through Tower , and a junction with F @-@ 05 , before it continues west to the Afton area . There M @-@ 33 turns north one last time , running along the east shore of Mullett Lake past Aloha and M @-@ 212 ; M @-@ 212 is the shortest highway in Michigan that provides access to Aloha State Park . North of Aloha , M @-@ 33 crosses the Cheboygan River and meets M @-@ 27 , the location of its northern terminus south of Cheboygan . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains M @-@ 33 like all other state trunkline highways in the state . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks traffic volumes using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This figure is a calculation of the traffic along a roadway segment for any average day of the year . In MDOT 's surveys in 2009 , they found that the peak AADT along M @-@ 33 was the 6 @,@ 928 vehicles a day along a section of the M @-@ 72 concurrency . The lowest traffic counts were measured immediately south of the Onaway city limits at 956 vehicles daily . The only section of M @-@ 33 that has been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) is the segment concurrent with M @-@ 32 in Montmorency County . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's defense , economy and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 33 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 . It ran along the current routing from Mio north to M @-@ 32 east of Atlanta . The highway also ran south of Mio to M @-@ 76 east of Roscommon using segments of what are now M @-@ 72 and M @-@ 144 . By 1927 , the southern section from Fairview to Roscommon was redesignated as a part of M @-@ 72 . M @-@ 33 was shifted to run south of Mio to Rose City instead , creating the M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 72 concurrency in the process . An extension was added by the end of the decade southward to M @-@ 55 at Campbell , a former community east of Selkirk in Ogemaw County . An earthen highway extension of M @-@ 33 north of Atlanta to US 23 at Onaway was opened in 1934 . A few years later in 1938 , M @-@ 55 was realigned to follow a more direct path east of West Branch . At the same time , M @-@ 33 was extended south by a few miles to the new roadway south of Campbell and Selkirk . A lengthy northern extension was added to M @-@ 33 in 1940 when US 23 was moved to a route along the Lake Huron shoreline between Rogers City and Cheboygan . The former route of US 23 between the Afton area and Rogers City was redesignated as a discontinuous section of M @-@ 68 , and M @-@ 33 was extended westward from Onaway along that highway to Afton and north to US 27 ( now M @-@ 27 ) near Cheboygan , creating the M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 68 concurrency in southern Cheboygan and Presque Isle counties . By 1945 , M @-@ 33 was extended southward again , this time to terminate at M @-@ 76 in Alger . 
 The Michigan State Highway Department rerouted M @-@ 33 / M @-@ 72 near Fairview in late 1951 or early 1952 , turning the former route back to local control . The last section of M @-@ 33 was paved in southern Cheboygan County in the late 1950s . The southern end was extended slightly to end at the M @-@ 76 freeway that opened between Alger and Standish ; that freeway was redesignated as part of I @-@ 75 in 1974 . A minor realignment of M @-@ 32 / M @-@ 33 east of Atlanta smoothed out some curves in the road in 1996 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Congregation Beth Elohim = 
 Congregation Beth Elohim ( Hebrew : בֵּית <unk> ) , also known as the Garfield Temple and the Eighth Avenue Temple , is a Reform Jewish congregation located at 274 Garfield Place and Eighth Avenue , in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn , New York City , United States . 
 Founded in 1861 as a more liberal breakaway from Congregation Baith Israel , for the first 65 years it attempted four mergers with other congregations , including three with Baith Israel , all of which failed . The congregation completed its current Classical Revival synagogue building in 1910 and its " Jewish Deco " ( Romanesque Revival and Art Deco ) Temple House in 1929 . These two buildings were contributing properties to the Park Slope historic district , listed as a New York City Landmark district and listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The congregation went through difficult times during the Great Depression , and the bank almost foreclosed on its buildings in 1946 . Membership dropped significantly in the 1930s because of the Depression , grew after World War II , and dropped again in the 1960s and 1970s as a result of demographic shifts . Programs for young children helped draw Jewish families back into the neighborhood and revitalize the membership . 
 By 2006 , Beth Elohim had over 1 @,@ 000 members , and , as of 2009 , it was the largest and most active Reform congregation in Brooklyn , the " oldest Brooklyn congregation that continues to function under its corporate name " , and its pulpit was the oldest in continuous use in any Brooklyn synagogue . In 2009 , it was listed by Newsweek as one of America 's 25 " Most Vibrant " Jewish congregations . 
 = = Early years : Pearl Street = = 
 Congregation Beth Elohim was founded on September 29 , 1861 by 41 German Jews at Granada Hall on Myrtle Avenue , members of Congregation Baith Israel who had become disaffected after they attempted and failed to reform practice there . The synagogue name was chosen by a vote of the membership , and the services were led by George Brandenstein , who served as cantor , and was paid $ 150 ( today $ 4 @,@ 000 ) a year . Brandenstein was hired as cantor , not rabbi , because " the congregation believed having a cantor was more important " , though in practice he filled both roles . A <unk> ( the equivalent of a sexton or beadle ) was also hired for $ 75 a year . 
 While searching for a permanent location , the congregation continued to meet and hold services at Granada Hall . Men and women sat together , unlike the traditional separate seating , and services were conducted in German and Hebrew . Within a few months , the former Calvary Protestant Episcopal church on Pearl Street , between <unk> and Concord , was purchased for $ 5 @,@ 100 ( today $ 121 @,@ 000 ) and renovated for another $ 2 @,@ 000 ( today $ 47 @,@ 000 ) . The new building was dedicated on March 30 , 1862 , and the congregation became known as " the Pearl street synagogue " . By 1868 , membership had increased to 103 , and by 1869 , almost 100 students attended the Sunday school . 
 Beth Elohim had originally conducted its services in the traditional manner , but on February 19 , 1870 " inaugurated the moderate reform services " instead . In an attempt to stem defections and make the synagogue more attractive to existing and potential members , that same month the congregation purchased , for $ 55 @,@ 000 ( today $ 1 @,@ 030 @,@ 000 ) , the building of the Central Presbyterian Church on Schermerhorn Street near Nevins Street . Sufficient numbers of new members did not , however , materialize , and the congregation was forced to give up its new building , forfeit its $ 4 @,@ 000 ( today $ 75 @,@ 000 ) deposit , and return to the Pearl Street building . Instead , the Pearl street building was renovated , and an organ and choir added . 
 Beth Elohim voted to retire Brandenstein in 1882 , an action which created some controversy both within the congregation , and among other Brooklyn synagogues . Younger members of the congregation found no specific fault with Brandenstein , but wanted " a change " , and succeeded in dismissing him and electing an entirely new board of officers . The final vote was 29 in favor , 21 against , out of a total membership of 53 or 54 ( only the male heads of households were counted as members during this era ) . Solomon Mosche was hired to replace Brandenstein . 
 In April 1883 , Baith Israel , Beth Elohim , and Temple Israel , Brooklyn 's three leading synagogues , attempted an amalgamation . This was the third such attempt ; the previous two had failed when the members could not agree on synagogue ritual . The combined congregation , which would purchase new premises , would have 150 members ; members would be refunded half the purchase price of the pews in their existing buildings . Mosche and the rabbi of Temple Israel were to split the offices of rabbi and cantor : Baith Israel , at the time , had no rabbi . Though this attempt also failed , in the following year the three congregations carried out combined activities , including a picnic and a celebration of the 100th birthday of Moses Montefiore . Membership at that time still hovered around 50 . 
 Mosche fell ill in 1884 , and after being unable to serve for six months , was replaced by 26 @-@ year @-@ old William Sparger . Despite his illness , Mosche lived until age 75 , dying on November 3 , 1911 . 
 Sparger was Hungarian by birth , a graduate of the Prince Rudolph University of Vienna , and , according to a contemporary New York Times article , " belong [ ed ] to the extreme liberal school of Hebrew theology " . He introduced changes to the services , including improving the choir , bringing in a new prayer book , adding Friday night services , and the " radical reform " of making the sermon the most important part of the service . He appealed to younger congregants , and , under his direction , the synagogue experienced a large increase in attendance . 
 = = State Street = = 
 Though more seats had been added to the synagogue by narrowing the aisles , as a result of Sparger 's innovations Beth Elohim outgrew its Pearl Street building , and a new one was sought . After a three @-@ year search , in 1885 Beth Elohim purchased the building of the Congregational Church at 305 State Street ( near Hoyt ) for $ 28 @,@ 000 ( today $ 740 @,@ 000 ) , and moved in that year . 
 In 1891 , Temple Emanu @-@ El in Manhattan offered Sparger a salary larger than Beth Elohim could match , and he moved there . Beth Elohim subsequently split the offices of cantor and rabbi , hiring G. Taubenhaus as rabbi and the Mauritz Weisskopf as cantor . 
 Born in Warsaw , Taubenhaus could read the Pentateuch fluently in Hebrew at age four , and began studying the Talmud at age six . He attended the " Berlin theological seminary " ( likely the Hochschule für die Wissenschaft des Judentums ) for six years . Upon emigrating to the United States , he served at Kehillah Kodesh Bene <unk> in Paducah , Kentucky , Temple Israel in Dayton , Ohio , and Congregation B 'nai Israel in Sacramento , California , before becoming the rabbi of the <unk> Zedek ( " Gates of Hope " ) synagogue in New York . Differences with the latter congregation led to his resignation there shortly before being hired by Beth Elohim . Taubenhaus 's brother Joseph would be appointed rabbi at Baith Israel , Beth Elohim 's parent congregation , in 1893 , and another brother , Jacob / Jean Taubenhaus , was a famous French chess master . 
 By the time of Taubenhaus 's hiring , Beth Elohim was , according to the Brooklyn Eagle , " recognized as the leading Hebrew synagogue of Brooklyn " . The views of the congregation regarding kashrut ( the Jewish dietary laws ) were by then quite liberal ; in 1892 , when Hyman Rosenberg was expelled as rabbi of Brooklyn 's Beth Jacob synagogue for eating ham , Taubenhaus stated that he did not believe his congregation would expel him for doing the same . 
 In 1895 , Samuel Radnitz succeeded Weisskopf as cantor , a role he filled until his death in 1944 . 
 By the turn of the twentieth century English had replaced German in the services and official minutes , and the second days of holidays eliminated . The synagogue had 106 members and annual revenues of around $ 8 @,@ 000 ( today $ 230 @,@ 000 ) , and its Sunday School had approximately 300 pupils . 
 Taubenhaus left the congregation in 1901 , and the following year Alexander Lyons was hired as the congregation 's first American @-@ born rabbi . Lyons went on to serve the congregation for 37 years , until his death in 1939 at the age of 71 . 
 In 1907 , the women 's auxiliary was founded ; until then , though seating was mixed , women had little say in the running of the synagogue . That year the congregation had 110 member families and annual revenues of $ 9 @,@ 259 @.@ 55 ( today $ 240 @,@ 000 ) . The congregational school , which held classes one day a week , had 15 teachers and 200 students . 
 = = Garfield Place and Eighth Avenue = = 
 = = = 1908 – 1929 : New buildings = = = 
 In 1908 , the congregation purchased a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) by 112 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) lot on the northeast corner of Garfield Place and Eighth Avenue . Plans were made to erect a new synagogue building there with a sanctuary seating 1 @,@ 500 people , at an anticipated cost of $ 100 @,@ 000 ( today $ 2 @.@ 6 million ) . The structure was designed and built by the Manhattan architectural firm of Simon Eisendrath and B. Horowitz ( or Horwitz ) . Construction began in 1909 and completed in 1910 . Designed in the Classical Revival style , this " monumental example " of " austere neo @-@ Classical grandeur " had five sides , representing the five books of Moses , a sanctuary that ultimately sat 1 @,@ 200 , and was capped by a saucer dome . The entrance faced the corner of Garfield and Eighth , and carved in stone over it was the Biblical verse fragment " <unk> HOUSE SHALL BE AN HOUSE OF <unk> FOR ALL PEOPLE " ( Isaiah 56 : 7 ) . The basement held classrooms , an auditorium , and administrative offices , and behind the Torah ark was a combination Rabbi 's study / Board meeting room . The State Street building was sold to Congregation Mount Sinai . 
 1909 was also the year Judah Leon Magnes proposed and founded his <unk> , a " comprehensive communal organization for the Jews of New York " , which operated until 1922 . Lyons opposed its creation , arguing that Jews in New York were too diverse to co @-@ exist in one organization with a single set of standards , that Jews should not organize as Jews for anything except purely religious purposes , and that in any event Reform Judaism was the future and Orthodox Judaism would not survive . As Lyons put it , 
 To me Reform Judaism is an irresistible conviction . I believe it to be the religion of the Jewish future , while I regard orthodoxy as a survival that may have a galvanized life now and then , but on the whole is doomed . 
 By 1919 , Beth Elohim had 133 member families . The congregational school , which held classes once a week , had 305 students and 16 teachers . 
 Negotiations to merge with Union Temple ( the successor to Temple Israel ) were started in 1925 . A confirmation vote eventually passed , and the impending merger was announced in the Brooklyn Eagle . However , younger congregants feared a loss of identity , and forced a withdrawal . 
 Instead , the congregation raised funds for a second building , and in 1928 – 1929 built the six @-@ story Temple House ( used for all congregational activities ) on the corner opposite the main sanctuary . Designed by Mortimer <unk> and David Levy , the cast stone building 's architectural style was " Jewish Deco " , a mix of Romanesque Revival and Art Deco decorative forms that was common in Jewish buildings of the period . Romanesque features included the fenestrations , while a prominent Art Deco feature was " the figure of Moses and the Tablets of Law , emphasizing the corner of the roof parapet . " The doorway and balcony at the east end of the building had " a distinctly Moorish flavor , featuring symbolic ornament : the Star of David , the Menorah , and the Lion of Judah . " The names of major figures from the Tanakh ( Hebrew Bible ) were inscribed on the Garfield Place facade , and the Biblical verses " SHOW ME THY <unk> O LORD <unk> ME THY <unk> <unk> ME " ( Psalms 25 : 4 – 5 ) on the Eighth Avenue facade . The building was also decorated with bas @-@ reliefs of Jonah being swallowed by a great fish and Babylonian charioteers . It housed a 125 @-@ seat chapel , a large ballroom , social halls , class rooms for the religious school , meeting rooms , administrative offices , a library , handball courts , a gymnasium , and a swimming pool . 
 Lyons took on a number of causes in the 1910s and 1920s . He worked with Bishop David Greer and Rabbi Stephen Wise to expose conditions in New York 's tenements , dissociated himself from Tammany Hall candidates , tried to secure a re @-@ trial for Leo Frank , and opposed some of the views of Samuel Gompers . In 1912 , Lyons was a founding member of the Eastern Council of Reform Rabbis , an organization of Reform rabbis from the Eastern United States that was created despite opposition from the Central Conference of Reform Rabbis . In 1919 he withdrew from the Brooklyn Victory Celebration Committee ( celebrating the Allied victory in World War I ) and asked that his contributed funds be donated instead to the Red Cross ; many committee members eventually resigned in protest over the overt politicization of the event , and its control by William Randolph Hearst . 
 = = = 1930s : Landman joins , Great Depression , Lyons dies = = = 
 Isaac Landman , a graduate of Hebrew Union College , joined Lyons as rabbi of Beth Elohim in 1931 . Born in Russia in 1880 , Landman had come to the United States in 1890 . In 1911 , with the assistance of Jacob Schiff , Julius Rosenwald , and Simon Bamberger , he founded a Jewish farm colony in Utah , and during World War I he was " said to be the first Jewish chaplain in the United States Army to serve on foreign soil " . A leader in Jewish – Christian ecumenism , he was editor of American Hebrew Magazine from 1918 , served as the delegate of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations ( now Union for Reform Judaism ) to the 1919 Paris Peace Conference , and in the late 1930s and early 1940s was editor of the new ten volume Universal Jewish Encyclopedia . 
 Landman had also been a prominent opponent of Zionism : when , in 1922 , the United States Congress was considering the Lodge – Fish resolution in support of the Balfour Declaration , Landman and Rabbi David Philipson had presented the Reform movement 's ( then ) anti @-@ Zionist position to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs . Landman also printed many opinions against the resolution and Zionism in his American Hebrew Magazine . The bill was eventually unanimously supported by both houses of Congress , and approved by President Harding . 
 During the Great Depression synagogue membership decreased significantly ; experiencing financial difficulties , the congregation stopped paying its mortgage . Nevertheless , Beth Elohim was not completely moribund ; in 1931 it opened its Academy of Adult Jewish Education , which " offered courses in Bible , religion and contemporary Jewish life " , and operated throughout the Depression . By 1937 the congregation had elected Lyons " rabbi for life " . 
 In 1938 Lyons made common cause with Thomas Harten , the black pastor of Holy Trinity Baptist Church . Speaking to a mixed black – Jewish audience at the church , Lyons informed the listeners that he was planning to attend the second Joe Louis versus Max <unk> boxing match in order to protest Adolf Hitler 's " view that a bout between a German and a Negro was improper " . Lyons denounced the Nazi racial ideas , which he noted discriminated against blacks as well as Jews , and encouraged the audience to boycott all German @-@ made goods until " Hitler comes to his senses " . 
 Lyons died the following year , and Landman served as sole rabbi . After his death , the Central Conference of American Rabbis described Lyons as the " dean of the Brooklyn rabbinate from the point of view of service " . 
 = = = World War II and aftermath : Sack joins , Landman dies = = = 
 The synagogue 's fortunes improved in the 1940s , but in 1946 , its bank threatened to foreclose on its buildings , in anticipation of their sale to the local Catholic diocese , as the congregation had not paid the mortgage in many years . The congregation succeeded in convincing the bank to re @-@ negotiate its mortgage , and reduce the outstanding loan , and Max <unk> led a drive to pay it off completely . 
 Eugene Sack , the father of Second Circuit Court of Appeals judge Robert D. Sack , joined Landman as rabbi in 1946 . While serving as assistant rabbi of Congregation Rodeph Shalom of Philadelphia , Sack had been instrumental in the founding of the Reform movement 's National Federation of Temple Youth in 1939 , and had presented a paper at its first biennial convention . Starting in 1943 he spent 18 months in the Pacific Theater of Operations of World War II as an army chaplain ; at one point he had to substitute peach juice for Passover wine . 
 Sack had also previously been involved in anti @-@ Zionist efforts amongst the Reform rabbinate . In 1942 the Central Conference of American Rabbis had abandoned its former anti @-@ Zionist stance , and adopted a resolution favoring the creation of a Jewish army in Palestine , to fight alongside other Allied armies , and under Allied command . Sack and other prominent Reform rabbis opposed this ; meeting on March 18 , 1942 , they agreed " there was a need to revitalize Reform Judaism , to oppose Jewish nationalism , and to publicize their point of view " . They planned " for a meeting of non @-@ Zionist Reform Rabbis to discuss the problems that confront Judaism and Jews in the world emergency " , to be held in Atlantic City . 36 rabbis eventually attended the two @-@ day conference on June 1 , 1942 , including Beth Israel 's Landman . The conference led to the formation of the anti @-@ Zionist American Council for Judaism , " the only American Jewish organization ever formed for the specific purpose of fighting Zionism and opposing the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine . " 
 Landman died suddenly in 1946 , leaving Sack to head Beth Elohim alone ; Sack would eventually serve as rabbi for 35 years . Richard Harvey also joined as cantor in the 1940s ; he would serve until his death in the 1970s . 
 After the war , Beth Elohim allowed women to become full members , granting them full voting privileges and allowing them to hold office . The congregation subsequently elected Jeanette Marks as a trustee . At this time the origins of the membership began to change , as Jews of Eastern European descent started joining the congregation . 
 In the late 1940s the central vault ceiling of the main sanctuary cracked , and had to be repaired . At that time the pulpit was also rebuilt , so that the rabbi and cantor had separate pulpits . Underneath the sanctuary ran an underground stream which would regularly overflow , leading to flooding problems . The flooding was fixed in the 1950s with the installation of check valves , and a concrete slab floor was installed . Though the intent was to provide usable space in the basement , it was rarely used . 
 By 1953 , Beth Elohim had grown to over 700 families , and the religious school had over 550 students . In the 1960s , however , membership began to decline , as young families moved to the suburbs . 
 = = = 1970s – 2000s : Decline , Weider joins , re @-@ birth = = = 
 In 1970 , the congregation again encountered difficulties , " faced with dwindling membership and bleak prospects " . The members , however , created one of the earliest nursery schools in the neighborhood , which , along with the Brownstone Revival movement in Park Slope , helped draw Jewish families back into the temple and revitalize the membership . One of those young families was that of Gerald I. Weider , a young rabbi who joined the synagogue 's staff in 1978 . 
 A native of the Bronx , Weider graduated from Rutgers University , and was ordained at Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati in 1973 ( he would be granted a Doctor of Divinity degree by Hebrew Union College in 1998 ) . Before joining Beth Elohim , he served as Assistant Rabbi of Temple <unk> Shalom of Brookline , Massachusetts , and as the Associate Rabbi of Washington Hebrew Congregation in Washington , D.C. At Beth Elohim , he focused on programming and services for urban Jewish families . Under his leadership , Beth Elohim opened after – school and early childhood centers in 1978 , and a day camp the following year , all housed in the Temple House . 
 The 1970s also saw a return to more traditional practices in the service , under Weider 's guidance . Some members began wearing head coverings in the sanctuary , some Hebrew prayers were added to the Sabbath service , and the Reform movement 's new High Holy Days prayer book The Gates of Repentance was adopted . The synagogue building and Temple House were contributing properties to the Park Slope historic district , which was listed as a New York City Landmark district in 1973 , and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . 
 In 1985 , Weider and Beth Elohim , in cooperation with the rabbis of the Park Slope Jewish Center and Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes , proposed opening a liberal Jewish day school in Brooklyn . Though housed at Beth Elohim , it would not be affiliated with any specific Jewish movement , and was intended for children from all branches of Judaism . Planning began in earnest in 1994 ; the school was modeled on New York 's Abraham Joshua <unk> School , as an outgrowth of Beth Elohim 's preschool program . The intent was to start with only first grade in 1995 , but extend to eighth grade by 2000 . At the time Beth Elohim had approximately 500 member families and 141 children in the preschool . The school opened in 1995 , and continued for three years , growing to 38 students , before moving to new premises and becoming independent under the name " Hannah <unk> Community Day School " . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s Beth Elohim 's buildings were repaired and refurbished a number of times . The sanctuary ceiling cracked in the early 1980s , and services were held in Temple House for a time . The congregation mounted a " Save our Sanctuary " campaign in 1982 , and repaired the ceiling . In the 1980s Beth Elohim also refurbished the Moses stained glass window , and painted the main sanctuary . The congregation restored and renovated its buildings in 1990 , and in 1992 did emergency restoration work to the facade of Temple House and restored the pews . In 1997 the synagogue began its " <unk> Capital Campaign " , which was intended to raise funds to repair and renovate the buildings . By 1999 , the congregation had restored Temple House 's facade , rebuilt the collapsed Garfield St. entrance , made entry into the synagogue handicapped accessible , added a multipurpose space and classrooms in the basement of the sanctuary , and planned to add a fifth floor for more classrooms . That year Sack ( by then Rabbi Emeritus ) died ; the year before his death his son , Robert , at his induction as a Second Circuit judge , had described his father as " the most open minded man he had ever known " . 
 Janet Leuchter joined as cantor in 2001 . A native of Vineland , New Jersey , and 1999 graduate of Hebrew Union College , she had previously served as cantor of Temple <unk> in Oceanside , New York . 
 = = = Weider retires , events since 2006 = = = 
 Weider retired as senior rabbi in 2006 , after 28 years of service . He was succeeded by Andy Bachman . At that time , Beth Elohim had over 1 @,@ 000 members . In 2007 , the synagogue was a winner of the Union for Reform Judaism 's Congregation of <unk> award for medium size synagogues , for " those synagogues that provide an exceptional environment of varied and comprehensive learning opportunities and have imbued their synagogue communities with a culture of learning " . 
 In 2009 , Beth Elohim was described as the largest and most active Reform congregation in Brooklyn . Prominent members included U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer . In April of that year , Beth Elohim was listed by Newsweek as one of America 's 25 " Most Vibrant " Jewish congregations . In September , just four days before Yom Kippur , a part of the sanctuary ceiling collapsed . No @-@ one was hurt , but the sanctuary had to be closed . The nearby Old First Reformed Church — with which Beth Elohim had had close ties since the 1930s — offered its premises for the holiday ( Sunday night and Monday ) , and accommodated over 1000 worshipers . The day before the holiday , the synagogue was picketed by members of the Westboro Baptist Church , who shouted antisemitic and anti @-@ gay slogans . 
 As of 2012 , Beth Elohim was the " oldest Brooklyn congregation that continues to function under its corporate name " , and its pulpit was the oldest in continuous use in any Brooklyn synagogue . Its rabbis were Andy Bachman , Shira Koch Epstein , and Marc Katz , the rabbi emeritus was Gerald Weider , and the cantor was Joshua <unk> . 
 Bachman , a graduate of University of Wisconsin – Madison with a 1996 rabbinic ordination from Hebrew Union College , became Beth Elohim 's first new senior rabbi in 25 years on October 25 , 2006 . Before becoming senior rabbi he had previously been an educator there from 1993 to 1998 . An advocate of more traditionalism in the Reform movement , in 2002 he started a small , more traditional , Hebrew @-@ focused spinoff prayer group at Beth Elohim , and has spoken in favor of a more traditional liturgy . Bachman and his wife , Rachel <unk> , have been instrumental in bringing 20- and 30 @-@ year @-@ olds into the synagogue , and in December 2007 , Bachman was named one of The Forward 's " Forward 50 " . In 2008 he was a regular contributor to the <unk> Interactive website . Epstein , born in the Bronx and raised in New Milford , Connecticut , attended Wesleyan University and Hebrew Union College , and served as the coordinator of the Institute for Reform Zionism . In 2008 she was a member of " Rabbis for Obama " , a cross @-@ denominational group of more than 300 American rabbis supporting Barack Obama 's 2008 presidential campaign . Barrington Rhode Island native Marc Katz graduated from Tufts University and studied at Hebrew Union College in Jerusalem before becoming Beth Elohim 's rabbinic intern in 2009 . 
 On September 22 , 2013 , Beth Elohim celebrated its 150th anniversary and dedicated a new Sefer Torah . Members of Beth Elohim stated it was " the first Torah in New York City to be completed by a woman " . 
 = = = Bachman departs , <unk> joins , Events since 2015 = = = 
 In June 2015 , Andy Bachman departed to join the 92nd Street Y as the Director of Jewish Content and Community Ritual . In July 2015 , Rachel <unk> became the Senior Rabbi . 
 = 2011 Heritage Classic = 
 The 2011 Heritage Classic was a regular season outdoor National Hockey League ( NHL ) game between the Montreal Canadiens and the Calgary Flames . The game was played at McMahon Stadium in Calgary , Alberta , Canada , on February 20 , 2011 . The Flames defeated the Canadiens by a score of 4 – 0 before a crowd of 41 @,@ 022 spectators . It was just the second time in six NHL outdoor games that the home team won . 
 It was the second Heritage Classic game , held seven seasons after the original . It was also the first time the NHL held two outdoor games in one season , as it followed the 2011 NHL Winter Classic in Pittsburgh . In spite of criticism that playing two such games in a season would lessen the spectacle , the Heritage Classic eclipsed all previous NHL outdoor games in sponsorship . The game 's title sponsor was Tim Hortons . 
 Calgary goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff was named the game 's first star after making 39 saves to record the first shutout in an NHL outdoor game . His teammates Rene Bourque and Alex Tanguay were the second and third stars respectively . Weather conditions were a major story during the game , as the wind chill made the temperature feel like − 25 ° C ( − 13 ° F ) on the ice , and forced the arena staff to manually flood the ice between periods to avoid damaging the ice surface . 
 The weekend featured numerous other games , which the Flames branded as the " Faceoff in the Foothills . " It began on Friday , February 18 with an American Hockey League ( AHL ) matchup that saw Calgary 's top minor league affiliate , the Abbotsford Heat , lose to the Oklahoma City Barons 3 – 1 at the Scotiabank Saddledome . An alumni game was held on the Saturday between a team composed mostly of players on Calgary 's 1989 Stanley Cup @-@ winning team against alumni of the Canadiens . It ended on Family Day Monday when the Regina Pats defeated the Calgary Hitmen in a Western Hockey League ( WHL ) game at McMahon that set a junior world attendance record of 20 @,@ 888 . 
 = = Second outdoor game = = 
 The Heritage Classic was played two months after the 2011 Winter Classic . NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman stated the Winter Classic is designed for American television and to promote the game in the United States , but that the league sought to hold another game for its Canadian partners . He said the league delayed on hosting a second outdoor game until it felt it was capable of holding three significant events in a two @-@ month span , including the All @-@ Star Game . 
 Corporate support for the Heritage Classic exceeded expectations ; Chief Operating Officer John Collins announced that the league had gained more sponsorship revenue for Calgary 's game than it had the Winter Classic . While the league would not commit to holding a third Heritage Classic , Collins admitted that nearly every team had expressed interest in holding their own game and that title sponsor Tim Hortons had signed a multi @-@ year deal with the league . 
 The league 's decision to play two outdoor games in one season was met with criticism from Scott Burnside of ESPN , who argued the NHL risks diluting the unique nature of the outdoor events . He also argued that the Heritage Classic was the league 's attempt to appease Canadian fans and media who were upset that all previous Winter Classics featured only American teams . Commissioner Gary Bettman dismissed both arguments as " absurd , " but agreed that the two games are intended for different markets . 
 = = Teams and venue = = 
 The Flames lobbied the NHL for the opportunity to host an outdoor game for some time . Team president Ken King said the fans consistently asked for such a game in Calgary , and the team quietly pressed the NHL for several years . They unsuccessfully sought to host a second outdoor game as part of a January 1 doubleheader with the 2010 NHL Winter Classic in Boston . 
 When the league finally approved Calgary for 2011 , the team considered where to host the game . They thought about building temporary stadiums west of the city limits or in Lake Louise and hosting the game at the foot of the Canadian Rockies . The team dismissed the latter idea as impractical , and settled on McMahon Stadium . The usual home of the Calgary Stampeders and the University of Calgary Dinos football teams , McMahon has a standard capacity of 35 @,@ 650 but additional seating added in the north end zone pushed the capacity for this game over 41 @,@ 000 . 
 It was the first outdoor game for the Flames in their franchise history but marked the second time the Canadiens participated in a NHL outdoor game . Montreal defeated the Edmonton Oilers in the original Heritage Classic , held in Edmonton in 2003 . 
 The Flames were inundated with complaints from season ticket holders upset by their seat assignments and the cost of tickets . King responded to the concerns by noting that the league had purchased the game from the Flames , and the team was given a limited allotment of seats for its ticket holders . He also noted that it was possible that the event would lose money , even at ticket prices ranging between $ 49 and $ 249 , but that the team brought the Heritage Classic to Calgary because the fans wanted the game to return to Canada . The Pittsburgh Penguins and Buffalo Sabres encountered similar issues allocating tickets for the Winter Classic . 
 = = Uniforms = = 
 As with other outdoor games , special jerseys were worn for the event . The Flames ' uniform was maroon with burnt yellow stripes and tan pants that were inspired by the uniforms worn by the Calgary Tigers of the 1920s . The Flames wore the uniform to pay homage to the first professional hockey team in the city 's history . As members of the Western Canada Hockey League of the 1920s , the Tigers won the league championship in 1924 before losing that year 's Stanley Cup Final to the Canadiens . Montreal wore a classic version of their usual road sweater , the difference was the blue block numbering with the red outline , what the team wore prior to 1997 . 
 The Flames uniform received mixed reviews . Detractors compared the uniform to the outfit Ronald McDonald wears . They proved popular with fans , however ; the league revealed a few days before the game that 16 @,@ 000 Flames jerseys had been sold , compared to about 6 @,@ 000 Montreal jerseys . Cheaper , unlicensed copies were widely available online and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police worked to stem the sale of counterfeit merchandise that was misrepresented as being authentic . 
 = = Broadcasters = = 
 The Heritage Classic was telecast throughout North America . The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) aired the game in English on Hockey Night in Canada , while <unk> des sports ( RDS ) carried the French @-@ language broadcast in Canada . Versus aired the game in the United States . The game was offered on 3D television in both countries : by CBC in Canada as its second 3D game of the season , and on Xfinity 3D in the U.S. The game was the first event broadcast by Comcast 's new 3D channel . 
 Though the game involved two Canadian teams , the NHL hoped that the event would prove a successful draw in the U.S. To that end , the league scheduled the Heritage Classic as the only game in prime time , while NBC debuted its Hockey Day in America with a pair of regional doubleheaders that led into the telecast ; throughout NBC 's telecast , commercials advised viewers to change to Versus for the Heritage Classic once the American games finished . University of Alberta sports economist Brad Humphreys questioned the league 's ambitions , arguing that a game without an American team would not appeal . He stated that the game was being held to placate the Canadian audience , but noted that it was important for the NHL to keep the league 's Canadian audience happy . 
 Nonetheless , the game drew strong ratings on both sides of the border . In Canada , the CBC averaged 2 @.@ 1 million viewers with a peak of 2 @.@ 9 million while RDS peaked at 1 @.@ 6 million . In the United States , Versus averaged 608 @,@ 000 viewers , and peaked above 700 @,@ 000 . For Versus , it represented the fourth @-@ most watched regular season game in the network 's history , and was the highest rated all @-@ Canadian NHL game on an American cable channel since Nielsen began tracking such ratings . 
 = = Entertainment = = 
 In spite of the wind chill , fans arrived at McMahon several hours before the game to experience an 88 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 200 m2 ) fan zone , and stood in line ups 100 people deep to buy Heritage Classic merchandise . The crowd maintained a party atmosphere throughout the game , with many fans describing the Classic as a " once in a lifetime show " . A cover band provided entertainment out front of McMahon while fans played air hockey , enjoyed free coffee from title sponsor Tim Hortons and tried their hockey skills in interactive booths . 
 Several musical acts performed throughout the game . Five for Fighting performed his song " Chances " during the opening ceremonies . Canadian indie rock acts Tokyo Police Club and Metric performed during the first and second intermissions , <unk> duo Thompson Square and Calgary native Paul Brandt performed the American and Canadian national anthems , respectively . The Montreal Canadiens organization was unhappy with Brandt 's rendition , filing a complaint with the NHL over the fact that he sang the English version of " O Canada " rather than the bilingual version . The league acknowledged the complaint , but took no action . 
 = = Game play = = 
 The cold weather and ice conditions reduced the game to a slower speed than usual , with little physical play . Both teams struggled to deal with bouncing pucks , while arena staff were called out to fix patches of the ice on numerous occasions . Flames ' defenceman Steve Staios stated that Calgary 's strategy revolved around " keeping it simple and trying to play the game in straight lines " . Montreal 's James Wisniewski admitted after the game that the Canadiens struggled to adapt to the conditions . 
 The Flames dominated the first period of play , outshooting Montreal 19 – 8 . Canadiens ' goaltender Carey Price made several difficult saves early in the game , stopping a Rene Bourque one @-@ timer from the top of the crease followed immediately by a save on Alex Tanguay , who tried to stuff the rebound into the net . Calgary was given an early two @-@ man advantage after P. K. Subban and Hal Gill both took tripping penalties in the seventh minute of play . The Flames capitalized on the power play , as Tanguay slid a pass in front of the Montreal net that was deflected in by Bourque to give Calgary a 1 – 0 advantage . 
 The score remained unchanged until the second period . Montreal held the advantage in play for much of the frame , taking 21 shots on Miikka Kiprusoff . They earned their only power play opportunity of the game midway through the frame when Jay Bouwmeester was penalized for interference . The Flames had the better chances despite being shorthanded ; Curtis Glencross was unable to deflect a pass into the net while rushing towards the Montreal goal , but fought to retrieve the puck and sent it back out front of the net , where Anton <unk> snapped it behind Price to extend Calgary 's lead to 2 – 0 . Bourque made the score 3 – 0 with five minutes left in the period when he cut in front of Price from the left side of the ice and put the puck in before being sent airborne over the fallen goaltender 's pads . The goal was the 100th of Bourque 's career . 
 The third period was relatively even . Montreal outshot Calgary 10 – 7 for the period , and 39 – 37 for the game . Roman <unk> sent the Flames to their fourth power play at 8 : 58 of the period , and the Flames capitalized a minute later when Jarome Iginla sent a pass over a sprawling Montreal defender to Tanguay , who was standing on top of the crease and tapped the puck into the net . Kiprusoff held Montreal off the scoreboard for the remainder of the game to record his fourth shutout of the season , and the first in the NHL 's outdoor history . With the win , the Flames became only the second home team to win an NHL outdoor game , following the Boston Bruins , who won the 2010 Winter Classic at Fenway Park . 
 = = = Weather = = = 
 Calgary 's unpredictable weather patterns impacted the game , as long term forecasts that called for relatively warm temperatures failed to materialize . An arctic front descended over the city in the week leading up to the game resulting in overnight temperatures as low as − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) , however the forecast called for daytime highs of − 6 ° C ( 21 ° F ) in time for the game 's playing . The actual temperature was slightly colder , sitting at − 8 @.@ 6 ° C ( 16 @.@ 5 ° F ) at the game 's start , but as the sun set and temperatures dropped , it felt as cold as − 21 ° C ( − 6 ° F ) with wind chill factored in . The temperature during the game was only slightly colder than Calgary 's averages of 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and − 11 ° C ( 12 ° F ) for the highs and lows . 
 The changing temperatures forced the ice crews to abandon the use of ice <unk> for fear of damaging the playing surface . Instead , they manually flooded the ice between periods using a high @-@ pressure hose and shovels . The players admitted that they were challenged by the condition of the ice , but praised the efforts of Dan Craig and his ice crew at quickly fixing areas of the surface that required patching . Flames defenceman Cory Sarich noted that while he had difficulty handling the puck , he was not concerned about the safety of the ice surface . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Number in parenthesis represents the player 's total in goals or assists to that point of the season 
 = = Team rosters = = 
 Several players on both teams had previously appeared in an outdoor game . For Calgary 's David Moss , it was his third appearance outdoors . He previously played in the 2001 Cold War game as a member of the University of Michigan Wolverines , and again at the opening game of the 2010 IIHF World Championship , in which he played for Team USA . Teammate Steve Staios was a member of the Oilers at the first Heritage Classic , when the defenceman led both teams with three points ( one goal , two assists ) . For the Canadiens , Michael Cammalleri was a teammate of Moss at the Cold war game , while defenceman James Wisniewski was a member of the Chicago Blackhawks when they hosted the 2009 NHL Winter Classic at Wrigley Field . 
 Scratches – Did not play 
 Montreal Canadiens : Alexandre Picard , Tom Pyatt 
 Calgary Flames : Brendan <unk> 
 Officials 
 Referees — Brad Meier , Mike Leggo 
 Linesmen — Mike <unk> , Mark <unk> 
 = = " Face @-@ off in the Foothills " = = 
 As part of the weekend festivities , the Flames organized several games during the Family Day long weekend that celebrated both the past and future of the Flames organization and of the city 's hockey history . The team branded the events as the " Face @-@ off in the Foothills " . 
 = = = Abbotsford Heat vs. Oklahoma City Barons = = = 
 The weekend began on Friday , February 18 , with an American Hockey League ( AHL ) game between the Flames ' affiliate , the Abbotsford Heat , and the affiliate of the Edmonton Oilers , the Oklahoma City Barons , at the Scotiabank Saddledome . The game , featuring the top prospects for both NHL organizations , drew 8 @,@ 407 fans to what ended in a 3 – 1 Barons victory . 
 The game marked the first return to the Saddledome for Oklahoma City forward Brad Moran . An original member of the Calgary Hitmen in 1995 , Moran remains the junior team 's all @-@ time leader in numerous categories , including goals , assists and points , and is the only player in Hitmen history to have his jersey retired . 
 = = = Alumni game = = = 
 Led by Jim Peplinski , an alumni game was organized for Saturday , February 19 , at McMahon . The game featured 14 members of the Flames ' 1989 Stanley Cup championship team , including Lanny McDonald , Al MacInnis , Joel Otto , Theoren Fleury and Joe Nieuwendyk . For Nieuwendyk , at the time the General Manager of the Dallas Stars , the chance to participate in the game was important enough that he chose to overlook the chronic pain in his back when he is on skates . Immensely popular forward Craig Conroy , who retired only a few weeks before the game , also took part for Calgary . 
 Among the players representing the Canadiens were Mike Keane , Brian Skrudland , Russ Courtnall and Martin Gelinas . The game was played with only two continuous time periods , and was won by the Canadiens , 5 – 3 . Over 10 @,@ 000 fans turned out for the game on what ended up as the coldest night of the weekend . 
 = = = Calgary Hitmen vs. Regina Pats = = = 
 The weekend ended with a Western Hockey League ( WHL ) game on February 21 outdoors at McMahon Stadium . The game featured the defending champion Hitmen against the Regina Pats , Canada 's oldest major @-@ junior hockey team . The WHL game offered a parallel to the NHL match @-@ up , as the Hitmen are owned by the Flames while the Pats were once an affiliate of the Canadiens . As with the NHL game , the WHL teams wore retro inspired jerseys . The Hitmen wore uniforms similar to those of the city 's only Memorial Cup champion , the 1924 Calgary Canadians , while the Pats donned jerseys similar to those they wore in the 1950s . The game was announced as the first outdoor game in WHL history , but the Spokane Chiefs subsequently revealed they would host the Kootenay Ice outdoors on January 15 , 2011 . 
 The game was played in much warmer conditions than the Flames @-@ Canadiens game the night previous , as the temperature hovered around the freezing mark . It was a considerably more physical game than the NHL contest , and was won by the Pats , 3 – 2 , on a last @-@ minute goal by Chandler Stephenson . Played before 20 @,@ 888 fans , the game set new Western and Canadian Hockey League attendance records and set the world record for highest attended junior game . 
 = Chrysippus = 
 Chrysippus of Soli ( Greek : <unk> ὁ <unk> , <unk> ho <unk> ; c . 279 – c . 206 BC ) was a Greek Stoic philosopher . He was a native of Soli , Cilicia , but moved to Athens as a young man , where he became a pupil of Cleanthes in the Stoic school . When Cleanthes died , around 230 BC , Chrysippus became the third head of the school . A prolific writer , Chrysippus expanded the fundamental doctrines of Zeno of Citium , the founder of the school , which earned him the title of Second Founder of Stoicism . 
 Chrysippus excelled in logic , the theory of knowledge , ethics and physics . He created an original system of propositional logic in order to better understand the workings of the universe and role of humanity within it . He adhered to a deterministic view of fate , but nevertheless sought a role for personal freedom in thought and action . Ethics , he taught , depended on understanding the nature of the universe , and he taught a therapy of extirpating the unruly passions which depress and crush the soul . He initiated the success of Stoicism as one of the most influential philosophical movements for centuries in the Greek and Roman world . 
 = = Life = = 
 Chrysippus , the son of Apollonius of Tarsus , was born at Soli , Cilicia . He was slight in stature , and is reputed to have trained as a long @-@ distance runner . While still young , he lost his substantial inherited property when it was confiscated to the king 's treasury . Chrysippus moved to Athens , where he became the disciple of Cleanthes , who was then the head ( <unk> ) of the Stoic school . He is believed to have attended the courses of <unk> and his successor <unk> , in the Platonic Academy . 
 Chrysippus threw himself eagerly into the study of the Stoic system . His reputation for learning among his contemporaries was considerable . He was noted for intellectual audacity and self @-@ confidence and his reliance on his own ability was shown , among other things , in the request he is supposed to have made to Cleanthes : " Give me the principles , and I will find the proofs myself . " He succeeded Cleanthes as head of the Stoic school when Cleanthes died , in around 230 BC . 
 Chrysippus was a prolific writer . He is said to rarely have gone without writing 500 lines a day and he composed more than 705 works . His desire to be comprehensive meant that he would take both sides of an argument and his opponents accused him of filling his books with the quotations of others . He was considered diffuse and obscure in his utterances and careless in his style , but his abilities were highly regarded , and he came to be seen as a preeminent authority for the school . 
 He died during the 143rd Olympiad ( 208 – 204 BC ) at the age of 73 . Diogenes Laërtius gives two different accounts of his death . In the first account , Chrysippus was seized with dizziness having drunk undiluted wine at a feast , and died soon after . In the second account , he was watching a donkey eat some figs and cried out : " Now give the donkey a drink of pure wine to wash down the figs " , whereupon he died in a fit of laughter . His nephew <unk> erected a statue in his honour in the <unk> . Chrysippus was succeeded as head of the Stoic school by his pupil Zeno of Tarsus . 
 Of his written works , none have survived except as fragments quoted in the works of later authors like Cicero , Seneca , Galen , Plutarch , and others . Recently , segments from Logical Questions and On Providence were discovered among the Herculaneum papyri . A third work by Chrysippus may also be among them . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Chrysippus had a long and successful career of resisting the attacks of the Academy and hoped not simply to defend Stoicism against the assaults of the past , but also against all possible attack in the future . He took the doctrines of Zeno and Cleanthes and crystallized them into what became the definitive system of Stoicism . He elaborated the physical doctrines of the Stoics and their theory of knowledge and he created much of their formal logic . In short , Chrysippus made the Stoic system what it was . It was said that " without Chrysippus , there would have been no Stoa " . 
 = = Logic = = 
 Chrysippus wrote much on the subject of logic and created a system of propositional logic . Aristotle 's term logic had been concerned with the interrelations of terms such as " Socrates " or " man " ( " all men are mortal , Socrates is a man , so Socrates is mortal " ) . Stoic logic , on the other hand , was concerned with the interrelations of propositions such as " it is day " ( " if it is day , it is light : but it is day : so it is light " ) . Though the earlier Megarian <unk> – Diodorus Cronus and Philo – had worked in this field and the pupils of Aristotle – Theophrastus and <unk> – had investigated hypothetical syllogisms , it was Chrysippus who developed these principles into a coherent system of propositional logic . 
 = = = Propositions = = = 
 Chrysippus defined a proposition as " that which is capable of being denied or affirmed as it is in itself " and gave examples of propositions such as " it is day " and " Dion is walking . " He distinguished between simple and non @-@ simple propositions , which in modern terminology are known as atomic and molecular propositions . A simple proposition is an elementary statement such as " it is day . " Simple propositions are linked together to form non @-@ simple propositions by the use of logical connectives . Chrysippus enumerated five kinds of molecular propositions according to the connective used : 
 Thus several types of molecular propositions , familiar to modern logic , were listed by Chrysippus , including the conjunction , the disjunction , and the conditional , and Chrysippus studied their criteria of truth closely . 
 = = = Conditional propositions = = = 
 The first logicians to debate conditional statements were Diodorus Cronus and his pupil Philo . Writing five @-@ hundred years later , Sextus Empiricus refers to a debate between Diodorus and Philo . Philo regarded all <unk> as true except those which with a correct antecedent had an incorrect consequent , and this meant a proposition such as " if it is day , then I am talking , " is true unless it is day and I fall silent . But Diodorus argued that a true conditional is one in which the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion – thus , because the proposition " if it is day , then I am talking " can be false , it is invalid . However , paradoxical propositions were still possible such as " if atomic elements of things do not exist , atomic elements exists . " Chrysippus adopted a much stricter view regarding conditional propositions , which made such paradoxes impossible : to him , a conditional is true if denial of the consequent is logically incompatible with the antecedent . This corresponds to the modern @-@ day strict conditional . 
 = = = Syllogistic = = = 
 Chrysippus developed a syllogistic or system of deduction in which he made use of five types of basic arguments or argument forms called <unk> syllogisms , which played the role of axioms , and four inference rules , called themata by means of which complex syllogisms could be reduced to these axioms . The forms of the five <unk> were : 
 Of the four inference rules , only two survived . One , the so @-@ called first thema , was a rule of <unk> . The other , the third thema , was a cut rule by which chain syllogisms could be reduced to simple syllogisms . The purpose of Stoic syllogistic was not merely to create a formal system . It was also understood as the study of the operations of reason , the divine reason ( logos ) which governs the universe , of which human beings are a part . The goal was to find valid rules of inference and forms of proof to help people find their way in life . 
 = = = Other logical work = = = 
 Chrysippus analyzed speech and the handling of names and terms . He also devoted much effort in refuting fallacies and paradoxes . According to Diogenes Laërtius , Chrysippus wrote twelve works in 23 books on the Liar paradox ; seven works in 17 books on <unk> ; and another nine works in 26 books on other conundrums . In all , 28 works or 66 books were given over to puzzles or paradoxes . Chrysippus is the first Stoic for whom the third of the four Stoic categories , i.e. the category somehow disposed is attested . In the surviving evidence , Chrysippus frequently makes use of the categories of substance and quality , but makes little use of the other two Stoic categories ( somehow disposed and somehow disposed in relation to something ) . It is not clear whether the categories had any special significance for Chrysippus , and a clear doctrine of categories may be the work of later Stoics . 
 = = = Later reception = = = 
 Chrysippus came to be renowned as one of the foremost logicians of ancient Greece . When Clement of Alexandria wanted to mention one who was master among logicians , as Homer was master among poets , it was Chrysippus , not Aristotle , he chose . Diogenes Laërtius wrote : " If the gods use dialectic , they would use none other than that of Chrysippus . " The logical work by Chrysippus came to be neglected and forgotten . Aristotle 's logic prevailed , partly because it was seen as more practical , and partly because it was taken up by the Neoplatonists . As recently as the 19th century , Stoic logic was treated with contempt , a barren formulaic system , which was merely clothing the logic of Aristotle with new terminology . It was not until the 20th century , with the advances in logic , and the modern propositional calculus , that it became clear that Stoic logic constituted a significant achievement . 
 = = Epistemology = = 
 For the Stoics , truth is distinguished from error by the sage who possesses right reason . Chrysippus 's theory of knowledge was empirical . The senses transmit messages from the external world , and their reports are controlled not by referring them to innate ideas , but by comparing them to previous reports stored in the mind . Zeno had defined impressions of sense as " an impression in the soul " and this was interpreted literally by Cleanthes , who compared the impression on the soul to the impression made by a seal on wax . Chrysippus preferred to regard it as an alteration or change in the soul ; that is , the soul receives a modification from every external object that acts upon it , just as the air receives countless strokes when many people are speaking at once . 
 In the receipt of an impression , the soul is purely passive and the impression reveals not only its own existence , but that also of its cause — just as light displays itself and the elements that are in it . The power to name the object resides in the understanding . First must come the impression , and the understanding — having the power of utterance — expresses in speech the affection it receives from the object . True presentations are distinguished from those that are false by the use of memory , classification and comparison . If the sense organ and the mind are healthy — and provided that an external object can be really seen or heard — the presentation , due to its clearness and distinctness , has the power to extort the assent that always lies in our power , to give or to withhold . In a context in which people are understood to be rational beings , reason is developed out of these notions . 
 = = Physics = = 
 Chrysippus insisted on the organic unity of the universe , as well as the correlation and mutual interdependence of all of its parts . He said , " the universe is its own soul and its own controlling mind . " Following Zeno , Chrysippus determined fiery breath or aether to be the primitive substance of the universe . Objects are made up of inert formless matter and an informing soul , " pneuma " , provides form to the undifferentiated matter . The pneuma pervades all of substance and maintains the unity of the universe and constitutes the soul — the incorporeal and , in many conceptions , immortal essence of a person or living thing — of the human being . 
 The classical elements change into one another by a process of condensation and rarefaction . Fire first becomes solidified into air ; then air into water ; and lastly , water into earth . The process of dissolution takes place in the reverse order : earth being rarefied into water , water into air and air into fire . 
 The human soul was divided by Chrysippus into eight faculties : the five senses , the power of reproduction , the power of speech , and the " ruling part " that is located in the chest rather than the head . Individual souls are perishable ; but , according to the view originated by Chrysippus , the souls of wise people survive longer after their death . No individual soul can , however , survive beyond the periodic conflagration , when the universe is renewed . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 For Chrysippus , all things happen according to fate : what seems to be accidental has always some hidden cause . The unity of the world consists in the chain @-@ like dependence of cause upon cause . Nothing can take place without a sufficient cause . According to Chrysippus , every proposition is either true or false , and this must apply to future events as well : 
 If any motion exists without a cause , then not every proposition will be either true or false . For that which has not efficient causes is neither true nor false . But every proposition is either true or false . Therefore , there is no motion without a cause . And if this is so , then all effects owe their existence to prior causes . And if this is so , all things happen by fate . It follows therefore that whatever happens , happens by fate . 
 The Stoic view of fate is entirely based on a view of the universe as a whole . Individual things and persons only come into consideration as dependent parts of this whole . Everything is , in every respect , determined by this relation , and is consequently subject to the general order of the world . 
 If his opponents objected that , if everything is determined by destiny , there is no individual responsibility , since what has been once foreordained must happen , come what may , Chrysippus replied that there is a distinction to be made between simple and complex predestination . Becoming ill may be fated whatever happens but , if a person 's recovery is linked to consulting a doctor , then consulting the doctor is fated to occur together with that person 's recovery , and this becomes a complex fact . All human actions – in fact , our destiny – are decided by our relation to things , or as Chrysippus put it , events are " co @-@ fated " to occur : 
 The non @-@ destruction of one 's coat , he says , is not fated simply , but co @-@ fated with its being taken care of , and someone 's being saved from his enemies is co @-@ fated with his fleeing those enemies ; and having children is co @-@ fated with being willing to lie with a woman . ... For many things cannot occur without our being willing and indeed contributing a most strenuous eagerness and zeal for these things , since , he says , it was fated for these things to occur in conjunction with this personal effort . ... But it will be in our power , he says , with what is in our power being included in fate . 
 Thus our actions are predetermined , and are causally related to the overarching network of fate , but nevertheless the moral responsibility of how we respond to impressions remains our own . The one all @-@ determining power is active everywhere , working in each particular being according to its nature , whether in rational or irrational creatures or in inorganic objects . Every action is brought about by the co @-@ operation of causes depending on the nature of things and the character of the agent . Our actions would only be involuntary if they were produced by external causes alone , without any co @-@ operation , on the part of our wills , with external causes . Virtue and vice are set down as things in our power , for which , consequently , we are responsible . Moral responsibility depends only on freedom of the will , and what emanates from our will is our own , no matter whether it is possible for us to act differently or not . This rather subtle position which attempts to reconcile determinism with human responsibility is known as soft @-@ determinism , or <unk> . 
 = = = Divination = = = 
 Chrysippus also argued for the existence of fate based on divination , which he thought there was good evidence for . It would not be possible for diviners to predict the future if the future itself was accidental . Omens and portents , he believed , are the natural symptoms of certain occurrences . There must be countless indications of the course of providence , for the most part unobserved , the meaning of only a few having become known to humanity . To those who argued that divination was superfluous as all events are foreordained , he replied that both divination and our behaviour under the warnings which it affords are included in the chain of causation . 
 = = = God = = = 
 The Stoics believed that the universe is God , and Chrysippus affirmed that " the universe itself is God and the universal outpouring of its soul . " It is the guiding principle of the universe , " operating in mind and reason , together with the common nature of things and the totality which embraces all existence . " Based on these beliefs , physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein identified Chrysippus as a <unk> . 
 Chrysippus sought to prove the existence of God , making use of a teleological argument : 
 If there is anything that humanity cannot produce , the being who produces it is better than humanity . But humanity cannot produce the things that are in the universe – the heavenly bodies , etc . The being , therefore , who produces them is superior to humanity . But who is there that is superior to humanity , except God ? Therefore , God exists . 
 Chrysippus spoke of God and gods interchangeably . He interpreted the gods of traditional Greek religion by viewing them as different aspects of the one reality . Cicero tells us that " he further maintained that aether is that which people call Zeus , and that the air which permeates the seas is Poseidon , and that the earth is what is known by the name of Demeter , and he treated in similar style the names of the other gods . " In addition , the universe exists for the benefit of the universal god : 
 We should infer in the case of a beautiful dwelling @-@ place that it was built for its owners and not for mice ; we ought , therefore , in the same way to regard the universe as the dwelling @-@ place of the gods . 
 = = = Theodicy = = = 
 In response to the question of how evil could exist in a good universe , Chrysippus replied " evil cannot be removed , nor is it well that it should be removed . " Firstly , he argued , following Plato , that it was impossible for good to exist without evil , for justice could not be known without injustice , courage without cowardice , temperance without intemperance or wisdom without foolishness . Secondly , apparent evils exist as a consequent of nature 's goodness , thus it was necessary for the human skull to be made from small and thin bones for reasons of utility , but this superior utility meant that the skull is vulnerable to blows . Thirdly , evils are distributed according to the rational will of Zeus , either to punish the wicked or because they are important to the world @-@ order as a whole . Thus evil is good under disguise , and is ultimately conducive to the best . Chrysippus compared evil to the coarse jest in the comedy ; for , just as the jest , though offensive in itself , improves the piece as a whole , " so too you may criticize evil regarded by itself , yet allow that , taken with all else , it has its use . " 
 = = Mathematics = = 
 Chrysippus regarded bodies , surfaces , lines , places , the void and time as all being infinitely divisible . He determined one of the principal features of the infinite set : since a man and a finger have an infinite number of parts as do the universe and a man , it cannot be said that a man has more parts than his finger , nor that the universe has more parts than a man . 
 Chrysippus also responded to a problem first posed by Democritus . If a cone is divided by a plane parallel to its base , are the surfaces of the segments equal or unequal ? If they are equal , then the cone becomes a cylinder ; if they are unequal , then the surface of the cone must be stepped . The reply of Chrysippus was that the surfaces are both equal and unequal . Chrysippus was , in effect , negating the law of excluded middle with respect to the equal and unequal , and thus he may have anticipated an important principle of modern infinitesimal calculus , namely , the limit and the process of convergence towards a limit . 
 Chrysippus was notable for claiming that " one " is a number . One was not always considered a number by the ancient Greeks since they viewed one as that by which things are measured . Aristotle in his Metaphysics wrote , " ... a measure is not the things measured , but the measure or the One is the beginning of number . " Chrysippus asserted that one had " magnitude one " ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) , although this was not generally accepted by the Greeks , and Iamblichus wrote that " magnitude one " was a contradiction in terms . 
 = = Ethics = = 
 Chrysippus taught that ethics depended on physics . In his Physical Theses , he stated : " for there is no other or more appropriate way of approaching the subject of good and evil on the virtues or happiness than from the nature of all things and the administration of the universe . " The goal of life , said Chrysippus , is to live in accordance with one 's experience of the actual course of nature . A person 's individual nature is part of the nature of the whole universe , and thus life should be lived in accordance with one 's own human nature as well as that of the universe . Human nature is ethical , and humanity is akin to the Divine , emanating from the primal fire or aether , which , though material , is the embodiment of reason ; and people should conduct themselves accordingly . People have freedom , and this freedom consists in emancipation from irrational desires ( lust , riches , position in life , domination , etc . ) and in subjecting the will to reason . Chrysippus laid the greatest stress on the worth and dignity of the individual , and on the power of will . 
 The Stoics admitted between the good and the bad a third class of things – the indifferent ( adiaphora ) . Of things morally indifferent , the best includes health , and riches , and honour , and the worst includes sickness and poverty . Chrysippus accepted that it was normal in ordinary usage to refer to the preferred indifferent things as " good " , but the wise person , said Chrysippus , uses such things without requiring them . Practice and habit are necessary to render virtue perfect in the individual – in other words , there is such a thing as moral progress , and character has to be built up . 
 The Stoics sought to be free of the unruly emotions , which they regarded as being contrary to nature . The passions or emotions ( <unk> ) are the disturbing element in right judgment . Chrysippus wrote a whole book concerning the therapy of the emotions . The passions are like diseases which depress and crush the soul , thus he sought to eradicate them ( <unk> ) . Wrong judgements turn into passions when they gather an impetus of their own , just as , when one has started running , it is difficult to stop . One cannot hope to eradicate the emotions when one is in the heat of love or anger : this can only be done when one is calm . Therefore , one should prepare in advance , and deal with the emotions in the mind as if they were present . By applying reason to emotions such as greed , pride , or lust , one can understand the harm which they cause . 
 = Red Hot Kinda Love = 
 " Red Hot Kinda Love " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera from her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . The song was written by Aguilera , Lucas Secon and Olivia Waithe , with production done by Secon . It is a multi @-@ genre song , combining dance , disco , hip hop , Latin and pop . The track makes use of two samples : " The Whole Wide World Ain 't Nothin ' But a Party " performed by Mark Radice and " 54 @-@ 46 That 's My Number " performed by Toots & the Maytals . Lyrically , the song talks about Aguilera 's attempts to impress the man she is flirting with and she will not go home without him . Its structure received comparisons to songs performed by Britney Spears and Kylie Minogue . The track was received positively by critics , the majority of whom praised the fun and playful production . Upon the release of Lotus , the song debuted at number five on the South Korean international singles chart , selling 20 @,@ 433 copies , and remained on the chart for a further four weeks . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After her sixth studio album Bionic ( 2010 ) was met with low sales figures , Aguilera divorced from husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film entitled Burlesque and recorded its accompanying soundtrack , became a coach on NBC 's The Voice and featured on Maroon 5 's song " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 and sold 4 @.@ 9 million copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Following these events , she announced plans to record a new album , declaring that quality was more important than quantity and that she wanted to find " personal " songs to record . Aguilera stated that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She continued to say that " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Concluding her statement , Aguilera said that the album would be about " self @-@ expression and freedom " because of the challenges she has faced over the past couple of years and wanting to go back to her roots . 
 Speaking about her new material on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera revealed that the album was taking a while to record because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . " Red Hot Kinda Love " was written by Aguilera , Lucas Secon and Olivia Waithe ; Secon served as the producer . In addition to his role as producer , Secon served as the programmer and arranger . He also recorded the track with Pete Hofmann . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez , and edited by Hofmann . Aguilera and Waithe , credited with her professional name Livvi Franc , provided background vocals for " Red Hot Kinda Love " . The track contains two samples : " The Whole Wide World Ain 't Nothin ' But a Party " performed by Mark Radice and " 54 @-@ 46 That 's My Number " performed by Toots & the Maytals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Red Hot Kinda Love " was written by Aguilera , Lucas Secon and Olivia Waithe , with production done by Secon . An up @-@ tempo song , it combines a variety of genres , including dance and disco , " subtle " tones of Latin , hip hop , and pop . It also features elements of dancehall . The track , which lasts for a duration of 3 : 06 , is a " smoky , sultry " song . It features an " old @-@ school hip @-@ hop loop " and vocal samples , as well as " dirty bass " which creates an " underground " feel . On " Red Hot Kinda Love " , Aguilera keeps her use of melisma to a minimum which allows for a " relaxed and playful " vocal performance . Lyrically , the song talks about Aguilera 's attempts to impress the man she is flirting with . She has " fallen hook , line and sinker for him " and will not take no for an answer . Chris Younie for 4Music wrote that his favorite lyric in the song is " Baby I 'm burning up , you got that red hot kinda love " , which the song 's hook is built around . According to Sal Cinquemani for Slant Magazine , it features " a catchy pre @-@ chorus , and an even catchier chorus . " Andrew Hampp for Billboard compared the song 's structure to those performed by Britney Spears and Kylie Minogue which they have " specialized in for years . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Red Hot Kinda Love " garnered very positive reviews from most music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine for Allmusic was complimentary of the pop song , writing that it is " giddy " and " delirious " . Chris Younie for 4Music wrote that Aguilera is " ramping up the romance and sexual energy " on " Red Hot Kinda Love " , which will make the listener need to take a cold shower . He also wrote that the listener should expect to hear " lots of ' oooh ' , ' <unk> ' , and ' la la la ' in her usual Mariah Carey @-@ shrilling manner . " Sam Hine for Popjustice described the song as " a welcome blast of upbeat pop following the rather serious start to the album . There are lots of good " oooh " " <unk> " hooky bits that all fit together and make a for an enjoyable listen . " Andrew Hampp for Billboard described it as the " standout song on Lotus " which sees her " at her most relaxed and playful . " He also noted that Secon 's production takes " precedence " on the song . Annie Zaleski for The A.V. Club called it a " dancehall @-@ tinged , vibrant party jam , " while Sarah Rodman for The Boston Globe named it a " kooky horn @-@ and @-@ yodel fest " . Robert Copsey for Digital Spy described the song as " care @-@ free " and " a bit cheeky . " Sarah Godfrey for The Washington Post praised Aguilera for sounding more like herself on the " frenzied " track . Jim Farber for Daily News wrote that " Red Hot Kinda Love " contains " a can 't @-@ miss gimmick of a chorus " . He also wrote that Aguilera " hits the clubs in horny revenge . " 
 <unk> Keane for Entertainment.ie described " Red Hot Kinda Love " as Lotus ' " highlight , " writing that the song revisits the bouncy melodies of " I Hate Boys " and " My Girls " from Bionic . Glenn Gamboa for Newsday simply wrote that the song is " fun " , while Melinda Newman for HitFix described " Red Hot Kinda Love " as having an " exuberant " and " playful " vibe , which she likened to <unk> @-@ Lite 's song " Groove Is in the Heart " . Mike Wass for Idolator praised Aguilera for having fun on the song and not letting her " I 'm back , bitches ! agenda " take over . Wass continued to write that " Red Hot Kinda Love " is Lotus ' answer to her Back to Basics ( 2006 ) album track , " Ain 't No Other Man " . However , Mesfin Fekadu for The Huffington Post criticized " Red Hot Kinda Love " , along with " Around the World " and " Make the World Move " , as she felt that Aguilera failed to capture the " fun " which they are supposed to embody . The song was placed at number 73 on PopCrush 's " Top 100 Songs of 2012 " , who described it as a " perfectly effervescent morsel of cotton @-@ candy pop . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at <unk> Music Studios , London . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , CA . 
 Sample 
 Contains samples of " The Whole Wide World Ain 't Nothin ' But a Party " performed by Mark Radice , courtesy of Capitol Records . 
 Contains samples of " 54 @-@ 46 That 's My Number " performed by Toots & the Maytals , courtesy of Universal Music Enterprises . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Red Hot Kinda Love " debuted on the South Korean international singles chart at number five during the week of November 11 – 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 20 @,@ 433 . The following week it fell to number nine , with sales of 15 @,@ 525 . In its third week , the song sold 10 @,@ 467 copies , charting at number 21 , and sold 6 @,@ 062 copies in its fourth , falling twenty places to number 41 . " Red Hot Kinda Love " sold 3 @,@ 436 copies in its fifth week , falling to number 93 . 
 = The Boat Race 1892 = 
 The 49th Boat Race took place on 9 April 1892 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the event as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . In total , twelve of the competitors had previous Boat Race experience . In a race umpired by former rower Frank Willan , Oxford won by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 19 minutes 10 seconds . It was their third consecutive victory and the fastest time in the history of the event . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the boat clubs of University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by half a length in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 25 victories to Cambridge 's 22 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were F. P. Bully , R. C. Lehmann ( former president of the Cambridge Union Society and captain of the 1st Trinity Boat Club ; although he had rowed in the trial eights for Cambridge , he was never selected for the Blue boat ) Douglas McLean ( who rowed five times for Oxford between 1883 and 1887 ) , and Guy Nickalls ( five @-@ time Blue between 1887 and 1891 ) . Lehmann had briefly coached Cambridge in the " early stages " of their preparation . 
 The umpire for the race for the fourth year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 lb ( 77 @.@ 4 kg ) , 5 @.@ 125 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained two rowers with no experience in the event , Robert Grieve Neill rowing at number two and Graham Campbell Kerr at number six . Four of their crew attended Trinity Hall . Oxford saw four rowers and the cox return from the previous year 's race , and included Guy Nickalls rowing in his fourth consecutive event . Six of the Dark Blues had been pupils at Eton College , and four were studying at Magdalen College . One rower was registered as non @-@ British : Edward Wason Lord for Cambridge hailed from Australia , having attending Brisbane Grammar School . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge , the pre @-@ race favourites ( although former rower and author George Drinkwater states this was as a result of a practice row after which Oxford 's time was inaccurately reported in the press ) . Conditions for the race were described by Drinkwater as " perfect " with a light breeze from the east and a good tide . Oxford led from the start and were half a length ahead by Craven Steps ( approximately 1 @,@ 080 yards ( 990 m ) along the course ) , extending to almost a length at Harrods Furniture Depository . A spurt from Cambridge 's stroke Gerard Elin reduced the deficit and by Hammersmith Bridge they were half a length down . 
 A malfunctioning slide rendered Elin 's contributions to the Light Blues ' efforts negligible and Oxford accelerated away , being two lengths up by Chiswick and four lengths ahead as they passed under Barnes Bridge . They passed the finishing post two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths ahead in a time of 19 minutes and 10 seconds . It was Oxford 's third consecutive victory , and was the fastest winning time in the history of the race ( when held on the Championship Course ) , beating the 1873 race winning time by 25 seconds . 
 = 2005 United States Grand Prix = 
 The 2005 United States Grand Prix was one of the most controversial Formula One motor races in modern history . It was held on June 19 , 2005 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and was the ninth race of the 2005 Formula One season . Out of the 20 cars that entered for the race , only the six cars from the teams using Bridgestone tyres ( Ferrari , Jordan and Minardi ) competed . The remaining fourteen entrants , all using Michelin tyres , completed the parade lap ( thus having technically taken part in the race , avoiding punishment ) , but retired to the pits before the race started . 
 Following several tyre failures before the race , most spectacularly on Ralf Schumacher 's Toyota during Friday practice , Michelin advised its seven customer teams that without a reduction in speed in Turn 13 , the tyres provided for the race would only be safe for 10 laps . Michelin had been providing working tyres for the race since 2001 . The situation was worsened by the 2005 Formula One rules , which forbade tyre changes during the race . 
 The Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , the sport 's governing body , refused a compromise proposal from Michelin to allow a chicane to be installed , maintaining that such rule changes would be grossly unfair to the Bridgestone @-@ shod teams , who had come prepared with properly working tyres , and that a last @-@ minute change to the track layout would be dangerous in case of crashes . The Michelin teams , unable to come to a compromise with the FIA , decided not to participate . It was later revealed that the Michelin @-@ shod teams could have potentially exposed themselves to criminal liability under Indiana state law had they competed . 
 Of the six competitors , Ferrari 's Michael Schumacher was the eventual winner , with his teammate Rubens Barrichello finishing second . The result significantly boosted Schumacher 's championship standing , placing him third overall — no driver above him in driver championship points took part in the race . This race also marked the Toyota team 's first Formula One pole position , which did not lead to a win due to the team 's withdrawal from the race start . The final race result was the lowest number of finishing entries ever seen in a major open @-@ wheel motorsports event at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway since the institution of the 500 @-@ Mile Race ( surpassing the previous record low of seven finishers in 1966 , a race marred by a major first lap accident that eliminated a full third of the starting field ) , and the lowest number of finishing entries for an international Grand Prix since the 1914 American Grand Prize , which saw only five finishers . The situation created enormous negative publicity for the sport of Formula One , especially in the United States , a market in which Formula One had struggled to establish itself over the preceding twenty years ; some even called the race " <unk> " . 
 = = Qualifying = = 
 The qualifying session for the United States Grand Prix was held on June 18 . Jarno Trulli gained the pole position by posting the fastest lap time , 1 : 10 @.@ 625 . Trulli , driving for Toyota , was the team 's first driver to win the pole position for a Formula One race . The second @-@ place qualifier was Kimi Räikkönen , who ran a lap of 1 : 10 @.@ 694 . Jenson Button , Giancarlo Fisichella , and Michael Schumacher were the next three fastest qualifiers . Fernando Alonso , who led the season point standings , qualified in sixth . The rest of the top 10 consisted of Rubens Barrichello , Takuma Sato , Mark Webber , and Felipe Massa . 
 = = Pre @-@ race controversy = = 
 = = = Michelin tyre failures = = = 
 During the afternoon 's practice session on Friday , June 17 , 2005 , Ralf Schumacher , driving for Toyota , crashed badly in Turn 13 of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway road course , apparently as a result of a left @-@ rear tyre failure . He was unable to continue racing , and was replaced by the team 's test driver , Ricardo Zonta , for the rest of the weekend . Ralf Schumacher had crashed at high speed at Turn 13 as a result of a tyre failure the previous year , while driving for the Williams team . Turn 13 on the Indianapolis Motor Speedway road course is a high speed banked turn , unique in Formula One racing , which causes a greater than usual tyre loading . On June 18 , Michelin reported that it did not understand why the tyres it had provided for its seven customer teams – BAR , McLaren , Red Bull , Renault , Toyota , Sauber , and Williams – had failed in this turn , and announced its intention to fly in tyres of a different specification from its Clermont @-@ Ferrand headquarters . Unfortunately , the replacement tyres flown in , which were of the type used in the Spanish Grand Prix earlier that year , turned out to have the same problem when tested . 
 = = = Correspondence between Michelin and the FIA = = = 
 In a letter to FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting dated Saturday , June 18 , Michelin representatives Pierre Dupasquier and Nick Shorrock revealed that they did not know the cause of the Toyota tyre failures , and unless the cars could be slowed down in Turn 13 , they could not guarantee the tyres ' safety for more than 10 laps . Whiting replied on Sunday , June 19 , expressing his surprise that Michelin had not brought suitable tyres , suggesting that the teams should limit their drivers to the maximum safe speed specified by Michelin in Turn 13 . He also addressed several solutions which had been proposed by the teams , insisting that use of the new specification tyres flown in overnight would be " a breach of the rules to be considered by the stewards " , and the placement of a chicane in the turn was " out of the question " – the race would not be sanctioned by the FIA ( making it a non @-@ championship race ) if the track layout was changed . He deemed the Michelin teams ' proposals to be " grossly unfair " to the Bridgestone teams . 
 In a second letter , also dated June 19 , Dupasquier and Shorrock confirmed that they would not permit their teams to race on the Michelin tyres used during qualification without changes to the circuit , and reiterated their request to slow down Turn 13 . Whiting 's brief reply maintained that no such change would be permitted , and gave the teams the choice of limiting speeds through Turn 13 , using tyres of a different specification to those used in qualifying , subject to a penalty , or changing tyres repeatedly , which would have been permitted if a driver 's safety were at issue . 
 = = = Attempts at compromise = = = 
 Paul Stoddart , then owner of Minardi , a team using Bridgestone tyres , published an account on Wednesday , June 22 , of the events leading up to the race . Stoddart recorded a meeting around 10 : 00am on the day of the race , to which Speedway president Tony George , " the two most senior Michelin representatives present at the circuit " , Bernie Ecclestone ( president and CEO of Formula One Management and Formula One Administration ) , the team principals , and the teams ' Michelin technical representatives were summoned . All invited were present except Jean Todt , Team Principal of Scuderia Ferrari . 
 By Stoddart 's account , the meeting proceeded as follows : The Michelin representatives stated their position that the tyres provided to the teams could not safely complete the race distance , and requested that the Bridgestone teams , represented by Stoddart and Jordan 's Colin Kolles , permit the installation of a chicane in Turn 13 . Those present discussed and agreed to reject the FIA 's solution of speed @-@ limiting the Michelin cars in the turn because of the potential for accidents . They likewise dismissed the possibility of making pit stops every ten laps , resolved that a chicane was the best solution , and instructed several technical representatives to prepare plans for its installation . Bernie Ecclestone volunteered to consult Todt , who had not come to the meeting , and the president of the FIA , Max Mosley , who was not present at the race , and reconvene the meeting when he had responses . 
 Ecclestone returned at about 10 : 55 to inform the group that Todt had refused to agree to the chicane , maintaining that it was an FIA and a Michelin problem and not his . By the time Stoddart 's account of the meeting was published , Todt had already denied that he had ever been consulted , but stated that , if asked , he would not have agreed to the chicane . Furthermore , Ecclestone reported that " Mr Mosley had stated that if any attempts were made to alter the circuit , he would cancel the Grand Prix forthwith " . 
 = = = Team principals ' plan = = = 
 The group , according to Stoddart , continued to propose alternative solutions , including " a non @-@ championship race , or a race in which the Michelin teams could not score points , and even a race whereby only the Michelin teams used the new chicane " , but eventually agreed that the best option was to install the chicane and run a non @-@ championship race , without Ferrari if necessary . To ignore the FIA 's instructions and carry on the race would have resulted in the FIA 's withdrawing its staff , so the group appointed delegates to fill the various offices , including a race director to replace Charlie Whiting and a safety car driver to replace Bernd <unk> . The team principals were instructed to convey to their teams and drivers that , in the absence of FIA scrutineers and equipment , the technical rules could not be enforced , and that they were to conduct themselves honourably and in the interest of an entertaining race . 
 They proceeded to summon the twenty drivers and present their plan . Of the drivers ' opinions , Stoddart writes : " While I cannot testify that each and every driver agreed with what we were proposing , what I can say with certainty is that no driver disagreed . " The Ferrari drivers expressed no opinion in the matter , leaving the decision to Todt , who was not present . The nine present team principals thereupon resolved that , unless they and the FIA could come to a decision in the interest of the sport , they would not participate in the race . 
 After a short break , the group gathered again in Ecclestone 's office to find Renault team principal Flavio Briatore on the phone with Max Mosley . Mosley had apparently rejected all of their proposals , and indeed " it was stated that Mosley had informed Mr Martin , the FIA 's most senior representative in the USA , that if any kind of non @-@ championship race was run , or any alteration made to the circuit , the US Grand Prix , and indeed , all FIA @-@ regulated motorsport in the US , would be under threat " . On the same day that Stoddart 's version of events was published , the FIA issued a statement denying that Mosley had made the reported threat , or that any such conversation had taken place . 
 Having exhausted their options , the Michelin team principals , Stoddart , and Bernie Ecclestone – but not Jordan 's Colin Kolles – discussed whether their cars should proceed to the grid , and decided that they should participate in the formation lap but that they could not race . Stoddart asked Kolles if he would be entering his cars and was informed that Jordan would indeed be racing , despite having previously agreed not to . Stoddart was then approached by a Bridgestone representative and told that Bridgestone wanted him to race ; he has also stated that given his " current relationship with Mr Mosley , [ he ] felt certain heavy sanctions would follow if [ he ] did not [ race ] . " Stoddart too decided to enter his drivers , but reported that he would retire them if the Jordans did not finish the race . 
 = = Race report = = 
 At the start of the race , all the cars lined up on the grid per FIA race procedure . As Charlie Whiting signalled the green light to start the formation lap , a full field of twenty cars set off as normal for a single lap before forming the starting grid . At the banked Turn 13 , the entrance to the pit lane ( and the turn that was the centre of the controversy ) , all teams that ran Michelin tyres returned to their pits , leaving just six cars from the three Bridgestone teams ( Ferrari , Jordan , and Minardi ) to start the race . 
 The move by the teams , to come to the grid and then pull out after the formation lap into the pits , infuriated the fans , who did not know about the plan . Boos were heard during the race , and some upset fans threw beer cans and water bottles on the track . BBC Radio broadcaster Maurice Hamilton said of the event , " Without question , it was the strangest race I commentated on in F1 . " Because of the retirement of the drivers who qualified ahead of them , Michael Schumacher and his Ferrari teammate , Barrichello , were the foremost starters , though using the grid positions they had qualified in ; the pair were followed by Tiago Monteiro and Narain Karthikeyan , both driving for Jordan . Rounding out the remaining field of six were Christijan Albers and Patrick Friesacher of Minardi . Schumacher retained the lead when the race started , and the only changes in positioning came when Albers and Karthikeyan exchanged places . The two Ferrari drivers quickly built a significant lead over their rivals , and Schumacher ended up with the victory , ahead of Barrichello . Monteiro and Karthikeyan finished in a distant third and fourth , and Albers and Friesacher brought up the rear . 
 The race was a story of pit strategy , as the only passing on the circuit was of lapped traffic . Albers was the only car to run a three pit stop race , as all other drivers chose to stop only twice . The only lead changes came on lap 26 , as Schumacher 's 32 @-@ second stop gave Barrichello the lead , and on lap 51 , as Schumacher turned in the quickest pit stop at 23 @.@ 615 seconds , giving him enough time to exit pit lane at the same time as Barrichello , with the result of forcing Barrichello into the grass of Turn One . After this incident , which was not investigated by race officials , both Ferrari drivers were reminded over their radios not to crash out of the race , and they both settled into a slower pace , comfortably ahead of the rest of the field . All four of the drivers for Jordan and Minardi scored their first points in Formula One at this race . Karthikeyan 's points were the first for an Indian driver in Formula One . This was also the final race at which the Minardi team tallied points . 
 At the podium ceremony , at which none of the scheduled dignitaries were present , all Ferrari team members quietly accepted their awards , and quickly exited . However , Monteiro stayed behind to celebrate his first podium finish , and the first for a Portuguese driver . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The win , Schumacher 's only victory of 2005 , moved him from fifth to third in the drivers championship . Alonso and Räikkönen remained first and second in the championship standings , on 59 and 37 points respectively , while Schumacher moved up to 34 points . With his second @-@ place finish , Barrichello went into fourth in the drivers championship , on 29 points , and Trulli dropped to fifth with 27 points . The Ferrari team moved into joint second in the Constructors ' Championship , matching McLaren with 63 points ; both teams trailed Renault , which retained the lead on 76 points . Both Jordan and Minardi scored points , moving out of a tie with BAR @-@ Honda at the bottom of the constructor standings . However , the results of the United States Grand Prix were overshadowed by the withdrawal of the Michelin @-@ shod teams , and by the inability to find a solution which would have allowed them to race . 
 Bernie Ecclestone , in answer to a question by ITV 's Martin Brundle in an interview just before the start of the race , described the future of Formula One in the United States and the future of Michelin in the sport as " not good " . He also said that the " incident 's not the fault of the teams , to be honest with you . " 
 The race was labelled a farce , and David Coulthard said , " It throws into doubt the future of the race in US " . Associated Press writer Stephen Wade pointed to the boycott as an extension of previous disagreements between the teams and Max Mosley , which had led to the threatened creation of a rival series as an alternative to Formula One . The Guardian 's Richard Williams considered the prior disputes a factor in the failure to reach a compromise and felt that the events at this race had increased the risk of a complete rupture . 
 Minardi boss Paul Stoddart said immediately after the race that nine teams – all but Ferrari – agreed not to race , and had Jordan not reversed its decision at the last minute , Minardi would also have boycotted the race . In his later , lengthier , statement , he indicated that although it had been Michelin 's failure to provide a reliable tyre which had initiated the events , he laid the full blame for the failure to reach some accommodation ( which would have allowed a race to happen , for the benefit of the many fans who had paid considerable money for travel and tickets ) at the feet of Max Mosley and the FIA , with a small share of the blame going to what he characterized as the obstructionist Ferrari team leader , Jean Todt . He furthermore called for Mosley 's resignation . 
 = = = FIA 's reaction = = = 
 The following day , the FIA published a justification of its refusal to permit a change in tyres or the installation of a chicane . The FIA also summoned the seven Michelin @-@ shod teams before the World Motorsport Council at their headquarters in France , for a hearing on June 29 , to explain their failure to participate , by which they had presumably violated the terms of the Concorde Agreement . It later published copies of the letters sent to each team " in the interests of transparency " . They were charged with violating article <unk> of the International Sporting Code , which refers to acts prejudicial to the interests of competition or motorsport generally . Specifically , it was charged that they had : 
 Failed to ensure availability of suitable tyres for the race . 
 Wrongfully refused to allow cars to start the race 
 Wrongfully refused to allow cars to race subject to speed restrictions at one corner , which was safe for such tyres available . 
 Combined with other teams to make a demonstration damaging to the image of Formula 1 by pulling into the pits immediately before the start of the race . 
 Failed to notify the stewards of intention not to race . 
 On June 22 the FIA produced a press release from Max Mosley , in the form of a question @-@ and @-@ answer session , in an effort to clarify the FIA 's stand on the controversy . In it Mosley drew an analogy to a hypothetical situation where the engines from one manufacturer had oil starvation problems due to high lateral loading in one corner , and pointed out that those cars would simply have been forced to run slower as a result . He reiterated that the reason for not installing the chicane was purely that it had never been tested and was thereby deemed unsafe . He pointed out that the alternatives that the FIA suggested were feasible , and wondered why the teams did not use the pitlane as an alternative , especially when , with only six Bridgestone cars , the Michelin teams could still compete for the points scoring seventh and eighth places . 
 On June 29 the FIA World Motorsport Council found the teams guilty on the first two counts , that is , of not being in possession of suitable tyres for the event , but with strong mitigating circumstances , and that of wrongfully refusing to allow their cars to start the race . The teams were found not guilty of the other three counts . The punishment , however , was not decided , and was not to have been announced until September 14 . 
 On July 22 , the FIA World Motorsport Council voted to overturn its previous decision , and exonerated the Michelin teams of all charges . The decision was due to " evidence previously submitted to the FIA Senate " , rumoured to be that the Michelin teams could have faced criminal charges under Indiana state law for knowingly putting others at risk if they had raced ( even if no accident actually occurred ) . 
 = = = Compensation = = = 
 On June 28 , Michelin announced that it would offer compensation to all race fans who had purchased tickets for the Grand Prix . The company planned to issue refund cheques through the Speedway ticket office for the price of all tickets for the race by the end of September . Additionally , Michelin purchased 20 @,@ 000 tickets for the 2006 United States Grand Prix to be distributed to spectators who attended the 2005 race . 
 In addition to the refunded tickets , there was some discussion about holding a second , non @-@ championship race at Indianapolis . On July 2 , at the 2005 French Grand Prix , McLaren team principal Ron Dennis suggested that an additional race could be held at the American circuit after the last official race of the season , in Shanghai . The teams had , apparently , already discussed the idea with Bernie Ecclestone . But the next day Tony George dismissed the possibility : " There will be no race at Indianapolis Motor Speedway this fall . " At the 2005 Champ Car World Series Grand Prix of Cleveland , held one week after the US Grand Prix , free admission was granted to all bearers of ticket stubs of the US Grand Prix . 
 = = Friday drivers = = 
 Teams that were not in the top four of the 2004 Constructors ' Championship standings were entitled to run a third car in free practice on Friday . These drivers drove on Friday but did not compete in qualifying or the race , with the exception of Ricardo Zonta , who replaced Ralf Schumacher after his practice accident . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Hellbound ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Hellbound " is the eighth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired on the Fox network on January 27 , 2002 . It was written by David Amann and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology , or the overarching fictional history . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers in its initial broadcast . It received positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Reyes takes the lead while investigating an X @-@ File case surrounding a man found skinned alive . When she discovers that he had visions of a similar thing , she calls on Scully ’ s expertise to help with the investigation . 
 " Hellbound " was written to take Gish 's character into a darker area . The episode 's plot is similar to mythology surrounding the Aztec agriculture god Xipe Totec . To create the skinned human bodies , the makeup team sprayed a mannequin with layers of latex . The layers were then peeled off and positioned onto other mannequins that had been designed to resemble the actors . The faux skin was created to look " moist " and was composed of over 200 prostethic pieces . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Novi , Virginia , a group of ex @-@ convicts , led by Dr. Lisa Holland ( Katy Boyer ) , meet ; the members discuss atoning for their sins . Terry <unk> ( Don Swayze ) tells the others that , since he has discovered the group , he has made amends for his past . However , another member , Ed ( Cyril O 'Reilly ) , tells him that humans are unable to change and that they are both destined for hell . Ed 's friend , Victor Potts ( David <unk> ) , tells Holland that he 's been having nightmares involving people being skinned alive . That night , he has a vision of Ed skinned . Several hours later , Victor is murdered . Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) asks John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to examine Potts ' body . Reyes explains that , because Potts had a premonition of his death , the case is an X @-@ File . Meanwhile , at a butchery , Terry and Ed get into an argument . Terry later has a vision — similar to Victor 's — in which Ed is skinned alive . That night , he is attacked and brutally flayed . 
 Reyes and Doggett arrive in Novi and talk to Detective Van Allen ( James McDonnell ) , who seems apathetic about the case . At the same time , Scully contacts Dr. Bertram Mueller ( George D. Wallace ) , a former medical examiner who autopsied several bodies in the 1960s that were skinned in a manner similar to Potts . Mueller tells Scully that the sheriff at the time did not pay much attention to the cases , emphasizing that there was more than one victim , and that he later killed himself . Reyes and Doggett receive news of Terry 's attack and arrive at the local butchery to find him strung up among the pigs . While looking around the crime scene , Doggett discovers that Terry is still alive ; Terry weakly says Ed 's name . Doggett and the local police arrest Ed , who claims that he is innocent . Reyes believes him and admits that she too is having similar visions . Ed is freed , but not before having a vision in which Dr. Holland is skinned . In the meantime , Scully discovers that Potts and Terry were both born on the same day that two of the 1960s murder victims died . 
 Doggett , acting on Reyes ' insistence that Ed is in danger , stakes out his house . Ed , however , is skinned regardless of Doggett 's attempts to protect him . Reyes admits to Doggett that she is having flashes of the same premonitions that the victims are experiencing . She tells Doggett that Ed 's body was gagged with a rag coated in coal dust from a mine , even though she has never seen his body . Reyes and Doggett head to the mine from which they believe the dust originated . Doggett finds the skeleton of a sheriff who killed himself in 1909 . 
 Reyes finds newspaper clippings explaining the story : In 1868 , a group of four miners murdered a man . The murderers ' souls have been reincarnated several times since , only to be brutally skinned by the soul of the victim . In each case , the avenger is a prominent figure of the law . 
 Reyes soon stumbles onto the collected skin of the victims , but is attacked by Van Allen . Doggett eventually finds her unharmed . Reyes explains to Doggett that Van Allen is avenging his own murder and that all the murders that are linked to the case have been in groups of four . Reyes believes Van Allen takes his own life each time in order to restart the series of murders . Reyes frantically calls Holland , informing her that she is the fourth victim . Van Allen arrives at the church , but is stopped by Reyes . Later , Reyes muses to Scully that in the past , she had always failed to stop Van Allen 's spirit . In this life , however , she managed to succeed . The shot changes to Van Allen dying , only to be reincarnated into a newborn baby . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Hellbound " was written by supervising producer David Amann and directed by Kim Manners . The entry was Amann 's fourth episode written for the series , after season seven 's " Rush " and " Chimera " and season eight 's " Invocation " . Executive producer John Shiban later explained that , since Doggett and Reyes were in control of the X @-@ Files , the producers needed to give one of them a drive . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz was interested in taking Annabeth Gish 's character into a darker area . According to Mat Hurwitz and Chris Knowles in their book The Complete X @-@ Files , the episode deals with themes of " reincarnation and the idea of karmic justice . " Shiban noted that the conceit of the episode was whether Reyes was " a good person or a bad person ? Did she fight evil , or did she let evil happen . " It has been noted that the episode 's plot is similar to mythology surrounding the Aztec agriculture god Xipe Totec . In mythology , Xipe Totec is often represented wearing a flayed human skin , usually with the flayed skin of the hands falling loose from the wrists . 
 The production crew was tasked with building a refrigerated building the size of a warehouse for the slaughterhouse scenes . In order to achieve the shots , an old dairy was converted for filming . 300 slaughter pigs were brought in for the sequences , as well as 200 rubber pigs . The skinned human bodies in the episode were created by spraying a mannequin with a layer of latex . The layer was then peeled off . Makeup technicians then took the " peeled skin " and positioned it onto other mannequins that had been designed to resemble the actors . According to Hurwitz and Knowles , the effects were " a level of detail and sophistication never before seen on series television . " The makeup staff worked quickly ; according to Robert Patrick , the team " literally did a 36 @-@ hour day to pull off some of " the effects . The faux skin was created to look " moist " and was composed of over 200 prostethic pieces . Fake veins were then overlaid on top of the skin . Makeup department head Cheri Montesanto @-@ Medcalf later claimed that " seven makeup artists work [ ed ] seven hours on each person [ for ] ten days . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Hellbound " originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on January 27 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on January 5 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 4 million households , and 7 @.@ 7 million viewers , making it the seventy @-@ first most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending January 27 . " Hellbound " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Hellbound " received generally positive reviews from critics . Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " B " . John Keegan , writing for Critical Myth , gave the episode a positive review and complimented its exploration of Reyes ' character . He rated it an 8 out of 10 and wrote that " overall , a wonderful unexpected look into the underlying motivations of a character that , until now , has been only vaguely drawn for the audience . Thankfully it is completely consistent with what we have seen before " . Keegan added that the " greatest drawback may be that we are unlikely to see this theme explored much further , since this is now officially the final season . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two wrote positively of the entry 's plot — comparing it to the first season episode " Squeeze " and the fourth season episode " The Field Where I Died " — calling the writing " delightfully subtle " . They praised Amann 's misdirection , noting that the episode contains several red herrings . Shearman and Pearson also praised the episode 's effects , calling the skinless bodies " the high point of the series ' trading in gore " . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , called the episode " unexpectedly entertaining " and praised the script 's attempts to shed more light on Reyes ' character . 
 = Of Vice and Men = 
 " Of Vice and Men " is the seventh episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ first episode overall . Written by Phil Klemmer and directed by Harry Winer , the episode premiered on The CW on November 14 , 2006 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica helps a student , Meryl ( Amanda Walsh ) locate her missing boyfriend . Meanwhile , with Mercer ( Ryan Devlin ) imprisoned for the campus rapes , Veronica tries to find the truth . This investigation leads to an instance in which Veronica is drugged and a part of her hair is removed by a mysterious figure . In addition , Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) questions the morality of his relationship with Harmony ( Laura San Giacomo ) , leading to their breakup . 
 " Of Vice and Men " was one of Rob Thomas 's favorite episodes from the season . It features the final appearance of San Giacomo and the reappearance of Ken Marino 's character , rival detective Vinnie Van Lowe . The episode received 2 @.@ 69 million viewers in its original broadcast and was given mixed reviews from television critics , with critics being divided on Veronica 's increasing sarcastic behavior and the final scene involving a drugged Veronica . Eric Goldman of IGN wrote that there were some " very strong scenes in the second half " , while Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club called the final scene " slightly manipulative . " 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 Veronica and Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) have a minor fight over Keith ’ s relationship with Harmony . Veronica is staying in Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) and Piz ’ s ( Chris Lowell ) dorm room . Piz comes in unexpectedly , and the two end up hanging out . However , a girl shows up and tells them that her boyfriend , Sully , has gone missing . They look in Sully ’ s room , but the girlfriend is hesitant to help . In criminology class , Mr. Landry ( Patrick Fabian ) tells Veronica that he ’ s applied her for an internship at the FBI . Veronica talks to Logan ( Jason Dohring ) about Mercer , but he still refuses to give her an alibi . Veronica and the girlfriend , Meryl , find that Sully has contacted another girl , Scarlett , but Scarlett knows that Sully has a girlfriend . Veronica visits Mercer in prison , and he tells her that there are many people who would want to frame him . Sully ’ s roommate comes back to their room , and Veronica uncovers that Meryl and Sully had a fight the previous weekend . 
 Harmony ( Laura San Giacomo ) succeeds in convincing Keith that their relationship is not immoral . Vinnie Van Lowe ( Ken Marino ) enters Mars Investigations and tells Keith that he needs to know the whereabouts of Kendall Casablancas . Afterwards , he blackmails Keith by showing him pictures of him and Harmony , saying that Keith must pay $ 4 @,@ 000 to prevent the information from being shown to Harmony ’ s husband . Veronica gets exasperated with Meryl when she feels that Meryl refuses to see the truth about Sully cheating on her . Veronica talks to the professor about his affair with Mindy O ’ Dell , but he says that he ’ ll give her the scholarship no matter what . After seeing Meryl and Scarlett hug , Veronica tries to frame Mercer to no avail . After showing Logan the evidence that Mercer is innocent , he tells Veronica what he was doing : they were in Tijuana , and Mercer set a room on fire . There were girls in Mercer ’ s room , but Logan ran away when the fire spread . 
 Meryl gets a voicemail from Sully , and Veronica agrees to track her . Veronica and Keith have another fight , with Veronica insulting his character for having a relationship with Harmony . Veronica and Meryl track the cell phone in the Fitzpatricks ’ bar . Liam Fitzpatrick drunkenly picks up Veronica and carries her around , but Vinnie supposedly takes a picture of it to get him off her . Veronica and Meryl go to the police station and find that Sully washed up on shore after surfing with a bump on his head and had mild amnesia . While cleared , Mercer is still being held in custody . Keith rejects Harmony , and Logan nervously calls Keith for the whereabouts of Veronica . At the food court , Veronica is listening to voicemails from Logan and Keith when she notices an issue with her food . She returns to the counter with her plate , leaving her drink unattended . She returns to her seat but , after eating and drinking , soon feels disoriented . She recognizes this feelings as identical to her experience after ingesting GHB previously . Veronica attempts to get into her car and collapses just outside of it but she manages to set off the alarm . A mysterious figure appears and stops the alarm . There is a buzzing sound the scene cuts to a nearby Logan hearing the alarm . Logan finds Veronica 's car with her unconscious on the ground next to it . He picks her up to reveal some locks of Veronica 's hair on the ground and a bald spot on the back of her head . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Of Vice and Men " was written by Phil Klemmer and directed by Harry Winer , marking Klemmer 's twelfth writing credit for the series and Winer 's fourth directing credit ( after " Meet John Smith " , " Blast from the Past " , and " Wichita Linebacker " ) . The episode features a reappearance by the character of Vinnie Van Lowe , played by Ken Marino , who did not appear for several episodes previously . Thomas complimented Marino 's performance in the scene in which he hands pictures of Harmony to Keith , saying that near the end of the scene , Marino turns a " cartoonish " character into something " real and menacing . " In addition , he thought that Marino 's performance in the scene effectively blurred the lines of comedy and drama on the show . 
 " Of Vice and Men " was one of the highlights of season three for Thomas . He was especially proud of the scene in which Veronica is drugged , which was created to give the show an interesting visual sequence , an aspect of production which Thomas thought was too often neglected on Veronica Mars . The episode also marks the final appearance in the series by Laura San Giacomo , who appeared on three episodes of Veronica Mars in total . Promos for the episode included much of the final sequence in which Veronica is drugged and approached by the rapist , a choice which several critics considered a major spoiler . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Of Vice and Men " received 2 @.@ 69 million viewers , marking a slight decrease from " Hi , Infidelity " and ranking 97th of 99 in the weekly rankings . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . While calling Veronica " not likable at all " in the episode , he praised the second half of the episode , particularly the final sequence involving a drugged Veronica . He wrote , " Veronica Mars seems to slowly be getting back on track . There are still some problems to be sure , but this week 's episode was a good one , and most notably , built towards some very strong scenes in the second half . " Price Peterson , writing for TV.com , was also positive towards the episode , writing " This was good ! I liked all of the scenes of Piz sleeping on the floor . And as much as it freaks me out to see Veronica in harm 's way ( I shouldn 't be watching TV , apparently ) , I appreciated the forward momentum in this plotline . " Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A " . 
 Alan Sepinwall , on his blog What 's Alan Watching , was mixed towards " Of Vice and Men " , writing that the episode 's focus on the mystery of the week did not work thematically , as Veronica did not have a stake in its solving . " The better we get to know the supporting characters and the closer each arc gets to its conclusion , the harder it gets to care about stories that don 't have a really personal connection for Veronica . " Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , was very critical of the episode , naming five ways in which he thought Veronica was unlikable in the episode . " Simply put , Veronica spends most of " Of Vice and Men " acting like she 's better and smarter than everyone else . Of course , she is smarter than everyone , so that 's okay . But better ? Sometimes that 's justified , sometimes it 's not , " elaborating that Veronica became increasingly unlikeable in the episode . He was also negative towards the final sequence , writing " it feels slightly manipulative , " commenting that the show was not ready to tackle scenes of attempted rape . 
 = Augustus E. Willson = 
 Augustus Everett Willson ( October 13 , 1846 – August 24 , 1931 ) was the 36th Governor of Kentucky . Orphaned at the age of twelve , Willson went to live with relatives in New England . This move exposed him to such literary masters as Ralph Waldo Emerson , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Oliver Wendell Holmes , and James Russell Lowell , who were associates of his older brother , poet Forceythe Willson . He was also afforded the opportunity to attend Harvard University , where he earned an A.B. in 1869 and an A.M. in 1872 . After graduation , he secured a position at the law firm of future Supreme Court justice John Marshall Harlan . Willson and Harlan became lifelong friends , and Willson 's association with Harlan deepened his support of the Republican Party . 
 A Republican in a primarily Democratic state , Willson suffered several defeats for public office , but was elected governor of Kentucky on his second attempt . Due to his handling of the Black Patch Tobacco Wars and his pardoning of several individuals involved in the assassination of Democratic governor William Goebel , Willson drew the ire of the Democrat @-@ controlled General Assembly . As a result , few of his proposed reforms were considered by the legislature . His term ended in 1911 , and in 1914 , he made an unsuccessful bid for a seat in the U.S. Senate . Following this defeat , Willson retired to Louisville , where he died in 1931 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Augustus Willson was born on October 13 , 1846 in Maysville , Kentucky , the second child of Hiram and Ann Colvin ( née Ennis ) Willson . A year following his birth , his father moved the family to Covington . In 1852 , the family moved again , this time to New Albany , Indiana . In 1856 , Willson 's mother died . Three years later , his father also died , leaving him an orphan at age twelve . He and his younger sister went to live with their grandmother in Allegany County , New York . Willson then moved to Cambridge , Massachusetts to live with his brother Forceythe , a poet of some renown . There , he was exposed to men of letters such as Ralph Waldo Emerson , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Oliver Wendell Holmes , and James Russell Lowell . 
 Willson took a preparatory course of study at Alfred Academy in New York . Later , he enrolled for one year at a preparatory school in Cambridge before matriculating to Harvard University in 1865 . Forceythe became terminally ill during Augustus ' sophomore year , and Augustus took a brief hiatus from his studies to care for him . Following Forceythe 's death , Augustus resumed his studies , and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1869 . 
 After graduation , Willson studied at Harvard Law School , receiving a Master of Arts degree in 1872 . He also studied in the law firm of Lothrop , Bishop , and Lincoln in Boston . He returned to New Albany in 1870 , where he lived with Indiana congressman Michael C. Kerr and was admitted to the bar . In 1874 , Kerr wrote a letter of introduction for Willson when he applied for a position in the Louisville law firm of John Marshall Harlan . Harlan described Willson as " one of the brightest young fellows I ever met . " The two became lifelong friends , and Willson 's association with Harlan deepened his support of the Republican Party . Willson became a junior partner in Harlan 's firm , continuing there until Harlan 's appointment as a Supreme Court justice in 1877 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Willson 's political career began when was he appointed chief clerk of the U.S. Treasury Department under Benjamin Bristow . He served in this capacity from December 1875 to August 1876 , resigning to continue his law practice in Louisville . On July 23 , 1877 , Willson married Mary Elizabeth Ekin ; [ a ] their only child died as an infant . 
 A Republican in a predominantly Democratic state , Willson suffered several defeats in his canvasses for public office . His 1879 loss in an election for a seat in the Kentucky Senate marked the first in a string of political defeats . He failed in bids to represent Kentucky 's Fifth District in the U.S. House of Representatives in 1884 , 1886 , 1888 , and 1892 . He was a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1884 , 1888 , 1892 , 1904 , 1908 , and 1916 . In 1897 , he was a member of the executive committee at the national monetary conference in Indianapolis , Indiana , where he advocated a sound money position . 
 In 1903 , Willson sought the Republican gubernatorial nomination . He had the backing of William O. Bradley , who in 1895 had become the first Republican governor in the state 's history . Others at the convention favored Louisville businessman Morris B. Belknap . After a ruling against a contested delegation to the convention , Willson withdrew his candidacy . Bradley , angered that the party had not united behind his candidate , boycotted the convention . Belknap was handily defeated by Democrat J. C. W. Beckham in the general election . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 In 1907 , Willson was chosen by acclamation as the Republican candidate for governor . Willson 's opponent had been chosen at a nominating convention two years earlier . Governor Beckham had convinced the Democrats to hold their primary early so he could secure the party 's nomination for the 1908 senatorial election while he was still serving as governor . Further , he wanted to influence the selection of his would @-@ be successor . Using his clout as governor , he assured the selection of Samuel Wilbur Hager as the party 's gubernatorial nominee . 
 The primary campaign issue was the ongoing Black Patch Tobacco Wars . Hager carried the stigma of being the hand @-@ picked candidate of Governor Beckham , who had largely ignored the violence during his administration . On the other hand , Willson had twice represented the American Tobacco Company , whose business practices were the reason for farmers ' discontent and violence . Democrats made much of this issue , and Willson did little to counter accusations that he was unsympathetic to the plight of the farmers . Hager tried to appeal to both sides of the conflict , but ultimately lost the support of both . Willson 's position appealed to urban voters who wanted the state 's reputation for violence to end even if it meant siding with the tobacco industry against the state 's farmers . 
 In the general election , Willson garnered 214 @,@ 481 votes to 196 @,@ 428 for Hager . ( Scattered votes were also cast for minor party candidates . ) Strong support from urban areas swung the election for Willson . Half of Willson 's 18 @,@ 000 @-@ vote majority came from the city of Louisville . Republicans also won the mayoral races in Louisville and Paducah . Further , a disagreement between Hager and an associate of Governor Beckham caused Beckham 's support for his candidate to wane . Voters who favored prohibition – strong supporters of Beckham for his pro @-@ temperance stand – also deserted Hager , who vacillated on the issue . 
 Willson was sworn in on December 10 , 1907 . Almost immediately , he drew the ire of the Democratic General Assembly for his handling of the Black Patch Wars . In contrast to Beckham 's inaction , Willson immediately deployed the state militia and declared martial law in twenty western ( and predominantly Democratic ) counties . While the troops were helpful , there were never more than three hundred deployed , and they were not a major factor in ending the violence . Hostile Democrats in the General Assembly formed an investigative committee that found Willson guilty of violating the state 's constitution by calling out the militia without a formal request by civil authorities . Willson also sent spies to infiltrate the " Night Riders " – an organization of vigilantes who perpetrated much of the violence – and determine which local officials supported them . He publicly announced he would pardon anyone who killed a Night Rider . This decision was hailed by some newspapers as an effective deterrent , while others criticized it as encouraging more lawlessness . 
 Willson 's interventions ultimately had little to do with the end of the violence . In 1908 , the courts began handing down convictions against the Night Riders , though many of their leaders escaped the convictions . A 1909 measure sponsored by Kentucky representative Augustus O. Stanley removed a national tax on tobacco , and in 1911 , the Supreme Court of the United States found the American Tobacco Company to be in violation of antitrust laws . Each of these events helped raise tobacco prices , pacifying the violent farmers . 
 Willson further alienated the legislature by issuing pardons for several individuals convicted of complicity in the assassination of Governor William Goebel ( 1900 ) . These included former Republican governor William S. Taylor ( 1899 – 1900 ) and Taylor 's Secretary of State , Caleb Powers . Henry Youtsey , who was convicted for complicity in the assassination but turned state 's evidence , was not pardoned , leading Democrats to portray the pardons of Taylor and Powers as partisan . Goebel 's likeness was also removed from state checks and documents and was replaced by likenesses of either Abraham Lincoln , Henry Clay , or John C. Breckinridge . 
 The 1908 session of the General Assembly was dubbed the " Education Legislature " . Its most significant accomplishment was passing legislation establishing high schools in every county of the state . It further increased funding for the newly renamed State University ( later the University of Kentucky ) and strengthened school attendance requirements . Other progressive reforms were also passed , including a stronger child labor law and a law establishing a juvenile court system . Off @-@ track betting was made illegal , and abortion was defined as a crime . 
 In his biennial message to the legislature in 1910 , Willson called for a uniform system of accounting based on legislation recently passed in the neighboring state of Indiana . He also advocated a measure requiring full disclosure of campaign expenditures . Due to its hostility toward Willson , the Assembly scarcely considered the governor 's agenda or other needed legislation such as tax reform and redistricting . The reforms Willson advocated would later pass under a Democratic administration . The few accomplishments of this legislature included making electrocution the legal form of capital punishment and establishing of an eight @-@ hour work day for public workers . 
 Outside the state , Willson enjoyed somewhat higher esteem . In 1908 , Harvard University presented him with an honorary Doctor of Laws degree . Also in 1908 , President Theodore Roosevelt called a meeting of state governors in Washington , D.C. to discuss conservation of natural resources . Willson was elected to chair this meeting , which became known as the National Governors ' Conference . The meeting sparked interest in an annual gubernatorial meeting , and in 1910 , Willson organized a second conference and was again elected chair . Although some had advocated for a House of Governors that would propose uniform state laws , Willson 's opening remarks made it clear that this was not the intent of the National Governors ' Conference . " This meeting has no legal authority whatever , " Willson stated . " It is not a house of Governors . It is simply a conference of Governors . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 In the gubernatorial election of 1911 , Republicans were divided as to whether they should celebrate Willson 's administration or downplay it . His actions to quell the violence in the Black Patch Wars and his pardons to Taylor and Powers were both unpopular with many voters . The eventual candidate , Edward C. O 'Rear , was lukewarm at best to Willson 's administration . Willson was upset by this hesitancy and lent O 'Rear only modest support on the campaign trail . Former governor Bradley also disagreed with O 'Rear 's selection and engaged in minimal campaigning . The failure of the party to unite behind their candidate gave Democrat James B. McCreary an easy victory . 
 Following his term as governor , Willson returned to his legal practice in Louisville . From 1910 to 1919 , he served on the Harvard University Board of Overseers . In 1914 , he was a candidate for the Senate seat of Johnson Camden . It was the state 's first senatorial election since passage of the Seventeenth Amendment , meaning the seat would be filled by popular vote rather than by a vote of the legislature . The seat had originally belonged to former governor Bradley , who had died in office . Governor McCreary appointed Camden to fill the unexpired term , but Camden had agreed not to seek re @-@ election so that J. C. W. Beckham could run for the seat . In the Republican primary , Willson defeated Richard P. Ernst . In the general election , the unpopularity of Willson 's gubernatorial administration combined with the overwhelming popularity of Democratic President Woodrow Wilson , ensured that Beckham won the seat by more than 32 @,@ 000 votes . This campaign was Willson 's last . He died on August 24 , 1931 , and is buried in the Cave Hill Cemetery in Louisville . 
 = Snyder , New York = 
 Snyder ( originally Snyderville ) is a hamlet within the town of Amherst in Erie County , New York , United States that is part of the Buffalo – Niagara Falls metropolitan area . The hamlet was established in 1837 . It was named for Michael Snyder , its first postmaster , who also operated a store at the corner of Harlem Road , which is also known as New York State Route 240 , and Main Street , which is also known as New York State Route 5 . The hamlet blossomed due to retail activity demand created along the Main Street transportation route between Buffalo and points to the east in the 19th and early 20th century . 
 As of 2009 , the hamlet has several commercial districts , including a modest business district along Main Street that includes the original town focal point at Main Street and Harlem Road , and several educational institutions . The educational institutions are both public and private and range from kindergarten through college . The Snyder community has above average affluence and education compared to the Buffalo region . The hamlet also hosts two structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places that serve as architectural artifacts of the early residential developments in the hamlet . 
 The traditional definition of the hamlet is the " Snyder " postal service area , now merged into the <unk> zip code . However , using United States Census Bureau @-@ based data , which does not necessarily align exactly with the old postal boundaries , the modern definition includes parts of the neighboring Eggertsville hamlet . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1804 , Timothy Hopkins was the first settler in the area that would later become Snyderville and subsequently Snyder . Hopkins married Nancy Kerr in Williamsville in the first marriage on record in Erie County . As newlyweds , they moved to a log cabin on a farm on the 4301 Main Street location of Amherst Central High School . The Schenck family moved to Amherst at the corner of Main Street and Harlem Road in 1821 . Abraham Snyder arrived from Pennsylvania in 1823 and moved to a spacious frame house in the late 1830s . His son Michael rose to prominence . John Schenck , Michael Snyder 's cousin , built the hamlet 's first house and later built the first store in 1837 , which was the year the hamlet was first established . 
 In 1830 , a stagecoach was established . It was the first regularly scheduled public means of transportation between Buffalo and Batavia , and sometimes Albany , and operated along Buffalo Road , which was later renamed Main Street . By the 1850s , the Amherst economy thrived on agriculture . Snyder also had a pottery and brick factory . Throughout the 19th Century Snyder evolved as a small scale business community catering to surrounding farmers and the stagecoach line along Main Street . In 1879 , the hamlets of Amherst began receiving newspaper service from the Amherst Bee , which continues to exist as of the beginning of the 21st century as a weekly newspaper . L. F. <unk> opened a hotel in 1883 . 
 In 1892 , an electric trolley , which ran from Main Street and Bailey Avenue , also known as U.S. Route 62 , into Williamsville , connected Amherst with the city of Buffalo 's streetcar system . This made Amherst 's various hamlets more accessible and desirable to the wealthier city residents who were interested in expanding their estates into the " country " . This caused growth and development of the Main and Harlem area which served as the center of town for the new suburbs . In 1905 , the Snyderville Fire burned 12 buildings in the Main Street / Harlem Road area , including blacksmith shops , barns , and other businesses critical to the Snyder economy as well as livestock and stores of grain . In the 1920s , the town of Amherst began to develop by converting farmland into subdivisions . Snyder residents began to live closer to each other in new subdivisions . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Snyder is located in the southern part of Amherst , which is located in Erie County , New York , United States . As a hamlet it has no formal boundaries , but was originally defined by the area served by its post office . The traditional boundaries of the hamlet are Getzville and Brantwood Road on the west , Sheridan Drive , also known as New York State Route 324 , on the north , I @-@ 290 , known as the Youngmann Expressway / I @-@ 90 , known as New York State Thruway on the east , and the Cheektowaga town line along Wehrle Drive east of Harlem Road and then Winspear Avenue on the south . 
 When defining the Snyder community market area using census data , the western boundary extends a little further to include parts of the hamlet of Eggertsville , which was built around the Main Street and Eggert Road intersection , with a western boundary from north to south of Millersport Highway , also known as New York State Route 263 , Longmeadow Road , Westfield Road , Main Street , <unk> Road , and Eggert Road . When defined this way , Snyder includes ( using a Main Street and Harlem Road origin , starting with the northwest quadrant , and moving clockwise ) census block groups 1 – 3 from census tract 94 @.@ 01 ; census block groups 3 & 4 from census tract 94 @.@ 02 ; census block groups 3 – 5 from census tract 95 @.@ 02 ; and census block groups 1 , 3 – 5 from census tract 95 @.@ 01 . The center of town at Main Street and Harlem is at an elevation of 673 feet ( 205 m ) . 
 The business district is located between Burroughs Drive to the east and Campus Drive to the west on Main Street . In this region , the Snyder Fire Department , the Eggertsville @-@ Snyder Branch of the Buffalo & Erie County Public Library ( 4622 Main Street ) , the Amherst YMCA ( <unk> Main Street ) , and the Main Harlem Plaza as well as the former location of the United States Postal Service office for the <unk> zip code that includes Snyder and the neighboring hamlet of Eggertsville are located . The post office for the zip code was formerly located at Main Street and Chateau Terrace with a 25 Chateau Terrace address until May 1 , 1990 . 
 Harlem road crosses through the business district and connects three of the hamlet 's four commercial districts . Sheridan Harlem Plaza and adjacent commercial property are located at the north end of Harlem . Both Kensington Avenue and Wehrle Drive intersect the southern part of the Snyder portion of Harlem in a commercial region that extends into Cheektowaga . The Harlem – Kensington commercial district is historic . The fourth commercial district is located in the eastern edge of the hamlet at the intersection of Main Street and Kensington Avenue near the entrance to the Youngmann Expressway . The extended Snyder community has additional commercial areas along the highly commercial Sheridan Drive and on Millersport Highway . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Snyder is bounded by I @-@ 290 , and has two interchanges on the eastern edge of the hamlet with this interstate highway that are both less than a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the Main and Harlem center of town . This provides direct access to the I @-@ 90 ( The New York State Thruway ) and continuing south on Harlem to the New York State Route 33 a little more than a mile from Snyder through Cheektowaga also provides access to the I @-@ 90 . The community is also serviced by the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority ( NFTA ) , which provides three different bus routes ( 30 , 48 , and 49 ) connecting directly to the light rail Buffalo Metro Rail along Main Street to the west . All three of these routes connect to various parts of Williamsville to the east and provide connections to Erie Community College ( north campus ) , the Buffalo Niagara International Airport and Transit Road ( New York State Route 78 ) . The hamlet is also serviced by NFTA route 65 from downtown Buffalo along Kensington Avenue to Main Street and the service continues to northeast Erie County destinations . 
 Historically , transportation through town has been active on Main Street . In 1836 , the street became a Macadam toll road . On April 5 , 1893 , the trolley line opened for business between Main Street and Bailey Avenue and the east end of Williamsville 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the east . It was later extended another 3 miles to Transit road . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The hamlet has two National Register of Historic Places listings : Entranceways at Main Street at Lamarck Drive and Smallwood Drive and Entranceway at Main Street at Roycroft Boulevard . The former were built in 1926 and the latter in 1918 . Both were added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 7 , 2005 . These stone wall entrances to residential developments are common throughout Eggertsville and Snyder along Main Street and serve to give residential developments the appearance of having entrances similar to the former grand estates that were previously common along Main Street in the area . 
 Willard <unk> built the Lord Amherst Motor Hotel on Main Street near the I @-@ 290 interchange on Main Street to harmonize with the colonial architectural motif used by the local Main Street businesses . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Snyder is an affluent and well @-@ educated community in Metropolitan Buffalo . The residential population consists mostly of large single family homes on individual lots . The 2000 United States Census average household income of $ 87 @,@ 700 ( $ 120 @,@ 509 today ) far exceeds the Buffalo regional average of $ 57 @,@ 400 ( $ 78 @,@ 874 ) . The Snyder population declined from 14 @,@ 294 to 13 @,@ 875 while the number of households increased from 5 @,@ 469 to 5 @,@ 574 between the 1990 United States Census and the 2000 United States Census . During the decade the number of children age 5 – 17 and adults age 35 – 54 grew significantly while the young adults age 18 – 34 and adults over the age of 55 declined sharply . The number of housing units grew from 5 @,@ 662 to 5 @,@ 739 . 1990 housing was 82 @.@ 5 % single @-@ family housing . The busiest ATM in the entire Buffalo region is in Snyder . 
 The traditionally defined Snyder portion of Main Street had 180 businesses as of January 2002 . The town has two theatres : Musical Fare Theater is a not for profit corporation on the <unk> College campus and Fisher @-@ Towne Theater . 
 Starting in the 1950s zoning laws required that all new buildings be set back from the street and have private on @-@ site parking . The 21st Century zoning laws date back to 1976 . 
 = = Government = = 
 There is no formal Snyder government . The hamlet , like the rest of the town of Amherst , is served by the Town of Amherst Government and receives municipal services from the town . It is serviced by entities such as the Amherst Police Department , Snyder fire department and the Town of Amherst Highway Department , although Main Street and Harlem Road are serviced by the New York State Department of Transportation . Residents of Amherst , including those in Snyder , pay taxes both to the Town of Amherst and the County of Erie . However , the town tax is solely a school tax and the county collects the remaining town taxes for municipal services . 
 = = Education = = 
 Amherst Central High School , the town 's public high school , is located at 4301 Main Street , just west of the business district . The school started when the new Amherst school district was created in the late 1920s . Previously students from Eggertsville and Snyder either attended Bennett High School at <unk> Main Street in Buffalo or what is now called Williamsville South High School at <unk> Main Street in Williamsville and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as Williamsville Junior and Senior High School . 
 <unk> College is located across from the high school at <unk> Main Street . Amherst Middle School ( formerly Amherst Junior High School ) , the town 's public middle school , is located two blocks south of the High School at 55 Kings Highway . Additionally , the <unk> Institute @-@ Western New York at <unk> Main Street , which offers undergraduate degrees , is found in the business district . 
 Other schools located in the district include Smallwood Drive Elementary School ( K @-@ 5 ) , Park School of Buffalo ( Pre @-@ K @-@ 12 ) , and Christ The King School ( Pre @-@ K @-@ 8 ) . Park has been located in Snyder since 1922 . Smallwood is public ; Park is private and Christ The King is a Roman Catholic school . 
 = Platt @-@ LePage XR @-@ 1 = 
 The Platt @-@ LePage XR @-@ 1 , also known by the company designation PL @-@ 3 , was an early American twin @-@ rotor helicopter , built by the Platt @-@ LePage Aircraft Company of Eddystone , Pennsylvania . The winner of a United States Army Air Corps design competition held in early 1940 , the XR @-@ 1 was the first helicopter tested by the USAAF , flying in 1941 . The flight testing of the XR @-@ 1 proved troublesome , and although continued testing showed that the design had promise , other , improved helicopters were becoming available before the XR @-@ 1 was ready for service . As a result , the development of the aircraft was terminated in 1945 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Developed during 1939 from an earlier , unsuccessful design , the PL @-@ 1 , the Platt @-@ LePage Model PL @-@ 3 was the winner of a 1940 design competition , held under the terms of the Dorsey @-@ Logan Act , for the supply of a helicopter design to the United States Army Air Corps . Platt @-@ LePage 's submission was judged by the Army to be superior to its competitors , which included a helicopter submitted by Vought @-@ Sikorsky , and autogyros developed by Kellett and Pitcairn . 
 Following the selection of the Platt @-@ LePage design in May 1940 , a contract for the construction of a prototype and a static test airframe was issued in July of that year . The contract specified delivery of the flying prototype in January 1941 , however the aircraft was not completed until three months later than the contract schedule , a delay that led to Sikorsky receiving Dorsey @-@ Logan Act funding for development of its design , which became the XR @-@ 4 . 
 In its design , the XR @-@ 1 bore a strong resemblance to the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 61 , a helicopter developed by Henrich Focke in Germany that , flown by Hanna Reitsch , had impressed Platt @-@ LePage co @-@ founder Wynn LePage during a tour of Europe . The XR @-@ 1 was powered by a Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 985 radial engine , mounted in a buried installation within the fuselage . The aircraft had two , three @-@ bladed rotors , mounted in a side @-@ by @-@ side arrangement on wing @-@ like pylons . The pylons were aerodynamically designed to produce some lift when in forwards flight , slightly unloading the rotors . The construction of the XR @-@ 1 was conventional by the standards of the time , with the aircraft 's frame consisting of a steel @-@ tube framework , which was covered with fabric . The XR @-@ 1 had tail surfaces similar to those of a conventional aircraft , and was equipped with a fixed , <unk> landing gear . The aircraft 's wheels freely <unk> for easier maneuvering on the ground . 
 The cockpit of the XR @-@ 1 seated the aircraft 's two crew members in a tandem arrangement , the pilot located ahead of the observer , and was extensively glazed to provide good visibility in the aircraft 's intended observation and army co @-@ operation role . During the development of the aircraft , Major General Robert M. Danford proposed to the War Department that the XR @-@ 1 be evaluated against the Stinson YO @-@ 54 and the Kellett YG @-@ 1B autogyro . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Following several months of ground testing , the XR @-@ 1 conducted its maiden flight on May 12 , 1941 , although the aircraft was restrained by a tether for its early flights . On June 23 the aircraft conducted its first free flight , albeit remaining within a few feet of the ground . As flight testing continued and the aircraft 's performance envelope was expanded , the XR @-@ 1 's quickly proved troublesome , the testing showing a variety of troubles with the design . These included issues with the aircraft 's controls , insufficient control authority being present , and in addition there were resonance issues with the airframe that made the XR @-@ 1 prone to pilot @-@ induced oscillations . The aircraft was modified in an attempt to resolve these issues , and the Army modified Platt @-@ LePage 's contract to provide additional funding for improvements to the design , but despite this the XR @-@ 1 's problems continued . In addition , the company 's test pilot , Lou Leavitt , lacked confidence in the design , refusing to fly the aircraft to its full potential . The situation was only resolved when Colonel H. Franklin Gregory , director of rotor @-@ wing projects for the Army Air Forces , flew the aircraft himself , reaching 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) on his first flight in the aircraft . 
 With the worst of the aircraft 's problems believed to have been resolved , the XR @-@ 1 was submitted for service testing by the Army Air Forces in 1943 . During the course of the Army 's evaluations , the XR @-@ 1 's empennage failed during structural testing , the surfaces being strengthened as a result and testing , following the repairs , resuming in 1944 . Despite the modifications to the design , however , the XR @-@ 1 still proved to be deficient in control authority . In July 1943 , the XR @-@ 1 program suffered a setback when the aircraft crashed , seriously injuring test pilot Jim Ray , who had replaced Leavitt following the latter 's dismissal from the company . The crash was caused by an inspector 's error in leaving a suspect part on the aircraft , the rotor hub failing in flight as a result of the decision . The aircraft was repairable , but it would be a year before the XR @-@ 1 was ready to fly again . 
 Testing was , however , able to continue in the meantime , as Platt @-@ LePage had re @-@ negotiated the XR @-@ 1 contract to cover a second flight @-@ test aircraft . Built to a revised and improved version of the XR @-@ 1 's design and designated XR @-@ 1A , the second aircraft had flown for the first time in May 1943 . The XR @-@ 1A featured a revised cockpit covering compared to that of the XR @-@ 1 , with the area of glazing being increased for improved visibility , and the pilot and observer 's positions being reversed , the pilot now seated in the rear cockpit . During flight testing the XR @-@ 1A was found superior in flight performance to the XR @-@ 1 ; however , the controls were still proving troublesome , although the worst of the bugs did seem to have been worked out . 
 Following a cross @-@ country flight to Wright Field in Ohio from Platt @-@ LePage 's Pennsylvania plant , testing of the XR @-@ 1A continued until a mechanical failure in the rotor hub led to a crash landing on 26 October 1944 , the company deciding to sell the wreckage for scrap . 
 The XR @-@ 1 , having been repaired in the meantime , was once again flying , and a contract had been awarded to Platt @-@ Lepage for the construction of seven pre @-@ production aircraft , to be built to an improved version of the XR @-@ 1A design , and designated YR @-@ 1A . Motivated by Congressional concerns about potential favouritism towards Sikorsky Aircraft , which had in the meantime been given a contract for development of an improved version of their VS @-@ 300 experimental helicopter , the contract called for delivery of the first YR @-@ 1A to the Army in January 1945 . However , due to continued financial and flight @-@ testing problems , Platt @-@ Lepage proved incapable of meeting this schedule . 
 Although the XR @-@ 1 's problems seemed to be approaching resolution by late 1944 , the protracted development of the aircraft meant that alternative , improved helicopters , such as Sikorsky 's XR @-@ 4 , less expensive and more maneuverable than Platt @-@ LePage 's aircraft , were becoming available . In addition , even the XR @-@ 1A 's improvements had failed to cure the aircraft of all of its control and vibration problems , and the AAF 's Air Material Command considered the company " inept " in its work , applying a " hit @-@ or @-@ miss method " to research and development . As a result of this assessment , the Army 's contracts with the company were universally cancelled in early April 1945 . 
 Following the cancellation of the Army 's contract , the XR @-@ 1 was returned to the company , Platt @-@ LePage believing that the design had potential as a civilian aircraft . The planned civilian version , the PL @-@ 9 , would have been an enlarged , twin @-@ engined aircraft ; however Platt @-@ LePage was by now in serious financial difficulty following the cancellation of its Army contract , and in mid 1946 the XR @-@ 1 's flight test program was concluded , the aircraft being retired to the Smithsonian Institution . 
 In the meantime , the company 's former test pilot , Lou Leavitt , had purchased the wreckage of the XR @-@ 1A at a price of 4 cents per pound . Leavitt had formed a new company , Helicopter Air Transport , intending to provide helicopter flight training in anticipation of a postwar aviation boom , and he returned the XR @-@ 1A to flying condition . The projected boom failed to materialise , however , and HAT quickly entered bankruptcy , Leavitt selling the XR @-@ 1A to Frank Piasecki , another former Platt @-@ LePage employee who had now started his own helicopter company . Piasecki soon grounded the aircraft due to airworthiness concerns , and used the airframe in the development of the PA @-@ 2B , a planned tiltrotor which failed to proceed beyond the mock @-@ up stage . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 Following the conclusion of flight testing , the XR @-@ 1 was returned to the Army Air Forces , who placed the aircraft in storage before donating it to the Smithsonian Institution 's National Air and Space Museum . The unrestored aircraft is stored at the Paul Garber Restoration and Storage Facility in " remarkable condition " . 
 = = Variants = = 
 XR @-@ 1 
 First prototype ; one built . 
 XR @-@ 1A 
 Second prototype with increased cockpit glazing and improved engine ; one built . 
 YR @-@ 1A 
 Seven pre @-@ production aircraft ordered ; contract cancelled before any completed . 
 PL @-@ 4 
 Proposed armed variant of the XR @-@ 1 , fitted with four machine guns in a reprofiled nose . 
 PL @-@ 11 
 Proposed Utility / Mail single seat helicopter . 
 PL @-@ 12 
 Proposed five place civil helicopter , partially built in May of 1945 
 Piasecki PA @-@ 2B 
 Proposed tiltrotor based on XR @-@ 1 airframe ; not built . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 United States Army Air Forces 
 = = Specifications ( XR @-@ 1A ) = = 
 Data from Connor and Lee 2000 ; <unk> 1958 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Two ( Pilot and observer ) 
 Length : 29 ft 4 in ( 8 @.@ 94 m ) 
 Wingspan : 65 ft 0 in ( 19 @.@ 81 m ) 
 Height : 9 ft 0 in ( 2 @.@ 74 m ) 
 Gross weight : 4 @,@ 730 lb ( 2 @,@ 145 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 985 @-@ AN @-@ 1 radial piston engine , 450 hp ( 340 kW ) 
 Main rotor diameter : 2 × 31 ft 6 in ( 9 @.@ 60 m ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 110 mph ; 96 kn ( 177 km / h ) 
 Disk loading : 4 @.@ 1 lb / sq ft ( 19 @.@ 9 kg / m2 ) 
 Power / mass : 10 @.@ 8 lb ( <unk> ) / hp 
 = John Gregorson Campbell = 
 John Gregorson Campbell ( 1836 – 22 November 1891 ) was a Scottish folklorist and Free Church Minister at the Tiree and Coll parishes in Argyll , Scotland . An avid collector of traditional stories , in 1831 he became Secretary to the Ossianic Society of Glasgow University . Ill health had prevented him taking up employment as a Minister when he was initially approved to preach by the Presbytery of Glasgow in 1858 and later after he was appointed to Tiree by the Duke of Argyll in 1861 , parishioners objected to his manner of preaching . 
 Several of the anecdotes he amassed were published in magazines and , just before his death , work began on collating the first of four compendiums of the tales ; three were published a few years after his death . He was fluent in several languages , including Scottish Gaelic , and transcribed the legends precisely as dictated by the narrators . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 John Gregorson Campbell was born near Loch Linnhe at <unk> , Argyll in 1836 , the fourth child and second son of Helen MacGregor and Captain Campbell , an officer for the ship Cygnet . A short memoir , published in 1895 and based on information from Gregorson Campbell 's sister , states a Bean <unk> , or fairy washerwoman as Gregorson Campbell defined it , had cast a spell on his father 's ancestors proclaiming " they shall grow like the rush and wither like the fern " . The family moved to Appin in about 1839 , where the local parochial school provided Gregorson Campbell 's education until he was ten years old . He then attended a higher school in Glasgow before moving on to the University of Glasgow . 
 = = Career = = 
 Law was the subject Gregorson Campbell chose to study after completing his education but his primary interest was folklore , a topic that fascinated him from his college days . In 1831 he was appointed Secretary to the Glasgow University Ossianic Society . He secured a licence to preach from the Presbytery of Glasgow in 1858 but was unable to commence work as a clergyman at that time owing to ill health . His recuperation was spent beginning his collection of folklore stories . 
 When appointed as clergyman at the Free Church united parishes of Tiree and Coll by the Duke of Argyll in early 1861 , objections were initially raised by some members of the Tiree congregation who found Gregorson Campbell 's sermons boring , uninspiring and " devoid of fervour " . The Presbytery upheld two of the three main complaints , but an appeal was made to the Synod . Concerns had also been expressed that his health was insufficiently robust to serve the needs and challenges of the Tiree parish . The appeal was heard by the General Assembly on 31 May 1861 with Gregorson Campbell 's defence arguing that the main thrust of the complaints was actually founded on the congregation 's desire to have their own preferred minister appointed . The motion was not upheld and Gregorson Campbell became the minister of both parishes , a position he held for thirty years . 
 = = Folklore collections = = 
 Interest in mythology and folklore gained momentum in the last quarter of the 19th century , probably fuelled by the contentious debates surrounding the authenticity of the Ossian poems published by James Macpherson during the 1760s . Gregorson Campbell continued to build on the collection he started during his period of recuperation around 1858 , preserving the traditional tales as quoted at the time . The folklorist John Francis Campbell ( 1822 – 85 ) , also known as Campbell of Islay , had his first mythology books published in 1860 and he corresponded with Gregorson Campbell . Both men were fluent in several languages , including Scottish Gaelic , and their letters discuss the variations in the folk tales , with Campbell of Islay stating : " I have about 16 versions of one story in Gaelic , and no two have the same name . " 
 Gregorson Campbell had his own style of collating legends , meticulously transcribing the stories as dictated by the individual storytellers , and only rarely interspersing tales with his own comments . Christian ministers in Scotland differed in their attitudes towards the traditional beliefs and myths perpetuated by their parishioners , and were often dismissive of what they considered to be superstition and paganism , but Gregorson Campbell persisted in enthusiastically adding to his collection throughout the late 1800s . He was concerned that the intolerance shown by some of his fellow collectors towards the illiterate Gaelic @-@ speaking storytellers and those who believed in the myths would result in the loss of a valuable resource , as he regarded the narrators as having " powers of mind of a highest order " . 
 = = = Published work = = = 
 Traditional tales collected by Gregorson Campbell were first published in the inaugural edition of the quarterly periodical the Scottish Celtic Review in March 1881 . Reproduced in Gaelic and translated on the following pages in English , it was entitled " How the great <unk> was put to death " and told how the son of the King of Ireland went to a hunting hill and sought the answer to the death of the Great <unk> . Further legends from his collection were included in the next three volumes of the review . The Gaelic Society of Inverness published some of the tales , also given in Gaelic with an English translation , from 1888 until 1892 . The first of these in 1888 , " Sir Olave O <unk> " , also involved a King of Ireland and included some explanatory notes from Gregorson Campbell . Celtic Magazine and Highland Monthly were two other journals that published some of his folklore . Some of these were reprinted in the first compendium of Gregorson Campbell 's collection , The <unk> , a set of traditional tales and verses about combat printed as part of the Argyllshire series of books in 1891 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Gregorson Campbell 's health deteriorated in the last years of his life , especially after the death of his mother Helen at the Tiree manse in 1890 ; he died on 22 November 1891 before seeing the final printed edition of The <unk> . Alfred Nutt , fellow folklorist and publisher , chronicled details of Gregorson Campbell 's life as an introduction to the second compilation of Gregorson Campbell 's collection of myths , Clan Traditions and Popular Tales of the Western Highlands and Islands , published in 1895 . Two other books were published posthumously : Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland in 1900 , and Witchcraft and Second Sight in the West Highlands the following year . 
 Richard Dorson , American author and director of the Folklore Institute at Indiana University , describes Gregorson Campbell as worthy of a " front rank among Celtic folklorists " and Sophia Kingshill , author and folklorist , felt his writing was " vivid and engaging " . Contemporary praise was not entirely universal ; an anonymous review of Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland included in The Scottish Antiquary , Or , Northern Notes & Queries ( now The Scottish Historical Review ) in 1901 described the work as " a book of considerable pretension " and stated it was in need of proofreading , citing several printing errors . 
 = Leo Burke = 
 Leonce Cormier ( born June 29 , 1948 ) is a retired Canadian professional wrestler . He was born in Dorchester , New Brunswick . He competed across Canada , in several American promotions , and wrestled internationally for both Puerto Rico 's World Wrestling Council ( WWC ) and the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) in New Zealand . In Canada , where he spent the majority of his career , Cormier used the ring name Leo Burke . In the United States , however , he competed as Tommy Martin . 
 Over the course of his career , Cormier held 46 wrestling championships . Several of his title victories came as part of a tag team with his brothers , three of whom were also professional wrestlers . He had long @-@ term storyline feuds with such wrestlers as Cuban Assassin and Bret Hart , both of whom he later reconciled with and joined forces with to hold tag team championships . Since his retirement in 1992 , he has also trained many wrestlers for both World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . Cormier also competes in occasional wrestling matches and has been honored by both the Cauliflower Alley Club , a fraternal organization of professional wrestlers , and Stampede Wrestling , who inducted him into their hall of fame . 
 = = Career = = 
 Growing up in a wrestling family , Leonce Burke decided at age six that he wanted to become a professional wrestler . He followed in the footsteps of his older brothers Yvon and Jean @-@ Louis , who trained him to compete . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Cormier made his professional debut in 1966 . Competing in Central States Wrestling , an affiliate of the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) , he used the ring name Tommy Martin . He won his first championship belt on October 11 , 1968 by defeating Bob Brown for the NWA Central States Heavyweight Championship . Later that month , he gained another title when he formed a tag team with his brother Romeo ( who was competing under the ring name Terry Martin ) to win the Central States version of the NWA North American Tag Team Championship from Brown and Bob <unk> . The reign as tag team champions lasted for seven days before the Martins dropped the belts in a match against The Texas Outlaws ( Dick Murdoch and Dusty Rhodes ) . The following month , Martin also lost the heavyweight championship to Rhodes . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 Cormier spent much of the early 1970s competing in the Maritimes for his brother Jean @-@ Louis ' Eastern Sports Association ( ESA ) ( which owned International Wrestling , or IW ) as both a singles and tag team wrestler . He did not want to use their name recognition to further his own career , so he took the last name of his friend , boxer Jackie Burke . The four Cormier brothers all competed in the territory and often joined forces in feuds with the promotion 's top heel ( villain ) wrestlers . Burke won the IW North American Heavyweight Championship on June 22 , 1971 by defeating Eric Pomeroy . The title reign lasted for three months ; Gino Brito won the title from Burke during a match in Halifax , Nova Scotia , but Burke regained the championship five days later . On August 8 , 1972 . Burke teamed with his brother Romeo again ( who was now wrestling as Bobby Kay ) to win the ESA International Tag Team Championship . They held the title until the following June , when they dropped it to Fred Sweetan and Kurt Von Steiger . In August 1973 , Burke became the first ESA Taped Fist Championship when the promotion awarded him the title . 
 Burke next competed in the NWA 's Amarillo , Texas territory . He teamed with another brother , Yvon , who competed under the ring name The Beast . In January 1974 , they defeated Don Fargo and Hank James to win the NWA Western States Tag Team Championship , which they held for two months until a loss to Ricky Romero and Dory Funk , Jr .. Returning to the ESA , Burke had a short reign as IW North American Heavyweight Champion in May 1974 , which he followed in July with another reign with the ESA International Tag Team Championship . Holding the title with his brother The Beast , Burke held the championship for less than one month before dropping it to Geto Mongol and Great Kuma . That month , he also dropped the Taped Fist Championship to Mongol but regained it in a rematch within days . The following year , he held the North American Heavyweight Championship twice more , defeating Bolo Mongol and Bob Brown . For the second victory , Burke substituted for Killer Karl Krupp , who was unable to compete . Although Burke won the match , the title was later returned to Brown after Brown appealed the decision , claiming that a substitute wrestler should not be eligible to win a championship . Burke also had one final reign with the Taped Fist Championship before vacating the title . 
 Burke continued to compete for Central States Wrestling , and he teamed with The Beast in a tournament for the vacant NWA Western States Tag Team Championship . The brothers defeated Silver Streak and Ricky Romero in the finals on February 20 , 1976 to win the belts but lost them in a rematch one week later . Returning from Texas to Nova Scotia , Burke became the only person ever to hold the ESA Maritimes Heavyweight Championship . He defeated The Brute to win the title ; when the ESA closed in 1977 , the title became part of Romeo Cormier ( Bobby Kay ) ' s Trans @-@ Canada Wrestling ( TCW ) . TCW closed later the same year , and Burke 's Maritimes Heavyweight Championship was retired . In 1976 , Burke also defeated The Brute to begin another reign as IW North American Heavyweight Champion . He later dropped it to Michel Dubois but regained it by defeating Frenchy Martin on July 14 , 1977 . The title was also retired when TCW closed that month . Prior to the promotion closing , Burke also had a short reign with Hubert Gallant with the ESA Maritimes Tag Team Championship . While competing in Nova Scotia , Burke also challenged Terry Funk for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Burke controlled the majority of the encounter , but Funk intentionally got himself disqualified 55 minutes into the match . Because the title cannot change hands on a disqualification , Funk retained the belt . 
 In 1977 , Burke moved to Calgary , Alberta to compete for Stu Hart 's Stampede Wrestling . He teamed with Hart 's son Keith to win the Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship in early 1977 by defeating The Cuban Assassins . Although they dropped the belts to The Royal Kangaroos , Burke was able to regain the title in September 1977 while teaming with his brother Romeo ( who was then competing as Bobby Burke ) . On December 10 , however , they lost the belts to Michel Martel and Mr. Hito . In the new year , Leo Burke focused on competing as a singles wrestler and won the Stampede North American Heavyweight Championship on several occasions . He defeated Don Gagne ( formerly known as Frenchy Martin ) for the first title and Michel Martel for the second . He won it once more , by defeating Larry Lane , before leaving the area to compete briefly in New Zealand . Competing for the NWA territory there , he won the New Zealand version of the NWA British Commonwealth Heavyweight Championship . He soon vacated the title , however , and returned to Stampede Wrestling . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Upon his return to Calgary in 1980 , Burke teamed with Keith Hart once again to win the promotion 's International Tag Team Championship . He also began feuding with Keith 's brother Bret Hart around that time . Burke defeated Mr. <unk> to win the North American Heavyweight Championship but lost it to Bret Hart later that year . He regained it in a rematch but dropped it to Hart once again . Burke returned to Canada 's Atlantic Coast briefly to compete for Atlantic Grand Prix Wrestling ( AGPW ) and won the promotion 's North American Tag Team Championship with Hubert Gallant . They lost the belts to Cuban Assassin and Bobby Bass that summer , but Burke was able to regain the championship by teaming with Stephen Petitpas . AGPW only promoted shows in the summer , and Burke then returned to Calgary during AGPW 's off @-@ season ; while there , he teamed with his brother Bobby Burke again to regain the International Tag Team Championship in December 1980 . Two months later , he had another reign as North American Heavyweight Champion after defeating " Dr. D " David <unk> ( who later regained the title in a rematch ) . Another reign as NWA Central States Heavyweight Champion followed in November 1981 , in which Cormier returned to his Tommy Martin ring name . 
 Returning to Stampede Wrestling once again , Burke entered and won a tournament for the vacant North American Heavyweight Championship , defeating Duke Myers in the final match on March 21 , 1982 to win the title . He dropped it back to Bret Hart three months later , however . He followed this with a brief return in August 1982 to AGPW , where he defeated Rick Valentine to win the AGPW United States Heavyweight Championship . On November 19 , 1982 , Burke teamed with his longtime rival Bret Hart to win the Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship . After losing the title the following month , the feud resumed , and Burke defeated Hart for the North American Heavyweight Championship on January 14 , 1983 ; the men continued to face each other , and Hart regained the championship that May . 
 Around that time , Burke spent more of his time competing in Central and Eastern Canada . He wrestled for Maple Leaf Wrestling in Toronto , Ontario , where he feuded with Johnny Weaver . In the summer of 1983 , he held both the AGPW United States Heavyweight Championship and the AGPW International Heavyweight Championship . He was also credited with an additional reign as United States Heavyweight Champion because he regained the title in a rematch after it was vacated due to a controversial match against The Spoiler . In February 1986 , Burke had one final title reign in Stampede Wrestling , holding the International Tag Team Championship with Ron Ritchie . 
 Back in AGPW , Burke continued to win championships . He held the International Heavyweight Championship three more times from 1986 to 1989 , and held the North American Tag Team Championship three times as well during that period . He won the tag team titles by reuniting with former partners Hubert Gallant and Stephen Petitpas ; the third reign came with Cuban Assassin , a former enemy of the entire Cormier wrestling family . 
 A turning point came in Burke 's wrestling career in the late 1980s when he decided to compete in Puerto Rico 's World Wrestling Council . He quickly won the promotion 's top title , the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship , by defeating Caribbean wrestling veteran Carlos Colón on December 17 , 1989 . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Burke held the WWC title until February 1990 , when he dropped it to TNT . This was followed by a return to AGPW , where he held the tag team championship with his brother Bobby Kay . Back in Puerto Rico , Burke defeated Colón again on March 24 , 1990 , this time to win the WWC Television Championship . Four days later , he also won the WWC Caribbean Tag Team Championship while teaming with Chicky Starr . They won the title from Invader # 1 and Invader # 4 but dropped it back to them in May . Shortly after dropping the tag team title , Burke defeated Invader # 1 in a singles match to win the WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship . Burke 's final title victory came in the summer of 1990 , when he defeated Ron Starr to win the AGPW International Heavyweight Championship for a fifth time . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After retiring from full @-@ time wrestling , he went to Calgary in the early 1992 . His old rival and real @-@ life friend Bret Hart arranged a position for Cormier as a trainer for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF , now World Wrestling Entertainment ) . Cormier helped train Ken Shamrock , Mark Henry , Adam Copeland ( known as Edge in WWE ) , Jason Reso ( known as Christian in WWE ) , and Andrew Martin ( known as Test in WWE ) . He also trained two former Canadian Football League players for their careers in professional wrestling : former Edmonton Eskimo Jeff Thomas , who later opened his own wrestling training school , and former Ottawa Rough Rider Glenn Kulka , who went on to compete for the WWF . 
 When Cormier 's contract expired , he began training wrestlers for WWF rival World Championship Wrestling . In January 2002 , he was hospitalized with septicemia and was put on life support before recovering . In November 2005 , he underwent surgery to replace his right knee ; this was followed by a left knee replacement in February 2006 . He has had eight operations on his knees altogether . After his last surgery , WWE invited him back to resume training wrestlers , but Cormier declined . Since his retirement , he has worked in the now @-@ closed bar at Calgary 's Cecil Hotel and has also operated a mobile coffee and sandwich shop . 
 Although Cormier considers himself retired from professional wrestling , he continues to compete from time to time . He was featured in a news video by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation during a return to the Maritimes for a match in 1998 . In June 2009 , it was announced that he was participating in an Ultimate Championship Wrestling Legends Tribute Tour in Atlantic Canada alongside his former rival Cuban Assassin . In 2010 , Burke refereed a match at the final wrestling card ever promoted at the Berwick Arena in Nova Scotia . 
 Cormier has been inducted into the Stampede Wrestling Hall of Fame . In 2009 , the Cormier wrestling family was honored by the Cauliflower Alley Club in recognition of their contributions to the sport . Bret Hart has described Burke as " one of the greatest Canadian wrestlers ever " . Les Thatcher , who competed against Cormier , said that he , " technically , is probably one of the most sound performers that ever stepped foot in a ring " . Michel Martel , who wrestled against Cormier for several championships , called him " a great worker " and " a professional in the ring and outside the ring " . 
 In 2013 Cormier appeared in the Victoria Pavilion , in Calgary , Alberta for the Hart Legacy Wrestling promotion . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Sleeper hold 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Atlantic Grand Prix Wrestling 
 AGPW North American Tag Team Championship ( 6 times ) - with Cuban Assassin ( 2 ) , Hubert Gallant ( 1 ) , Bobby Kay ( 1 ) , and Stephen Petitpas ( 2 ) 
 AGPW United States Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 Central States Wrestling 
 NWA Central States Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 NWA North American Tag Team Championship ( Central States version ) ( 1 time ) - with Terry Martin 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with Bobby Kay ( 1 ) and The Beast ( 1 ) 
 ESA Maritimes Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 ESA Maritimes Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Hubert Gallant 
 ESA Taped Fist Championship ( 3 times ) 
 IW North American Heavyweight Championship ( 6 times ) 
 NWA New Zealand 
 NWA British Commonwealth Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Western States Sports 
 NWA Western States Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with The Beast 
 Stampede Wrestling 
 Stampede North American Heavyweight Championship ( 8 times ) 
 Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship ( 6 times ) - with Keith Hart ( 2 ) , Bobby Burke ( 2 ) , Bret Hart ( 1 ) and Ron Ritchie ( 1 ) 
 Stampede Wrestling Hall of Fame 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC Caribbean Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Chicky Starr 
 WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWC Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Juan Martín del Potro = 
 Juan Martín del Potro ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> del <unk> ] , born 23 September 1988 ) , often nicknamed <unk> , is an Argentine professional tennis player . His biggest achievement was winning the 2009 US Open , defeating Rafael Nadal in the semifinal and Roger Federer in the final . He was the first to defeat both Federer and Nadal during a major and was the only man outside the Big Four to win a major between the 2005 French Open and the 2013 US Open , a span of 35 tournaments . He is also the second Argentine and the fifth @-@ youngest man to win the US Open in the Open Era . His other career highlight was winning the bronze medal in men 's singles at the London Olympics in 2012 . 
 Del Potro achieved a top @-@ 10 ranking by the Association of Tennis Professionals ( ATP ) for the first time on 6 October 2008 . In January 2010 , he reached a career @-@ high ranking of World No. 4 , after which del Potro had to withdraw from most of the tournaments in 2010 due to a wrist injury . 
 He returned to the ATP World Tour on 15 February 2016 , at Delray Beach , after a long injury @-@ induced absence . 
 Having started playing tennis at the age of seven , del Potro won his first senior match in 2004 at the age of 15 . In 2008 , he became the first player in ATP history to win his first four career titles in as many tournaments . He also completed the second @-@ longest winning streak in 2008 , and the second longest by a teenager in the Open Era , behind Nadal — with his winning sequence spanning 23 matches over five tournaments . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Juan Martín del Potro was born in Tandil , Argentina . He is of Italian and Spanish descent . His father , Daniel del Potro , played semi @-@ professional rugby union in Argentina and is a veterinarian . His mother , Patricia , is a teacher and he has a younger sister named Julieta . He also had an elder sister who died when she was 8 @-@ years @-@ old in a car accident . Del Potro speaks Spanish , English and some Italian . Aside from tennis , he enjoys playing association football and supports the Boca Juniors team in Argentina and Juventus in Italy . He would often dedicate time to both sports during his childhood , and Argentine @-@ Italian international footballer Mauro <unk> remains a close friend of del Potro . 
 Del Potro began playing tennis at the age of seven with coach Marcelo Gómez ( who also coached Tandil @-@ born players Juan Mónaco , Mariano Zabaleta and Máximo González ) . Del Potro 's talent was discovered by Italian ex @-@ tennis professional Ugo <unk> , who accompanied him through the initial phases of his young career , and is still today his agent and close friend . When questioned about his ambitions in tennis he replied , " I dream of winning a Grand Slam and the Davis Cup . " However , he has refused to participate in the Davis Cup several times . He is a Roman Catholic . 
 = = Tennis career = = 
 = = = 2002 – 2005 = = = 
 As a junior in 2002 , del Potro won the Orange Bowl 14s title , beating Marin Čilić en route to a victory over Pavel <unk> in the final . In 2003 , at the age of 14 , del Potro received wild cards to three ITF Circuit events in Argentina , where he lost in straight sets in the first round of each . 
 As a junior , Del Potro reached as high as No. 3 in the combined junior world rankings in January 2005 . 
 In May 2004 , del Potro won his first senior match , at the age of 15 , at the ITF Circuit event in Buenos Aires by defeating Matias <unk> . He then went on to lose in three sets to Sebastián <unk> in the second round . His next victory came over five months later against the Chilean Álvaro Loyola in a tournament in Antofagasta . Later that year , del Potro reached the quarterfinals of the ITF Circuit event in Campinas , Brazil ; recording victories over Henrique Mello and Alessandro <unk> . Del Potro won two more matches before the end of the year and saw his world ranking rise from no . 1441 in August to no . 1077 in November . He also reached the finals in the Argentina Cup and <unk> Internazionali D 'Italia Junior tournaments . 
 Del Potro reached his first final of the ITF Junior Circuit on 11 January 2005 , the Copa del Cafe ( Coffee Bowl ) - Junior ITF Tournament in Costa Rica , which he lost to Robin Haase in three sets . He was involved in a dispute with the umpire during this match , who decided to stop play because of rain , which del Potro believed favoured Haase . Because of the rain delays , the final set had to be played indoors ; this was the first time the indoor courts had been used in the 44 @-@ year history of the youth tournament . 
 At the age of 16 , del Potro reached his first senior singles final at the Futures tournament in <unk> <unk> , Mexico , where he lost to Darko <unk> . He then went on to win consecutive titles at two Future ITF Circuit events in Santiago , Chile , including the 26th International Junior tournament . In the first tournament , he beat Jorge Aguilar , and in the second , he did not drop a set in the whole tournament and defeated Thiago Alves in the final , a player ranked more than 400 places higher at the time . He won his third title in his home country by defeating Damian <unk> , who forfeited the match , at the ITF Circuit event in Buenos Aires . 
 Del Potro turned professional after the Italy <unk> event in Bassano , and in his first professional tournament , the Lines Trophy in Reggio Emilia , he reached the semifinals , where he lost to countryman Martín <unk> <unk> in three sets . Two tournaments later , he reached the final of the <unk> Citi MasterCard Tennis Cup in Campos do Jordão , Brazil , where he lost to André Sá in straight sets . After turning 17 , he won the Montevideo Challenger by defeating Boris <unk> in the final in three sets . That same year , he failed in his first attempt to qualify for his first Grand Slam , at the US Open , losing in the first round to Paraguayan Ramón Delgado . Throughout 2005 , del Potro jumped over 900 positions to finish with a world ranking of no . 158 , largely due to winning three Futures tournaments . He was the youngest player to finish in the year @-@ end top 200 . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 In February , del Potro played his first ATP tour event in Viña del Mar , where he defeated Albert Portas , before losing to Fernando González in the second round . Later , seeded seventh , he won the Copa Club <unk> de Aguascalientes by defeating the likes of Dick Norman and Thiago Alves , before beating Sergio <unk> in the final . 
 Del Potro qualified for the main draw of his first Grand Slam in the 2006 French Open at the age of 17 . He lost in the opening round to former French Open champion and 24th seed Juan Carlos Ferrero . Having received a wild card , he reached the quarterfinals of the ATP event in Umag , Croatia , where he lost in three sets to the eventual champion , Stanislas Wawrinka . In Spain , he participated in the Open Castilla y León Challenger tournament held in Segovia , defeating top seed Fernando Verdasco in the quarterfinals and Benjamin Becker in the final . 
 Del Potro qualified for his first US Open in 2006 , after being seeded ninth in the qualifying stages , where he beat Brian <unk> , Wayne Arthurs , and Daniel <unk> in straight sets . In the US Open , he lost in the first round to fellow qualifier Alejandro Falla of Colombia in four sets . He went on to qualify for his first ATP Masters Series tournament in Spain , the Mutua <unk> Madrid Open , where he lost in the first round to Joachim Johansson . After receiving a wild card thanks to Roger Federer , he reached the quarterfinals of the 2006 Davidoff Swiss Indoors in Basel , Switzerland ; defeating lucky loser Tobias Clemens in the first round and George <unk> in the second round , before losing to the eventual runner @-@ up Fernando González in three sets . Del Potro finished 2006 as the youngest player in the top 100 at 18 years , 2 months . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 Del Potro began the year by reaching his first semifinal in ATP Adelaide , Australia , where he lost to Chris Guccione , having beaten Igor Kunitsyn earlier in the day . He then reached the second round of the Australian Open , where he had to retire because of injury in his match against eventual finalist Fernando González in the fifth set . In February , del Potro played for Argentina in the first round of the Davis Cup against Austria , winning the fourth and deciding match against Jürgen Melzer in five sets , allowing Argentina to qualify for the quarterfinals . 
 Del Potro defeated Feliciano López before losing to eventual semifinalist Mardy Fish in the second round of the indoor Regions Morgan Keegan Championships . In his next ATP Masters event , he reached the second round of the Pacific Life Open , beating Gustavo <unk> in the first round , but then losing to Richard Gasquet . Del Potro went further in the Sony Ericsson Open , reaching the fourth round , after he defeated three top @-@ 50 players : Jonas Björkman , Marcos Baghdatis , and Mikhail Youzhny , before falling to Rafael Nadal in two sets . In May , he lost in the first round of the French Open to eventual champion Nadal . 
 In his first grass @-@ court event , del Potro beat Thomas Johansson in two sets and reached the second round at the Queen 's Club , where he lost to Nadal . He also reached the quarterfinals in Nottingham the following week ; there he beat British qualifier Jamie Baker and Kunitsyn in the first two rounds , but lost to Ivo Karlović at the quarterfinal stage . At his inaugural Wimbledon Championships , he defeated Davide Sanguinetti in the first round , before losing to eventual champion Roger Federer in the second round , after a rain delay in the third set . 
 Del Potro lost to Frank <unk> in three sets in the second round of the singles at the ATP event in Indianapolis . At the same event , partnered with Travis Parrott in doubles , he won his first doubles tournament , defeating Teymuraz Gabashvili and Karlović in the final . He regards this as a special victory , " It was fantastic to play doubles with Parrott . I 'm so happy because I 've never won a doubles tournament . For the rest of my life , I will remember this tournament . " Del Potro qualified for the ATP Masters Series event in Cincinnati , where he reached the third round . He defeated countryman Guillermo <unk> in the first round and Philipp Kohlschreiber in the second , before losing to former world no . 1 Carlos <unk> . At that year 's US Open , he defeated Nicolas Mahut and Melzer , before losing to eventual finalist and third seed Novak Djokovic in the third round . He also reached the third round of the Madrid Masters by beating <unk> <unk> and Tommy Robredo , before losing to eventual champion David Nalbandian in straight sets . In the last tournament of the year , the Paris Masters , he reached the second round , where he lost to Nikolay Davydenko . That year , del Potro was the youngest player to finish in the year @-@ end top 50 at 19 years , 2 months . 
 = = = 2008 : Breakthrough = = = 
 Del Potro 's first half of the season was hampered by injuries and a change of coach , starting with a first @-@ round loss in Adelaide , where he was the seventh seed . He then made it to the second round of the Australian Open in January , only to retire against David Ferrer due to an injury . Del Potro returned to the circuit in March , winning his first match against Jesse Levine at the Sony Ericsson Open , before losing in the second round to López . Struggling with injuries , his ranking fell as low as no . 81 in April . " At the start of the year , I was playing good , but I had many injuries , many problems with my body , with my physique " , said del Potro . " I changed my coach , changed my physical trainer , I changed everything . " 
 In May , del Potro had to retire again , this time in a first @-@ round match against Andy Murray at the Rome Masters . During the second set , the Argentine allegedly made derogatory comments about Murray 's mother which resulted in a complaint to the umpire . Del Potro 's serve was subsequently broken three times in a row , and he suffered a back injury , which caused his retirement . In his second Grand Slam of the year , the French Open , he was eliminated in the second round by Simone Bolelli in four sets . In June , he reached the semifinals of the <unk> Open , losing to eventual winner and top seed David Ferrer in straight sets . For the second year in a row , he was knocked out of Wimbledon in the second round ; he won his first @-@ round clash with Pavel <unk> in straight sets , but then lost to Stanislas Wawrinka . 
 A successful summer followed for the Argentine . In July , del Potro and his team decided to remain in Europe to test his fitness . " We decided to play on clay courts for my back because if I start to play again on hard courts , maybe I will injure it again " , he recalled . Del Potro won his first career ATP tour title at the Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart , defeating Gasquet in straight sets in the final . A week later , del Potro reached his second career ATP Tour final at the Austrian Open in Kitzbühel , where he beat local hope and sixth seed Melzer in less than an hour , to claim his second title in two weeks . Having competed in just two clay tournaments all of the 2007 season , he never thought he would win his first two titles on clay courts . 
 In August , del Potro won his third consecutive title at the Countrywide Classic in Los Angeles , beating Andy Roddick in straight sets in the final . After the match , Roddick praised his opponent . " [ Del Potro ] hits this way and this way kind of equally and he can hit it from inside out and running to it , which is a good thing for him , bad for the rest of us " . A fourth consecutive title followed a week later in the Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington , D.C. , where he recorded a victory over Viktor Troicki , becoming the first player in ATP history to win his first four career titles in as many tournaments . " I don 't really understand what I did . It is difficult to believe that I have won four consecutive titles " , del Potro said , crediting coach Franco <unk> for his impressive run . " He changed my game . He changed my mind . He changed everything . When I play and I see him in the stands , it gives me confidence . I can play relaxed . " 
 At the 2008 US Open , del Potro progressed to the third round , where he won his first match to five sets in the circuit against Gilles Simon to reach the round of 16 . He went on to defeat Japanese teenager Kei Nishikori in straight sets . In the quarterfinals , he was stopped by eventual finalist Murray , losing after almost four hours . The defeat came after 23 consecutive victories : the second @-@ longest winning streak in 2008 and the longest winning streak by a player outside the top 10 in the last 20 years . 
 Del Potro was selected to play his first home @-@ based Davis Cup tie , between Argentina and Russia . He won his first singles match against Davydenko in three sets . He also won the fifth and deciding match against Igor Andreev in straight sets , booking Argentina a place in the final . 
 At the AIG Japan Open Tennis Championships , he made the final by defeating 11th seed Jarkko Nieminen , top seed and defending champion Ferrer , and fourth seed Richard Gasquet . He was defeated by Tomáš Berdych in the final . At the Madrid Masters , he lost in the quarterfinals in straight sets to Roger Federer . He reached the semifinals of his next tournament , the Davidoff Swiss Indoors , before losing to countryman Nalbandian . He was beaten by Nalbandian again in his next tournament , this time it was in the second round of the Paris Masters . Del Potro blamed fatigue for his defeat , " It 's difficult to play the last tournament of the year . I was tired , my mind was in Argentina [ the venue for the Davis Cup final ] " . This left del Potro 's qualification for the 2008 Tennis Masters Cup out of his hands ; fortunately for him , Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga beat James Blake in the semifinals , which was enough to ensure his place at the year @-@ end event . 
 Del Potro won one match at the Masters Cup , against Tsonga , but lost his other two matches against the higher @-@ ranked Djokovic and Davydenko , meaning that he exited the tournament in the round @-@ robin stage . This was his last event of the year on the ATP Tour . He went on to lose one match in the Davis Cup final , against López , as his team succumbed to a 3 – 1 loss against Spain . He was forced to withdraw from his second match due to a thigh injury and was replaced by José <unk> . Nonetheless , del Potro enjoyed a successful season ; winning four titles and finishing 2008 as the youngest player in the top 10 , top @-@ ranked Argentine , and highest @-@ ranked South American . 
 = = = 2009 : Maiden Grand Slam title = = = 
 At the Heineken Open in Auckland , New Zealand , del Potro was the top seed . He defeated American Sam Querrey in the final to win the title , the fifth of his career . Seeded eighth at the Australian Open , he beat Marin Čilić in the fourth round . Del Potro 's tournament ended in his next match , when he lost in straight sets to Federer . At the BNP Paribas Open , the sixth seed del Potro advanced to the quarterfinals , where he was defeated by world no . 1 Nadal . Del Potro avenged that loss the following week at the Sony Ericsson Open , where he came back from a double break down in the third set at 0 – 3 to defeat Nadal in the quarterfinals . This was the first time del Potro had defeated Nadal in five meetings . Despite a loss in the semifinals to Murray , del Potro reached a career @-@ high ranking of world no . 5 . 
 In the clay @-@ court season , del Potro was eliminated in the second round of the Monte Carlo Masters by Ivan Ljubičić . In Rome , del Potro beat Victor Troicki and Wawrinka to advance to the quarterfinals , where he was defeated by defending champion Djokovic in straight sets . This meant del Potro 's head @-@ to @-@ head record with the Serb was now 0 – 3 . Del Potro then played at the 2009 Madrid Masters . After defeating Murray for the first time in the quarterfinals , he lost to Federer in the semifinals . At the French Open , where he was fifth seed , del Potro defeated Michaël Llodra , Troicki , Andreev , and ninth seed Tsonga en route to the quarterfinals . He then defeated three @-@ time former quarterfinalist Tommy Robredo to get to his first semifinal of a Grand Slam . He was defeated in a close semifinal , where he was leading by a set twice , by eventual champion Federer who , after their match , said : " [ Del Potro ] is young and strong , I have a lot of respect for him . " Prior to this encounter , del Potro had never taken a set from Federer in their five previous career meetings . 
 At the 2009 Wimbledon Championships , his poor grass @-@ court form from the past continued , as he went down to unseeded Lleyton Hewitt in the second round . In the Davis Cup quarter @-@ final against the Czech Republic , del Potro won his matches against Ivo <unk> and Berdych in straight sets , but Argentina still lost the tie 2 – 3 , eliminating them from the competition . A few weeks later , he defeated Hewitt and Fernando González en route to the Washington final . He successfully defended his title against top @-@ seeded Wimbledon finalist Andy Roddick to win his second tournament of the year and become the first player since Andre Agassi to win back @-@ to @-@ back Washington titles . Del Potro played the following week at the Masters 1000 in Montreal , where he was seeded sixth , defeating world no . 2 Nadal in the quarterfinals , his second win in a row over Nadal . He then defeated Roddick in the semifinals , saving a match point , to advance to his first Masters 1000 final , and to improve his head @-@ to @-@ head record against Roddick to 3 – 0 . In the final , he lost against Murray in three sets . He later withdrew from the next Masters 1000 event in Cincinnati due to fatigue . 
 Seeded sixth at the 2009 US Open , del Potro began by defeating Juan Mónaco and Jürgen Melzer in straight sets , before dropping a set but defeating <unk> to reach the fourth round . He defeated a resurgent Juan Carlos Ferrero to advance to the quarterfinals for the second consecutive year . Del Potro then advanced to the semifinals by defeating Marin Čilić . Del Potro was down a set and a break , before winning 17 of the final 20 games to win the match . His advance to the semifinals ensured his return to the top 5 in the rankings . He then easily defeated and crushed world No. 3 and reigning Australian Open champion Rafael Nadal in the semifinals to reach his first Grand Slam final . This was his third consecutive victory over Nadal and made him the first Argentine to reach a Grand Slam singles final since Mariano Puerta at the 2005 French Open . In the finals , del Potro rallied from a set and a break down to defeat world no . 1 and five @-@ time defending champion Roger Federer in five sets ; his first victory over Federer after six previous defeats , and Federer 's first loss in the US Open since 2003 . Del Potro stated , " Since [ I was ] young , I dream with this and take trophy with me " , said del Potro , who became the first Argentine male to win the title since Guillermo Vilas in 1977 . " I did my dream , and it 's unbelievable moment . It 's amazing match , amazing people . Everything is perfect . " After the match , Federer praised del Potro ; " I thought he hung in there and gave himself chances and , in the end , was the better man . " 
 He is the first player since countryman David Nalbandian to defeat Federer at the US Open , and at 198 cm ( 6 ft 6 in ) , he is the tallest ever Grand Slam champion , a record he now shares with Marin Čilić , the 2014 US Open winner . Besides Nadal and Djokovic , del Potro is the only player to defeat Federer in a Grand Slam final , and the first player to defeat both Nadal and Federer in the same Grand Slam tournament . 
 Dick Enberg hosted the post @-@ match ceremony during which a victorious Del Potro requested to address his fans in Spanish . Enberg declined the request saying that he was running out of time , but went on to list the corporate sponsored prizes Del Potro won . A couple of minutes later , Del Potro made the same request again , and only then did Enberg relent saying , " Very quickly , in Spanish , he wants to say hello to his friends here and in Argentina " . An emotional del Potro finally spoke a few sentences in Spanish to a cheering crowd . Many viewers expressed disappointment with Enberg and broadcaster CBS over the interview . A CBS executive later defended Enberg , noting that the contract with the United States Tennis Association required that certain sponsors receive time during the ceremony . 
 In his first match since the US Open , Del Potro was upset by world no . 189 Édouard Roger @-@ <unk> in straight sets at the Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships in Tokyo . He then lost his second straight match to Melzer in the second round at the Masters 1000 event in Shanghai , retiring while trailing in the second set . This retirement caused concerns over the length of the tennis season . He had to retire again in the Paris Masters quarterfinals when down 0 – 4 to Radek Štěpánek due to an abdominal injury . In November , del Potro competed in the ATP World Tour Finals , where he lost his first round @-@ robin match against Andy Murray , but he managed to defeat Fernando Verdasco in his second match to keep his hopes alive . After defeating Roger Federer in the following match , he qualified for the semifinals , ousting Murray by the slimmest possible margin of one game . He defeated Robin Söderling in the semifinals , before losing to Nikolay Davydenko in the final . Del Potro finished 2009 as the youngest player in the top 10 , top @-@ ranked Argentine , and highest @-@ ranked South American for the second consecutive year . 
 = = = 2010 : Best Ranking and wrist injury = = = 
 Del Potro started his 2010 season at the AAMI Kooyong Classic in Melbourne , Australia with a win over Croatian world no . 24 Ivan Ljubičić . On 11 January , he moved up to a career high world no . 4 . He was scheduled to face Frenchman Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga on day 2 of the Kooyong Classic exhibition tournament , but withdrew due to a wrist injury . He came into the 2010 Australian Open with the injury not healed , and was forced to take a month off after the event . In the fourth round , he fell to eventual semifinalist Marin Čilić . 
 Following the Australian Open loss , del Potro missed several tournaments , including the Masters tournaments at Indian Wells and Miami , which were touted as potential return dates , due to the persistent wrist injury . Even though he withdrew from the Monte @-@ Carlo Rolex Masters , he regained the world no . 4 ranking , due to Murray 's early exit in the second round . He then withdrew from Barcelona and the Rome Masters . On 4 May , del Potro took the option of having an operation to fix the injury . On 19 May , del Potro said he would not defend his US Open title , but if all went well , he would appear after the event , targeting the Paris Masters as a possible comeback . However , on 22 July , the <unk> stated that del Potro was expected to defend his US Open crown . The player himself confirmed that his comeback to the tour would be the Thailand Open and said nothing about the New York event . On 2 August , del Potro returned to the practice courts . A week before the start of the US Open , after practicing for two weeks , del Potro withdrew from the event , as he felt he was not ready to compete at the highest level . 
 After the nine @-@ month break , del Potro confirmed that he would make his return at the 2010 PTT Thailand Open . In his return match , he lost in the first round to Olivier Rochus . He then also played at the 2010 Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships , but again lost in the opening round , this time to Feliciano López . 
 = = = 2011 : Return to tour = = = 
 Del Potro began his 2011 season at the Medibank International as a wildcard entry . In the second round , Del Potro was defeated by Florian Mayer of Germany in straight sets , despite winning against sixth seed Feliciano López in three sets . His next tournament would be the first Grand Slam of the year at the 2011 Australian Open , where Del Potro was defeated by 21st seed Marcos Baghdatis in the second round . As a result , Del Potro slipped further down the rankings to no . 485 . 
 After the Australian Open , he participated in the 2011 SAP Open in San Jose , where he was accepted into the main draw via protected ranking ( PR ) . He reached the semifinals without dropping a set , however he lost to top seed Fernando Verdasco in straight sets . Del Potro 's next scheduled tournament was the 2011 Regions Morgan Keegan Championships and the Cellular South Cup , where he was accepted into the main draw via wildcard . Here , he made his second consecutive ATP semifinal , where he lost to top seed , world no . 8 , and eventual champion Andy Roddick . To continue preparing for his first ATP Masters event since 2009 , Del Potro entered the 2011 Delray Beach International Tennis Championships . He defeated Ričardas Berankis , Teymuraz Gabashvili , Kevin Anderson and second seed Mardy Fish , to advance to an ATP @-@ level final stage of a tournament since 2009 at the Barclays World Tour Finals in London . In the final , he defeated an erratic Janko Tipsarević in two sets to get back in the winners circle . 
 Del Potro 's next tournament was the ATP Masters at the 2011 BNP Paribas Open . He reached the semifinals , where he lost to top seeded Rafael Nadal in straight sets . Del Potro then flew to Key Biscayne , Miami to participate in the second ATP Masters of the year at the 2011 Sony Ericsson Open . Del Potro made it to the fourth round , in the third round he defeated World <unk> Robin Söderling in straight sets , however in the next round he lost to eventual semifinalist Mardy Fish in straight sets . 
 He then played in 2011 Estoril Open , which was del Potro 's first tournament on clay since he lost the 2009 Roland Garros semifinal to the eventual champion Roger Federer . In Estoril , he defeated Fernando Verdasco in the final . On the way to the final , del Potro defeated top seeded Robin Söderling ( Who was two time @-@ finalist in the French Open ) and dropped just one set in his five matches . After suffering an 8 @-@ millimeter tear in his left rectus , del Potro withdrew from 2011 Mutua Madrid Open and did not participate in the 2011 Internazionali BNL d 'Italia , but confirmed that he would play the French Open . Del Potro lost to Novak Djokovic in the third round . 
 Del Potro reached the round of 16 at Wimbledon for the first time by defeating Flavio <unk> , Olivier Rochus , and Gilles Simon . He then lost to world no . 1 Rafael Nadal , in four sets , in the fourth round . Del Potro returned to the top 20 at world no . 19 for the first time in nearly a year . His next tournament was the Farmers Classic in Los Angeles , where he received a first @-@ round bye as the second seed . He defeated James Blake but was defeated by Ernests Gulbis in the quarterfinals . 
 At the 2011 Rogers Cup , seeded 16th , del Potro defeated Jarkko Nieminen before losing to Marin Čilić in the second round . At the Western & Southern Masters tournament , del Potro lost to Roger Federer , snapping the two @-@ match winning streak he had against his rival . Del Potro entered the 2011 US Open seeded 18th . He beat Filippo <unk> and Diego Junqueira before losing to Gilles Simon in the third round , thus ending his US Open campaign . 
 After the US Open , del Potro played in the Davis Cup semifinal against Serbia , winning both of his rubbers against Janko Tipsarević and world no . 1 Novak Djokovic . This helped Argentina to a 3 – 2 victory over Serbia in the semifinals , booking their place in the final . He then played in the Stockholm Open , losing in the second round to James Blake . He then reached the final in Vienna , losing for the first time to Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga . Despite having won the first set , he eventually lost the final . Del Potro then reached the semifinals of the Valencia Open 500 , losing to eventual champion Marcel Granollers . He then withdrew from the Paris Masters due to a shoulder injury , wiping out his chances of qualifying for the Year @-@ End Championships . 
 Del Potro played in the Davis Cup Final , with the title on the line and looking to fulfill his childhood dream . He lost in the second rubber to David Ferrer , despite being two sets to one up , eventually losing in a pulsating five @-@ set contest in a match lasting over five hours . With his country down 2 – 1 , del Potro needed to beat Rafael Nadal in the reverse singles to keep the tie going . Del Potro dominated the first set , but could not keep his level up and lost in four sets . For the third time in six years , Argentina lost in the finals of the Davis Cup World Group , this time 3 – 1 . 
 Del Potro finished the year ranked world no . 11 , despite being ranked no . 485 at one stage . He was named 2011 ATP Comeback Player of the Year . 
 = = = 2012 : Return to the Top 10 and Olympic Medal = = = 
 Del Potro 's first tournament of the year was the 2012 Apia International Sydney , where he was the top seed . He made it to the quarterfinals after receiving a bye into the second round . He defeated Łukasz <unk> in the second round . In the quarterfinals , he was beaten by Marcos Baghdatis . 
 In the first round of the 2012 Australian Open , Del Potro defeated Adrian <unk> in four sets . He reached the quarterfinals of the Grand Slam for the second time , losing to Roger Federer in the quarterfinals . 
 He went on to play in Rotterdam at the 2012 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam , where he was third seed . Here he defeated Tomáš Berdych in order to make it to his first final of an ATP 500 level tournament or higher after returning from his wrist injury in 2010 . He lost to Federer in straight sets in the final . At the Open 13 in Marseille , del Potro defeated Davydenko , Gasquet , Tsonga , and Michaël Llodra in the final to get his tenth ATP championship . Del Potro then had a good run in Dubai , reaching the semifinals , then losing to Roger Federer again in straight sets . Del Potro lost in the quarterfinals of the BNP Paribas Open to Federer for the fourth time that year . He made it to the fourth round of the Sony Ericsson Open , but lost to David Ferrer in two sets . 
 Del Potro started his clay @-@ court campaign of 2012 in the Davis Cup Quarterfinals against Croatia . He won his first rubber against Ivo Karlović and then demolished Marin Čilić in the reverse singles . He continued his clay @-@ court season at the Estoril Open , where he was the defending champion and the top seed . He did not drop a set en route to the finals , where he beat Frenchman Richard Gasquet in straight sets in the final to collect his 11th ATP World Tour title . He next competed in the Madrid Masters as the twelfth seed and defeated Florian Mayer , Mikhail Youzhny , Marin Čilić , Alexandr Dolgopolov , but lost to Tomáš Berdych in the semifinals . 
 Del Potro played at the second Grand Slam of the year , the French Open , where he was seeded ninth . Del Potro defeated Albert Montañés , Édouard Roger @-@ <unk> and Marin Čilić . He defeated seventh seed Tomáš Berdych before losing to Roger Federer in the quarterfinals in five sets , after being up two sets to love . 
 At Wimbledon , del Potro beat Robin Haase , Go Soeda , and Kei Nishikori , before losing to David Ferrer in the fourth round . 
 At the Olympic Games , del Potro faced Roger Federer in the semifinals , which resulted in the longest " best of three sets " tennis match by duration in history , lasting four hours and 26 minutes , half an hour longer than the previous record holder , a Milos Raonic – Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga match that took place three days earlier ; the final set took two hours and 43 minutes . Del Potro lost the encounter , 6 – 3 , 6 – 7 , 17 – 19 . Less than two hours after this marathon , del Potro took to the tennis court again with Gisela Dulko for their quarterfinal mixed doubles match against Lisa Raymond and Mike Bryan , which they lost . Two days later , del Potro defeated Novak Djokovic in the bronze @-@ medal match . It was Del Potro 's first victory over Djokovic , excluding a win that occurred in the Davis Cup where Djokovic retired after dropping the first set . 
 Del Potro returned to hard courts to play at the Rogers Cup , where he was upset by 33 @-@ year @-@ old world no . 40 Radek Štěpánek . Del Potro lost in the quarterfinals of the US Open against Djokovic . 
 In October , del Potro beat qualifier Grega <unk> to win the Erste Bank Open in Vienna . He then beat Roger Federer to win the Swiss Indoors title , in Basel . The following week , he suffered a third @-@ round loss to Michaël Llodra at the BNP Paribas Masters . During the round @-@ robin stage of the ATP World Tour Finals , he won two of his three matches and qualified for the semifinals , where he was defeated by Djokovic in three sets , after leading by a set and a break . 
 He ended the year ranked world no . 7 , with a 65 – 17 win @-@ loss record and four titles captured throughout the season . 
 = = = 2013 : Continued successes and back to the top 5 = = = 
 Del Potro began his season at the Australian Open , where he was upset in the third round by Jérémy Chardy in five sets . The next month , he won the Rotterdam Open , beating Gaël Monfils , Ernest Gulbis , Jarkko Nieminen , Grigor Dimitrov in the semifinals , and Julien Benneteau in the final . At Dubai , Juan Martín beat Marcos Baghdatis , saving three match points , Somdev Devvarman , and Daniel Brands , but lost in the semifinals to eventual winner Novak Djokovic . 
 At Indian Wells , del Potro defeated Nikolay Davydenko , Björn Phau , and Tommy Haas . In the quarterfinals , he beat Andy Murray for the second time in six matches . In the semifinals , he upset top seed Novak Djokovic , to end the Serb 's streak of 22 victories . He then lost in the final to Rafael Nadal . Del Potro withdrew from the clay court season and from the French Open due to a viral infection . 
 On grass , del Potro began at the 2013 Aegon Championships , where he won his first comeback match in three sets against Xavier <unk> , who had achieved his biggest win at the Queens Club against Novak Djokovic in 2010 . Del Potro came back from behind in the third set to take the match . He defeated Daniel Evans , only to be upset on the quarterfinals by Lleyton Hewitt 
 At Wimbledon , Del Potro won against Albert Ramos , Jesse Levine , and Grega <unk> before advancing past the fourth round for the first time in his career , thanks to a win over Andreas Seppi . He then played David Ferrer and , despite slipping badly during the fifth point of the match and aggravating a pre @-@ existing leg injury , requiring over five minutes of treatment and by his own admission being close to forfeiting the match , he recovered to defeat Ferrer in straight sets to advance to his first Grand Slam semifinal since the 2009 US Open without dropping a set . On 5 July , Djokovic defeated him in five sets in 4 hours and 43 minutes , making it the longest semifinal in the history of Wimbledon men 's singles . 
 Starting the US Series , del Potro won the 2013 Citi Open in Washington DC , where he got a first @-@ round bye , and then defeated Ryan Harrison , Bernard Tomic , and Kevin Anderson on his way to the quarterfinals , Tommy Haas in the semifinals , and won the final against John Isner in three sets . Before the final he didn 't drop a set . This was his third title at the event and his second of the year . Del Potro reached the semifinals of Western & Southern Open where he won against Nikolay Davydenko , Feliciano López , in the quarterfinals Dmitry <unk> , and faced Isner again , this time in the semifinals . He lost the match in three sets . Del Potro got to the second round of the US Open , after a four @-@ set victory against Guillermo García @-@ López , only to be upset by Lleyton Hewitt in five sets . 
 At the 2013 Japan Open , Del Potro beat Marcos Baghdatis , Carlos <unk> , Alexandr Dolgopolov , and Nicolas Almagro before beating third seed Milos Raonic to win his third title of the year . 
 In October , Del Potro reached the final of the 2013 Shanghai Rolex Masters , defeating Philipp Kohlschreiber , Tommy Haas , Nicolás Almagro , and Rafael Nadal ( for the first time since the semifinals of the 2009 US Open ) en route , but eventually losing to defending champion Novak Djokovic in a third @-@ set tiebreak . Later , he beat Roger Federer at the 2013 Swiss Indoors in the final , his fourth title of the year . However , lost to Federer at the 2013 BNP Paribas Masters and in a winner @-@ take @-@ all , round @-@ robin clash in the 2013 ATP World Tour Finals . He finished the year with a 51 – 16 record , winning four titles overall and $ 4 @,@ 294 @,@ 039 . Del Potro was named Argentina ’ s Sportsman of the Year . 
