 = = = 2014 – 2016 : Second wrist injury = = = 
 Juan Martin del Potro began his 2014 ATP World Tour season at the Apia International Sydney as the top seed , winning the final of the tournament against defending champion Bernard Tomic in only 53 minutes . It was his fifth title as top seed . 
 When asked to play for Argentina in the Davis Cup , del Potro declined , arguing problems with the press and the team , and his decision to prioritize his personal career . 
 At the Australian Open , he won his opening match against Rhyne Williams , but lost to Roberto Bautista @-@ Agut in the second round , having led two sets to one . Despite his second @-@ round loss , del Potro returned to being world no . 4 because David Ferrer made it only to the quarterfinals and thus lost 360 points , whereas del Potro lost only 45 points . After the Australian Open , del Potro required treatment for his left wrist , which has been giving him trouble since 2012 . 
 In February , at the 2014 Rotterdam Open , he eased past Gaël Monfils and Paul @-@ Henri Mathieu in straight sets , but fell to Latvian Ernests Gulbis in the quarterfinals . In the 2014 Dubai Tennis Championships , he retired against Somdev Devvarman after losing the first set due to his wrist injury . The same injury led to his subsequent withdrawal from Masters 1000 series events in Indian Wells and Miami , meaning that del Potro dropped to world no . 8 . 
 Del Potro underwent surgery to repair the problem in his left wrist , missing the rest of the 2014 season . 
 Del Potro began his 2015 season with wrist pain and was not sure whether he would play Sydney and the Australian Open . However , at the last minute he decided to play both tournaments . He had not played a tournament since February 2014 , but he started the 2015 Apia International Sydney with a straight @-@ sets win against Sergiy Stakhovsky . In the second round , his opponent was world no . 19 and top seed Fabio Fognini . It was a tough test for del Potro , but he proved to be stronger than the Italian . Del Potro was through to the quarterfinals , but lost to Mikhail <unk> in two tiebreakers . After his Sydney campaign , he was drawn to play Jerzy Janowicz in the first round of the 2015 Australian Open , Del Potro withdrew due to his wrist injury . Del Potro played in Miami and was not seen for nearly a year , under going surgery again in June 2015 . 
 He played his first tournament since undergoing wrist surgery in the 2016 Delray Beach Open . In his first competitive match in almost a year , Del Potro defeated Denis <unk> in two sets . He followed this up with a straight sets win over Australian John @-@ Patrick Smith . He defeated Jérémy Chardy in two sets in the quarterfinal , reaching his first semifinal since 2014 ; which he lost to eventual champion Sam Querrey . He returned to Indian Wells , competing in the first round , winning against Tim <unk> in two sets . He lost in the next round to Tomas Berdych in straight sets . His next tournament was the Miami Open . He won his first match against countryman Guido Pella in two sets . He was set to play Roger Federer for the first time in more than two years but just hours before the match Federer withdrew due to a stomach virus . He then played lucky loser and countryman Horacio Ceballos and lost in straight sets . He then competed in his first clay court tournament since 2013 in the BMW Open . He won his first clay court match in three years against Dustin Brown , beating him in two sets . In his second match of the tournament he beat Jan @-@ Lennard <unk> in his first three set match of the year . He then lost to Philipp Kohlschreiber in the quarterfinals in straight sets . The next tournament he entered was the 2016 Mutua Madrid Open . He had his best victory after coming back on the tour defeating 14th seed Dominic Thiem in straight sets . He lost his next match to Jack Sock in two sets . He then competed at the 2016 <unk> . His first grass tournament since 2013 Wimbledon Championships . He started off against Grigor Dimitrov , winning in straight sets . He then saw off John Millman in two sets . He faced 4th seed Gilles Simon in the quarterfinal , emerging victorious in three sets . He then played 7th seed Philipp Kohlschreiber , who had defeated him earlier this year at the 2016 BMW Open , losing in straight sets . 
 After missing the French Open in May to focus on the grass season , he entered Wimbledon and was drawn against Frenchman Stephane Robert . He defeated Robert 6 @-@ 1 7 @-@ 5 6 @-@ 0 to set up a second @-@ round match with the 4th seed Stanislas Wawrinka , whom he defeated 3 @-@ 6 6 @-@ 3 7 @-@ 6 6 @-@ 3 . Del Potro would then lose in 4 sets against the 32nd seed Lucas <unk> in the 3rd round . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Del Potro is an offensive <unk> with a very powerful serve and deep , flat , topspin groundstrokes . His forehand is one of his main strengths and possibly the most powerful in the game , capable of frequently generating speeds of 100 mph , and he also possesses a very consistent and powerful double @-@ handed backhand . Del Potro is also known to have a very low unforced error rate , making him a very good defender too . He 's also comfortable going to the one @-@ handed slice backhand , and also has considerable touch for a bigger player . Del Potro 's height allows him to get a powerful first serve , often clocked in the mid @-@ 130s , and maxing out at 147 mph ( <unk> Madrid , vs Murray ) , and makes it easier for him to return high topspin balls . 
 = = Equipment and apparel = = 
 Del Potro used the Wilson Hyper <unk> 6 @.@ 1 <unk> Stretch early on in his career , and has continued to use this racquet under new paint jobs years later . Del Potro is very superstitious , and after suffering a wrist injury shortly after switching to the Wilson BLX Pro Tour paint job in 2010 , he returned to playing with the then outdated Wilson K @-@ Factor 6 @.@ 1 95 paint job . He particularly favored the exact racquets he had used to win his only Grand Slam title at the 2009 US Open . He again refused to update his racquet to the Wilson BLX Juice Pro in 2012 , and as of 2014 , has only a few K @-@ Factor racquets left . For strings , he uses <unk> <unk> Power strung at 58 lbs . 
 His clothing sponsor is Nike . He used to wear sleeveless shirts , but more recently has worn crew shirts , and often also sports double @-@ wide wristbands and a bandana . For shoes , he wears Nike Air Max Cages . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = Big Four = = = 
 Del Potro has a 14 – 39 ( 26 @.@ 42 % ) record against all members of the Big Four . 
 = = = = Roger Federer = = = = 
 Del Potro has a 5 – 15 ( 25 % ) record against Roger Federer . Despite Roger Federer winning the most matches , Del Potro won their biggest match at the 2009 US Open final , but Federer won their long 2012 Olympic semifinal 19 – 17 in the final set . Del Potro also captured both 2012 and 2013 Swiss Indoors finals against the seven @-@ time <unk> of the tournament . 
 = = = = Novak Djokovic = = = = 
 Del Potro has a 3 – 11 ( 21 @.@ 43 % ) record against Novak Djokovic . In 2012 , Del Potro won the Bronze medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics in straight sets . However , in 2013 , Djokovic got the upper hand on the rivalry again and won an epic five @-@ setter at the 2013 Wimbledon Championships and a thrilling three @-@ setter final at the 2013 Shanghai Masters . Del Potro defeated Djokovic en route to his second Masters 1000 final , at the 2013 Indian Wells Masters , where Del Potro lost to Nadal . 
 = = = = Rafael Nadal = = = = 
 Del Potro has a 4 – 8 ( 33 @.@ 33 % ) record against Rafael Nadal . The pair played three semifinals and two finals ( One Davis Cup rubber ) . Del Potro bested Nadal in the semifinals for the first time after a 0 – 4 ( 0 % ) record en route to his 2009 US Open title which was the only other time ( other than Novak Djokovic ) where a player managed to beat both Roger Federer and Nadal in the same Grand Slam tournament . However the Spaniard managed to win both times in the Indian Wells Masters encounters , in the 2011 semifinal and the 2013 final . Nadal also won the fourth and last rubber of the 2011 Davis Cup final against the Argentine . Del Potro gained the upper hand at the 2013 Shanghai Masters , defeating Nadal to reach the final where he lost to Djokovic . 
 = = = = Andy Murray = = = = 
 Del Potro has a 2 – 5 ( 28 @.@ 57 % ) record against Andy Murray . In their seven matches , only one was played in this decade . They only played one final , in the 2009 Rogers Cup , which was won by Murray . However , when Del Potro beat Murray in the quarterfinals of the 2013 BNP Paribas Open , Del Potro won against all members of the big four in 2013 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Grand Slam tournament performance timeline = = = 
 Finals : 1 ( 1 title ) 
 = = = Year @-@ End Championship performance timeline = = = 
 Finals : 1 ( 1 runner @-@ up ) 
 = The Office ( U.S. season 8 ) = 
 The eighth season of the American television comedy The Office commenced airing on NBC in the United States on September 22 , 2011 , and concluded on May 10 , 2012 , consisting of 24 episodes . The series is an American adaptation of the British comedy series of the same name , and is presented in a mockumentary format , portraying the daily lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictitious Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . The eighth season of The Office aired on Thursdays at 9 : 00 p.m. ( Eastern ) in the United States as part of the " Comedy Night Done Right " television block . This was the first season without Steve Carell as Michael Scott in the lead role and the only one to not feature the character in any capacity . 
 The eighth season largely centers on Andy Bernard 's ( Ed Helms ) ascension to regional manager , as well as the antics of Robert California ( James Spader ) , the new CEO of Sabre , a fictional printer company that owns Dunder Mifflin . Halfway through the season , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) — along with Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) , Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) , and Cathy Simms ( Lindsey Broad ) — travel to Florida to help set up a Sabre Store , where Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) is introduced . Eventually , former CFO of Dunder Mifflin David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) buys back the company , firing California . 
 Despite debuting with moderate viewing figures , the departure of Carell affected the show 's ratings , which fell as the season progressed . The season ranked as the eighty @-@ seventh most watched television series during the 2011 – 12 television year and saw a dramatic decrease in ratings from the previous season . Critical reception was mixed ; many critics had previously said the series should have ended after the departure of Carell and thus criticized the recycled storylines . Other critics were more positive , commenting on various actors and their characters . It marked the first time since season one that the show did not receive any Emmy nominations . 
 = = Production = = 
 The eighth season of the show was produced by Reveille Productions and Deedle @-@ Dee Productions , both in association with NBC Universal Television Studios . The show is based on the British comedy series of the same name , which was created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) . In addition , the two are executive producers on the show . This season of The Office was produced by Greg Daniels and Paul Lieberstein , the latter of whom serves as the showrunner . Returning writers from the previous season included Lieberstein , Charlie Grandy , Justin Spitzer , Carrie Kemper , Daniel Chun , Robert Padnick , Aaron Shure , Steve Hely , Amelie Gillette , Mindy Kaling , and B. J. Novak ; the latter two were both also credited as executive producers . It was previously unknown whether Kaling would write for the series any longer . Kaling herself confirmed via her Twitter page that she would write the Christmas @-@ themed episode , " Christmas Wishes " . Three new writers joined the staff beginning in season eight : Owen Ellickson , Allison Silverman and Dan Greaney . The season also saw the directorial debuts of cast members Ed Helms and Brian Baumgartner ; Helms directed the episode " Christmas Wishes " , and Baumgartner directed " After Hours " . 
 The series was renewed for an eighth season on March 17 , 2011 , began filming on July 25 , 2011 , and the season concluded filming on March 9 , 2012 . Jenna Fischer 's pregnancy was written into the show , and Pam was again pregnant at the start of the season with a boy as she was in real life . Unlike the sixth season , there was no episode focusing on the baby 's birth ; it was instead announced on a blog . In an interview , executive producer Lieberstein stated that , with the departure of Michael Scott , the writers would explore further into the other characters on the show , such as centering on a specific character for an episode . On January 25 , 2012 , news broke that NBC was planning a spin @-@ off series starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute , that would be set at Schrute Farms , Dwight 's bed @-@ and @-@ breakfast and beet farm . The spin @-@ off would be created by Wilson and executive producer Paul Lieberstein , but Office developer Greg Daniels would not be involved . Due to his initial involvement in the spin @-@ off , Lieberstein stepped down as showrunner of The Office . On October 29 , 2012 , it was revealed that NBC was not going forward with the proposed spin @-@ off , although the original backdoor pilot , " The Farm " aired later in the ninth season . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The Office employs an ensemble cast . Most of the main characters , and some minor ones , are based on characters from the British version of The Office . While these characters normally have the same attitudes and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show . The show is known for its large cast size , many of whom are known particularly for their improvisational work . Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is the Assistant to the Regional Manager , although the character frequently fails to include " to the " in his title . John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a sales representative and prankster , who is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is married to Pam Halpert , the office administrator . Pam ( Fischer ) , who is based on Dawn Tinsley , is shy , but is often a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight . B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard , who is a temporary worker . Helms plays Andy Bernard , the preppy manager — who was previously a salesman — and boastful Cornell alumnus whose love for a cappella music and awkward social skills generates mixed feelings from his employees . Andy is an original character , meaning he has no English equivalent from Gervais 's series . Reprising his guest @-@ starring role of Robert California , James Spader joined the regular cast to replace Kathy Bates 's character as the CEO of Sabre ; it was announced that Spader would appear in at least fifteen episodes . Cody Horn , who guest starred in the seventh season as Jordan Garfield , with a possibility of returning as a series regular , did not return . 
 The eighth season also featured new characters , originally expected to include Stanley Hudson 's other daughter and a new male addition to the accounting department , however , these characters never appeared . Stephen Collins , Dee Wallace and Josh Groban were cast as Andy 's father , mother and brother , respectively , and appeared in the episode " Garden Party " . From the episodes " Pam 's Replacement " to " Last Day in Florida " , Lindsey Broad had a recurring guest star spot as Cathy Simms , Pam 's temporary replacement while she was on maternity leave , and who remained employed at the company for a while after . Maura Tierney appeared in " Mrs. California " , playing California 's wife . Catherine Tate returned to reprise her role as Nellie Bertram , in a major arc starting in the episode " Tallahassee " . Despite reports that she would also get romantically involved with Robert , this never occurred . Two writers for the animated comedy series The Simpsons , Matt Selman and Matt Warburton , appeared in the Kaling @-@ scripted episode " Test the Store " , and Simpsons star Dan Castellaneta appeared in the episode " Turf War " . 
 At the time , this season marked the final year that some cast members — notably Helms , Fischer , Novak , and Krasinski — were signed on for the show , as their contracts expired at the end of the season ; this caused speculation that several members of the main cast would leave the series following this season . The eighth season was Novak 's last as a series regular , although he made a few recurring appearances in the ninth season . It was also Kaling 's final full season , due to her pilot , The Mindy Project , being picked up by Fox ; Kaling portrayed customer service representative Kelly Kapoor . On February 28 , 2012 , it was announced that Spader would not return for a ninth season of the show . There was initial speculation that following the eighth season , Daniels was considering rebooting the series due to the possible departures of main cast members . However , a new deal was negotiated with NBC , and all the main cast members , sans Spader , Novak , and Kaling , would return for the ninth season , although several new characters would be brought on board for a " mini reboot " . NBC also announced that Catherine Tate would become a series regular . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The series aired on Thursdays at 9 : 00 p.m. as part of " Comedy Night Done Right " television block . The season premiere , " The List " received a 3 @.@ 9 / 10 percent share in the Nielsen ratings among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 9 percent of viewers aged 18 to 49 watched the episode , and 10 percent of viewers watching television at the time watched the episode . " The List " was the highest rated episode of the season . Despite this , it became the lowest season premiere of the series since the series premiere . The rest of the season was unable to receive more than seven million viewers . The twenty @-@ second episode , " Fundraiser " received only 4 @.@ 17 million viewers , making it , at the time , the lowest @-@ rated episode of The Office to ever air , although it was later beaten by several ninth season episodes the following year . The season finale , " Free Family Portrait Studio " , was viewed by 4 @.@ 49 million viewers , making it the lowest finale for The Office to air , beating the first season finale " Hot Girl " , which was viewed by 4 @.@ 8 million viewers . The drop in ratings led to a lower ad @-@ price for the series , with an average cost of $ 178 @,@ 840 per @-@ 30 second commercial . Despite this , the show was still one of NBC 's highest rated shows and ranked as the most expensive ad @-@ cost for any NBC scripted series during the year it aired . Despite the lower live ratings , Nielsen Soundscan announced that The Office added up to 44 percent to its next @-@ day " live plus same day " 18 – 49 rating when additional time @-@ shifted viewing was added , such as <unk> . 
 The season ranked as the eighty @-@ seventh most @-@ watched television series during the 2011 – 12 season , with an average of 6 @.@ 506 million viewers . The season also ranked as the thirty @-@ second most @-@ watched television series in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . In this category , the show was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 376 million viewers per episode and received a 3 @.@ 42 rating / 9 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that , on average , the season was viewed by 3 @.@ 42 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The eighth season of The Office received mixed reviews . While some critics felt that the show was still humorous in its eighth year , many others argued that the program should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt criticized California 's role , noting that he was someone whom " the narrative reacts to as opposed to something actually involved in the narrative " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix criticized Ed Helms ' comedic performance as manager calling him " a softer version of Michael Scott " . He has also criticized the toning down of Spader 's character , California , from his appearance in the show 's seventh season 's finale , " Search Committee " , as well as expressing disappointment over seeing many supporting characters transform into caricatures of their earlier season 's selves . He stopped reviewing a majority of the Season 8 episodes since " Pam 's Replacement " , due to his distaste for the series . Time writer James Poniewozik agreed with Sepinwall and said that Jim should have been named manager so the series could be more ensemble oriented . New York Magazine named Andy Bernard one of the most annoying TV characters of 2011 . Matt Zoller Seitz from New York wrote , " Fact is , the show 's first post – Steve Carell year has been a mess , at times bordering on a disaster " , although he did write , " Nevertheless , I still adore these characters , even when the writing doesn 't do them justice . " McNutt gave the season a C grade overall , writing that the season finale , " Free Family Portrait Studio " was " a disheartening conclusion to the show 's worst season , offering little optimism to sustain our already dwindling enthusiasm over the summer months . " 
 Bret Fetzer of Amazon.com wrote that " it 's best to approach this season as if it were a completely new series " . He felt that it is unfair to compare the quality of the season to past seasons because " the series ' previous heights were so very high " . Ultimately , he called the year " uneven " , because episodes would range from putting " Andy into Michael Scott @-@ ish situations " to " seek [ ing ] out new angles on the well @-@ established web of interpersonal conflicts " , with the result that the episodes " sometimes " work . Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon considered the post @-@ Michael Scott era of The Office " warmer and more reflective " . He also praised the decision of Andy as a manager , specifically Ed Helms and Craig Robinson 's performance in " Lotto " calling it the " subtlest , deepest acting to date [ for The Office ] " . He called " Lotto " the best episode of the season . Hank Stuever of The Washington Post named the series the tenth best series of 2011 specifically praising the actors ' performances in " Mrs. California " for their ability to deliver cringe humor without Carell . TV Guide named it an honorable mention on their list of the best TV shows of 2011 . Price Peterson from TV.com called the series " still one of the best shows on TV " and argued that , while " Season 8 definitely wasn 't the show 's best " , the season " sneaked in some genuinely great jokes , new characters , and affecting plotlines . " Despite the lackluster reviews many of the episodes received , many critics praised Ellie Kemper 's performance as Erin Hannon . McNutt noted that " regardless of how down I was on this or any other episode , Ellie Kemper really has been tremendous all season . " In addition , Kemper 's performance in the episodes " Spooked , " " Christmas Wishes , " " Pool Party , " and " Special Project , " in particular , were praised by critics . 
 Many members of the cast and crew felt that the season was not the show 's best . Rainn Wilson said that the season possessed some mistakes " creatively " , such as the chemistry between Spader and Helms , which he called " a bit dark " . He argued that the show should have gone for a " brighter and more energized " relationship . Brian Baumgartner felt that the show " stayed status quo [ with the previous year ] , but without a key piece " and " didn 't make a firm decision " on the direction the show was headed . Ben Silverman , one of the show 's producers , said that " it didn 't have the sense of purpose and focus " that the next season would have . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , " U.S. viewers ( million ) " refers to the number of Americans who viewed the episode on the night of broadcast . Episodes are listed by the order in which they aired , and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 = Bloodline ( Fringe ) = 
 " Bloodline " is the eighteenth episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 61st episode overall . The storyline follows the pregnant Olivia Dunham of the parallel universe ( " Fauxlivia " ) as she experiences a kidnapping and acceleration of her pregnancy ; meanwhile , her fellow Fringe agents Lincoln Lee and Charlie Francis attempt to locate her . 
 The episode 's script was written by co @-@ executive producers Alison Schapker and Monica Owusu @-@ Breen , while Dennis Smith directed . " Bloodline " featured the return of guest actors Seth Gabel , Kirk Acevedo , Ryan McDonald , Andre Royo , and Amy Madigan . The Fox network released a " movie @-@ style trailer " in the days leading up to the episode 's broadcast as a special promotion . 
 It first aired in the United States on March 25 , 2011 to an estimated 3 @.@ 9 million viewers . Broadcasting in the wake of a fourth season renewal , the episode 's 1 @.@ 5 / 5 ratings share was a fifteen percent increase from the previous week . " Bloodline " received mixed to positive reviews from critics , with several commentators characterizing the kidnapping mystery as predictable while also praising the depth of the parallel universe and its characters . Lead actress Anna Torv submitted the episode for consideration at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , but failed to receive a nomination . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the parallel universe , Fauxlivia ( Anna Torv ) is returned home by her mother Marilyn ( Amy Madigan ) after undergoing a pre @-@ natal test to see if she has viral propagated eclampsia , a virus that killed her sister and sister 's baby during childbirth . She believes she is being followed , and contacts Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) at the Fringe division , who sends over a security detail . By the time they arrive , Fauxlivia has been kidnapped ; though they try to follow a secret tracker each agent carries , her abductors have extracted it to throw Fringe off their tracks . Walternate ( John Noble ) and Lincoln believe the abduction to be an inside job due to this . Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) identifies a vehicle that has passed by Fauxlivia 's home at a high frequency , that being the taxi that belongs to Henry ( Andre Royo ) . Lincoln and Charlie ( Kirk Acevedo ) track down Henry , who explains he has been keeping an eye on Fauxlivia , surprised to have seen her return and seeming like a different person than his previous encounters with her ; Henry is unaware that he had actually helped the prime universe 's Olivia to escape ( " Olivia " and " The Abducted " ) . Lincoln , suspicious of these events , forces Walternate to admit that Fauxlivia was switched with Olivia , and that the child Fauxlivia carries is his grandchild . Meanwhile , Marilyn learns that Fauxlivia 's test for the virus is positive and warns Charlie that Fauxlivia will die if she has the child . 
 During the Fringe team 's search , Fauxlivia finds herself being put under a treatment to accelerate her pregnancy , bringing her child near term . She is able to escape from her captors and contact Fringe division to identify her location , but struggles from labor pains as the child is about to be born . Henry drives Lincoln to her location , and they are able to help Fauxlivia to deliver her child , a son , before medical help arrives . Fauxlivia and her child recover under tight security ordered by Walternate , fearing for their safety . The doctors determine the accelerated pregnancy outpaced the virus , thus allowing both Fauxlivia and her child to survive . 
 In the epilogue , as September ( Michael Cerveris ) the Observer , watches , a blood sample from the child is drawn discreetly by one of Fauxlivia 's captors posing as an orderly , who transfers it to Brandon ( Ryan McDonald ) , who is revealed to have developed the accelerated pregnancy procedure under Walternate 's orders . Meanwhile , Lincoln and Charlie become somewhat distrustful of Walternate after learning what he hid from them . They consider that Colonel Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) disappeared around the same time that Fauxlivia returned , and wonder what else Walternate is hiding from them . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bloodline " was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producers Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker , while The Practice veteran , Dennis Smith , directed the installment . Editor Timothy A. Good has called " Bloodline " the second of two parts – the first half was the season 's third episode " The Plateau " , which Owusu @-@ Breen and Schapker also co @-@ wrote . Executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman had planned Fauxlivia 's pregnancy since they conceived her character , but noted that " this isn ’ t going to be a normal pregnancy that you see , either . And the pregnancy is [ going to evolve ] in a Fringe way that you don ’ t comprehend yet . It 's not going to be your traditional love triangle , ' I 'm pregnant and having a baby ' story . It ’ s going to be Fringe @-@ ified . " 
 In late January 2011 , TVline 's Michael Ausiello reported actor Andre Royo was returning for one episode later in the third season . Royo made his third guest appearance of the season in " Bloodline " , as cab driver Henry Higgins from the parallel universe . It is his final credit on the series to date . Amy Madigan , who plays Olivia 's mother Marilyn , also returned in a guest appearance . Previous guest stars Seth Gabel , Kirk Acevedo , Ryan McDonald , and Michael Cerveris returned as Lincoln Lee , Charlie Francis , Brandon Fayette , and September the Observer , respectively . The episode also featured one @-@ time guest actors Kendall Cross as Nurse Joyce and Françoise Yip as Dr. Rosa Oporto . 
 Leading up to the episode 's broadcast , Fox released a " movie @-@ style trailer " as a promotion , something they had previously done with " Entrada " and " Marionette " , two episodes from earlier in the season . The video recapped the Peter / Olivia / Fauxlivia love triangle from Fauxlivia 's perspective and then previewed scenes in " Bloodline " . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Bloodline " , with the intention of having " students learn about gestation and how it is different from species to species . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Accelerated growth of yet @-@ unborn children was a major plot element of " The Same Old Story " , the second episode of the first season . While eclampsia is a real medical condition that can interfere with childbirth , the " viral @-@ propagated eclampsia " presented in this episode is fictional . When Henry is located by the Fringe division , he is seen reading an " Opus the <unk> " comic , the parallel universe 's counterpart to the " Opus " comic strip drawn by Berkeley Breathed . Also within the parallel universe , the movie Taxi Driver is shown to have been directed by Francis Ford Coppola rather than Martin Scorsese ( though Robert De Niro was still able to improvise the " You talkin ' to me ? " scene ) , while the television series , The West Wing , is shown to be entering its twelfth season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Bloodline " aired the day after Fringe 's fourth season renewal was announced by Fox Entertainment , which came in the wake of various actors communicating directly with fans to watch the series . Actor Lance Reddick noted of the renewal , " I know so often fans think that they need us ... but I would be digging ditches or something else if it wasn 't for you . So — thank you . Really . " SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall was surprised but delighted by the network 's decision , stating " That any network , let alone Fox , had the patience and the faith to renew this show is , for me , little short of a miracle . It was a week , it seems , for wonders . " 
 " Bloodline " first aired in the United States on March 25 , 2011 . It was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 9 million viewers , earning a 1 @.@ 5 / 5 ratings share among the 18 – 49 demographic , up from the previous episode 's 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 4 rating . This was a 15 percent increase . Fringe helped Fox place in second for the night among adult viewers behind NBC , but the network fell into third place among total viewers behind NBC and ABC . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Bloodline " has received generally mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Sarah Stegall enjoyed it , commenting that " This was one of the more quietly brilliant episodes of Fringe to date . Reaching all the way back to the first season for its genesis , it was still firmly rooted in the most up @-@ to @-@ date events , tied together several characters in a cabal of resistance , paved the way for major drama down the way , and gave us some emotional highlights we cannot expect to see from Our Side characters . " Entertainment Weekly staff writer Ken Tucker called the episode " a beautifully modulated hour , written by Alison Schapker and Monica Owusu @-@ Breen , that took care to establish the anxiety felt by <unk> and her mother , Marilyn ( Amy Madigan ) about the pregnancy . " 
 On a slightly less positive note , Noel Murray of The A.V. Club graded the episode with a B + . He remarked that it " starts out intense and crazy " but " becomes fairly predictable in its second half , " as he correctly predicted Walternate 's involvement in the abduction . Murray concluded , " Ultimately , ' Bloodline ' is more of a plot @-@ mover than most episodes of Fringe . There ’ s no additional case to solve , and no profound theme to explore . If anything , it ’ s like the writers decided to inject a serum into the belly of show and accelerate the story , to get Fauxlivia ’ s baby out and to get on to the next phase . " IGN 's Ramsey Isler also didn 't find the birth storyline all that shocking " since the number of people that had the power and knowledge to do this kind of thing was low . " Rating the episode 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , Isler added that " the story could have used a bit more misdirection and a red herring or two to really keep us guessing , but that 's a minor critique . Overall , Walternate 's Machiavellian role in this story works , and the most important takeaway from this story is that it moved the overarching plot forward in one huge leap . Instead of waiting nine ' story ' months for Fauxlivia 's baby to pop out , we 've already got the kid ready to fit into whatever plot twist the show runners have planned . " 
 Some television critics have praised the parallel universe 's characterization , with one noting that the " writers have made us care about the other side of this war , forced us to see the opposite numbers of our heroes as real and human and sympathetic ; it 's a brilliant move . " The alternate performances of the actors in particular have been highlighted , especially those of Torv and Noble , but also those of Gabel , Acevedo , and Nicole . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Anna Torv submitted " Bloodline " , along with the season three episodes " Olivia " , " Entrada " , Marionette " , and " The Day We Died " , for consideration in the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series category at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . She failed to receive a nomination . 
 = Gospić massacre = 
 The Gospić massacre was the killing of 100 – 120 civilians in Gospić , Croatia during the last two weeks of October 1991 , during the Croatian War of Independence . The majority of the victims were ethnic Serbs , arrested in Gospić and the nearby coastal town of Karlobag . Most of them were arrested on 16 – 17 October . Some of the detainees were taken to the Perušić barracks and executed in Lipova <unk> near the town , while others were shot in the <unk> area of Gospić . The killings were ordered by the Secretary of Lika Crisis Headquarters , Tihomir Orešković , and the commander of the 118th Infantry Brigade of the Croatian National Guard , Lieutenant Colonel Mirko Norac . 
 The killings were publicised in 1997 , when a wartime member of Autumn Rains paramilitary spoke about the unit 's involvement in killings of civilians in Gospić in an interview to the Feral Tribune . No formal investigation was launched until 2000 , after three former Croatian intelligence and military police officers informed the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia about the killings . Five , including Orešković and Norac , were arrested in 2001 and tried . Orešković , Norac and Stjepan Grandić were found guilty of the crime and sentenced to 14 , 12 and 10 years in prison respectively in 2004 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 , an insurrection took place in Croatia centred in predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas , including parts of Lika , near the city of Gospić , which also had a significant ethnic Serb population . The areas were subsequently named SAO Krajina and , after declaring its intention to integrate with Serbia , the Government of Croatia declared it to be a rebellion . By March 1991 , the conflict escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated . A three @-@ month moratorium followed , after which the decision came into effect on 8 October . 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported SAO Krajina and the Croatian Police was unable to cope with the situation , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 . The development of the military of Croatia was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September , while the military conflict in Croatia continued to escalate — the Battle of Vukovar started on 26 August . By the end of August the fighting intensified in Lika as well , including in <unk> where fighting to control the city continued through much of September . Although Gospić was controlled by Croat forces , it remained under Serbian artillery bombardment after the battle . The fighting resulted in heavy damage to the town and the flight of the bulk of its population after which only about 3 @,@ 000 residents <unk> . Before the war , Gospić had a population of 8 @,@ 000 , including 3 @,@ 000 Serbs . Many Serbs previously living in the town fled but Croatian authorities urged them to return through television and radio broadcasts . 
 As the civilian population started to return in late September , Gospić chief of police Ivan Dasović proposed that a list of the returning Serbs should be drawn up , ostensibly for security purposes . According to Ante <unk> , President of the Lika Crisis Headquarters ( <unk> <unk> ) , Dasović feared that the returning Serbs might harbour a fifth column , undermining defence of the town . <unk> reportedly opposed the move , but the list was compiled on 10 October . A similar list of Serbs returning to nearby Karlobag was prepared on 16 October . 
 Gospić police were subordinated to control by the Lika Crisis Headquarters by dint of an order issued by the then Minister of the Interior Ivan Vekić as were the 118th Infantry Brigade of the ZNG and the military police based in Gospić . In addition , a paramilitary volunteer group , nicknamed " Autumn Rains " , controlled by Tomislav Merčep , was deployed to Gospić in September ; this unit was formally subordinate to the Ministry of the Interior . 
 = = Killings = = 
 The Secretary of the Lika Crisis Headquarters , Tihomir Orešković , and the commanding officer of the 118th Infantry Brigade Lieutenant Colonel Mirko Norac , called a meeting of their subordinates and ordered the arrest of Serb civilians , their subsequent detention in the Perušić barracks , and killings . Sources disagree on the exact date of the meeting . According to Dasović , the meeting took place on 15 October , at approximately 9 : 00 p.m. , which he attended along with several other officials . Other sources , including the subsequent criminal inquiry and trial witnesses , indicated the meeting was held on 16 or 17 October . The courts processing the case , including the Supreme Court of Croatia , determined that the meeting took place on 17 October and that Orešković and Norac ordered those in attendance to execute civilians that had been arrested based on the prepared lists . The killing of civilians in Široka Kula by Serbian paramilitaries , which took place on 13 October , was used as a pretext for the executions . 
 Most of the arrests occurred on 16 – 17 October , both in Gospić and Karlobag . The civilians , especially Serbs , were led away at gunpoint from bomb shelters starting on 16 October . Two days later , residents of Gospić witnessed civilians being loaded aboard eleven military lorries at the town 's cattle market , never to be seen again . At least ten civilians were killed at <unk> in the Gospić area known as <unk> on 17 October . The killings continued at Lipova <unk> near Perušić on 18 October , where 39 or 40 people were executed by firing squad after being held in the Perušić barracks , where a battalion of the 118th Infantry Brigade was based at the time . Three additional Serb civilians were arrested in Gospić and Karlobag on 25 October . They were also shot and their bodies retrieved in the <unk> <unk> area on 3 December . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The massacre in Gospić was the most significant such atrocity committed by Croats during the war . Sources disagree on the total number of fatalities in the Gospić massacre , with estimates ranging from nearly 100 to 120 killed . The official figures indicate that a total of 123 persons went missing in the area of Gospić between 1991 – 95 . 
 Ten victims were dumped in a septic tank and covered with layers of clay and stone rubble in Gospić , later discovered by International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) investigators in May 2000 , arousing complaints from the mayor of Gospić and street protests by Croatian veterans . Twenty @-@ four additional corpses had been burnt and disposed of near <unk> <unk> , a village east of Perušić , but retrieved by the 6th Brigade of the JNA on 25 December 1991 , examined and reburied in <unk> Brdo , 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 miles ) away from Udbina . Eighteen were buried in a mass grave while six others were buried individually , but these were disinterred and reburied elsewhere by relatives . The mass grave was excavated in December 2000 as a part of a criminal investigation . The victims ' homes were looted in the immediate aftermath by the Autumn Rains unit . In 1992 , several members of the unit were briefly imprisoned by Croatian authorities , but released without charge . 
 In September 1997 , the now defunct Croatian newspaper Feral Tribune published a detailed eyewitness account by Miroslav Bajramović , one of the Autumn Rains troops , who claimed to have been involved in carrying out the massacre . In his interview , Bajramović stated that the unit was ordered to ethnically cleanse Gospić . He also claimed they were occasionally ordered by Tomislav Merčep , who had been an ally of Croatian President Franjo Tuđman , to " terminate " prisoners , and that Vekić was fully aware of their task . Bajramović and three other members of the unit identified in the interview were arrested , while Vekić denied Bajramović 's claims and Croatian government officials denied any responsibility in the matter . In turn , the ICTY requested information on the four . By 1998 , two Croatian intelligence officers and a military police officer , Milan Levar , Zdenko Bando and Zdenko <unk> , approached the ICTY offering information concerning the events . Levar , who was later murdered , was particularly valuable as a witness as he claimed to have witnessed the deaths of about 50 people in the Gospić area . 
 Ranko Marijan , the Justice Minister in a new government , criticised his predecessors and the police for their failure to pursue the case , but the authorities failed to protect Levar , who was murdered by car bomb on 30 August 2000 . The investigation of the killings in Gospić was a contributing factor in the criticism of the government 's efforts by seven active duty and five retired Croatian generals who issued the Twelve Generals ' Letter making their grievance public . That led to sacking of the seven active duty officers , including by President Stjepan Mesić . The group included Norac , who had held the rank of major general since September 1995 . 
 = = = Trial of Orešković et al . = = = 
 A formal inquest of the killings in Gospić was launched in late 2000 and warrants for the arrest of Orešković , Norac , Stjepan Grandić , Ivica Rožić and Milan Čanić were issued in February 2001 . Norac evaded arrest for two weeks , convinced that the authorities intended to extradite him to the ICTY . Relatives of Grandić , Rožić and Čanić , aided by residents of Gospić , attempted to prevent the police from arresting the three by surrounding the police vans sent to transport the defendants to custody . The opposition to the prosecution culminated in a 150 @,@ 000 @-@ strong street protest in Split on 11 February . The protests were repeated in Zagreb , where 13 @,@ 000 protesters appeared . Norac surrendered on 21 February after he received assurances that he would be tried in Croatia rather than by the ICTY . 
 A formal indictment was brought forward on 5 March , charging the five with the killing of 50 civilians in Gospić and Karlobag . The case was tried in Rijeka County Court , and included the testimony of 120 witnesses in the Rijeka court , 18 survivors of the 1991 attacks in Gospić who testified in Belgrade , and two Croatian nationals who fled to Germany fearing for their own safety . One of these two , surnamed <unk> , refused to testify because he distrusted government assurances regarding his safety . In March 2003 , the Court found the defendants guilty ; Orešković was sentenced to 15 years in prison , while Norac received a sentence of 12 years in prison . Grandić was imprisoned for a term of 10 years . Rožić and Čanić were acquitted due to lack of evidence against them . The case was ultimately appealed all the way to the Supreme Court of Croatia in 2004 , which upheld the first @-@ instance convictions of Orešković , Norac and Grandić , as well as the acquittals of Rožić and Čanić . A BBC News analysis claimed the trials indicated a willingness on the part of the Croatian government to deal with war crimes committed by its nationals , following a long period of inactivity described by Rijeka County Court judge Ika Šarić as a " conspiracy of silence " . 
 Bajramović and four other members of his unit were convicted in an unrelated case of killing and abuse of Serb and Croat civilians committed in Poljana near Pakrac in 1991 . They received prison sentences ranging from three to twelve years . As of 2013 , Merčep is on trial charged with command responsibility in war crimes committed in Poljana . 
 = Some Thoughts Concerning Education = 
 Some Thoughts Concerning Education is a 1693 treatise on the education of gentlemen written by the English philosopher John Locke . For over a century , it was the most important philosophical work on education in England . It was translated into almost all of the major written European languages during the eighteenth century , and nearly every European writer on education after Locke , including Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , acknowledged its influence . 
 In his Essay Concerning Human Understanding ( 1690 ) , Locke outlined a new theory of mind , contending that the gentleman 's mind was a tabula rasa or " blank slate " ; that is , it did not contain any innate ideas . Some Thoughts Concerning Education explains how to educate that mind using three distinct methods : the development of a healthy body ; the formation of a virtuous character ; and the choice of an appropriate academic curriculum . 
 Locke wrote the letters that would eventually become Some Thoughts for an aristocratic friend , but his advice had a broader appeal since his educational principles allowed commoners to think they could acquire the same kind of character as the aristocrats for whom Locke originally intended the work . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Rather than writing a wholly original philosophy of education , Locke , it seems , deliberately attempted to popularise several strands of seventeenth @-@ century educational reform at the same time as introducing his own ideas . English writers such as John Evelyn , John Aubrey , John <unk> , and John Milton had previously advocated " similar reforms in curriculum and teaching methods , " but they had not succeeded in reaching a wide audience . Curiously , though , Locke proclaims throughout his text that his is a revolutionary work ; as Nathan Tarcov , who has written an entire volume on Some Thoughts , has pointed out , " Locke frequently explicitly opposes his recommendations to the ' usual , ' ' common , ' ' ordinary , ' or ' general ' education . " 
 As England became increasingly mercantilist and secularist , the humanist educational values of the Renaissance , which had enshrined scholasticism , came to be regarded by many as irrelevant . Following in the intellectual tradition of Francis Bacon , who had challenged the cultural authority of the classics , reformers such as Locke , and later Philip Doddridge , argued against Cambridge and Oxford 's decree that " all <unk> and <unk> in their <unk> should lay aside their various Authors , such that caused many dissensions and strifes in the Schools , and only follow Aristotle and those that defend him , and take their Questions from him , and that they exclude from the Schools all <unk> and inane Questions , disagreeing from the antient and true Philosophy [ sic ] . " Instead of demanding that their sons spend all of their time studying Greek and Latin texts , an increasing number of families began to demand a practical education for their sons ; by exposing them to the emerging sciences , mathematics , and the modern languages , these parents hoped to prepare their sons for the changing economy and , indeed , for the new world they saw forming around them . 
 = = Text = = 
 In 1684 Edward Clarke asked his friend , John Locke , for advice on raising his son and heir , Edward , Jr . ; Locke responded with a series of letters that eventually served as the basis of Some Thoughts Concerning Education . But it was not until 1693 , encouraged by the Clarkes and another friend , William Molyneux , that Locke actually published the treatise ; Locke , " timid " when it came to public exposure , decided to publish the text anonymously . 
 Although Locke revised and expanded the text five times before he died , he never substantially altered the " familiar and friendly style of the work . " The " Preface " alerted the reader to its humble origins as a series of letters and , according to Nathan Tarcov , who has written an entire volume on Some Thoughts , advice that otherwise might have appeared " meddlesome " became welcome . Tarcov claims Locke treated his readers as his friends and they responded in kind . 
 = = Pedagogical theory = = 
 Of Locke 's major claims in the Essay Concerning Human Understanding and Some Thoughts Concerning Education , two played a defining role in eighteenth @-@ century educational theory . The first is that education makes the man ; as Locke writes at the opening of his treatise , " I think I may say that of all the men we meet with , nine parts of ten are what they are , good or evil , useful or not , by their education . " In making this claim , Locke was arguing against both the Augustinian view of man , which grounds its conception of humanity in original sin , and the Cartesian position , which holds that man innately knows basic logical propositions . In his Essay Locke posits an " empty " mind — a tabula rasa — that is " filled " by experience . In describing the mind in these terms , Locke was drawing on Plato 's <unk> , which suggests that the mind is like a " wax tablet " . Although Locke argued strenuously for the tabula rasa theory of mind , he nevertheless did believe in innate talents and interests . For example , he advises parents to watch their children carefully to discover their " aptitudes , " and to nurture their children 's own interests rather than force them to participate in activities which they dislike — " he , therefore , that is about children should well study their natures and aptitudes and see , by often trials , what turn they easily take and what becomes them , observe what their native stock is , how it may be improved , and what it is fit for . " 
 Locke also discusses a theory of the self . He writes : " the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender <unk> have very important and lasting consequences . " That is , the " associations of ideas " made when young are more significant than those made when mature because they are the foundation of the self — they mark the tabula rasa . In the Essay , in which he first introduces the theory of the association of ideas , Locke warns against letting " a foolish maid " convince a child that " goblins and sprites " are associated with the darkness , for " darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas , and they shall be so joined , that he can no more bear the one than the other . " 
 Locke 's emphasis on the role of experience in the formation of the mind and his concern with false associations of ideas has led many to characterise his theory of mind as passive rather than active , but as Nicholas Jolley , in his introduction to Locke 's philosophical theory , points out , this is " one of the most curious misconceptions about Locke . " As both he and Tarcov highlight , Locke 's writings are full of directives to actively seek out knowledge and reflect on received opinion ; in fact , this was the essence of Locke 's challenge to <unk> . 
 = = = Body and mind = = = 
 Locke advises parents to carefully nurture their children 's physical " habits " before pursuing their academic education . As many scholars have remarked , it is unsurprising that a trained physician , as Locke was , would begin Some Thoughts with a discussion of children 's physical needs , yet this seemingly simple generic innovation has proven to be one of Locke 's most enduring legacies — Western child @-@ rearing manuals are still dominated by the topics of food and sleep . To convince parents that they must attend to the health of their children above all , Locke quotes from Juvenal 's Satires — " a sound mind in a sound body . " Locke firmly believed that children should be exposed to harsh conditions while young to inure them to , for example , cold temperatures when they were older : " Children [ should ] be not too warmly clad or covered , winter or summer " ( Locke 's emphasis ) , he argues , because " bodies will endure anything that from the beginning they are accustomed to . " Furthermore , to prevent a child from catching chills and colds , Locke suggests that " his feet to be washed every day in cold water , and to have his shoes so thin that they might leak and let in water whenever he comes near it " ( Locke 's emphasis ) . Locke posited that if children were accustomed to having sodden feet , a sudden shower that wet their feet would not cause them to catch a cold . Such advice ( whether followed or not ) was quite popular ; it appears throughout John Newbery 's children 's books in the middle of the eighteenth century , for example , the first best @-@ selling children 's books in England . Locke also offers specific advice on topics ranging from bed linens to diet to sleeping regimens . 
 = = = Virtue and reason = = = 
 Locke dedicates the bulk of Some Thoughts Concerning Education to explaining how to instill virtue in children . He defines virtue as a combination of self @-@ denial and rationality : " that a man is able to deny himself his own desires , cross his own inclinations , and purely follow what reason directs as best , though the appetite lean the other way " ( Locke 's emphasis ) . Future virtuous adults must be able not only to practice self @-@ denial but also to see the rational path . Locke was convinced that children could reason early in life and that parents should address them as reasoning beings . Moreover , he argues that parents should , above all , attempt to create a " habit " of thinking rationally in their children . Locke continually emphasises habit over rule — children should <unk> the habit of reasoning rather than memorise a complex set of prohibitions . This focus on rationality and habit corresponds to two of Locke 's concerns in the Essay Concerning Human Understanding . Throughout the Essay , Locke bemoans the irrationality of the majority and their inability , because of the authority of custom , to change or forfeit long @-@ held beliefs . His attempt to solve this problem is not only to treat children as rational beings but also to create a disciplinary system founded on esteem and disgrace rather than on rewards and punishments . For Locke , rewards such as sweets and punishments such as beatings turn children into <unk> rather than rationalists ; such sensations arouse passions rather than reason . He argues that " such a sort of slavish discipline makes a slavish temper " ( Locke 's emphasis ) . 
 What is important to understand is what exactly Locke means when he advises parents to treat their children as reasoning beings . Locke first highlights that children " love to be treated as Rational Creatures , " thus parents should treat them as such . Tarcov argues that this suggests children can be considered rational only in that they respond to the desire to be treated as reasoning creatures and that they are " motivated only [ by ] rewards and punishments " to achieve that goal . 
 Ultimately , Locke wants children to become adults as quickly as possible . As he argues in Some Thoughts , " the only fence against the world is a thorough knowledge of it , into which a young gentleman should be entered by degrees as he can bear it , and the earlier the better . " In the Second Treatise on Government ( 1689 ) , he contends that it is the parents ' duty to educate their children and to act for them because children , though they have the ability to reason when young , do not do so consistently and are therefore usually irrational ; it is the parents ' obligation to teach their children to become rational adults so that they will not always be fettered by parental ties . 
 = = = Academic curriculum = = = 
 Locke does not dedicate much space in Some Thoughts Concerning Education to outlining a specific curriculum ; he is more concerned with convincing his readers that education is about instilling virtue and what Western educators would now call critical @-@ thinking skills . Locke maintains that parents or teachers must first teach children how to learn and to enjoy learning . As he writes , the instructor " should remember that his business is not so much to teach [ the child ] all that is knowable , as to raise in him a love and esteem of knowledge ; and to put him in the right way of knowing and improving himself . " But Locke does offer a few hints as to what he thinks a valuable curriculum might be . He deplores the long hours wasted on learning Latin and argues that children should first be taught to speak and write well in their native language , particularly recommending Aesop 's Fables . Most of Locke 's recommendations are based on a similar principle of utility . So , for example , he claims that children should be taught to draw because it would be useful to them on their foreign travels ( for recording the sites they visit ) , but poetry and music , he says , are a waste of time . Locke was also at the forefront of the scientific revolution and advocated the teaching of geography , astronomy , and anatomy . Locke 's curricular recommendations reflect the break from scholastic humanism and the emergence of a new kind of education — one emphasising not only science but also practical professional training . Locke also recommended , for example , that every ( male ) child learn a trade . Locke 's pedagogical suggestions marked the beginning of a new bourgeois ethos that would come to define Britain in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . 
 = = Class = = 
 When Locke began writing the letters that would eventually become Some Thoughts on Education , he was addressing an aristocrat , but the final text appeals to a much wider audience . For example , Locke writes : " I place Vertue [ sic ] as the first and most necessary of those Endowments , that belong to a Man or a Gentleman . " James Axtell , who edited the most comprehensive edition of Locke 's educational writings , has explained that although " he was writing for this small class , this does not preclude the possibility that many of the things he said about education , especially its main principles , were equally applicable to all children " ( Axtell 's emphasis ) . This was a contemporary view as well ; Pierre Coste , in his introduction in the first French edition in 1695 , wrote , " it is certain that this Work was particularly designed for the education of Gentlemen : but this does not prevent its serving also for the education of all sorts of Children , of whatever class they are . " 
 While it is possible to apply Locke 's general principles of education to all children , and contemporaries such as Coste certainly did so , Locke himself , despite statements that may imply the contrary , believed that Some Thoughts applied only to the wealthy and the middle @-@ class ( or as they would have been referred to at the time , the " middling sorts " ) . One of Locke 's conclusions in Some Thoughts Concerning Education is that he " think [ s ] a Prince , a Nobleman , and an ordinary Gentleman 's Son , should have different Ways of Breeding . " As Peter Gay writes , " [ i ] t never occurred to him that every child should be educated or that all those to be educated should be educated alike . Locke believed that until the school system was reformed , a gentleman ought to have his son trained at home by a tutor . As for the poor , they do not appear in Locke 's little book at all . " 
 In his " Essay on the Poor Law , " Locke turns to the education of the poor ; he laments that " the children of labouring people are an ordinary burden to the parish , and are usually maintained in idleness , so that their labour also is generally lost to the public till they are 12 or 14 years old . " He suggests , therefore , that " working schools " be set up in each parish in England for poor children so that they will be " from infancy [ three years old ] inured to work . " He goes on to outline the economics of these schools , arguing not only that they will be profitable for the parish , but also that they will instill a good work ethic in the children . 
 = = Gender = = 
 Locke wrote Some Thoughts Concerning Education in response to his friend Samuel Clarke 's query on how to educate his son , so the text 's " principal aim " , as Locke states at the beginning , " is how a young gentleman should be brought up from his infancy . " This education " will not so perfectly suit the education of daughters ; though where the difference of sex requires different treatment , it will be no hard matter to distinguish " ( Locke 's emphasis ) . This passage suggests that , for Locke , education was fundamentally the same for men and women — there were only small , obvious differences for women . This interpretation is supported by a letter he wrote to Mrs. Clarke in 1685 stating that " since therefore I acknowledge no difference of sex in your mind relating ... to truth , virtue and obedience , I think well to have no thing altered in it from what is [ writ for the son ] . " Martin Simons states that Locke " suggested , both by implication and explicitly , that a boy 's education should be along the lines already followed by some girls of the intelligent genteel classes . " Rather than sending boys to schools which would ignore their individual needs and teach them little of value , Locke argues that they should be taught at home as girls already were and " should learn useful and necessary crafts of the house and estate . " Like his contemporary Mary Astell , Locke believed that women could and should be taught to be rational and virtuous . 
 But Locke does recommend several minor " restrictions " relating to the treatment of the female body . The most significant is his reining in of female physical activity for the sake of physical appearance : " But since in your girls care is to be taken too of their beauty as much as health will permit , this in them must have some restriction ... ' tis fit their tender skins should be fenced against the busy sunbeams , especially when they are very hot and piercing . " Although Locke 's statement indicates that he places a greater value on female than male beauty , the fact that these opinions were never published allowed contemporary readers to draw their own conclusions regarding the " different treatments " required for girls and boys , if any . Moreover , compared to other pedagogical theories , such as those in the best @-@ selling conduct book The Whole Duty of a Woman ( 1696 ) , the female companion to The Whole Duty of Man ( 1657 ) , and Rousseau 's Emile ( 1762 ) , which both proposed entirely separate educational programs for women , Locke 's Some Thoughts appears far more egalitarian . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Along with Rousseau 's Emile ( 1762 ) , Locke 's Some Thoughts Concerning Education was one of the foundational eighteenth @-@ century texts on educational theory . In Britain , it was considered the standard treatment of the topic for over a century . For this reason , some critics have maintained that Some Thoughts Concerning Education vies with the Essay Concerning Human Understanding for the title of Locke 's most influential work . Some of Locke 's contemporaries , such as seventeenth @-@ century German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz , believed this as well ; Leibniz argued that Some Thoughts superseded even the Essay in its impact on European society . 
 Locke 's Some Thoughts Concerning Education was a runaway best @-@ seller . During the eighteenth century alone , Some Thoughts was published in at least 53 editions : 25 English , 16 French , six Italian , three German , two Dutch , and one Swedish . It was also excerpted in novels such as Samuel Richardson 's Pamela ( 1740 – 1 ) , and it formed the theoretical basis of much children 's literature , particularly that of the first successful children 's publisher , John Newbery . According to James Secord , an eighteenth @-@ century scholar , Newbery included Locke 's educational advice to legitimise the new genre of children 's literature . Locke 's imprimatur would ensure the genre 's success . 
 By the end of the eighteenth century , Locke 's influence on educational thought was widely acknowledged . In 1772 James Whitchurch wrote in his Essay Upon Education that Locke was " an Author , to whom the Learned must ever acknowledge themselves highly indebted , and whose Name can never be mentioned without a secret Veneration , and Respect ; his <unk> being the result of intense Thought , strict Enquiry , a clear and penetrating Judgment . " Writers as politically dissimilar as Sarah Trimmer , in her periodical The Guardian of Education ( 1802 – 06 ) , and Maria Edgeworth , in the educational treatise she penned with her father , Practical Education ( 1798 ) , invoked Locke 's ideas . Even Rousseau , while disputing Locke 's central claim that parents should treat their children as rational beings , acknowledged his debt to Locke . 
 John Cleverley and D. C. Phillips place Locke 's Some Thoughts Concerning Education at the beginning of a tradition of educational theory which they label " environmentalism " . In the years following the publication of Locke 's work , Etienne Bonnot de Condillac and Claude Adrien <unk> eagerly adopted the idea that people 's minds were shaped through their experiences and thus through their education . Systems of teaching children through their senses proliferated throughout Europe . In Switzerland , Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi , relying on Locke 's theories , developed the concept of the " object lesson . " These lessons focused pupils ' attention on a particular thing and encouraged them to use all of their senses to explore it and urged them to use precise words to describe it . Used throughout Europe and America during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , these object lessons , according to one of their practitioners " if well @-@ managed , cultivate Sense @-@ Perception , or Observation , accustom children to express their thoughts in words , increase their available stock of words and of ideas , and by thus storing material for thinking , also prepare the way for more difficult and advanced study . " 
 Such techniques were also integral to Maria Montessori 's methods in the twentieth century . According to Cleverley and Phillips , the television show Sesame Street is also " based on Lockean assumptions — its aim has been to give underprivileged children , especially in the inner cities , the simple ideas and basic experiences that their environment normally does not provide . " In many ways , despite Locke 's continuing influence , as these authors point out , the twentieth century has been dominated by the " nature vs. nurture " debate in a way that Locke 's century was not . Locke 's optimistic " environmentalism , " though qualified in his text , is now no longer just a moral issue – it is also a scientific issue . 
 = The Boat Race 1885 = 
 The 42nd Boat Race took place on 28 March 1885 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Cambridge rower Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd , the lead changed hands several times . Oxford won by a margin of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 36 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 23 – 18 in favour of Oxford . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Oxford held the overall lead , with 22 victories to Cambridge 's 18 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coach was G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1882 and 1883 races . There is no record of who coached Cambridge , who were seriously disrupted in the build @-@ up to the race , with Edric Wolseley Haig contracting mumps , J. C. Brown breaking a floating rib and William King <unk> being introduced to the crew days prior to replace him . The umpire for the race was Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1856 and 1859 ) . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 6 @.@ 75 lb ( 79 @.@ 1 kg ) , 7 @.@ 75 pounds ( 3 @.@ 5 kg ) more than their opponents . It was the heaviest crew to have ever featured in the Boat Race . Cambridge 's crew contained four rowers who had Boat Race experience , including Fraser Elmslie Churchill and Sidney Swann , both of whom were participating in their third race . Similarly , Oxford saw four former Blues return , with Douglas McLean making his third appearance and rowing with his brother Hector for the first time . 
 The race featured one registered non @-@ British participant in Oxford 's number two , J. S. Clemons , who originated from Tasmania . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge were pre @-@ race favourites . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The race started at 12 : 26 p.m. in fine weather on a moderate tide . Although Oxford made the better start , Cambridge held a half @-@ of @-@ a @-@ length lead by the time the crews passed the Craven Steps . With the advantage of the bend in the river , the Oxford stroke H. Girdlestone , without increasing the stroke rate , took his crew level , and ahead at the Mile Post . Although the Cambridge stroke Frederick Pitman tried to restore parity by encouraging a spurt , Oxford held the Light Blues off and by Hammersmith Bridge held a length 's lead . Despite appearing " as if the crew going to pieces " after some difficult conditions , Oxford extended their lead to two lengths by The Doves pub . Approaching Barnes Bridge , the Dark Blues had to avoid a skiff , allowing Cambridge to come back at them , before pushing on once again on to win by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 36 seconds . 
 After the race it was noted that the Oxford number three , P. W. Taylor , had dislocated his shoulder but had continued despite his injury . 
 = James Reimer ( ice hockey ) = 
 James Reimer / <unk> / ( born March 15 , 1988 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender for the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Reimer has also played for the Toronto Maple Leafs and San Jose Sharks . He was selected by the Maple Leafs in the fourth round ( 99th overall ) of the 2006 NHL Entry Draft . He started playing minor hockey in his hometown when he was 12 . He played junior hockey with the Red Deer Rebels of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , after being selected in the fifth round of the 2003 WHL Bantam Draft . After turning professional , Reimer played with the South Carolina Stingrays and Reading Royals of the ECHL , as well as the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League . Reimer was named the most valuable player of the ECHL playoffs , as the Stingrays won the Kelly Cup in 2009 . Reimer made his NHL debut with the Maple Leafs during the 2010 – 11 season and went on to replace Jean @-@ Sébastien Giguère as the Maple Leafs ' starting goaltender . He plays for Canada internationally , and first represented his country at the 2011 World Championship . As of 2013 , he had the best save percentage in Toronto Maple Leafs history with a then <unk> . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor = = = 
 Reimer started playing goalie when his older brother , Mark , needed practice shooting but had no goalie . A local minor hockey manager heard about his prowess in goal , and recruited him . His parents were unsure if minor hockey was the right fit for their son , so he did not play organized hockey until he was 12 . He was first noticed by agent Ray Petkau when he was 13 , after playing with a church team at a tournament in Steinbach , Manitoba . As of November 2011 , Petkau was still his representative . 
 Reimer played his last seasons of minor hockey for the <unk> Lightning of the Manitoba " AAA " Midget league . He was the team 's rookie of the year and top scholastic player after the 2002 – 03 season , and the most valuable player after the 2004 – 05 season . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Reimer was selected by the Red Deer Rebels in the fifth round of the 2003 Western Hockey League ( WHL ) Bantam Draft , with a pick that originally belonged to the Spokane Chiefs . The team drafted Reimer largely on the word of a single scout , Carter Sears . After Reimer performed poorly during his first training camp with the club , Rebels head coach Brent Sutter wanted to release him , but Sears was persistent in his support for Reimer . Reimer made the club in his third attempt after having been cut the previous two seasons . His first season in the WHL was a poor one for the Rebels . Reimer played 34 games , recording only 7 wins . Reimer broke his hand late in the season , an injury which cost him a chance to play for Team Canada at the 2006 IIHF World U18 Championships . Reimer was selected by the Toronto Maple Leafs in the fourth round ( 99th overall ) of the 2006 National Hockey League ( NHL ) Entry Draft . John Ferguson , Jr . , the Maple Leafs general manager at the time , remembers Reimer as an unfinished product needing time to develop , being " somewhat raw " . At the time of the draft , Reimer was preparing for his high school graduation , and did not attend the event in Vancouver , British Columbia . He said , " I made a decision not to pay a lot of attention because I was reluctant to get my hopes too high . " His agent , Ray Petkau , called with the news about being drafted and later brought him his Maple Leafs jersey and hat that draftees receive . Prior to the draft , Reimer had mentioned that he would like to be drafted by the Los Angeles Kings , saying " I 'd love to play hockey in all that sunshine . " 
 Reimer attended training camp with the Maple Leafs in 2006 and 2007 , but was returned to the Rebels both times . During the 2006 – 07 WHL season , Reimer played in 60 games with the Rebels , and recording 26 wins , 23 losses and 7 ties . This was the only season in his WHL career that Reimer finished with a winning record . The 2007 – 08 WHL season was Reimer 's final season in the WHL . He suffered a torn ligament in his ankle , and only appeared in 30 games . In March 2008 , the Maple Leafs signed Reimer to a three @-@ year contract worth an annual base salary of $ 555 @,@ 000 . The deal included a $ 180 @,@ 000 signing bonus and playing incentives that could increase the total value of the contract to $ 1 @.@ 8 million . His base salary was $ 555 @,@ 000 — the minimum salary for an NHL player . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = = 
 After attending the Maple Leafs training camp in September 2008 , he was assigned to the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . After starting the season with the Marlies , Reimer was assigned to the Reading Royals of the ECHL . He was recalled by the Marlies and recorded his first AHL win by a score of 3 – 2 in a shootout on December 27 , 2008 against the Manitoba Moose . In two stints with the Marlies , Reimer had a record of one win and two losses , with a goals against average ( GAA ) of 3 @.@ 28 and a <unk> save percentage . With the Royals , Reimer had a record of ten wins , seven losses and three ties . At the ECHL trade deadline , Reimer was moved to the South Carolina Stingrays , a team that had gone through eight goaltenders during the season . The deal was facilitated to expose Reimer to post @-@ season experience , as the Royals were out of playoff contention . While with the Stingrays , Reimer helped them win the 2009 Kelly Cup championship . Recording four wins and one shutout over eight games in the post @-@ season , he was named the ECHL Playoffs Most Valuable Player . 
 After attending the Maple Leafs training camp ahead of the 2009 – 10 National Hockey League ( NHL ) season , Reimer was again sent down to the AHL . As part of the Marlies ' pre @-@ season , Reimer competed in the Gardiner Cup , held as part of Scotland 's 2009 Homecoming celebrations . He stopped 33 shots in the final as the Marlies lost 3 – 1 to the Hamilton Bulldogs . Back in the AHL , he spent the majority of the 2009 – 10 season with the Marlies , playing in 26 games and recording 14 wins . He had a GAA of 2 @.@ 25 and a save percentage of .925 . Reimer was called up by the Leafs on an emergency basis on October 13 , 2009 , when starting goaltender Vesa Toskala was injured . Serving as Joey MacDonald 's backup , he did not receive any playing time in his first NHL call @-@ up ; he was sent back down to the Marlies on October 25 , 2009 . Reimer missed significant time with an ankle injury during the 2009 – 10 season . It was not the same ankle he injured during his final season with the Red Deer Rebels . 
 At the outset of the 2010 – 11 NHL season , Reimer again was assigned to the AHL 's Marlies . Reimer was not expected to contribute to the Maple Leafs at the NHL level during the 2010 – 11 season . Expectations for the young netminder were low heading into the season , with head coach Ron Wilson saying " We wanted him to play in the minors and continue to get better , develop and try to stay healthy . " He was recalled by the Maple Leafs several months into the season , making his NHL debut on December 20 , 2010 in relief of Jonas Gustavsson against the Atlanta Thrashers . He played 14 minutes in the third period , stopping all four shots he faced . Reimer made his first NHL start against the Ottawa Senators on January 1 , 2011 . The Maple Leafs won the game 5 – 1 , with Reimer recording 32 saves while picking up his first career NHL win . On February 3 , 2011 , Reimer recorded 27 saves and picked up his first career NHL shutout against the Carolina Hurricanes . A combination of injuries and poor play by Gustavsson and Jean @-@ Sebastien Giguere provided an opportunity for Reimer at the NHL level . His strong play caused the Leafs to carry three goalies on their NHL roster , a fact which did not surprise Giguere , who said " The way he played the last time he was up , you knew he was going to get another chance . " Leafs head coach Ron Wilson acknowledged Reimer as the team 's starting goalie as they set out on a late @-@ season run for a playoff spot , saying " It ’ s going to be his ball the rest of the way . As long as we stay in the race . And I think he ’ s up to it . " 
 Reimer became a quick fan favourite during his rookie NHL season , earning the nicknames " Optimus <unk> " and " The Statue " . The former is a reference to the Transformers protagonist Optimus Prime , while the latter resulted from head coach Wilson 's attempts to suppress the hype around the rookie goalie only a short time into his NHL career , saying " There 's all this [ attention ] around here , a guy wins a game and we 're ready to build a statue for him . " Reimer 's strong performance was recognized by the league when he was named the NHL 's Rookie of the Month for March 2011 . Reimer would have become a restricted free agent on July 1 , 2011 , but he signed a three @-@ year contract worth $ 5 @.@ 4 million ( $ 1 @.@ 8 million salary cap hit ) on June 9 , 2011 . 
 Reimer began the 2011 – 12 season as the starter going 4 – 0 – 1 . He suffered an injury on October 22 in a game against the Montreal Canadiens . During the game Reimer was run into by Brian Gionta , he finished the first period , but did not return after the intermission . The team called the injury whiplash despite rumors that he was suffering from a concussion . Reimer missed 19 games with the injury , and struggled upon his return , yielding some starts to Gustavsson . After recording two back @-@ to @-@ back shutouts on February 1 and February 4 , Reimer seemed to have solidified the starting position once again . 
 Near the end of March 2012 , Reimer was starting to play to an acceptable standard again , but an upper @-@ body injury ( later revealed to be a neck injury ) sidelined him for the remainder of the season from March 29 . On April 9 , he told the media that he would be available by training camp in September 2012 . Due to the NHL lockout , Reimer was afforded more time to heal and attended training camp in January 2013 . Reimer held off an early challenge from rookie backup Ben <unk> to remain Toronto 's starting goaltender . On February 11 , Reimer suffered a MCL strain , which kept him out of action for a little over two weeks , he won all three of his next starts after returning . Upon returning Reimer backstopped the Maple Leafs to their first playoff berth since 2004 and finishing the regular season with a career best 2 @.@ 46 GAA and .924 SV % in 34 games . 
 Prior to the 2013 – 14 season , the club acquired Jonathan Bernier from the Los Angeles Kings . At the beginning of the season , Reimer and Bernier were splitting time in the Toronto goal , but as the season progressed , Bernier cemented his status as the Leafs ' starting goaltender . 
 Following the 2013 @-@ 2014 season , Reimer became a restricted free agent . Dissatisfied with his role as the Leafs ' backup , he requested a trade from the Leafs . On July 25 , 2014 , the Leafs and Reimer avoided a salary arbitration hearing scheduled for the next week by agreeing to terms on a two year contract with an average annual value of $ 2 @.@ 3 million . 
 Reimer began the 2015 @-@ 16 season as Bernier 's backup , a role he had held since the team acquired the latter . However , Bernier was injured early in the season , and Reimer was given starting duties . He took off with the job , going 3 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 with a 1 @.@ 62 goals @-@ against average and <unk> save percentage to be named the 3rd star for the week of November 9 – 15 , 2015 . Reimer would hold the position as Maple Leafs ' starting goaltender for the rest of his tenure , earning praise for his play on a Toronto team that struggled throughout the year . 
 = = = = San Jose Sharks = = = = 
 As the February 29 trade deadline approached , Reimer 's future with the rebuilding Maple Leafs became uncertain . On February 27 , 2016 , two days before the deadline , Reimer was traded to the San Jose Sharks , alongside Jeremy Morin , in exchange for Alex <unk> , Ben Smith and a conditional fourth round pick in the 2018 draft . 
 Reimer had the best 5 on 5 save percentage and the best Fenwick save percentage in the NHL for the 2015 / 16 season ( 1200 minutes minimum TOI ) at <unk> and <unk> respectively . 
 = = = = Florida Panthers = = = = 
 On July 1 , 2016 , as a free agent for the first time in his career , Reimer was signed to a 5 @-@ year contract with the Florida Panthers . 
 = = International play = = 
 Reimer 's first brush with international hockey came near the end of the 2005 – 06 season . He was selected to play for Team Canada at the 2006 IIHF World U18 Championships , but was unable to compete due to a broken hand he suffered while playing for Red Deer . After his strong rookie season in the NHL , Reimer received another invitation from Hockey Canada , this time to compete at the 2011 IIHF World Championship . Reimer got his first win in the tournament beating Belarus 4 – 1 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Reimer plays in the butterfly style of goaltending . Observers have attributed Reimer 's success during the 2010 – 11 season to his ability to maintain his focus and confidence . Reimer tries to focus on the basics of playing goal , feeling that the fundamentals of goaltending are the key to success , saying " It ’ s not about making the great save , or making a diving save or playing outside yourself . It ’ s all about pushing , stopping , and being square and just relying on that . Most of the time if you let out a rebound the defenceman is there so it ’ s more about being solid fundamentally . " 
 = = Personal = = 
 Reimer was born in <unk> , Manitoba , to parents Harold and Marlene Reimer . His father owns a business moving homes . He graduated from <unk> Christian High School in his hometown . His favorite hockey team growing up was the Toronto Maple Leafs , and his favourite player was Ed Belfour . Reimer met his wife , April , at a junior hockey game in Moose Jaw , Saskatchewan . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Barret Wallace = 
 Barret Wallace ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a player character in Square Enix 's role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII . Created by character designer Tetsuya Nomura , he has since appeared in the CGI film sequel , Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children as well as other games and media in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII series . As of Advent Children , Barret is voiced by Masahiro Kobayashi in Japanese and Beau Billingslea in English localizations . 
 Barret is first introduced in Final Fantasy VII as an eco @-@ terrorist , leading the group AVALANCHE to bomb Mako reactors in the fictional city of Midgar , so as to avenge the losses dealt him by the megacorporation Shinra , the Planet 's de facto world government , who operate under the pretense of saving the Planet . As the story progresses , Barret re @-@ examines his efforts and focuses on pursuing the villain Sephiroth in an effort to protect the Planet and the future of his adopted daughter , Marlene . Elements of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII would later expand upon his character , detailing the character 's history before and after the events of the original game . 
 The first dark @-@ skinned playable character in the Final Fantasy series , Barret 's appearance and sometimes profane speech has been heavily compared to that of actor Mr. T , earning much praise , but also criticism and accusations of racism by some . 
 = = Conception and design = = 
 Designed by Tetsuya Nomura , Barret was present in Final Fantasy VII from its early development . Initially , the game was to have only three playable characters , with Barret one of those three , along with the protagonist Cloud Strife and the heroine Aerith Gainsborough . During a phone call to project director Yoshinori Kitase , it was suggested that at some point in the game , one of the main characters should die , and after much discussion as to whether it should be Barret or Aerith , the producers chose Aerith , as they felt Barret 's death would be " too obvious . " 
 Barret 's name is based on the Japanese transliteration of the English word " bullet " , and he was developed with the " Gunner " character class in mind . Standing 6 feet 5 inches ( 197 cm ) tall , he is the first black playable character in the series , and has a high and tight haircut and full beard , and an earring in his left ear . His attire consists of a jacket with torn sleeves , dark green pants , boots , a fingerless glove on his left hand , and metal bands surrounding his abdomen and left wrist . His left upper arm is covered by a <unk> ; this was later changed by replacing his right hand with a prosthetic Gatling gun ( called a " Gimmick Arm " ) which he refers to as his " partner " in @-@ game . He was originally planned to have a medallion around his neck , described as a gift from his deceased wife , but this was later changed to a set of dog tags . 
 When developing Advent Children , Nomura stated that because of the comparisons between Barret 's original design and Mr. T , they decided to take it in a different direction for the film , implementing co @-@ director Takeshi Nozue 's suggestion to give him cornrows for his hair , while Nomura designed his face . Artist Yusuke Naora influenced the design as well , developing his attire , which originally consisted of white overalls , before instead having him wear him a down vest . Barret 's arm tattoo was changed as well , although it retained the " skull and fire " motif of the original . Other aspects of his design included the loss of the metal bands around his body , a white sleeve extending from the middle of his right forearm to his elbow fastened by straps , a black band on his left forearm surrounded by a pink string and bow , and a fishnet shirt that ends in torn fibers below his waist . The dog tags were altered to a bullet and medallion supported by a chain around his neck , and three rings covered his left hand . His Gimmick Arm was modified into a robotic prosthetic hand , developed by Nomura , with the only guideline being " a huge , over @-@ the @-@ top gun that transforms in a huge , over @-@ the @-@ top way . " Nozue stated that these specifics made it difficult to work with , and decided to conceal the hand 's transformation sequence into the gun as much as possible . His Advent Children design was also planned to be used for the Final Fantasy VII remake . However , the staff later decided to give every character in the party a new look . 
 When choosing a voice actor for the film , Nomura was initially unsure of whether to have Masahiro Kobayashi do the role of Barret or another character , Loz . Kobayashi described his performance as treating Barret as " unrefined [ ... ] but also dependable and unique , " trying to keep his " upbeat character and good outlook in mind . " He tried to give him a booming , confident sounding voice , though at times was instructed to " take it up a notch . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 First seen in Final Fantasy VII in 1997 , Barret is introduced as the leader of the eco @-@ terrorist organization AVALANCHE . Situated in city of Midgar , his group opposes the ruling company , Shinra , and their use of " Mako " energy as a power source , believing it to be killing the Planet . To this end , AVALANCHE bombs their Mako reactors , with the specific goal of saving the Planet . When the game begins , they have just hired the mercenary Cloud Strife at the behest of his childhood friend and AVALANCHE member Tifa Lockhart , nicknaming him " Spiky " in reference to his hairstyle . After the deaths of several members of AVALANCHE , Barret follows Cloud out of Midgar in pursuit of the game 's villain , Sephiroth . 
 Along the way he encounters a former friend of his , Dyne , armed in a manner similar to him , who forces Barret to fight him . Upon Barret defeating Dyne , Dyne kills himself . Through flashbacks it is revealed that Shinra had wanted to build a Mako reactor in his home town of Corel , an idea Barret advocated . However , due to an accident at the plant , Shinra razed the town , killing Barret 's wife in the process , and causing Barret and Dyne to flee with Dyne 's daughter , Marlene . Cornered , Dyne slipped off a cliff and Barret grabbed his hand , but Shinra soldier 's opened fire , and destroyed Barret 's and Dyne 's right and left hands respectively , causing the latter to fall to his presumed death . Barret adopted Marlene as his own daughter , had an " adapter " graft to his arm to interface with prosthetic weapons to aid in his combat against Shinra , and founded AVALANCHE . Dyne 's death causes him to admit his grudge with Shinra is solely for revenge , with his earlier claims of " saving the world " meant only to convince himself he was fighting for the greater good . Barret eventually shifts his goal to actually wanting to save the Planet , doing so for Marlene 's sake , and he helps Cloud and his allies defeat Sephiroth to prevent the Planet 's destruction . 
 Early drafts of Barret 's background featured subtle differences , such as Marlene intended as Barret 's biological daughter , and his wife executed in front of him by a then @-@ undecided Shinra executive . The attack on Corel was initially written to be due to the discovery of Mako energy and Shinra 's desire to keep its existence a secret . His reunion with Dyne was also different , written to culminate in a duel between the two in Corel 's ruins , while Cloud and the others fought investigating Shinra soldiers . 
 = = = Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Barret appears in Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , a 2005 mobile phone @-@ based prequel to the events of Final Fantasy VII , which shows the events prior to Corel 's destruction . He helps the game 's protagonists , the Turks , defend the Mako reactor , believing it to be the town 's future . It is revealed that the reactor is under attack by the original AVALANCHE group , who are the cause of Shinra 's attack upon the town . Unaware of their involvement , Barret uses their ideals to form his own branch of the group . 
 In 2005 , Barret appeared in the CGI film Advent Children , which details the events two years after Sephiroth 's defeat . Barret places Marlene in Tifa 's care , travelling the world to rebuild the planet 's infrastructure and find alternate power sources to replace Mako . He returns later to assist in combating the film 's villains , the Remnants and fight the summon creature Bahamut SIN . He later appears in a small role in the 2006 video game Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , set one year after Advent Children , where he helps the protagonist Vincent Valentine prevent Omega WEAPON from destroying the planet . 
 A novella entitled " Case of Barret " was released in 2007 exclusively for the " Limited Edition Collector 's Set " DVD edition of Advent Children . Written by Kazushige Nojima as part of the On the Way to a Smile series , it details the events between Final Fantasy VII and Advent Children , examining Barret 's reaction to his weapon and his belief that it made him a monster . At the conclusion of the story , Barret visits the creator of the adapter on his wrist and receives the prosthetic hand / gun combination seen in the film , reasoning that although he needs a hand , he also still needs a weapon to prevent others from having to fight . He then decides to return to Marlene . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Barret 's comparisons to Mr. T in the media has resulted in both praise and criticism , with most of the criticism accusing the character of serving as a negative racial stereotype of African Americans . IGN argued in favor of this point , citing his use of " stilted slang , " and stating that the character stands out amongst the cast because " his dialog is written as if it was run through a broken <unk> translator , " further noting a trend in Japanese games to apply such dialogue to characters based on their skin color . Journalist Jeremy Parish agreed that the character was racist , although he argued that cultural gaps between Japan and the United States , plus the lack of American translators for Final Fantasy VII may have been contributing factors , arguing that the likeness between Barret and Mr. T was possibly an attempt to make a character that appealed to Americans , as the actor did . 
 In contrast , on 1UP.com , Parish argued in favor of Barret , noting that while on the surface he appeared to be the " worst kind of stereotype , " he was a great character with complexity , having made " difficult decisions in his life , and agonized over his losses . " Parish went further to describe Barret as the " first true father figure the [ Final Fantasy ] series had ever seen , " noting his relationship with his adopted daughter . RPGamer 's content manager Shawn Bruckner took the discussion further , arguing that claims of Barret 's presentation being racist was oversimplification of the character 's portrayal , and stated that while he was in some aspects a stereotype , in others , such as his compassion towards his daughter or guilt regarding his past actions , he was not . He added that Barret " shows us that a black man speaking in ' <unk> ' is not something to fear , " and that his portrayal was not racist , but instead the opposite . 
 Despite their criticism , IGN ranked Barret fourth on their 2006 list of best sidekick characters in video games , stating that he " took the videogame world by storm " when introduced and noting that his portrayal was also appealing , adding that his past made him a visibly loyal character . Joystiq named him one of twenty characters from the Final Fantasy franchise they wished to see in Square Enix ' crossover fighting game Dissidia Final Fantasy , noting a preference for his use of profanity and citing his combat abilities as easily suitable for the game . Edge praised Barret 's introduction as something " new " in the series , citing both his use of a gun and his " distinctively black " character , and further describing him as a " pseudo @-@ nod " to similarly armed characters , such as Mega Man or Samus Aran , who in contrast were either robots or encased in armor . 
 = Church of the SubGenius = 
 The Church of the SubGenius is a parody religion that satirizes better known belief systems . It teaches a complex philosophy that focuses on J. R. " Bob " Dobbs , purportedly a salesman from the 1950s , who is revered as a prophet by the Church . SubGenius leaders have developed detailed narratives about Dobbs and his relationship to various gods and conspiracies . Their central deity , Jehovah 1 , is accompanied by other gods drawn from ancient mythology and popular fiction . SubGenius literature describes a grand conspiracy that seeks to brainwash the world and oppress Dobbs ' followers . In its narratives , the Church presents a blend of cultural references in an elaborate remix of the sources . 
 Ivan Stang , who co @-@ founded the Church of the SubGenius in the 1970s , serves as its leader and publicist . He has imitated actions of other religious leaders , using the tactic of culture jamming in an attempt to undermine better @-@ known faiths . Church leaders instruct their followers to avoid mainstream commercialism and the belief in absolute truths . The group holds that the quality of " Slack " is of utmost importance — it is never clearly defined . The number of followers is unknown , although the Church 's message has been welcomed by college students and artists in the United States . The group is often compared to Discordianism . Journalists often consider the Church to be an elaborate joke , but a few academics have defended it as an honest system of deeply held beliefs . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius was founded by Ivan Stang ( born Douglas St Clair Smith ) and Philo Drummond ( born Steve Wilcox ) as the SubGenius Foundation . Dr. X ( born Monte <unk> ) was also present at the group 's inception . The organization 's first recorded activity was the publication of a photocopied document , known as the Sub Genius Pamphlet # 1 , disseminated in Dallas , Texas in 1979 . The document announced the impending end of the world and the possible deaths of its readers . It criticized Christian conceptions of God and New Age perceptions of spirituality . 
 Church leaders maintain that a man named J. R. " Bob " Dobbs founded the group in 1953 . SubGenius members constructed an elaborate account of the life of Dobbs , which is described by commentators as fictional . They assert that he telepathically contacted Drummond in 1972 , before meeting him in person the next year , and that Drummond persuaded Ivan Stang to join shortly afterwards . Stang describes himself as the " sacred scribe " of Dobbs and a " professional maven of weirdness " . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 = = = Deities = = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius ' ostensible beliefs defy categorization or a simple narrative , often striking outside observers as bizarre and convoluted . The group has developed an intricate mythology involving gods , aliens , and mutants , which is usually considered by observers to satirize other religions . Their primary deity , generally known as Jehovah 1 , is cast as an extraterrestrial , who contacted Dobbs in the 1940s . Various accounts state that the encounter occurred while Dobbs was building a television or watching late @-@ night television . Jehovah 1 gave him supernatural knowledge of the past and future , in addition to incredible power . Dobbs then posed deep questions to the alien , receiving mysterious answers . Some of their discussion centered on a powerful conspiracy , to which the Church attributes command of the world . 
 Jehovah 1 and his spouse Eris , regarded by the Church as " relatively evil " , are classified as " rebel gods " . SubGenius leaders note that Jehovah 1 is wrathful , a quality expressed by his " stark fist of removal " . The Church teaches that they are part of the Elder Gods , who are committed to human pain , but that Jehovah 1 is " relatively good " in comparison . Yog @-@ <unk> , a character from H. P. Lovecraft 's Cthulhu Mythos , is the leader of the Elder Gods . In her 2010 study of the Church of the SubGenius , religious scholar Carole Cusack of the University of Sydney states that Lovecraft 's work is a " model for the Church of the SubGenius ' approach to scripture " , in that aspects of his fiction were treated as real by some within paganism , just as the Church appropriates aspects of popular culture in its spirituality . 
 = = = J. R. " Bob " Dobbs = = = 
 SubGenius leaders teach that Dobbs ' nature is ineffable and consequently stylize his name with quotation marks . They cast him as a " World Avatar " and hold that he has died and been reborn many times . The Church 's primary symbol is an icon of his face in which he smokes a pipe . Stang states that the image was taken from Yellow Pages clip art , and it has been likened to Ward Cleaver , Mark Trail , or a 1950s @-@ era salesman . The Church 's canon contains references to aspects of the culture of the United States in that decade ; religious scholar Danielle Kirby of RMIT University argues that this type of reference " simultaneously critiques and subverts " the concept of the American dream . 
 In the Church 's mythology , Jehovah 1 had intended for Dobbs to lead a powerful conspiracy and brainwash individuals to make them work for a living . Dobbs refused to support the group ; instead , he infiltrated it and organized a counter @-@ movement . Church leaders teach that he was a very intelligent child and , as he grew older , studied several religious traditions , including Sufism , Rosicrucianism , and the Fourth Way . Another key event in his life occurred when he traveled to Tibet ; there he learned vital truths about topics including Yetis . The Church teaches that Yetis exist , and that SubGenius members have descended from them . The only relative of Dobbs that the Church identifies is his mother , Jane McBride Dobbs — Church leaders cite his lack of resemblance to his mother 's husband as the reason for not revealing his father . Dobbs is married to a woman named Connie ; SubGenius leaders identify the couple as archetypes of the genders in a belief that resembles Hindu doctrines about Shiva and Parvati . Church literature has variously described Dobbs ' occupation as " drilling equipment " or fluoride sales , and accounts of his life generally emphasize his good fortune rather than intelligence . SubGenius leaders believe that he is capable of time travel , and that this ability results in occasional changes to doctrine , deemed the " Sacred Doctrine of <unk> " by the Church . Consequently , members attempt to follow Dobbs by eschewing unchangeable plans . 
 = = = Conspiracy and " Slack " = = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius ' literature incorporates many aspects of conspiracy theories , teaching that there is a grand conspiracy at the root of all lesser ones . It records that there are many UFOs , most of which are used by the conspiracy leaders to monitor humans , although a few contain extraterrestrials . In the Church 's view , this conspiracy uses a facade of empowering messages but manipulates people so that they become indoctrinated into its service . The Church refers to these individuals as " pinks " and states that they are blissfully unaware of the organization 's power and control . SubGenius leaders teach that most cultural and religious mores are the conspiracy 's propaganda . They maintain that their followers , but not the pinks , are capable of developing an imagination ; the Church teaches that Dobbs has empowered its members to see through these illusions . Owing to their descent from Yetis , the Church 's followers have a capacity for deep understanding that the pinks lack . Cultural studies scholar Solomon Davidoff states that the Church develops a " satiric commentary " on religion , morality , and conspiracies . 
 SubGenius members believe that those in the service of the conspiracy seek to bar them from " Slack " , a quality promoted by the Church . Its teachings center on " Slack " ( always capitalized ) , which is never concisely defined , except in the claim that Dobbs embodies the quality . Church members seek to acquire " Slack " and believe that it will allow them the free , comfortable life ( without hard work or responsibility ) which they claim as an entitlement . Sex and the avoidance of work are taught as two key ways to gain " Slack " . Davidoff believes that " Slack " is " the ability to effortlessly achieve your goals " . Cusack states that the Church 's description of " Slack " as ineffable recalls the way that Tao is described , and Kirby casts " Slack " as a " unique magical system " . The <unk> Linux distribution is so named after the tenet of Slack . 
 = = Members = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius ' founders were based in Dallas when they distributed their first document . The SubGenius Foundation moved to Cleveland , Ohio , in 1999 . In 2009 , Stang claimed that the Church had 40 @,@ 000 members , but the actual number may have been much lower . As of 2012 , becoming a minister in the Church consists of paying a $ 35 fee ; Stang has estimated that there are 10 @,@ 000 ministers and that the Church 's annual income has reached $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Most SubGenius members are male , and , according to Stang , many of them are social outcasts . He maintains that those who do not fit into society will ultimately triumph over those who do . The Church has experienced success " converting " college students , particularly at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . It has also gained popularity in several American cities , including San Francisco , Little Rock , and Cleveland . A few Church members have voiced concerns and / or amusement about new members who took the Church too seriously , fearing that they acted like serious cult @-@ followers , the very concept that the SubGenius parodies . Stang has expressed concern that the Church 's doctrines could exacerbate pre @-@ existing psychoses of mentally ill devotees , although he believes that the Church genuinely helps many adherents . 
 Notable associates of the Church include Mark Mothersbaugh , Mojo Nixon , Paul <unk> , Paul Reubens , members of <unk> , David Byrne , and R. Crumb . Crumb , a cartoonist , provided early publicity for the church by reprinting Sub Genius Pamphlet # 1 in his comics anthology Weirdo . References to the Church are present in several works of art , including the Internet @-@ based collaborative fiction Ong 's Hat , the comic book The Middleman , the band Sublime 's album <unk> to Freedom , and the television program Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse . 
 = = = Instructions = = = 
 Church leaders have issued specific instructions to their followers ; Robert Latham of the University of California , Riverside , casts their ideology as " <unk> " . Five specific commands particularly embody the group 's values . 
 The first command is to shun regular employment and stop working . This encapsulates the Church 's view that to repent is to " <unk> OFF " ( sic ) , in opposition to the idea of working for a living . SubGenius leaders state that it is permissible for members to collect public assistance in lieu of maintaining employment . 
 The second command is to purchase products that are sold by the Church , which its leaders teach was founded by Dobbs to gain wealth . Unlike most religious groups , the Church proudly admits it is for @-@ profit ( presumably mocking some religious groups that seem to have ulterior financial motives ) . Cusack sees the instruction to buy as an ironic parody of the " greed is good " mentality of the 1980s , and Kirby notes that although the group emphasizes " the consumption of popular cultural artefacts " , this consumption is " simultaneously de @-@ emphasized by the processes of remix " . 
 The third command is to rebel against " law and order " : specifically , the Church condemns security cameras and encourages computer hacking . Cusack notes that this instruction recalls Robert Anton Wilson 's critique of law and order . 
 The fourth command is to rid the world of everyone who did not descend from Yetis . SubGenius leaders teach that Dobbs hopes to rid the Earth of 90 percent of humanity , making the Earth " clear " . The group praises drug abuse and abortion as effective methods of culling unneeded individuals . 
 The fifth command is to exploit fear , specifically that of individuals who are part of the conspiracy . Church leaders teach that members of the conspiracy fear SubGenius devotees . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Devivals = = = 
 Local groups of members of the Church of the SubGenius are known as " <unk> " . They host periodic events known as " <unk> " , which include sermons , music , and other art forms . Their leaders take comical names and give angry rants , and many <unk> occur in bars or similar venues . Cusack compares the style of the services to Pentecostal revivalism ; David <unk> of the Akron Beacon Journal casts them as " campy preaching sessions " . Cusack posits that these events are examples of Peter Lamborn Wilson 's concept of Temporary Autonomous Zones , spaces in which the ordinary constraints of social control are suspended . On one occasion , the presence of the wife of a Church leader at a SubGenius meeting that included public nudity and a goat costume contributed to her losing custody of her children in a court case . However , the publicity surrounding the event was ultimately a boon to the Church 's recruitment efforts . 
 The Church also celebrates several holidays in honor of characters drawn from fiction and popular culture , such as Monty Python , Dracula , and Klaatu . The Association for Consciousness Exploration and pagan groups have occasionally assisted the Church in its events . Some SubGenius members put little emphasis on meetings , citing the Church 's focus on individualism , although the Book of the SubGenius discusses community . 
 The Church of the <unk> has held Devivals in multiple states within the continental United States , as well as different countries , including China , the Netherlands , and Germany . The Church has also held Devivals at non @-@ SubGenius events , such as Burning Man and the Starwood Festival . 
 The Church of the SubGenius has a relationship with the Association for Consciousness Exploration , which hosts the Starwood Festival in Pomeroy , Ohio . <unk> members have access to discounted tickets for the ACE ’ s annual festival . 
 = = = X @-@ Day = = = 
 In early SubGenius literature , July 5 , 1998 , was introduced as a significant date , later becoming known as " X @-@ Day " . The Church held that Dobbs identified the date 's significance in the 1950s , claiming that the world was to experience a massive change on that date when <unk> , beings from Planet X , would arrive on Earth . SubGenius leaders declared that their paying members were to be transported onto spaceships for union with goddesses as the world was destroyed , although a few posited that they would be sent to a joyful hell . In anticipation of the event , X @-@ Day " drills " were held in 1996 and 1997 . 
 In July 1998 , the Church held a large <unk> at a " clothing @-@ optional " campground in Sherman , New York , attended by about 400 members . The event was ostensibly intended to celebrate the coming of aliens . When their appearance was not detected using the technology available at that time , Stang speculated that they might arrive in <unk> , an inversion of 1998 ; this has been interpreted as a satire of the way that religious groups have revised prophecies after their failures . Some critics have dismissed the event as a prank or form of " performance art " . Steve Bevilacqua , the Church 's business manager , admitted that his group made strange predictions about aliens , but contended that their statements were as believable as the account of Jesus ' walk on water . Another theory is that The Conspiracy has lied about what year the present year actually is ( just as they have lied about everything else ) , so that the liberation date would seem to pass without fulfillment and cause followers to lose faith . As a precaution , SubGenius members continue to gather for X @-@ Day every July 5 after 1998 . At these events , the non @-@ appearance of the aliens is celebrated . Cusack casts the productions as carnivalesque or an echo of ancient Greek satyr plays . 
 = = Publishing = = 
 = = = Online = = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius established a website in May 1993 , and its members were very active on Usenet in the 1990s . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Although it has gained a significant online presence , it was successful before the advent of Internet communities . The Church was a pioneer in the religious use of zines ; Cusack notes that its use of the medium can be seen as a rejection of the alienation of labor practices . 
 The SubGenius Foundation has published several official teachings , as well as non @-@ doctrinal works by Stang . The Book of the SubGenius , which discusses " Slack " at length , was published by Simon & Schuster and sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in its first five years in print . Kirby casts the book as a " call to arms for the forces of absurdity " . The juxtaposition , visual style , and content of the book mirror the group as a whole . It draws themes from fiction , as well as established and new religions , parodying a number of topics , including the Church of the SubGenius itself . 
 A number of SubGenius writers have authored stories to build their mythology , which have been compiled and published . Their core texts are disordered , presented in the style of a collage . Kirby notes that the group 's texts are a bricolage of cultural artifacts , which is then remixed into a new creation . In this process , Kirby argues , they interweave and juxtapose a variety of concepts , which she describes as a " web of references " . 
 = = = Video = = = 
 The group has also been promoted by a video Stang produced in 1992 . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 The Church of the SubGenius hosts several radio shows throughout the world , including broadcasters in Atlanta , Ohio , Maryland , and California . The Hour of Slack , the Church ’ s most popular audio production , is broadcast by several radio stations in the United States and two in Canada . 
 = = Analysis and commentary = = 
 = = = Comparative religion = = = 
 The Church 's teachings are often perceived as satirizing Christianity and Scientology , earning them a reputation as a parody religion . Church leaders have stated that Dobbs met L. Ron Hubbard , and SubGenius narratives echo extraterrestrial themes found in Scientology . Cusack notes that descriptions of Jehovah 1 bear noticeable similarities to Xenu , a powerful alien found in some Scientologist writings . The Church 's rhetoric has also been seen as a satirical imitation of the televangelism of the 1980s . Cusack sees the Church 's faux commercialism as culture jamming targeting prosperity theology ; she describes this as " a strikingly original innovation in contemporary religion " . Religious scholar Thomas Alberts of the University of London views the Church as attempting to " subvert the idea of authenticity in religion " by mirroring other religions to create both a sense of similarity and alterity . 
 Cusack compares the Church of the SubGenius to the <unk> , a radical 17th @-@ century pantheist movement in England . She notes that they made statements that shocked many hearers , attacking traditional notions of religious orthodoxy and political authority . In her view , this demonstrates that the Church of the SubGenius has " legitimate pedigree in the history of Western religion " . The American journalist Michael Muhammad Knight likens the Church to the Moorish Orthodox Church of America , a 20th @-@ century American syncretic religious movement , citing their shared emphasis on freedom . 
 There are a number of similarities between the Church of the SubGenius and Discordianism . Eris , the goddess of chaos who is worshiped by adherents of the latter , is believed by members of the Church of the SubGenius to be the wife of Jehovah 1 and an ally to humans . Like Discordianism , the Church of the SubGenius rejects absolute truth and embraces contradictions and paradoxes . Religious scholar David Chidester of the University of Cape Town views the Church as a " <unk> offshoot " , and Kirby sees them as " a child of the <unk> " . Both groups were heavily influenced by the writings of Robert Anton Wilson , who is referred to by SubGenius members as " Pope Bob " . Kirby states that the two groups have elements of bricolage and absurdity in common , but the Church of the SubGenius more explicitly remixes pop culture . 
 = = = Categorization = = = 
 Scholars often have difficulty defining the Church . Most commentators have placed the Church in the category of " joke religions " , which is usually seen as a pejorative description . Kirby sees this categorization as partially accurate because irony is an essential aspect of their faith . Other terms used to describe the Church include " faux cult " , " [ post @-@ modern ] cult " , " satirical <unk> " , " sophisticated joke religion " , " anti @-@ religion religion " , and " high parody of <unk> " . Members of the Church , however , have consistently maintained that they practice a religion . Stang has described the group as both " satire and a real stupid religion " , and he contends that it is more honest about its nature than are other religions . 
 Cusack states that the Church " must be accorded the status of a functional equivalent of religion , at the very least , if not ' authentic ' religion " . She sees it as " arguably a legitimate path to liberation " , citing its culture jamming and activism against commercialism . Kirby posits that the Church is a religion masquerading as a joke , rather than the reverse : in her view , it is a spiritual manifestation of a cultural shift toward irony . Alberts believes that there is broad agreement that the Church is fundamentally a different type of group than religions that date to antiquity ; he prefers to use the term " fake religion " to describe the group . He sees it , along with Discordianism , as part of a group of " popular movements that look and feel like religion , but whose apparent excess , irreverence and arbitrariness seem to mock religion " . Knight characterizes the Church as " at once a postmodern spoof of religion and a viable system in its own right " . 
 = = = Appraisal = = = 
 Kirby argues that the Church forms a counterpart to Jean Baudrillard 's concept of hyperreality , arguing " they create , rather than consume , popular culture in the practice of their spirituality " . She describes their remixing of popular culture sources as an " explicitly creative process " , maintaining that it prompts the reader to adopt some of the group 's views by forcing " the individual to reconsider normative methods of approaching the content " . She states that the group attempts to " strip references of their original meaning without necessarily losing their status as icons " . 
 In addition , Kirby sees the Church 's goal as deconstructing " normative modes of thought and behavior " in American culture ; she believes that it attempts to fight culturally ingrained thought patterns by shocking people . She argues that traditional approaches to religion cast seriousness as a measure of devotion , an approach which she believes has failed in contemporary society . She feels that irony is a common value that has been ignored by most religions . By embracing the quality , she maintains , the Church of the SubGenius offers a more accessible worldview than many groups . 
 Literature scholar Paul Mann of Pomona College is critical of the Church of the SubGenius . He notes that the Church purports to present the truth through absurdity and faults it for insufficiently examining the concept of truth itself . In addition , he believes that the group undermines its attempts to take a radical perspective by their " hysterical , literal , fantastic embrace " of criticism . 
 Anarchist writer Bob Black , a former member , has criticized the Church , alleging that the group has come to be characterized by conformism and submission to authority . He believes that although it initially served to satirize cults , it later took on some of their aspects . In 1992 , allegations of cult @-@ like behavior also appeared in the newspaper Bedfordshire on Sunday after a spate of SubGenius @-@ themed vandalism struck the English town of Bedford . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Books 
 SubGenius Foundation ( 1987 ) . Book of the SubGenius . Simon and Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Ivan Stang ( 1988 ) . High Weirdness by Mail . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Ivan Stang ( 1990 ) . Three @-@ fisted tales of " Bob " : Short Stories in the SubGenius Mythos . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Ivan Stang ; SubGenius Foundation ( 1994 ) . Revelation X : the " Bob " Apocryphon : Appointed to be Read in Churches . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Ivan Stang ( 2006 ) . The SubGenius <unk> of Slack : The <unk> . Running Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 56025 @-@ 939 @-@ 8 . 
 Videos 
 Stang , Ivan ; Holland , <unk> ; Robins , Hal ( 2006 ) [ 1991 ] . Arise ! : the SubGenius Video ( DVD @-@ R ) . SubGenius Moving Pictures . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Epaminondas = 
 Epaminondas ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> , <unk> ; d . 362 BC ) , was a Theban general and statesman of the 4th century BC who transformed the Ancient Greek city @-@ state of Thebes , leading it out of Spartan subjugation into a preeminent position in Greek politics . In the process he broke Spartan military power with his victory at Leuctra and liberated the Messenian helots , a group of Peloponnesian Greeks who had been enslaved under Spartan rule for some 230 years , having been defeated in the Messenian War ending in 600 BC . Epaminondas reshaped the political map of Greece , fragmented old alliances , created new ones , and supervised the construction of entire cities . He was militarily influential as well , inventing and implementing several major battlefield tactics . 
 The Roman orator Cicero called him " the first man of Greece " , and Montaigne judged him one of the three " worthiest and most excellent men " that had ever lived , but Epaminondas has fallen into relative obscurity in modern times . The changes Epaminondas wrought on the Greek political order did not long outlive him , as the cycle of shifting hegemonies and alliances continued unabated . A mere twenty @-@ seven years after his death , a recalcitrant Thebes was obliterated by Alexander the Great . Thus Epaminondas — who had been praised in his time as an idealist and liberator — is today largely remembered for a decade ( 371 BC to 362 BC ) of campaigning that sapped the strength of the great land powers of Greece and paved the way for the Macedonian conquest . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 The life of Epaminondas is very poorly attested in the ancient sources , especially compared to some of his near contemporaries ( e.g. Philip II of Macedon , Pelopidas ) . One principal reason for this is the loss of Plutarch 's biography of him . Epaminondas was one of approximately 50 ancient figures given an extensive biography by Plutarch in his Parallel Lives , in which he is paired with the Roman statesman Scipio Africanus ; however , both these " Lives " are now lost . Plutarch was writing over 400 years after Epaminondas 's death and is therefore very much a secondary source , but he often explicitly names his sources , which allows some degree of verification of his statements . 
 Some details of Epaminondas 's life can be found in Plutarch 's " Lives " of Pelopidas and Agesilaus II , who were contemporaries . There is also a surviving ( and possibly abridged ) biography of Epaminondas by the Roman author Cornelius Nepos from the first century BC , in the absence of Plutarch 's , that becomes a major source for Epaminondas 's life . 
 The period of Greek history from 411 – 362 BC is primarily attested by the historian Xenophon , who evidently saw his work as continuation of Thucydides 's History of the Peloponnesian War . Xenophon , who idolized Sparta and its king , Agesilaus , avoids mentioning Epaminondas wherever possible and does not even note his presence at the Battle of Leuctra . Epaminondas 's role in the conflicts of the 4th century is also described by Diodorus Siculus , in his Bibliotheca historica . Diodorus was writing in the 1st century BC , and is also very much a secondary source , though useful for corroborating details found elsewhere . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Epaminondas was born into the Theban aristocracy in the late 5th century BC ; estimates for the year of his birth vary widely . Cornelius Nepos claims that his father , <unk> , had been left impoverished by his ancestors . He was educated in his childhood by Lysis of Tarentum , one of the last major Pythagorean philosophers . Epaminondas evidently excelled as a student , and was devoted to Lysis . Nepos also tells us that the young Epaminondas worked hard to increase his physical prowess , and specifically his agility , since " he thought that strength suited the purposes of wrestlers , but that agility conduced to excellence in war . " He also trained in running and wrestling , but most of all , he undertook " martial exercises " ( presumably training with weapons ) . 
 Epaminondas evidently began serving as a soldier after adolescence ; Plutarch refers to an incident involving Epaminondas that occurred during a battle at Mantinea . Though not explicitly stated , this was probably the Spartan attack on Mantinea in 385 BC , as described by Xenophon ; Plutarch tells us that Epaminondas was there as part of a Theban force aiding the Spartans , so this battle fits the description . Epaminondas was certainly not old enough to have served at the First Battle of Mantinea which was in 418 BC . 
 It was at this battle , regardless of exactly when and where this occurred , that a defining moment of Epaminondas 's early life would happen . Epaminondas saved the life of his fellow Theban Pelopidas ; 
 Pelopidas , after receiving seven wounds in front , sank down upon a great heap of friends and enemies who lay dead together ; but Epaminondas , although he thought him lifeless , stood forth to defend his body and his arms , and fought desperately , single @-@ handed against many , determined to die rather than leave Pelopidas lying there . And now he too was in a sorry plight , having been wounded in the breast with a spear and in the arm with a sword , when Agesipolis the Spartan king came to his aid from the other wing , and when all hope was lost , saved them both . 
 Plutarch says that this incident firmly cemented their friendship , and Pelopidas would be Epaminondas 's partner in politics for the next twenty years . 
 Epaminondas was considered the greatest warrior @-@ statesmen of ancient Thebes by many , including the Roman historian Diodorus Siculus . Diodorus does not have anything to say about the sexual orientation of Epaminondas or the Sacred Band , nor does he say anything about the following account , again from Plutarch ( <unk> 17 ) . According to Plutarch 's dramatic dialogue , Epaminondas had two male lovers : <unk> and <unk> , the latter died with him at Mantineia in battle . They were buried together , something usually reserved for a husband and wife in Greek society . 
 = = Political and military career = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Epaminondas lived at a particularly turbulent point in Greek history . Following the end of the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC , Sparta had embarked upon an aggressively unilateralist policy towards the rest of Greece and quickly alienated many of its former allies . Thebes , meanwhile , had greatly increased its own power during the war and sought to gain control of the other cities of Boeotia ( the region of ancient Greece northwest of Attica ) . This policy , along with other disputes , brought Thebes into conflict with Sparta . By 395 BC , Thebes , alongside Athens , Corinth , and Argos , found itself arrayed against Sparta ( a former ally ) in the Corinthian War . That war , which dragged on inconclusively for eight years , saw several bloody Theban defeats at Spartan hands . By the time of its conclusion , Thebes had been forced to check its expansionist ambitions and return to its old alliance with Sparta . 
 In 382 BC , however , the Spartan commander <unk> committed an act that would ultimately turn Thebes against Sparta for good and pave the way for Epaminondas 's rise to power . Passing through Boeotia on campaign , <unk> took advantage of civil strife within Thebes to secure entrance to the city for his troops . Once inside , he seized the Cadmeia ( the Theban acropolis ) , and forced the anti @-@ Spartan party to flee the city . Epaminondas , although associated with that faction , was allowed to remain ; since " his philosophy made him to be looked down upon as a recluse , and his poverty as impotent " . The Spartans installed a puppet government in Thebes , and garrisoned the Cadmeia to ensure the behaviour of the Thebans . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 = = = = 378 BC – Theban coup = = = = 
 In the years following the Spartan takeover , the exiled Thebans regrouped in Athens and , at the instigation of Pelopidas , prepared to liberate their city . Meanwhile , in Thebes , Epaminondas began preparing the young men of the city to fight the Spartans . In the winter of 379 BC , a small group of the exiles , led by Pelopidas , infiltrated the city . They then assassinated the leaders of the pro @-@ Spartan government , and supported by Epaminondas and <unk> , who led a group of young men , and a force of Athenian hoplites , they surrounded the Spartans on the Cadmeia . The following day , Epaminondas and <unk> brought Pelopidas and his men before the Theban assembly and exhorted the Thebans to fight for their freedom ; the assembly responded by acclaiming Pelopidas and his men as liberators . The Cadmeia was surrounded , and the Spartans attacked ; Pelopidas realised that they must be expelled before an army came from Sparta to relieve them . The Spartan garrison eventually surrendered on the condition that they were allowed to march away unharmed . The narrow margin of the conspirators ' success is demonstrated by the fact that the Spartan garrison met a Spartan force on the way to rescue them as they marched back to Sparta . Plutarch portrays the Theban coup as an immensely significant event : 
 ... the subsequent change in the political situation made this exploit the more glorious . For the war which broke down the pretensions of Sparta and put an end to her supremacy by land and sea , began from that night , in which people , not by surprising any fort or castle or citadel , but by coming into a private house with eleven others , loosed and broke in pieces , if the truth may be expressed in a metaphor , the fetters of the Lacedaemonian supremacy , which were thought indissoluble and not to be broken . 
 = = = = 378 – 371 BC – Aftermath = = = = 
 When news of the uprising at Thebes reached Sparta , an army under Cleombrotus I had been dispatched to subdue the city , but turned back without engaging the Thebans . Another army under Agesilaus II was then dispatched to attack the Thebans . However , the Thebans refused to meet the Spartan army in battle , instead building a trench and stockade outside Thebes , which they occupied , preventing the Spartans advancing on the city . The Spartans ravaged the countryside but eventually departed , leaving Thebes independent . This victory so heartened the Thebans that they undertook operations against other neighboring cities as well . In short order the Thebans were able to reconstitute their old Boeotian confederacy in a new , democratic form . The cities of Boeotia united as a federation with an executive body composed of seven generals , or Boeotarchs , elected from seven districts throughout Boeotia . This political fusion was so successful that henceforth the names Theban and Boeotian were used interchangeably in a nod to the newfound solidarity of the region . 
 Seeking to crush the Thebans , the Spartans would invade Boeotia three times over the next few years ( 378 , 377 , ? possibly Leuctra ) . At first the Thebans feared facing the Spartans head on , but the conflict gave them much practice and training , and they " had their spirits roused and their bodies thoroughly inured to hardships , and gained experience and courage from their constant struggles " . Although Sparta remained the dominant land power in Greece , the Boeotians had demonstrated that they , too , were a martial threat and a politically cohesive power . At the same time , Pelopidas , an advocate of an aggressive policy against Sparta , had established himself as a major political leader in Thebes . 
 Epaminondas 's role in the years to 371 BC is difficult to piece together . Certainly , he served with the Theban armies in the defence of Boeotia in the 370s , and , by 371 BC , he had become a Boeotarch . It seems safe to assume , given their close friendship , and their close collaboration after 371 BC , that Epaminondas and Pelopidas also collaborated closely on Theban policy in the period 378 – 371 BC . 
 = = = = Peace conference of 371 BC = = = = 
 The years following the Theban coup had seen desultory fighting between Sparta and Thebes , with Athens also drawn into the conflict . A feeble attempt at a common peace had been made in 375 BC , but desultory fighting between Athens and Sparta had resumed by 373 BC ( at the latest ) . By 371 BC , Athens and Sparta were again war @-@ weary , and in 371 BC a conference was held at Sparta to discuss another attempt at a common peace . 
 Epaminondas was serving as a Boeotarch for 371 BC , and led the Boeotian delegation to the peace conference . Peace terms were agreed at the outset of the conference , and the Thebans presumably signed the treaty in their own name alone . However , on the following day , Epaminondas caused a drastic break with Sparta when he insisted on signing not for the Thebans alone , but for all the Boeotians . Agesilaus refused to allow the change of the Theban envoys ' signature , insisting that the cities of Boeotia should be independent ; Epaminondas countered that if this were to be the case , the cities of Laconia should be as well . <unk> , Agesilaus struck the Thebans from the document . The delegation returned to Thebes , and both sides mobilized for war . 
 = = = = Battle of Leuctra ( 371 BC ) = = = = 
 Immediately following the failure of the peace talks , orders were sent out from Sparta to the Spartan king Cleombrotus , who was at the head of an army in Phocis , commanding him to march directly to Boeotia . Skirting north to avoid mountain passes where the Boeotians were prepared to ambush him , Cleombrotus entered Boeotian territory from an unexpected direction and quickly seized a fort and captured 10 or 12 triremes . Then marching towards Thebes , he camped at Leuctra , in the territory of Thespiae . Here , the Boeotian army came to meet him . The Spartan army contained some 10 @,@ 000 hoplites , 700 of whom were the elite warriors known as Spartiates . The Boeotians opposite them numbered about 6 @,@ 000 , but were bolstered by a cavalry superior to that of the Peloponnesians . 
 Epaminondas was given charge of the Boeotian army , with the other six Boeotarchs in an advisory capacity . Pelopidas , meanwhile , was captain of the Sacred Band , the elite Theban troops . Before the battle , there was evidently much debate amongst the Boeotarchs about whether to fight or not . As a consistent advocate of an aggressive policy , Epaminondas wished to fight , and supported by Pelopidas , he managed to swing the vote in favour of battle . During the course of the battle , Epaminondas was to display a grasp of tactics hitherto unseen in Greek warfare . 
 The phalanx formation used by Greek armies had a distinct tendency to veer to the right during battle , " because fear makes each man do his best to shelter his unarmed side with the shield of the man next him on the right " . Traditionally , a phalanx therefore lined up for battle with the elite troops on the right flank to counter this tendency . Thus , in the Spartan phalanx at Leuctra , Cleombrotus and the elite ' Spartiates ' were on the right , while the less experienced Peloponnesian allies were on the left . However , needing to counter the Spartans ' numerical advantage , Epaminondas implemented two tactical innovations . Firstly , he took the best troops in the army , and arranged them 50 ranks deep ( as opposed to the normal 8 – 12 ranks ) on the left wing , opposite Cleombrotus and the Spartans , with Pelopidas and the Sacred Band on the extreme left flank . Secondly , recognizing , that he could not have matched the width of the Peloponnesian phalanx ( even before the deepening the left flank ) , he abandoned all attempts to do so . Instead , placing the weaker troops on the right flank , he " instructed them to avoid battle and withdraw gradually during the enemy 's attack " . The tactic of the deep phalanx had been anticipated by <unk> , another Theban general , who used a 25 man deep formation at the Battle of Delium . However , the reversing of the position of the elite troops , and an oblique line of attack were innovations ; it seems that Epaminondas was therefore responsible for the military tactic of refusing one 's flank . 
 The fighting at Leuctra opened with a clash between the cavalry , in which the Thebans were victorious over the inferior Spartan cavalry , driving them back into the ranks of the infantry , and thereby disrupting the phalanx . The battle then became general , with the strengthened Theban left flank marching to attack at double speed , while the right flank retreated . After intense fighting , the Spartan right flank began to give way under the impetus of the mass of Thebans , and Cleombrotus was killed . Although the Spartans held on for long enough to rescue the body of the king , their line was soon broken by the sheer force of the Theban assault . The Peloponnesian allies on the left wing , seeing the Spartans put to flight , also broke and ran , and the entire army retreated in disarray . One thousand Peloponnesians were killed , while the Boeotians lost only 300 men . Most importantly , since it constituted a significant proportion of the entire Spartan manpower , 400 of the 700 Spartiates present were killed , a loss that posed a serious threat to Sparta 's future war @-@ making abilities . When , after the battle , the Spartans asked if they and the Peloponnesians could collect the dead , Epaminondas suspected that the Spartans would try to cover @-@ up the scale of their losses . He therefore allowed the Peloponnesians to remove their dead first , so that those remaining would be shown to be Spartiates , and emphasise the scale of the Theban victory . 
 The victory at Leuctra shook the foundations of the Spartan dominance of Greece to the core . Since the number of Spartiates was always relatively small , Sparta had relied on her allies in order to field substantial armies . However , with the defeat at Leuctra , the Peloponnesian allies were less inclined to bow to Spartan demands . Furthermore , with the loss of men at Leuctra and other battles , the Spartans were not in a strong position to reassert their dominance over their erstwhile allies . 
 = = = Theban hegemony = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of Leuctra , the Thebans considered following up their victory by taking their vengeance on Sparta ; they also invited Athens to join them in doing so . However , their Thessalian allies under Jason of Pherae dissuaded them from shattering what remained of the Spartan army . Instead , Epaminondas occupied himself with consolidating the Boeotian confederacy , compelling the previously Spartan @-@ aligned polis of Orchomenus to join the league . 
 The following year the Thebans invaded the Peloponnesus , aiming to break Spartan power for good . It is not clear exactly when the Thebans started to think not just of ending the Spartan hegemony , but of replacing it with one of their own , but it is clear that eventually this became their aim . Hans Beck asserts that , unlike Sparta in the Peloponnesian League and Athens in the Delian League , Thebes made no effort either to create an empire or to bind its allies in any sort of permanent and stable organization . Indeed , after Leuctra Thebes devoted its attention to diplomatic efforts in Central Greece rather than schemes of domination further afield . By late 370 Thebes ' network of alliances in central Greece made her secure in the area — as she had not been before Leuctra — and offered scope for further expansion of Theban influence . 
 = = = = First Invasion of the Peloponnese ( 370 BC ) = = = = 
 When , in the immediate aftermath of Leuctra , the Thebans had sent a herald to Athens with news of their victory , the messenger was met with stony silence . The Athenians then decided to take advantage of the Spartan discomfiture , holding a conference in Athens , in which the peace terms proposed earlier in 371 BC were ratified by all cities ( except Elis ) ; and this time , the treaty explicitly made the Peloponnesian cities , formerly under Spartan dominance , independent . Taking advantage of this , the <unk> decided to unify their settlements into a single city , and to fortify it ; a decision which greatly angered Agesilaus . Furthermore , Tegea , supported by Mantinea , instigated the formation of an Arcadian alliance . This led to the Spartans declaring war on Mantinea , whereupon the majority of Arcadian cities grouped together to oppose the Spartans ( thus forming the confederation that the Spartans were trying to prevent ) , and requested assistance from the Thebans . The Theban force arrived late in 370 BC , and it was led by Epaminondas and Pelopidas , both at this time Boeotarchs . As they journeyed into Arcadia , the Thebans were joined by armed contingents from many of Sparta 's former allies , swelling their forces to some 50 – 70 @,@ 000 men . In Arcadia Epaminondas encouraged the Arcadians to form their proposed league , and to build the new city of Megalopolis ( as a center of power opposed to Sparta ) . 
 Epaminondas , supported by Pelopidas and the Arcadians , then persuaded the other Boeotarchs to invade Laconia itself . Moving south , they crossed the Evrotas River , the frontier of Sparta , which no hostile army had breached in memory . The Spartans , unwilling to engage the massive army in battle , simply defended their city , which the Thebans did not attempt to capture . The Thebans and their allies ravaged Laconia , down to the port of Gythium , freeing some of the Lacedaemonian perioeci from their allegiance to Sparta . Epaminondas briefly returned to Arcadia , before marching south again , this time to Messenia , a region which the Spartans had conquered some 200 years before . Epaminondas freed the helots of Messenia , and rebuilt the ancient city of Messene on Mount <unk> , with fortifications that were among the strongest in Greece . He then issued a call to Messenian exiles all over Greece to return and rebuild their homeland . The loss of Messenia was particularly damaging to the Spartans , since the territory comprised one @-@ third of Sparta 's territory and contained half of their helot population . The helots ' labor allowed the Spartans to become a " full @-@ time " army . 
 Epaminondas ' campaign of 370 / 369 has been described as an example of " the grand strategy of indirect approach " , which was aimed at severing " the economic roots of her [ Sparta 's ] military supremacy . " In mere months , Epaminondas had created two new enemy states that opposed Sparta , shaken the foundations of Sparta 's economy , and all but devastated Sparta 's prestige . This accomplished , he led his army back home , victorious . 
 = = = = Trial = = = = 
 In order to accomplish all that he wished in the Peloponnesus , Epaminondas had persuaded his fellow Boeotarchs to remain in the field for several months after their term of office had expired . Upon his return home , Epaminondas was therefore greeted not with a hero 's welcome but with a trial arranged by his political enemies . According to Cornelius Nepos , in his defense Epaminondas merely requested that , if he be executed , the inscription regarding the verdict read : 
 Epaminondas was punished by the Thebans with death , because he obliged them to overthrow the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra , whom , before he was general , none of the Boeotians durst look upon in the field , and because he not only , by one battle , rescued Thebes from destruction , but also secured liberty for all Greece , and brought the power of both people to such a condition , that the Thebans attacked Sparta , and the Lacedaemonians were content if they could save their lives ; nor did he cease to prosecute the war , till , after settling Messene , he shut up Sparta with a close siege . 
 The jury broke into laughter , the charges were dropped , and Epaminondas was re @-@ elected as Boeotarch for the next year . 
 = = = = Second invasion of the Peloponnesus ( 369 BC ) = = = = 
 In 369 BC the Argives , <unk> and the Arcadians , eager to continue their war against Sparta , recalled the Thebans to their support . Epaminondas , at the height of his prestige , again commanded an allied invasion force . Arriving at the Isthmus of Corinth , the Thebans found it heavily guarded by the Spartans and Athenians ( along with the Corinthians , <unk> and <unk> ) . Epaminondas decided to attack the weakest spot , guarded by the Lacedaemonians ; in a dawn attack he forced his way through the Spartan position , and joined his Peloponnesian allies . The Thebans thus won an easy victory and crossed the Isthmus . Diodorus stresses that this was " a feat no whit inferior to his former mighty deeds " . 
 However , the rest of the expedition achieved little : Sicyon and Pellene became allied to Thebes , and the countryside of Troezen and Epidaurus was ravaged , but the cities could not be taken . After an abortive attack on Corinth and the arrival of a task force sent by Dionysius of Syracuse to aid Sparta , the Thebans decided to march home . 
 = = = = Thessaly ( 368 BC ) = = = = 
 When Epaminondas returned to Thebes , he continued to be dogged by his political enemies who prosecuted him for the second time . They actually succeeded in excluding him from the office of Boeotarch for the year 368 BC . This was the only time from the Battle of Leuctra until his death that he did not serve as Boeotarch . In 368 , the Theban army marched into Thessaly to rescue Pelopidas and Ismenias , who had been imprisoned by Alexander of Pherae while serving as ambassadors . The Theban force not only failed to overcome Alexander and his allies , but got into serious difficulties , when it tried to withdraw ; Epaminondas , serving as a private soldier , succeeded in extricating it . In early 367 , Epaminondas led a second Theban expedition to free Pelopidas , and Ismenias . He finally outmaneuvered the Thessalians , and secured the release of the two Theban ambassadors without a fight . 
 = = = = Third invasion of the Peloponnesus ( 367 BC ) = = = = 
 In the spring of 367 BC , Epaminondas again invaded the Peloponnesus . This time an Argive army captured part of the Isthmus on Epaminondas 's request , allowing the Theban army to enter the Peloponnesus unhindered . On this occasion , Epaminondas marched to Achaea , seeking to secure their allegiance to Thebes . No army dared to challenge him in the field , and the Achaean oligarchies therefore acquiesced to the request that they be allied to Thebes . Epaminondas ' acceptance of the Achaean oligarchies roused protests by both the Arcadians and his political rivals , and his settlement was thus shortly reversed : democracies were set up , and the oligarchs exiled . These democratic governments were short @-@ lived , since the pro @-@ Spartan aristocrats from all the cities banded together and attacked each city in turn , re @-@ establishing the oligarchies . According to G.L. Cawkwell , " the sequel perhaps showed the good sense of Epaminondas . When these exiles recovered the cities , they ' no longer took a middle course ' . " In the light of their treatment by Thebes , they abandoned their previously neutral stance , and thereafter " fought zealously in support of the Lacedaemonians " . 
 = = = = Resistance to Thebes = = = = 
 In 366 / 365 BC an attempt was made to make a common peace , with the Persian King Artaxerxes II as arbiter and guarantor . Thebes organized a conference to have the terms of the peace accepted , but their diplomatic initiative failed : the negotiations could not resolve the hostility between Thebes and other states that resented its influence ( such as the Arcadian leader <unk> who challenged the right of the Thebans to hold the congress in Thebes ) ; the peace was never fully accepted , and fighting soon resumed . 
 Throughout the decade after the Battle of Leuctra , numerous former allies of Thebes defected to the Spartan alliance or even to alliances with other hostile states . By the middle of the next decade , even some Arcadians ( whose league Epaminondas had helped establish in 369 BC ) had turned against them . At the same time , however , Epaminondas managed through a series of diplomatic efforts to dismantle the Peloponnesian league : the remaining members of the league finally abandoned Sparta ( in 365 Corinth , Epidaurus , and Phlius made peace with Thebes and Argos ) , and Messenia remained independent and firmly loyal to Thebes . 
 Boeotian armies campaigned across Greece as opponents rose up on all sides ; Epaminondas even led his state in a challenge to Athens at sea . The Theban demos voted him a fleet of a hundred triremes to win over the Rhodes , Chios , and Byzantium . The fleet finally sailed in 364 , but modern scholars believe that Epaminondas achieved no lasting gains for Thebes on this voyage . In that same year , Pelopidas was killed while campaigning against Alexander of Pherae in Thessaly . His loss deprived Epaminondas of his greatest Theban political ally . 
 = = = = Fourth invasion of the Peloponnesus ( 362 BC ) = = = = 
 In the face of this increasing opposition to Theban dominance , Epaminondas launched his final expedition into the Peloponnese in 362 BC . The immediate goal of the expedition was to subdue Mantinea , which had been opposing Theban influence in the region . Epaminondas brought an army drawn from Boeotia , Thessaly and Euboea . He was joined by Tegea , which was the center of local opposition to Mantinea , Argos , Messenia , and some of the Arcadians . Mantinea , on the other hand , had requested assistance from Sparta , Athens , Achaea and the rest of Arcadia , so that almost all of Greece was represented on one side or the other . 
 This time the mere presence of the Theban army was not enough to cow the opposition . Since time was passing and the Mantinean alliance showed no signs of capsizing , Epaminondas decided that he would have to break the stalemate . Hearing that a large Lacedaemonian force was marching to Mantinea , and that Sparta was practically undefended , he planned an audacious night @-@ time march on Sparta itself . However , the Spartan king Archidamus was alerted to this move by an informant , probably a Cretan runner , and Epaminondas arrived to find the city well @-@ defended . Although he did attack the city , he seems to have drawn off relatively quickly on discovering that he had not , after all , surprised the Spartans . Furthermore , the Lacedaemonian and Mantinean troops which had been stationed at Mantinea had marched to Sparta during the course of the day , and dissuaded Epaminondas from attacking again . Now hoping that his adversaries had left Mantinea defenseless in their haste to protect Sparta , Epaminondas counter marched his troops back to his base at Tegea , and then dispatched his cavalry to Mantinea . However , a clash outside the walls of Mantinea with Athenian cavalry foiled this strategy as well . Realising that the time allotted for the campaign was drawing to a close , and reasoning that if he departed without defeating the enemies of Tegea , Theban influence in the Peloponnesus would be destroyed , he decided to stake everything on a pitched battle . 
 What followed on the plain in front of Mantinea was the largest hoplite battle in Greek history . Epaminondas had the larger army , 30 @,@ 000 strong infantry and 3 @,@ 000 cavalry , whilst his opponents numbered 20 @,@ 000 infantry and 2 @,@ 000 cavalry . Xenophon says that , having decided to fight , Epaminondas arranged the army into battle order , and then marched it in a column parallel to the Mantinean lines , so that it appeared that the army was marching elsewhere , and would not fight that day . Having reached a certain point in the march , he then had the army down arms , so it appeared they getting ready to camp . Xenophon suggests that " by so doing he caused among most of the enemy a relaxation of their mental readiness for fighting , and likewise a relaxation of their readiness as regards their array for battle " . The whole column , which had been marching right @-@ to @-@ left past the front of the Mantinean army then ' right @-@ faced ' , so that they were now in a battle line , facing the <unk> . Epaminondas , who had been at the head of the column ( now the left wing ) , brought some companies of infantry from the extreme right wing , behind the battle line , to reinforce the left wing . By this , he recreated the strengthened left @-@ wing that the Thebes had fielded at Leuctra ( this time probably made up by all the Boeotians , and not just the Thebans as at Leuctra ) . On the wings he placed strong forces of cavalry strengthened by light @-@ infantry . 
 Epaminondas then gave the order to advance , catching the enemy off guard , and causing a furious scramble in the Mantinean camp to prepare for battle . The battle unfolded as Epaminondas had planned . The cavalry forces on the wings drove back the Athenian and Mantinean cavalry opposite them . Diodorus says that the Athenian cavalry on the Mantinean right wing , although not inferior in quality , could not withstand the missiles from the light @-@ troops that Epaminondas had placed among the Theban cavalry . Meanwhile , the Theban infantry advanced . Xenophon evocatively describes Epaminondas 's thinking : " [ he ] led forward his army prow on , like a trireme , believing that if he could strike and cut through anywhere , he would destroy the entire army of his adversaries . " As at Leuctra , the weakened right wing was ordered to hold back and avoid fighting . In the clash of infantry , the issue briefly hung in the balance , but then the Theban left @-@ wing broke through the Spartan line , and the entire enemy phalanx was put to flight . However , at the height of the battle , Epaminondas was mortally wounded by a Spartan , and died shortly thereafter . Following his death , the Thebes and allies made no effort to pursue the fleeing enemy ; a testament to Epaminondas 's centrality to the war effort . 
 Xenophon , who ends his history with the battle of Mantinea , says of the battle 's results : 
 When these things had taken place , the opposite of what all men believed would happen was brought to pass . For since well @-@ nigh all the people of Greece had come together and formed themselves in opposing lines , there was no one who did not suppose that if a battle were fought , those who proved victorious would be the rulers and those who were defeated would be their subjects ; but the deity so ordered it that both parties set up a trophy as though victorious and neither tried to hinder those who set them up , that both gave back the dead under a truce as though victorious , and both received back their dead under a truce as though defeated , and that while each party claimed to be victorious , neither was found to be any better off , as regards either additional territory , or city , or sway , than before the battle took place ; but there was even more confusion and disorder in Greece after the battle than before . 
 = = Death = = 
 While pressing forward with the troops at Mantinea , Epaminondas was hit in the chest by a spear ( or , in some accounts , a sword or large knife ) . Cornelius Nepos suggests the Spartans were deliberately aiming at Epaminondas in the hope of killing him , and thereby demoralizing the Thebans . The enemy who struck the killing blow was variously identified as <unk> , <unk> , or Gryllus , son of Xenophon . 
 The spear broke , leaving the iron point in his body , and Epaminondas collapsed . The Thebans around him fought desperately to stop the Spartans taking possession of his body . When he was carried back to camp still living , he asked which side was victorious . When he was told that the Boeotians had won , he said " It is time to die . " Diodorus suggests that one of his friends exclaimed " You die childless , Epaminondas " and then burst into tears . To this Epaminondas is supposed to have replied " No , by Zeus , on the contrary I leave behind two daughters , Leuctra and Mantinea , my victories . " Cornelius Nepos , whose story is otherwise similar has the last words of Epaminondas as " I have lived long enough ; for I die unconquered . " When the spear point was withdrawn , Epaminondas quickly expired . In accordance with Greek custom , he was buried on the battlefield . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Character = = = 
 In matters of character , Epaminondas was above reproach in the eyes of the ancient historians who recorded his deeds . Contemporaries praised him for disdaining material wealth , sharing what he had with his friends , and refusing bribes . One of the last heirs of the Pythagorean tradition , he appears to have lived a simple and ascetic lifestyle even when his leadership had raised him to a position at the head of all Greece . Cornelius Nepos notes his incorruptibility , describing his rejection of a Persian ambassador who came to him with a bribe . These aspects of his character contributed greatly to his renown after his death . 
 Epaminondas never married and as such was subject to criticism from countrymen who believed he was duty @-@ bound to provide the country with the benefit of sons as great as himself . In response , Epaminondas said that his victory at Leuctra was a daughter destined to live forever . He is known , however , to have had several young male lovers , a standard pedagogic practice in ancient Greece , and one that Thebes in particular was famous for ; Plutarch records that the Theban lawgivers instituted the practice " to temper the manners and characters of the youth . " An anecdote told by Cornelius Nepos indicates that Epaminondas was intimate with a young man by the name of <unk> . Plutarch also mentions two of his beloveds ( <unk> ) : <unk> , who fought together with him at the battle of Leuctra , where he greatly distinguished himself ; and <unk> , who fell with Epaminondas at Mantineia and was buried by his side . 
 = = = Military record = = = 
 Extant biographies of Epaminondas universally describe him as one of the most talented generals ever produced by the Greek city @-@ states . Even Xenophon , who fails to note his presence at Leuctra , says of his Mantinean campaign : " Now I for my part could not say that his campaign proved fortunate ; yet of all possible deeds of forethought and daring the man seems to me to have left not one undone . " Diodorus is effusive in his praise for Epaminondas 's military record : 
 " For it seems to me that he surpassed his contemporaries ... in skill and experience in the art of war . For among the generation of Epaminondas were famous men : Pelopidas the Theban , Timotheus and Conon , also Chabrias and Iphicrates ... Agesilaus the Spartan , who belonged to a slightly older generation . Still earlier than these , in the times of the Medes and Persians , there were Solon , Themistocles , Miltiades , and Cimon , <unk> , and Pericles and certain others in Athens , and in Sicily <unk> , son of <unk> , and still others . All the same , if you should compare the qualities of these with the generalship and reputation of Epaminondas , you would find the qualities possessed by Epaminondas far superior " . 
 As a tactician , Epaminondas stands above every other general in Greek history ( unless the Macedonian kings Philip II and Alexander the Great are included ) , although modern historians have questioned his larger strategic vision . According to Richard A. Gabriel , his tactics " marked the beginning of the end of traditional Greek methods of war " . His innovative strategy at Leuctra allowed him to defeat the vaunted Spartan phalanx with a smaller force , and his decision to refuse his right flank was the first recorded instance of such a tactic . Many of the tactical innovations that Epaminondas implemented would also be used by Philip of Macedon , who in his youth spent time as a hostage in Thebes and may have learned directly from Epaminondas himself . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In some ways Epaminondas dramatically altered the face of Greece during the 10 years in which he was the central figure of Greek politics . By the time of his death , Sparta had been humbled , Messenia freed , and the Peloponnese completely reorganized . In another respect , however , he left behind a Greece no different than that which he had found ; the bitter divides and animosities that had poisoned international relations in Greece for over a century remained as deep as or deeper than they had been before Leuctra . The brutal internecine warfare that had characterized the years from 432 BC onwards continued unabated until all the states involved were subjugated by Macedon . 
 At Mantinea , Thebes had faced down the combined forces of the greatest states of Greece , but the victory brought it no spoils . With Epaminondas removed from the scene , the Thebans returned to their more traditional defensive policy , and within a few years , Athens had replaced them at the pinnacle of the Greek political system . No Greek state ever again reduced Boeotia to the subjection it had known during the Spartan hegemony , but Theban influence faded quickly in the rest of Greece . Finally , at Chaeronea in 338 BC , the combined forces of Thebes and Athens , driven into each other 's arms for a desperate last stand against Philip of Macedon , were crushingly defeated , and Theban independence was put to an end . Three years later , heartened by a false rumor that Alexander the Great had been assassinated , the Thebans revolted ; Alexander squashed the revolt , then destroyed the city , slaughtering or enslaving all its citizens . A mere 27 years after the death of the man who had made it preeminent throughout Greece , Thebes was wiped from the face of the Earth , its 1 @,@ 000 @-@ year history ended in the space of a few days . 
 Epaminondas , therefore , is remembered both as a liberator and a destroyer . He was celebrated throughout the ancient Greek and Roman worlds as one of the greatest men of history . Cicero eulogized him as " the first man , in my judgement , of Greece , " and Pausanias records an honorary poem from his tomb : 
 By my counsels was Sparta shorn of her glory , 
 And holy Messene received at last her children . 
 By the arms of Thebes was Megalopolis encircled with walls , 
 And all Greece won independence and freedom . 
 Epaminondas 's actions were certainly welcomed by the Messenians and others whom he assisted in his campaigns against the Spartans . Those same Spartans , however , had been at the center of resistance to the Persian invasions of the 5th century BC , and their absence was sorely felt at Chaeronea ; the endless warfare in which Epaminondas played a central role weakened the cities of Greece until they could no longer hold their own against their neighbors to the north . As Epaminondas campaigned to secure freedom for the Boeotians and others throughout Greece , he brought closer the day when all of Greece would be subjugated by an invader . Victor Davis Hanson has suggested that Epaminondas may have planned for a united Greece composed of regional democratic federations , but even if this assertion is correct , no such plan was ever implemented . Simon Hornblower asserts that Thebes ' great legacy to fourth century and Hellenistic Greece was federalism , " a kind of alternative to imperialism , a way of achieving unity without force " , which " embodies a representative principle " . 
 For all his noble qualities , Epaminondas was unable to transcend the Greek city @-@ state system , with its endemic rivalry and warfare , and thus left Greece more war @-@ ravaged but no less divided than he found it . Hornblower asserts that " it is a sign of Epaminondas ' political failure , even before the battle of Mantinea , that his Peloponnesian allies fought to reject Sparta rather than because of the positive attractions of Thebes " . On the other hand , Cawkwell concludes that " Epaminondas must be judged not in relation to these inevitable limitations of Boeotian power . To have established the power of Boeotia and ended the Spartan domination of the Peloponnese was the most and the best that a Boeotian could have done . " 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 = José Juan Barea = 
 José Juan " J.J. " Barea Mora ( born June 26 , 1984 ) is a Puerto Rican professional basketball player for the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He played college basketball for Northeastern University before joining the Mavericks in 2006 and becoming just the seventh Puerto Rican to play in the NBA . He went on to win an NBA championship with the Mavericks in 2011 before signing with the Minnesota Timberwolves where he played for the next three seasons . He has also played in the NBA Development League and the Baloncesto Superior Nacional . 
 Barea was a member of the Puerto Rican national team that won the gold medal in the 2006 and 2010 Central American and Caribbean Games . He was the starting point guard for Puerto Rico when they won the gold medal in the 2011 Pan American Games and the silver medal in the 2007 Pan American Games . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barea was born in the Puerto Rican municipality of Mayagüez in 1984 to parents Marta ( née Mora ) and Jaime Barea . Growing up in Mayagüez , Barea was a member of Boy Scouts of America Troop 790 for seven years . 
 In 2001 , Barea starting playing basketball for Indios de Mayagüez of the Baloncesto Superior Nacional ( BSN ) . Later that year , he moved to the United States to attend high school at Miami Christian School in Miami , Florida . As a senior in 2001 – 02 , he averaged 20 points , 6 rebounds , 8 assists and 3 steals in helping his team to the state title and a 38 – 2 record . He made a name for himself nationally at the City of Palms event in December 2001 when he was the team 's leading scorer at the event and showcased an accurate shot from three @-@ point range . In April 2002 , he enrolled at Northeastern University . 
 After enrolling at Northeastern , Barea returned to Puerto Rico where he again joined Indios de Mayagüez for the 2002 BSN season where in 14 games , he averaged 2 @.@ 8 points per game . 
 = = College career = = 
 As a freshman at Northeastern in 2002 – 03 , Barea earned third @-@ team All @-@ AEC and AEC All @-@ Rookie team honors after averaging 17 @.@ 0 points , 3 @.@ 0 rebounds , 3 @.@ 9 assists and 1 @.@ 9 steals in 28 games . His 17 @.@ 0 ppg led the America East Conference in scoring and subsequently became the first Husky freshman to record 400 points and 100 assists in a season , and led NU with a team @-@ high 25 double @-@ figure scoring games . 
 As a sophomore in 2003 – 04 , Barea earned first @-@ team All @-@ AEC honors after he finished second in the conference in scoring ( 20 @.@ 7 ppg ) and assists ( 5 @.@ 8 apg ) , becoming the first Husky since Reggie Lewis in 1986 – 87 to average at least 20 points per game . 
 As a junior in 2004 – 05 , Barea ranked second in the America East and eighth in the country in scoring ( 22 @.@ 2 ppg ) . He also led the conference and was fifth in the nation in assists ( 7 @.@ 3 apg ) . He subsequently earned first @-@ team All @-@ AEC honors for the second straight year . In addition , he placed third in assists ( 218 ) , fourth in three @-@ pointers ( 68 ) and sixth in points ( 665 ) on Northeastern 's single @-@ season charts , and tied the school record with a career @-@ high 41 points against Stony Brook . He was also named a finalist for the Bob Cousy Award . 
 As a senior in 2005 – 06 , Barea was named Honorable Mention All @-@ America by The Associated Press , Player of the Year in the CAA , first @-@ team All @-@ CAA , first @-@ team NABC All @-@ District 1 , and Mid @-@ Major Player of the Year by <unk> He finished third in the country in assists ( 8 @.@ 4 apg ) and led Northeastern and finished 19th in the nation in scoring ( 21 @.@ 0 ppg ) . He was again named a finalist for the Bob Cousy Award . He finished his career as the school 's second all @-@ time leading scorer with 2 @,@ 209 points behind Reggie Lewis . He also leaves Northeastern as its second all @-@ time leader in assists with 721 and leader in three @-@ point field goals made ( 255 ) . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = = Post @-@ college = = = 
 In April 2006 , Barea had a productive participation at the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament in Virginia , finishing with averages of 14 @.@ 0 points , 13 @.@ 7 assists and 5 @.@ 7 rebounds per game in three contests . Barea broke the single @-@ game and single @-@ tournament assist records , dishing out 18 assists for Beach Barton Ford in a 118 – 100 victory over Norfolk Sports Club , giving him 41 assists in three games . For his efforts , Barea received the tournament 's first Allen Iverson A.I. award , given to the player deemed most important to his team . 
 Following the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament , Barea returned to Puerto Rico and joined Cangrejeros de Santurce for the 2006 BSN season where in 9 games , he averaged 10 @.@ 4 points , 2 @.@ 7 assists and 2 @.@ 8 rebounds per game . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Dallas Mavericks ( 2006 – 2011 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 season = = = = 
 After going undrafted in the 2006 NBA draft , Barea joined the Golden State Warriors for the 2006 Las Vegas Summer League where in five games , he averaged 6 @.@ 8 points , 1 @.@ 8 rebounds , 2 @.@ 8 assists and 2 @.@ 0 steals in 21 @.@ 4 minutes per game . He then joined the Dallas Mavericks for the Rocky Mountain Revue where in three games , he averaged 12 @.@ 0 points , 1 @.@ 7 rebounds and 6 @.@ 7 assists in 25 @.@ 0 minutes per game . 
 On August 17 , 2006 , Barea signed a multi @-@ year deal with the Dallas Mavericks . On November 4 , 2006 , he made his regular season debut for the Mavericks , recording two points in two and a half minutes of action in a 76 – 107 loss to the Houston Rockets . 
 On January 17 , 2007 , Barea was assigned to the Fort Worth Flyers of the NBA Development League . On January 29 , he was named the D @-@ League Performer of the Week after he topped 40 points in two different games while leading the Flyers to a 3 @-@ 1 record . On February 1 , 2007 , he was recalled by the Mavericks after he averaged 27 @.@ 3 points , 5 @.@ 0 rebounds , 7 @.@ 8 assists and 1 @.@ 3 steals in eight D @-@ League games . 
 On April 13 , 2007 , Barea recorded a season @-@ high 16 points in an 89 – 104 loss to the Utah Jazz . Four days later , he started his first career game for the Mavericks as he record 13 points , 10 rebounds and 3 assists in an 82 – 111 loss to the Golden State Warriors . He finished his rookie season with averages of 2 @.@ 4 points , 0 @.@ 5 rebounds , 0 @.@ 8 assists and 0 @.@ 7 steals in 33 regular season games . He also played two playoff games for the Mavericks , scoring 0 points in three and a half total minutes . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 season = = = = 
 In July 2007 , Barea re @-@ joined the Dallas Mavericks for the 2007 Las Vegas Summer League where in five games , he averaged 16 @.@ 0 points , 2 @.@ 5 rebounds and 7 @.@ 0 assists in 27 @.@ 6 minutes per game . 
 On November 3 , 2007 , he recorded a then career @-@ high 25 points in a 123 – 102 win over the Sacramento Kings . He went on to appear in 44 regular season games ( 9 starts ) for the Mavericks in 2007 – 08 while averaging 4 @.@ 3 points , 1 @.@ 1 rebounds and 1 @.@ 3 assists in 10 @.@ 5 minutes per game . He also managed one playoff game where he scored eight points against the New Orleans Hornets . 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 season = = = = 
 On July 9 , 2008 , Barea re @-@ signed with the Dallas Mavericks to a three @-@ year deal . In 2008 – 09 , Barea 's role on the team increased dramatically . Injuries to Jerry Stackhouse , Josh Howard and Jason Terry saw Barea 's minutes per game double as coach Rick Carlisle began regularly using a three @-@ guard lineup which included Jason Kidd , Jason Terry and Barea to spark an offensive streak in games . On February 20 , 2009 , Barea scored a then career high 26 points in an 86 – 93 loss to the Houston Rockets . 
 In the 2009 playoffs , Barea became a starter during the first round , replacing Antoine Wright in an effort to contain Tony Parker of the San Antonio Spurs . He scored 13 points and 7 assists in his first playoff start . 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 In 2009 – 10 , Barea again played an important role off the bench for the Mavericks . In 78 games ( 18 starts ) , he averaged 7 @.@ 6 points , 1 @.@ 9 rebounds and 3 @.@ 3 assists in 19 @.@ 8 minutes per game . He scored a season @-@ high 23 points two times during the season , and played in all six of the Mavericks ' playoff games where they once again lost to the San Antonio Spurs in the first round . 
 In June 2010 , the Mavericks exercised their $ 1 @.@ 8 million 2010 – 11 team option on Barea 's contract . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 In 2010 – 11 , Barea played a career @-@ high 81 regular season games as he averaged 9 @.@ 5 points , 2 @.@ 0 rebounds and 3 @.@ 9 assists in 20 @.@ 6 minutes per game . On January 1 , 2011 , he scored a then career high 29 points in an 87 – 99 loss to the Milwaukee Bucks . 
 In the 2011 playoffs , the Mavericks faced the defending champion Los Angeles Lakers in the second round . In the second game of the series , Barea scored 12 points from the bench to lead a fourth @-@ quarter rally which resulted in a 93 – 81 win for Dallas . With the game already decided and 24 seconds remaining , Barea was clotheslined by Lakers ' forward Ron Artest ; Artest was later suspended . After the game , the Lakers praised Barea 's game with Phil Jackson even comparing him to Chris Paul while Kobe Bryant said that " Barea kicked our asses " . 
 In the last game of the series , the Mavericks defeated the Lakers , eliminating them . Barea was the second @-@ leading scorer for his team with 22 points and 8 assists . During the fourth quarter , Lakers ' center Andrew Bynum threw an elbow at Barea as he was driving for a layup . Barea fell down hard while Bynum was immediately ejected . Although Barea recovered and finished the game , he called the foul " dangerous " . Initially Bynum was unapologetic about the incident saying , " We were getting embarrassed . They were breaking us down . So I just fouled somebody . " He later issued a formal apology to the league and Barea . The NBA suspended Bynum for the first five games in the next season , but later shortened the suspension to four games due to the lockout @-@ shortened season . 
 The Mavericks went on to advance to the NBA Finals where the faced the Miami Heat . In what took six games , the Mavericks defeated the Heat 4 games to 2 , claiming their first NBA championship in the franchise 's history . Barea also became just the second Puerto Rican player to win an NBA championship , following Butch Lee in 1980 . Barea played all 21 playoff games for the Mavericks which included three starts . He averaged 8 @.@ 9 points , 1 @.@ 9 rebounds and 3 @.@ 4 assists in 18 @.@ 6 minutes per game . 
 = = = Minnesota Timberwolves ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 Following failed negotiations with the Dallas Mavericks to re @-@ sign with the franchise , Barea started looking elsewhere , but because of the NBA lockout , he was unable to sign anywhere . On December 14 , 2011 , following the conclusion of the lockout , Barea signed a four @-@ year , $ 19 million contract with the Minnesota Timberwolves . 
 On December 26 , 2011 , Barea made his debut for the Timberwolves , recording 14 points , 2 assists and 2 rebounds in a 100 – 104 loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder . However , Barea 's season was hampered with ankle and thigh injuries as he managed just 41 of 66 games for the Timberwolves in 2011 – 12 . Despite this , on March 23 , 2012 , Barea scored his first career triple @-@ double , recording 25 points , 10 rebounds and 14 assists in a 149 – 140 loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder . During the last weeks of the season , and with injuries to starters Ricky Rubio , Kevin Love and Luke <unk> , Barea became the starting point guard , averaging 15 @.@ 8 points and 9 @.@ 4 assists during the last 9 games . During that period , Barea recorded a season @-@ high 28 points and a career @-@ high 15 assists . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 Barea began the season with 21 points and 5 assists against the Sacramento Kings on November 2 , 2012 . However , in his fourth game , he sprained his left foot , which caused him to miss the next five games . During December , Barea averaged more than 25 minutes and 12 @.@ 7 points per game coming off the bench . He had his best game of the season on April 12 , when he scored 23 points against the Utah Jazz and finished the season with averages of 11 @.@ 3 points , 4 @.@ 0 assists and 2 @.@ 8 rebounds in 23 @.@ 1 minutes per game . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 In 2013 – 14 , Barea served as the Timberwolves back @-@ up point guard behind Ricky Rubio . He had his best offensive game in November 15 , against the Denver Nuggets , scoring 21 points with 4 assists . In January , Timberwolves star Kevin Love indirectly criticized teammates Barea and Dante Cunningham for their behavior during game timeouts . Barea finished the season averaging 8 @.@ 4 points and 3 @.@ 8 assists per game . 
 On October 27 , 2014 , Barea was waived by the Timberwolves in the hope of returning to the Dallas Mavericks . 
 = = = Return to Dallas ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On October 29 , 2014 , Barea signed with the Dallas Mavericks , returning to the franchise for a second stint . In his first game back for Dallas the following day , Barea received a standing ovation from the American Airlines Center crowd upon entering the game off the bench during the first quarter . He went on to record 4 points , 4 rebounds and 3 assists in the 120 – 102 win over the Utah Jazz . On February 11 , 2015 , Barea scored a season @-@ high 22 points on 8 @-@ of @-@ 15 shooting in the 87 @-@ 82 win over the Utah Jazz . 
 On July 16 , 2015 , Barea re @-@ signed with the Mavericks to a four @-@ year , $ 16 million contract . On December 23 , 2015 , Barea scored a career @-@ high 32 points on 13 @-@ of @-@ 20 shooting in a 119 – 118 overtime win over the Brooklyn Nets . Three days later , he made a career @-@ high seven three @-@ pointers and finished with 26 points in a 118 – 111 win over the Chicago Bulls . On March 30 , 2016 , he scored 26 points and made the go @-@ ahead layup with 49 @.@ 9 seconds left as the Mavericks rallied in the fourth quarter to beat the New York Knicks 91 – 89 . On April 6 , he helped the Mavericks win their fifth straight game , recording game highs of 27 points and 8 assists in an 88 – 86 victory over the Houston Rockets . Having become the Mavericks ' sparkplug late in the season with Deron Williams sidelined , Barea suffered his own injury on April 8 , a right groin strain which forced him to leave the game against the Memphis Grizzlies after just eight minutes . The groin injury continued to bother him for the rest of the regular season and into the Mavericks ' first round playoff series with the Oklahoma City Thunder . 
 = = International career = = 
 Barea began his international career with Puerto Rico 's Under @-@ 19 team , participating in the Under @-@ 19 World Championship where he finished tied for third place of the tournament 's Most Valuable Player poll . His next international representation came at Caguas , Puerto Rico in the Under @-@ 21 <unk> tournament where Puerto Rico won the gold medal . Barea was awarded the competition 's Most Valuable Player recognition after leading the tournament in scoring , assists and steals . His last participation at the Under @-@ 21 level occurred at the World Championships where he finished fourth in scoring , with an average of 17 @.@ 6 points per game and led the competition in assists with 7 @.@ 3 per game , as Puerto Rico finished seventh . 
 In July 2006 , Barea made his debut for the senior national team in the 2006 Central American and Caribbean Games where Puerto Rico won the gold medal . Here he scored a decisive three point basket with fourteen seconds left in the championship game against Panama , giving Puerto Rico a final advantage . In this tournament Puerto Rico finished undefeated with six straight victories . He was selected as the tournament 's Most Valuable Player . Barea was the primary point guard for the Puerto Rican team that participated in the 2007 Pan American Games , where the team won the silver medal . Later that year , he had limited participation in the 2007 FIBA Americas tournament , where Puerto Rico won the bronze medal . In 2008 , Barea participated in a series of preparatory tournaments , before attending an Olympic <unk> event . In these exhibition games , he performed in the team 's starting position . The Olympic Qualifying Tournament began on July 14 , 2008 , with Barea returning to the back @-@ up position behind Carlos Arroyo . Puerto Rico advanced to the finals , but didn 't qualify to the Olympic games . In this tournament Barea had averages of 12 @.@ 4 points , 2 @.@ 2 assists and 3 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . 
 Barea continued playing in the backup position at the 2008 CentroBasket tournament . He entered the final round leading the event in points , after scoring 31 and 30 points against Panama and the Dominican Republic . In the last two games , Barea was placed in the team 's starting lineup . Puerto Rico won the tournament 's gold medal by defeating the United States Virgin Islands . Following this game , Barea received the event 's Most Valuable Player award . In 2009 , the Mavericks didn 't give Barea permission to play in the FIBA Americas Championship . This decision was based on the fact that the player had undergone surgery on his left shoulder during the post @-@ season . Barea returned to international play at the 2010 CentroBasket , serving as the national team 's starting point guard , Arroyo was in turn reassigned to the regular shooting guard position . Puerto Rico won its group , defeating Panama in semifinals and the Dominican Republic in the final to win the gold medal . Barea had averages of 13 @.@ 8 points per game and led CentroBasket in assists per game with 7 @.@ 0 , earning him inclusion in the tournament 's All @-@ Star Team . 
 Barea was one of the members of the Puerto Rico men 's national basketball team that participated in the 2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup . Although Puerto Rico was eliminated after the Preliminary Round , Barea ended up as the leading scorer of the Cup during that first round . Barea accumulated 110 points in 5 games , for an average of 22 @.@ 0 points per game . Barea 's scoring statistics were above players like Luis Scola , <unk> <unk> , Pau Gasol , and Francisco García . 
 = = = International Tournaments statistics = = = 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While listed as 6 ' 0 " by the NBA , Barea 's mother believes his actual height is around 5 ' 10 " . 
 In March 2011 , Barea confirmed he was in a relationship with Miss Universe 2006 <unk> Rivera . In July 2011 , they confirmed that they were expecting their first child . Rivera gave birth to Sebastián José Barea Rivera in February 2012 . Barea was present during the birth . The couple later split in April 2013 . 
 In the summer of 2013 , Barea started dating actress and Miss Universe Puerto Rico 2011 Viviana Ortiz . In February 2016 , they confirmed that they were expecting their first child . Paulina Barea Ortiz was born in March 31 , 2016 . 
 = Moments ( One Direction song ) = 
 " Moments " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction from their debut studio album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) . It was written by Ed Sheeran , and Si Hulbert , the song 's producer . In 2011 , as One Direction member Harry Styles told Sheeran that the boy band did not have enough songs for their album , Sheeran offered " Moments " , a track that Sheeran " was never going to use " . The song is a mid @-@ tempo pop ballad about a love lost to distance or , as fans have speculated , death . Instrumentation includes a lightly strummed guitar and intermediate piano lines . The ballad received generally positive reviews from music critics , who noted the song 's memorability and complimented its composition . Upon the release of Up All Night , " Moments " charted in lower regions on the singles charts of Australia , Canada , and the United Kingdom due to strong digital download sales . One Direction performed the song on all three of their major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) , Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) and Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 After being formed and finishing third in the seventh series of The X Factor in 2010 , One Direction were signed to Syco Music . Recording for their debut studio album , Up All Night , began in January 2011 . In February 2011 , the boy band and other contestants from the series participated in the X Factor Live Tour . After the tour concluded in April 2011 , the group continued working on their debut album . " Moments " was written by Ed Sheeran and Si Hulbert , and produced by Hulbert . In an April 2012 interview with <unk> , Sheeran said that he wrote the track " years ago . " In 2011 , Sheeran met One Direction 's Harry Styles at his " guitarist 's friend 's house " . The group were putting their debut studio album together at the time . Sheeran had a CD with him of 40 songs that he was going to give to publishers . As the boy band did not have enough songs for their album , Sheeran told Styles , " Here 's a CD . If you want one of these songs , have it . " The song ended up on the deluxe edition of the album . Sheeran acknowledged that he was happy with the outcome , " It was a song I was never going to use . To have it on a multi @-@ platinum selling album is quite nice . " During the album 's UK launch in late 2011 , member Louis Tomlinson referred to the song as his favourite track on the album . Niall Horan also commented , " getting to write and record with Sheeran on our album was an honour . " 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Moments " is a mid @-@ tempo pop ballad . Written in the key of D major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 150 beats per minute . One Direction 's vocal range in the song span from the note of D4 to A5 . " Moments " utilises a gently strummed guitar and intermediate piano lines . Inspired by the breakdown of a relationship between Sheeran and an unnamed woman , the song 's lyrics revolve around an unrequited love . The chorus of the song is essentially built on the hook , " You know I 'll be your life , your voice , your reason to be / My love , my heart is breathing for this moment in time / I 'll find the words to say / Before you leave me today . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Moments " received generally positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised its musical arrangement and memorability . Alex Hughes from The Huffington Post characterised the song as " heartbreaking " . Hollywood Life and AllMusic both rated " Moments " as one of the best songs on Up All Night . Herald Sun writer Cameron Adams referred to the track as a " classic boy band ballad " . Entertainment Weekly 's Adam Markovitz cited the lyrics " be your life , your voice , your reason to be " , writing that " Lyrics like that won 't help the group earn much respect in music circles . But if a tween @-@ pop empire is what these boys are after , they 're definitely headed in the right direction " . Erica Futterman for Rolling Stone opined that the track 's lyricism is " quintessentially <unk> " toward an audience aged approximately 8 to 12 and female . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of Up All Night , " Moments " debuted on multiple world charts due to strong digital download sales . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 118 on the chart issue of 3 December 2011 . " Moments " was One Direction 's sixth best @-@ selling song in the UK by August 2012 . It bowed on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 87 on the chart issue of 21 March 2012 . It also entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 60 on the chart issue date of 8 April 2012 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One Direction performed the song on three of their major concert tours : Up All Night Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) , Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) & Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) . Idolator editor Mike Wass felt the vocal ensemble performed a " rousing rendition " of the song at Sydney 's Hordern Pavilion and noted , " Louis [ Tomlinson ] described it as his favourite song on Up All Night and he 's not alone in that opinion if the swooning girls in the audience are any indication " . Herald Sun writer Cameron Adams opined that the performance of " Moments " at Melbourne 's Hisense Arena showcased the group 's " strong pop voices " . Erica Futterman for Rolling Stone assessed that the performance of the track at New York City 's Beacon Theatre was the most tender moment of the show . Jane Stevenson of Canoe.ca listed the performance of the number at Toronto 's Molson Canadian Amphitheatre among the show 's highlights . The song was later included on the DVD release , Up All Night : The Live Tour . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire = 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is the fourth novel in the Harry Potter series , written by British author J. K. Rowling . It follows Harry Potter , a wizard in his fourth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and the mystery surrounding the entry of Harry 's name into the Triwizard Tournament , in which he is forced to compete . 
 The book was published in the United Kingdom by Bloomsbury and in the United States by Scholastic , in both countries the release date was 8 July 2000 , the first time a book in the series was published in both countries at the same time . The novel won a Hugo Award , the only Harry Potter novel to do so , in 2001 . The book was made into a film , which was released worldwide on 18 November 2005 , and a video game by Electronic Arts . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Plot introduction = = = 
 Throughout the three previous novels in the Harry Potter series , the main character , Harry Potter , has struggled with the difficulties of growing up , and the added challenge of being a famed wizard : when Harry was a baby , Lord Voldemort , the most powerful Dark wizard in history , killed Harry 's parents but mysteriously vanished after unsuccessfully trying to kill Harry , which left a lightning @-@ shaped scar on Harry 's forehead . This results in Harry 's immediate fame and his being placed in the care of his <unk> , or non @-@ magical aunt and uncle , Aunt Petunia Dursley and Uncle Vernon Dursley , who have a son named Dudley Dursley . 
 Harry learns that he is a wizard when he is 11 years old , just before he enrolls in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . He befriends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , and is confronted by Lord Voldemort who is trying to regain power . In Harry 's first year he has to protect the Philosopher 's Stone from Voldemort and one of his faithful followers at Hogwarts . After returning to the school after summer break , students at Hogwarts are attacked by the legendary monster of the " Chamber of Secrets " after the chamber is opened . Harry ends the attacks by killing a Basilisk and defeating another attempt by Lord Voldemort to return to full strength . The following year , Harry hears that he has been targeted by escaped mass murderer Sirius Black . Despite stringent security measures at Hogwarts , Harry is confronted by Black at the end of his third year of schooling , and Harry learns that Black was framed and is actually Harry 's godfather . He also learned that it was his father 's old school friend Peter Pettigrew who actually betrayed his parents . 
 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 The book opens with Harry seeing Frank Bryce being killed by Lord Voldemort in a vision , and is awoken by his scar hurting . The Weasleys then take Harry and Hermione Granger to the Quidditch World Cup , using a Portkey , to watch Ireland versus Bulgaria , with Ireland emerging victorious . There , Harry meets Cedric Diggory , who is attending the match with his father . After the match , Voldemort 's followers attack the site , destroying spectators ' tents and wreaking havoc . The Dark Mark gets fired into the sky , which leads to a panic since it is the first time the sign has been seen in 13 years . Winky , Barty Crouch Senior 's house elf , is blamed for casting the Mark after she is found holding Harry 's wand , which is revealed to have been used to cast the Mark , as Harry had lost it during the chaos of the Death Eaters ' attack . 
 At Hogwarts , Professor Dumbledore announces that Alastor " Mad @-@ Eye " Moody will be the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher for the year , and also that Hogwarts will host the Triwizard Tournament , with a prize of one thousand gold <unk> . However , only those over 17 — the age of majority in the wizarding world — will be allowed to enter . It is the first time in 202 years that the Triwizard Tournament will be held . Students from Beauxbatons Academy and the Durmstrang Institute , other wizarding academies , will travel to Hogwarts , where they will stay for the year , in hopes of competing . At Halloween , the Goblet of Fire picks Fleur Delacour from Beauxbatons Academy ; Viktor Krum ( who is also the Seeker on Bulgaria 's Quidditch team ) from Durmstrang Institute ; and Cedric Diggory from Hogwarts to compete in the tournament . However , it additionally gives a fourth name — Harry Potter — leading to suspicion and indignation from everyone and magically binding Harry to compete . Ron is jealous that Harry is once again in the limelight and refuses to speak to Harry . 
 Hagrid reveals to Harry that the first task involves dragons , and since Fleur and Krum 's headmasters are also aware of this , and will surely tell them in advance , Harry informs Cedric as well . At the task , Harry has to pass a Hungarian Horntail to retrieve a golden egg that contains a hint to the next task , which he does by summoning his Firebolt broomstick with the <unk> spell , and finishes the task tied for first with Krum . Ron and Harry subsequently reconcile , Ron now understanding the full danger of the tournament . When Harry opens the egg , though , it merely shrieks loudly . 
 Meanwhile , gossipy reporter Rita Skeeter is writing scandalous articles of half @-@ truths and outright fabrications in The Daily Prophet about those at Hogwarts , including Hermione , Harry , Hagrid , and Madame Maxime of Beauxbatons . 
 With the Yule Ball approaching , Harry must find a partner , but when he finally approaches his crush Cho Chang , Cedric has beaten him to her , so Harry and Ron ask Parvati and Padma Patil . Ron is shocked and jealous to see that Hermione is attending with Krum . Cedric gives Harry a tip on the egg , telling him to take it to the prefects ' bathroom , but Harry refuses to listen , jealous over Cho . 
 Finally acting on the tip , Harry takes the egg to the prefects ' bathroom , where Moaning Myrtle tells him to listen to the egg underwater ; there the words become understandable . Harry learns that the task is to recover something he will " sorely miss " , and starts looking for spells to help him breathe where the objects will be taken : The Black Lake . By the morning of the task , Harry still hasn 't found a solution , but Dobby gives him some <unk> to give Harry gills . Harry completes the task by rescuing Ron from under the lake . Harry then takes a risk by also rescuing Fleur 's younger sister , Gabrielle , after Fleur was unable to . After the judges confer , he earns enough points to tie him with Cedric for the lead . 
 One month before the final task , Harry and Krum are talking when they encounter Crouch , who appears to have gone insane , but manages to tell Harry to get Dumbledore . Leaving Krum with Crouch , Harry fetches Dumbledore but returns to find Krum stunned and Crouch gone . Harry returns to preparing for the final task , a hedge maze . Inside the maze , Harry is forced to incapacitate Krum , who has been bewitched , to save Cedric . Working together , the two reach the cup . They agree to touch it at the same time , and doing so , discover that it is a Portkey that transports them to a graveyard . There , Peter Pettigrew kills Cedric and uses Harry 's blood ( along with his own hand and Tom Riddle Sr. ' s bone ) to resurrect Lord Voldemort . 
 Voldemort summons his Death Eaters , berating them for thinking he was dead , before he reveals that he has a single " faithful servant " concealed at Hogwarts , who has been working to ensure that Harry would make it to the graveyard , and then challenges Harry to a duel . However , when he and Harry fire curses at each other , their wands connect due to their identical cores . Voldemort 's wand releases the most recent spells it performed , resulting in imprints of his last victims appearing in the graveyard , including Harry 's parents , who provide a distraction so that Harry can escape back to Hogwarts using the Portkey , taking Cedric 's body with him . 
 When he returns , Moody takes him to his office , and reveals himself to be Voldemort 's ' faithful servant ' ; he was the one who put Harry 's name into the Goblet of Fire , and has been guiding him through the tournament from behind the scenes to ensure that he would grab the Portkey first . Before Moody can kill Harry , Dumbledore , McGonagall and Snape intervene . They learn that Moody is in fact Barty Crouch Jr . , Mr. Crouch 's son , disguised by Polyjuice Potion . Crouch had sentenced Crouch Jr. to life imprisonment in Azkaban over alleged ties to the Death Eaters but smuggled him out as a last favour to his dying wife . Crouch Jr. was the one who set off the Dark Mark at the Quidditch World Cup , doing it to scare the Death Eaters he felt had abandoned Voldemort . Eventually , Voldemort had gotten in contact with Crouch Jr. and had him impersonate Moody as part of his plan . Crouch Jr. also admits to killing Crouch Sr. , to prevent him telling Dumbledore about Voldemort . The real Moody is found inside Crouch Jr . ' s enchanted trunk and rescued . Harry is then declared the winner of the Triwizard Tournament and given his winnings . 
 Many people , including Fudge , do not believe Harry and Dumbledore about Voldemort 's return , and as Fudge has the Dementor 's Kiss performed , Crouch Jr. is unable to give testimony . Hermione discovers Rita Skeeter is an unregistered <unk> , who can take the form of a beetle , and blackmails her to force her to stop writing her libellous stories . Not wanting his tournament winnings , Harry gives them to Fred and George to start their joke shop and returns home with the Dursleys . 
 = = Development = = 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is the fourth book in the Harry Potter series . The first , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , was published by Bloomsbury on 26 June 1997 ; the second , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was published on 2 July 1998 ; and the third , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , followed on 8 July 1999 . Goblet of Fire is considerably longer than the first three ; almost twice the size ( the paperback edition was 636 pages ) . Rowling stated that she " knew from the beginning it would be the biggest of the first four " . She said there needed to be a " proper run @-@ up " for the conclusion and rushing the " complex plot " could confuse readers . She also stated that " everything is on a bigger scale " which was symbolic , as Harry 's horizons widened both literally and metaphorically as he grew up . She also wanted to explore more of the magical world . 
 Until the official title 's announcement on 27 June 2000 , the book was called by its working title , ' Harry Potter IV . ' Previously , in April , the publisher had listed it as Harry Potter and the Doomspell Tournament . However , J. K. Rowling expressed her indecision about the title in an Entertainment Weekly interview . " I changed my mind twice on what [ the title ] was . The working title had got out — Harry Potter and the Doomspell Tournament . Then I changed Doomspell to Triwizard Tournament . Then I was teetering between Goblet of Fire and Triwizard Tournament . In the end , I preferred Goblet of Fire because it 's got that kind of cup of destiny feel about it , which is the theme of the book . " 
 Rowling mentioned that she originally had a Weasley relative named <unk> , who , according to Rowling , " was the daughter of the ' second cousin who 's a stockbroker ' mentioned in Philosopher 's Stone . This stockbroker had been very rude to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley in the past , but now he and his ( Muggle ) wife had inconveniently produced a witch , they came back to the Weasleys asking for their help in introducing her to wizarding society before she starts at Hogwarts " . <unk> was supposed to be a Slytherin and who was to fill in the Rita Skeeter subplot , but eventually was removed as " there were obvious limitations to what an eleven year old closeted at school could discover " . Rowling considered Rita Skeeter to be " much more flexible " . Rowling also admitted that the fourth book was the most difficult to write at the time , because she noticed a giant plot hole halfway through writing . In particular , Rowling had trouble with the ninth chapter , " The Dark Mark " , which she rewrote 13 times . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Jeff Jensen , who interviewed Rowling for Entertainment Weekly in 2000 , pointed out that bigotry is a big theme in the Harry Potter novels and Goblet of Fire in particular . He mentioned how Voldemort and his followers are prejudiced against Muggles and how in Goblet of Fire Hermione forms a group to liberate Hogwarts ' house @-@ elves who have " been indentured servants so long they lack desire for anything else " . When asked why she explored this theme , Rowling replied , 
 Because bigotry is probably the thing I detest most . All forms of intolerance , the whole idea of that which is different from me is necessarily evil . I really like to explore the idea that difference is equal and good . But there 's another idea that I like to explore , too . Oppressed groups are not , generally speaking , people who stand firmly together – no , sadly , they kind of subdivide among themselves and fight like hell . That 's human nature , so that 's what you see here . This world of wizards and witches , they 're already ostracized , and then within themselves , they 've formed a loathsome pecking order . 
 She also commented that she did not feel this was too " heavy " for children , as it was one of those things that " huge number of children at that age start to think about " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = UK / US release = = = 
 Goblet of Fire was the first book in the Harry Potter series to be released in the United States on the same date as the United Kingdom , on 8 July 2000 , strategically on a Saturday so children did not have to worry about school conflicting with buying the book . It had a combined first @-@ printing of over five million copies . It was given a record @-@ breaking print run of 3 @.@ 9 million . Three million copies of the book were sold over the first weekend in the US alone . FedEx dispatched more than 9 @,@ 000 trucks and 100 planes to fulfill book deliveries . The pressure in editing caused a mistake which shows Harry 's father emerging first from Voldemort 's wand ; however , as confirmed in Prisoner of Azkaban , James died first , so then Harry 's mother ought to have come out first . This was corrected in later editions . 
 = = = = Launch publicity = = = = 
 To publicise the book , a special train named Hogwarts Express was organised by Bloomsbury , and run from King 's Cross to Perth , carrying J.K. Rowling , a consignment of books for her to sign and sell , also representatives of Bloomsbury and the press . The book was launched on 8 July 2000 , on platform 1 at King 's Cross – which had been given " Platform 9 3 ⁄ 4 " signs for the occasion – following which the train departed . En route it called at Didcot Railway Centre , Kidderminster , the Severn Valley Railway , Crewe ( overnight stop ) , Manchester , Bradford , York , the National Railway Museum ( overnight stop ) , Newcastle , Edinburgh , arriving at Perth on 11 July . The locomotive was West Country class steam locomotive no . <unk> Taw Valley , which was specially repainted red for the tour ; it later returned to its normal green livery ( the repaints were requested and paid for by Bloomsbury ) . The coaches of the train included a sleeping car . A Diesel locomotive was coupled at the other end , for use when reversals were necessary , such as the first stage of the journey as far as Ferme Park , just south of Hornsey . The tour generated considerably more press interest than the launch of the film Thomas and the Magic Railroad which was premièred in London the same weekend . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire has received mostly positive reviews . In The New York Times Book Review , author Stephen King stated the Goblet of Fire was " every bit as good as Potters 1 through 3 " and praised the humour and subplots , although he commented that " there 's also a moderately tiresome amount of adolescent squabbling ... it 's a teenage thing " . Kirkus Reviews called it " another grand tale of magic and mystery ... and clicking along so smoothly that it seems shorter than it is " . However , they commented that it did tend to lag , especially at the end where two " bad guys " stopped the action to give extended explanations , and that the issues to be resolved in sequels would leave " many readers , particularly American ones , uncomfortable " . For The Horn Book Magazine , Martha V. <unk> gave a mixed review , saying " some will find [ it ] wide @-@ ranging , compellingly written , and absorbing ; others , long , rambling , and tortuously fraught with adverbs " . A Publishers Weekly review praised the book 's " red herrings , the artful clues and tricky surprises that disarm the most attentive audience " and saying it " might be her most thrilling yet . " Writing for The New Yorker , Joan Acocella noted that " where the prior volumes moved like lightning , here the pace is slower , the energy more dispersed . At the same time , the tone becomes more grim . " 
 Kristin <unk> of CNN said that it is not great literature : ' Her prose has more in common with your typical beach @-@ blanket fare and the beginning contained too much recap to introduce characters to new readers , although Rowling quickly gets back on track , introducing readers to a host of well @-@ drawn new characters . ' Writing for Salon.com , Charles Taylor was generally positive about the change of mood and development of characters . Entertainment Weekly 's reviewer Kristen Baldwin gave Goblet of Fire the grade of A- , praising the development of the characters as well as the many themes presented . However , she did worry that a shocking climax may be a nightmare factory for young readers . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire won several awards , including the 2001 Hugo Award for Best Novel . It won the 2002 Indian Paintbrush Book Award , the third after Philosopher 's Stone and Prisoner of Azkaban . The novel also won an Oppenheim Toy Portfolio Platinum Award for one of the best books , who claimed it was " more intense than the first three books " . In addition , Entertainment Weekly listed Goblet of Fire in second place on their list of The New Classics : Books – The 100 best reads from 1983 to 2008 . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was adapted into a film , released worldwide on 18 November 2005 , which was directed by Mike Newell and written by Steve Kloves . The film grossed $ 102 @.@ 7 million for the opening weekend , and eventually grossed $ 896 million worldwide . The film was also nominated for Best Art Direction at the 78th Academy Awards . 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 It was also made into a video game for PC , PlayStation 2 , Nintendo DS , Nintendo GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and PlayStation Portable by Electronic Arts . It was released just before the film . 
 = History of York City F.C. ( 1908 – 80 ) = 
 York City Football Club is a professional association football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . The history of York City F.C. from 1908 to 1980 covers the period from the club 's original foundation , through their reformation and progress in the Football League , to the end of the 1979 – 80 season . 
 Originally founded in 1908 , York City played several seasons in the Northern League and Midland League before going into liquidation during the First World War . The club was reformed in 1922 and was elected to play in the Midland League for 1922 – 23 . After seven seasons in the Midland League , they were elected to play in the Football League for 1929 – 30 , and were placed in the Third Division North . During the Second World War , York played in regional competitions , before the Football League restored its usual competitions in 1946 – 47 . After fourteen seasons in the Football League , the club was required to apply for re @-@ election for the first time because they finished 1949 – 50 at the bottom of the Third Division North . York had their best FA Cup season in 1954 – 55 , when they reached the semi @-@ final ; they were defeated by First Division club Newcastle United in a replay . 
 York played in the Third Division North until 1958 – 59 , when a league reorganisation placed them in the Fourth Division . The same season , they finished third and won their first @-@ ever promotion , but were relegated after one season . York won another promotion in 1964 – 65 , but were again relegated after one season . The club won a third promotion to the now @-@ unified Third Division in 1970 – 71 , remaining there for the next two seasons on goal average . They were promoted into the Second Division for the first and only time in 1973 – 74 . By mid @-@ October 1974 , York were in fifth place — their highest league placing — before finishing 1974 – 75 in fifteenth place . They faced two successive relegations in 1976 and 1977 , and a twenty @-@ second place finish in the 1977 – 78 Fourth Division forced the club to apply for re @-@ election . 
 = = 1908 – 17 : Foundation and liquidation of original club = = 
 With the expansion of the York & District League ( formed 1897 ) at a time when association football was gaining national popularity , demand for a club representative of the city of York arose . York City Football Club was founded as an amateur club , joining the Northern League for the 1908 – 09 season and acquiring a ground in Holgate Road at the end of Lindley Street and Murray Street . York won their first match 2 – 1 at home to South Bank , but finished the season eleventh out of twelve teams in the Northern League . During this season the club entered the FA Amateur Cup ; after beating Withernsea and St Paul 's the team were knocked out by Scarborough in a replay . York finished in last place in 1909 – 10 , before joining the Yorkshire Combination to reduce travelling . York competed in this division for two seasons ; after finishing eighth in a ten @-@ team league in 1910 – 11 they ranked in the same position in an expanded league of fourteen teams the following season . 
 J. E. Wright took over as secretary in 1911 , and advocated the formation of a limited company to run a professional club , believing amateur football would not succeed in a rugby league stronghold . The club turned professional in 1912 , and acquired a rough plot of land known as Field View . York were admitted into the Midland League in June 1912 , and the new ground was opened with a 2 – 1 win over Rotherham Town , which was played before 5 @,@ 000 spectators . They played in the Midland League for three seasons , achieving a highest finish of tenth of twenty teams in 1912 – 13 before ranking twelfth in an eighteen @-@ team league the following season . York were invited to a meeting to discuss the formation of a Third Division of the Football League , but with the outbreak of the First World War the meeting did not take place . Because of hostilities the Midland League was suspended after 1914 – 15 , in which York ranked sixteenth of twenty teams . The club went into liquidation through the bankruptcy court in August 1917 after a creditor pressed for payment for the ground 's stand . York 's ground was taken over by the York Corporation , who leased it to allotment @-@ holders . 
 = = 1922 – 39 : <unk> and establishment in Football League = = 
 As local football continued to expand after the war , and with the success of the newly formed Yorkshire League , demand for another senior team in York arose . At a meeting held at the Co @-@ operative Hall in York on 6 May 1922 , the decision was made to form the York City Association Football and Athletic Club Limited , with W. H. Shaw as chairman . Despite having neither a ground nor players , an application was made for election into the Football League ; this was unsuccessful but the club was admitted into the Midland League on 10 June 1922 . York 's first match was away to Notts County reserves on 6 September 1922 , and despite a good performance the team lost 4 – 2 . York had to play their first two home matches at Mille Crux , the ground of Messrs Rowntree & Company Limited , because their Fulfordgate ground was not ready . Their first match at Fulfordgate came on 20 September 1922 , with a 4 – 1 victory against Mansfield Town . York finished 1922 – 23 in nineteenth place ; they had been placed mid @-@ table in early @-@ March 1923 but failed to win any of their remaining fourteen fixtures . In the same year York reached the final of the North Riding Senior Cup but lost 4 – 2 to Middlesbrough reserves at Ayresome Park on 10 March 1923 . The club 's first season proved disappointing financially , with a loss of £ 718 reported , and as a consequence Shaw relinquished the chairmanship to Arthur Brown . York entered the FA Cup for the first time in 1923 – 24 and reached the first qualifying round , losing 3 – 1 to Mexborough Town in a second replay . They again ranked nineteenth in the table with an almost identical record to the previous season 's . 
 For 1924 – 25 the Midland League was reorganised because eight Football League clubs withdrew their reserve teams from the competition . York finished sixth in the Principal Competition that concluded in February 1925 and were runners @-@ up to Denaby United in the North Subsidiary Competition . The club struggled financially in this period , and was only kept going by the enthusiasm and generosity of the directors . John Fisher , one of these benefactors , was elected chairman in 1925 . The Midland League was restored to its previous size for 1925 – 26 and York finished in sixteenth place after a poor start to the season , from which they never recovered . York enjoyed their most successful Midland League season in 1926 – 27 , when they finished in sixth place and scored ninety @-@ six goals in thirty @-@ eight league matches . They surpassed the FA Cup 's qualifying rounds for the first time this season , being beaten 2 – 1 by Second Division side Grimsby Town at Blundell Park in the second round . In 1927 the club made its first serious attempt for election into the Football League , but Barrow and Accrington Stanley were re @-@ elected instead . Fisher resigned as chairman in August 1927 and Brown took the position for the second time . After ranking seventh in the Midland League in 1927 – 28 , York appointed their first official manager in July 1928 , with Jock Collier named as player @-@ manager . York finished ninth in 1928 – 29 , and Jimmy Cowie was the divisional top scorer with forty @-@ nine goals . This was York 's last season in the Midland League as the club won election into the Football League on 3 June 1929 , taking the place of Ashington in the Third Division North . 
 York 's first match in the Football League was against Wigan Borough at Springfield Park on 31 August 1929 and finished with a 2 – 0 victory for the visitors . Reg <unk> , the scorer of the first goal , became the youngest player to represent the club in a competitive match at the age of 15 years and 281 days . The 1929 – 30 season brought two meetings with First Division club Newcastle United in the FA Cup third round , and a sixth place finish in York 's debut Football League season . Collier resigned as manager in May 1930 and George Sherrington took over for the following three years , combining this with his role as club secretary . Sherrington 's first season in charge saw York rank twelfth in the league , and they again faced First Division opposition in the FA Cup third round , taking Sheffield United to a replay . Despite an improved league position of ninth in 1931 – 32 , York were eliminated from the FA Cup in the first round . This , combined with disappointing average home crowds , resulted in a deficit of £ 1 @,@ 539 over the season . In August 1932 , York moved to a new ground at Bootham Crescent , which was closer than Fulfordgate to the club 's centre of support and the railway station . The ground was officially opened for a match with Stockport County on 31 August 1932 ; it ended a 2 – 2 draw , and the first goalscorer at the ground was Tom Mitchell . York 's worst performance in the Football League to date came in 1932 – 33 , finishing in twentieth place . The club only avoided having to seek re @-@ election after winning the last match of the season . 
 Collier was re @-@ appointed manager in May 1933 , and York enjoyed a better season in 1933 – 34 , finishing twelfth in the Third Division North . The club finished in fifteenth place in 1934 – 35 , and Bootham Crescent staged its first match against First Division opposition when Derby County defeated York 1 – 0 in the FA Cup third round . In 1935 – 36 York ranked in sixteenth place , and by the end of the season the club 's debt was £ 7 @,@ 048 . The annual report stated that " increased support must be forthcoming if the club was to retain its Football League status " . The team reached the FA Cup fourth round for the first time in 1936 – 37 , being eliminated by Second Division club Swansea Town in a replay . Collier retired from football in March 1937 to go into business with his brother , and was replaced by Tom Mitchell . The team finished an inconsistent season in twelfth place . The 1937 – 38 season saw York placed " firmly on the football map " , as the team eliminated First Division West Bromwich Albion and Middlesbrough from the FA Cup , before meeting Huddersfield Town in the sixth round . This match saw York draw 0 – 0 at home before a crowd of 28 @,@ 123 , the club 's record highest attendance . York lost the replay 2 – 1 at Leeds Road , a match that attracted 58 @,@ 066 spectators . By the end of that season 's FA Cup run York were on the fringe of the promotion race but faltered in the closing weeks and finished in eleventh place . The club avoided having to apply for re @-@ election with a win in the penultimate match of 1938 – 39 , ranking twentieth in the table . W. H. Sessions was appointed chairman to succeed Brown in 1939 . 
 = = 1939 – 59 : Wartime football , FA Cup run and first promotion = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 the Football League was suspended indefinitely , leaving the club with no revenue . The Football League organised regional competitions after the government gave the Football Association permission for football to proceed on a wartime footing . York decided to carry on playing and were placed in the North East League , where they ranked eighth in their section of eleven clubs . In the final weeks of 1939 – 40 , York competed in the Football League War Cup . The club was placed in the Football League North for 1940 – 41 , and finished thirty @-@ second in the thirty @-@ six @-@ club league . They beat Sheffield Wednesday 7 – 0 in the War Cup , before being eliminated by Newcastle United in the second round . After completing eighteen fixtures in the 1941 – 42 Football League North , York competed in the league @-@ organised qualifying stage of the War Cup . They were eliminated after ranking thirty @-@ third of fifty @-@ four clubs , failing to qualify for the knock @-@ out stages by one place . York played in the Combined Counties Cup in the season 's closing weeks , and beat Halifax Town 5 – 4 over two legs in the final . 
 After ranking seventeenth of forty @-@ eight clubs in the Football League North in 1942 – 43 , York progressed through the War Cup qualifying stages , reaching the semi @-@ final of a major cup competition for the first time . They were beaten 4 – 1 over two legs by Sheffield Wednesday . In the 1943 – 44 Football League North the team finished thirty @-@ first of fifty clubs , and after qualifying for the War Cup knock @-@ out stages were eliminated 7 – 2 over two legs by Bradford Park Avenue in the second round . York experienced selection problems in 1944 – 45 with many players leaving for war service ; after ranking forty @-@ second of fifty @-@ four clubs in the Football League North , they then failed to qualify for the War Cup knock @-@ out stages . They extended their programme by competing in the Tyne , Wear and Tees Cup . Although hostilities had finished by the start of 1945 – 46 , there was insufficient time for the Football League to restore its usual competitions . York finished mid @-@ table in the Third Division North ( East ) in the first half of the season , before reaching the second round of the Third Division North ( East ) Cup after qualifying through the group stages . The FA Cup resumed this season , and for the first and only time ties were played on a two @-@ legged basis . York reached the fourth round , at which point they were beaten 11 – 1 on aggregate by Sheffield Wednesday . York made a profit in five of the seven seasons played during the war . 
 Peacetime football resumed in 1946 – 47 , with the same fixture list as the abandoned 1939 – 40 season . York endured a mid @-@ season run of ten defeats from eleven matches , before their form improved , and five wins from the last eight matches saw them finish in fifteenth place in the Third Division North . They were top of the table by mid @-@ September 1947 , before a run of two wins from thirteen matches saw them drop to eighteenth place . York finished 1947 – 48 in thirteenth place , and the club recorded a net profit of £ 4 @,@ 914 ; a balance surplus of £ 1 @,@ 843 was carried forward . In September 1948 York purchased their Bootham Crescent ground , which had been leased since 1932 , for £ 4 @,@ 075 . They achieved their record average league attendance of 10 @,@ 412 during 1948 – 49 at the peak of the post @-@ war attendance boom . The team enjoyed a run of eight successive league wins at home spanning September 1948 to January 1949 , but failed to win any of their last seven fixtures to finish 1948 – 49 in fourteenth place . 
 Mitchell resigned as manager in February 1950 and was replaced in April with Dick Duckworth , a former York player . York were forced to apply for re @-@ election to retain their place in the Football League for the first time , after finishing bottom of the Third Division North in 1949 – 50 . They did not have to enter the ballot because the Football League was to be extended to ninety @-@ two clubs for 1950 – 51 . Despite York 's senior team 's troubles , the reserve team scored over one hundred goals to finish sixth in the Midland League , and won the North Riding Senior Cup for the first time after beating Middlesbrough 3 – 0 at Ayresome Park in the final . York 's fortunes improved in 1950 – 51 ; they ranked seventeenth in the league and reached the FA Cup third round for the first time since 1946 , when they were beaten 2 – 0 by First Division Bolton Wanderers at Burnden Park . York 's best post @-@ war season to date came in 1951 – 52 , as they finished in tenth place and set a home record of sixteen wins , four draws and three defeats . York chased promotion in 1952 – 53 , and by late @-@ January 1953 they were third in the table . They finished in fourth place with fifty @-@ three points ; both new club records in the Football League . During this season Duckworth was reluctantly released from his contract to take charge at Stockport County in October 1952 . His successor , the former Grimsby Town manager Charlie Spencer , died in February 1953 . Sheffield United 's assistant manager Jimmy McCormick was appointed in June 1953 , and by late @-@ December York were bottom of the table . A win in the last match of 1953 – 54 meant they finished in twenty @-@ second place , and avoided having to apply for re @-@ election . Sessions resigned as chairman in November 1953 and was succeeded by Hugh Kitchin . 
 After a dispute with the directors over team selection , McCormick resigned in September 1954 , after which team affairs were handled by trainer Tom Lockie and secretary George Sherrington . With an emphasis on close @-@ passing attacking football , the team embarked on a ten @-@ match unbeaten sequence . In the 1954 – 55 FA Cup , York became the first third @-@ tier club to participate in an FA Cup semi @-@ final replay . York beat Scarborough , Dorchester Town , Blackpool ( winners of the competition eighteen months earlier ) , Bishop Auckland , Tottenham Hotspur and Notts County in the previous rounds before playing Newcastle United in the semi @-@ final . After drawing 1 – 1 at Hillsborough , York were defeated 2 – 0 in the replay at Roker Park , which ended an FA Cup campaign in which Arthur Bottom scored eight goals . The team were billed " The Happy Wanderers " after a popular song ; Henry Rose of the Daily Express said , " There are no weak spots in this First Division side masquerading in Third Division shirts " . By the end of the cup run , York were on the fringes of the Third Division North promotion race , but injuries and a congested fixture list led to them finishing fourth in 1954 – 55 . Bottom was the divisional top scorer that season , with thirty @-@ one goals . 
 York were optimistic for 1955 – 56 , and they were top of the table after ten matches . A run of nine consecutive matches without a win saw York drop out of promotion contention , and they finished eleventh . That season 's FA Cup run included a 2 – 1 win over a Swansea Town side featuring eight Wales internationals at Vetch Field in the third round . They then played First Division Sunderland , billed as the " Bank of England club " because of their high expenditure on transfers , York were beaten 2 – 1 at Roker Park in a replay . During this season York filled the managerial position that had been vacant for the last eighteen months ; Arsenal player Don Roper rejected the job before Sam Bartram was appointed in March 1956 . Bartram , a former Charlton Athletic player , was a popular choice , having been a favourite with the fans while playing for the club during the war . York invested heavily in transfers for 1956 – 57 , spending £ 12 @,@ 000 on fees — a sizeable amount at that time . The aim was promotion into the Second Division , but the team failed to make the intended impact and finished in seventh place . The 1957 – 58 season was the last of regionalised football ; the top twelve clubs in the North and South sections would form the new Third Division , and the bottom clubs would become founder members of the Fourth Division . York went into the Easter period third from bottom , but after seven wins and three draws in their last ten matches they missed out on a top @-@ twelve position on goal average . York led the Fourth Division until early @-@ November 1958 , and despite faltering mid @-@ term continued strongly to finish third in 1958 – 59 and gain promotion for the first time . They only missed out on the runner @-@ up spot to Coventry City on goal average . 
 = = 1959 – 80 : Promotions , relegations and spell in Second Division = = 
 By late @-@ February 1960 , York were placed twelfth in the Third Division . After one season , in which the team won only two of their last fourteen matches , they were relegated from the Third Division in twenty @-@ first place . Bartram was released from his contact in July 1960 and was replaced by Lockie . His team started 1960 – 61 well , and were fourth by mid @-@ November 1960 . York endured five successive defeats before a winning run in the New Year revived their promotion hopes . They finished the season in fifth place , having won only one of their last seven matches . Throughout 1961 – 62 York were in or around the top four places , but missed out on promotion after losing 1 – 0 to Aldershot in the last match , finishing in sixth place . That season , York enjoyed their best run in the newly instituted League Cup . In this competition they beat First Division club Leicester City , but were eliminated after a 2 – 1 defeat to divisional rivals Rochdale at Spotland Stadium in the fifth round . York made a poor start to 1962 – 63 and were second from bottom by late @-@ December 1962 , but their form improved from March 1963 and they finished the season fourteenth . Club historian David Batters described the 1963 – 64 season as " one of the worst in the club 's history " . York spent most of the season in the bottom four before finishing twenty @-@ second , having to apply for re @-@ election for the second time . This application was successful , as the club polled the maximum forty @-@ eight votes . During this season a football betting scandal exposed by the newspaper Sunday People accused York player Jack Fountain of fixing match results . His contract was terminated and he was found guilty of fixing two matches York lost . 
 York produced some of their best football in a decade in 1964 – 65 , winning twenty league matches at home — a club record — and ending the season in third place to gain promotion , one point behind champions Brighton & Hove Albion . The following season they were in the bottom four by late @-@ December 1965 . They finished the season in bottom place and were relegated back into the Fourth Division , having conceded a club @-@ record 106 goals . After the season ended York released Norman Wilkinson , who had scored a record 143 goals for the club . York struggled throughout 1966 – 67 and finished twenty @-@ second after a club @-@ record eight successive defeats . The club was forced into its third re @-@ election bid , which was successful with forty @-@ five votes . Kitchin resigned the chairmanship in June 1967 and was succeeded by Derrick Blundy , who held the position for sixteen months , after which Eric <unk> took over . York started 1967 – 68 winning none of their first thirteen matches . Their first win came in late @-@ October 1967 , by which time Lockie had become the first manager to be sacked by the club . Former Sheffield United player Joe Shaw took charge in November 1967 , and York rose from bottom place to fourteenth by late @-@ March 1968 . However , they won none of their last eight matches and finished twenty @-@ first . Another application for re @-@ election was made , which was successful with forty @-@ six votes . Shaw resigned for personal reasons a week into 1968 – 69 , and former Huddersfield Town manager Tom Johnston succeeded him in October 1968 . Poor away form led to York finishing twenty @-@ first , and the club 's application for re @-@ election was successful with forty @-@ five votes . The team reached the FA Cup third round , and were beaten 2 – 0 at home by First Division Stoke City . 
 York were fourth in the table twelve matches into 1969 – 70 . Their promotion challenge faded and they finished the season thirteenth . York reached the fourth round of the FA Cup for the first time since 1958 , and played two Second Division teams ; after beating Cardiff City 3 – 1 at St Andrew 's in a second replay , they lost 4 – 1 to Middlesbrough at Ayresome Park . Barry Jackson , who made a club @-@ record 539 appearances for York , was released at the end of the season . York started 1970 – 71 strongly , and after faltering mid @-@ season they went unbeaten in sixteen consecutive matches to enter the top four . Despite losing three of their last four fixtures , York remained in fourth place to earn a third promotion . They also reached the FA Cup fourth round for the second successive season ; after drawing 3 – 3 at home to First Division Southampton they were beaten 3 – 2 in the replay at the Dell . York started 1971 – 72 with three wins from eight matches , but after failing to win in eleven consecutive matches they dropped into the bottom four . They finished nineteenth on goal average and avoided relegation . In the third round of the League Cup York played First Division club Sheffield United , losing 3 – 1 at Bramall Lane . York failed to win any of their first eleven matches in 1972 – 73 , but results improved and they were tenth in the table by early @-@ March 1973 . Another downturn in form followed before York beat Rotherham United in the last match of the season to finish eighteenth , avoiding relegation from the Third Division on goal average for the second successive year . 
 From mid @-@ November 1973 York remained within the top three in 1973 – 74 and won promotion into the Second Division for the first time , in the season " three up , three down " was introduced in the top three divisions . Promotion was secured after a 1 – 1 home draw against Oldham Athletic on 27 April 1974 . This season , York held First Division Manchester City to a 0 – 0 home draw in the League Cup fourth round , before being beaten 4 – 1 in the replay at Maine Road . In January 1974 Bob Strachan became chairman and served on the FA Council , the first York official to do so . The team drew 1 – 1 at home with Aston Villa in their opening Second Division match on 17 August 1974 , with Barry Lyons the York goalscorer . After starting 1974 – 75 well , York were fifth in the table by mid @-@ October 1974 — the club 's highest @-@ ever placing in the Football League . York finished in fifteenth place , and the season 's highlights included doubles over Norwich City — who won promotion — and Fulham — who were FA Cup finalists that season . York were exempt from the FA Cup until the third round , where they drew 1 – 1 with First Division team Arsenal at Highbury ; in the replay , Arsenal won 3 – 1 after extra time at York . Johnston left to take over at Huddersfield Town in January 1975 , and was succeeded in February by former Manchester United manager Wilf McGuinness . York started 1975 – 76 with two wins from eight fixtures , but a run of ten defeats from eleven matches saw them drop into the bottom two . Seven successive defeats in the New Year saw York drop to bottom place , although results improved in the season 's closing weeks . They were relegated into the Third Division in twenty @-@ first place , after a 2 – 2 home draw with Chelsea on 24 April 1976 . They lost their League Cup second round match 1 – 0 at home to First Division Liverpool . 
 York started 1976 – 77 poorly , and they were in the bottom two of the Third Division for most of the first half of the season . The mid @-@ season signings Chris Galvin and Gordon <unk> marked an improvement in results , but after winning only one of their last fifteen matches they finished in bottom place and were relegated for the second successive season . The 1977 – 78 season also started poorly ; York lost seven of their opening twelve matches , leaving them seventeenth in the table . McGuinness was sacked in October 1977 and was succeeded the following month by Charlie Wright , a former Charlton Athletic player . York remained in the lower reaches of the table and finished the season in twenty @-@ second place , forcing the club to apply for re @-@ election for the sixth time . This was successful , as the club polled the maximum number of votes . This season , attendances fell to an all @-@ time low , and amid growing financial trouble , Michael Sinclair took over as chairman in a boardroom shuffle in April 1978 . Results improved in 1978 – 79 ; York finished tenth in the Fourth Division and reached the FA Cup fourth round . They played reigning First Division champions and European Cup winners @-@ elect Nottingham Forest , and were beaten 3 – 1 at the City Ground . In 1979 – 80 York were consistently in the lower reaches of the table , before finishing seventeenth . With the club eighteenth in the table by mid @-@ March 1980 Wright was sacked . Youth coach Barry Lyons succeeded him , initially as caretaker manager , before being appointed permanently in May 1980 . 
 = Partick Thistle F.C. = 
 Partick Thistle Football Club ( nicknamed the Jags ) are a professional football club from Glasgow , Scotland . Despite their name , the club are based at Firhill Stadium in the Maryhill area of the city , and have not played in Partick since 1908 . The club have been members of the Scottish Professional Football League ( SPFL ) since its formation in 2013 and compete in the Scottish Premiership , the highest tier of the SPFL structure , following promotion from the 2012 – 13 Scottish First Division . They are one of three Glasgow @-@ based teams competing in the Premiership , the others being Celtic and Rangers , with Queen 's Park playing in the Scottish League Two . 
 Since 1936 , Thistle have played in their distinctive red @-@ and @-@ yellow jerseys of varying designs , with hoops , stripes and predominantly yellow tops with red trims having been used , although in 2009 a centenary kit was launched in the original navy @-@ blue style to commemorate 100 years at Firhill . Since 1908 the club have won the Scottish Second Division once and the Scottish First Division ( second tier , now the Scottish Championship ) six times , most recently in 2013 . Thistle have won the Scottish Cup and the Scottish League Cup in 1921 and 1971 respectively . 
 The club are managed by former defender Alan Archibald , who took over the role on 30 January 2013 , following the departure of Jackie McNamara to Dundee United . Under Archibald 's management , the club achieved promotion to the newly formed Scottish Premiership in 2013 , and have remained there for three consecutive seasons . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years = = = 
 Partick Thistle Football Club was formed in 1876 in the burgh of Partick , which was at that time administratively independent of Glasgow ( Partick was not subsumed into Glasgow until 1912 ) . The club 's first recorded match ( and victory ) took place in February against a local junior team , named Valencia . The location of this match , and thereby Thistle 's first home ground , was recorded as ' <unk> Park ' , which is thought to have been located next to <unk> Road , just south of Kelvingrove Park . In 1891 , Partick Thistle joined the Scottish Football Alliance , one of several competitions set up immediately after the formation of the Scottish Football League in 1890 . The club won the Second Division championship in 1897 and were elected to the First Division . The following season they were re @-@ elected after finishing in eighth place . In 1900 they were elected back to the top level , having finished as Second Division champions again , but were relegated the following season and then promoted in second place in 1902 . This would be the last time Thistle changed their division for almost 70 years . Since joining the Scottish professional leagues in 1893 , Thistle had been an unpredictable side , spending four years in the First Division and five in the Second , winning promotion three times . It was during the 1902 – 03 Scottish Division One season in which Thistle set their highest finish in the Scottish league structure , finishing 8th in the table with 19 points . In the following 33 years , they moved from home to home , using parks at Kelvingrove , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> among others . In 1891 they moved to Meadowside , where they played until 1908 . After being homeless for over a season , they moved to their present home , Firhill Stadium , in the Maryhill district of Glasgow . They played their first home match at Firhill , on 18 September 1909 , in a 3 – 1 victory against Dumbarton Harp . 
 = = = Cup success and league progress = = = 
 In 1921 Thistle won the Scottish Cup , beating Rangers 1 – 0 in the final . Johnny Blair scored the only goal of the game , which was held at Celtic Park . The Jags reached the final again nine years later , facing the same opposition , but Rangers won 2 – 1 in a replay following a 0 – 0 draw in the first match . In 1935 the Jags won both the Glasgow Cup and the Charity Cup , competitions that were taken seriously at the time . 
 Although it was over 30 years before Thistle achieved further cup success they not only maintained their top tier status during this period but finished third in the league in 1947 – 48 , 1953 – 54 and 1962 – 63 . 
 On 23 October 1971 Davie McParland 's team secured the club 's most famous result against Jock Stein 's Celtic in the League Cup final at Hampden Park , Glasgow . 62 @,@ 470 fans watched Thistle take a dramatic 4 – 0 lead at half time with goals from Alex Rae , Bobby Lawrie and Jimmy Bone amongst the many emerging talents in the Thistle squad including Alan Rough , Alex Forsyth and Denis McQuade . Kenny Dalglish pulled a goal back for Celtic , however the final result was never in doubt as Thistle eased to a 4 – 1 victory . Ironically before the match , former BBC sport broadcaster Sam Leitch stated that " In Scotland , it 's League Cup final day at Hampden Park , where Celtic meet Partick Thistle , who have no chance . " 
 = = = Decline and " Save the Jags " campaign = = = 
 Thistle 's fortunes on the pitch declined during the 1980s . Although the club had experienced difficult times before , having dropped into the second tier of Scottish football twice in the 1970s , they had bounced straight back up on both occasions . The relegation of 1982 led to the Club 's first sustained period outside the top tier since the late 19th century . Although this period of exile ended with promotion in 1992 , mounting financial problems , including a debt of over £ 1 @.@ 5 million , threatened to put the club out of existence . In 1998 in particular the club was close to going bankrupt and was only kept afloat by the fan @-@ organised " Save the Jags " campaign . Despite avoiding financial oblivion Thistle were relegated to the third tier of Scottish Football in 1997 – 98 and only narrowly avoided a further relegation the following season , finishing in eighth place . 
 = = = Revival under John Lambie = = = 
 In 1999 John Lambie commenced his third period as manager of the club and under his stewardship Thistle enjoyed a brief revival , winning back @-@ to @-@ back promotions in 2000 – 01 and 2001 – 02 , the second of which earned the club a place in the Scottish Premier League . 
 SPL guidelines at the time stipulated that clubs would only be eligible for promotion to the league if their stadium had a minimum 10 @,@ 000 seated capacity . To comply with these guidelines the terraced section at the north end of Firhill was replaced with a 2000 @-@ seat stand . Speaking in 2004 Thistle chairman Tom Hughes argued the club did not at the time require a stadium with such a large capacity and building the new stand ' seriously affected [ their ] competitiveness ' . Thistle maintained their place in the SPL under Lambie by finishing 10th in 2002 – 03 , despite being favourites for relegation . 
 = = = Successive relegations and play @-@ off promotion = = = 
 Following Lambie 's retirement at the end of the 2002 – 03 season , Thistle struggled . Gerry Collins ( Lambie 's previous assistant ) was sacked mid @-@ season and replaced with joint player @-@ managers Derek Whyte and Gerry Britton . This change was not enough to revive the team , and Thistle were relegated at the end of the 2003 – 04 season after Inverness , having won the First Division title , were permitted to groundshare with Aberdeen . In season 2004 – 05 the team continued to struggle and Whyte and Britton were dismissed mid @-@ season . Dick Campbell , their successor , was unable to avoid relegation to the Second Division . He did return the club to the First Division the following season , through the newly introduced play @-@ off system , having finished 4th in the league . This brought to a close the club 's most unpredictable decade , in footballing terms at least : between 1996 and 2006 Thistle had been promoted three times and relegated four times . They were the first team in Scottish football to be relegated from the top flight through successive subsequent relegations ( excluding those caused by league reconstruction ) . 
 = = = Ian McCall 's tenure , 2007 – 2011 = = = 
 Despite starting well upon returning to the First Division , Dick Campbell was sacked on 27 March 2007 , following a succession of poor results . A caretaker management team of Jimmy Bone and Terry Butcher saw out the season before Ian McCall , a former player , was unveiled as manager . McCall 's first season saw Thistle finish 6th in the First Division and embark on a successful Scottish Cup campaign , reaching the quarter @-@ finals before being defeated by eventual winners Rangers after a 1 – 1 draw at Ibrox , Thistle lost the replay 2 – 0 at Firhill . League form further improved in season 2008 – 09 with Thistle exceeding expectations to finish 2nd in the First Division , behind St Johnstone . This season saw midfielder Gary Harkins win the Irn Bru Phenomenal Player of the Year and Jonathan <unk> become the club 's first full international for several years . 
 McCall quit his post as manager in April 2011 , citing personal reasons . Jackie McNamara was initially appointed as caretaker manager before being made full @-@ time manager of the club at the end of the 2010 – 11 season . 
 = = = Jackie McNamara 2011 – 2013 = = = 
 McNamara and assistant Simon Donnelly guided Thistle to a sixth @-@ place finish in 2011 – 12 season . The following season Thistle started well and emerged as promotion candidates , competing with Dunfermline and Greenock Morton for a place in the following season 's top flight . On 29 January 2013 the club gave permission to Dundee United to speak to McNamara about becoming their new manager . The following day McNamara and his assistant Simon Donnelly resigned , to become the new management team at United . Along with Donnelly , McNamara brought goalkeeper Craig Hinchcliffe , Paul Paton and Chris Erskine to Tannadice . Thistle were second in the league at the time and , because McNamara was under contract , compensation was owed to the club . 
 = = = Alan Archibald = = = 
 On 30 January 2013 , Alan Archibald was appointed as the club 's interim manager , with former Thistle player Scott Paterson as his assistant . On 22 March , the duo were given the job on a permanent basis signing a one @-@ year rolling contract . The following month on 20 April 2013 , the club clinched promotion to the Scottish Premiership having sealed the First Division championship with a 2 – 0 victory away to Falkirk . The title win meant Thistle returned to the top flight of Scottish football for the first time in nine years . Thistle 's initial return to the Premiership had mixed success . The team managed to maintain a relatively positive away record , however it was months before Thistle finally secured a home win , with them beating Aberdeen 3 – 1 at Firhill in February 2014 . Thistle managed to avoid the relegation and play @-@ off spots , eventually finishing third @-@ bottom , following a 4 – 2 win away to Hearts at Tynecastle . 
 The 2015 – 16 Scottish Premiership season saw Thistle secure long @-@ term contracts for many of their key players , including Kris Doolan , Callum Booth , Tomáš Černý and Mustapha <unk> . 
 On 7 May 2016 , Thistle secured their Premiership status with a 2 @-@ 0 away victory to Kilmarnock , with goals coming from Steven Lawless and Kris Doolan . This result meant that Archibald overtook former manager Johnny Davidson as the record holder of top @-@ flight victories . 
 = = Club crest and colours = = 
 The first crest to appear on a Partick Thistle kit was a thistle design , and every logo since has featured a thistle . The thistle appeared first in 1902 , then again in 1909 . It remained until 1978 , when a new logo with the thistle housed inside a roundel was used . A modernist logo with the thistle on a rectangle was introduced in 1990 , and the current crest was introduced in 2008 . 
 The Jags flirted with a number of colour schemes in their early years . From their inception until 1900 the kits were predominantly blue with red and white trimmings . There was then a brief period in which the players wore an orange and black striped top with white shorts and black socks . This was replaced in 1905 by a colour scheme close to that used by Aston Villa , before the club reverted to the predominantly blue kits in 1909 . In season 1936 – 37 they changed to , and settled upon , the red @-@ yellow @-@ and @-@ black attire for which they are best known , this change having been triggered initially by the club borrowing kits from the local rugby union team , West of Scotland Football Club . 
 In 2008 – 09 and 2009 – 10 , Thistle became the first football club in Scotland to use pink as the primary colour in their away kit . In 2008 – 09 this took the form of <unk> and pink @-@ hooped tops . 
 Since the 2013 – 14 season , Partick Thistle 's kits have been manufactured by Joma Sports . During the 2014 – 15 season , Partick Thistle supported the Breast Cancer Care Charity by wearing a black and pink away shirt , with the charity ribbon on the shirt . The partnership saw a portion of kit sale revenue being donated to Breast Cancer Care . Partick Thistle 's current home kit features a yellow and red hooped shirt , with a slight gradient pattern between each hoop . The kit features red shorts and socks , with a yellow trim . The away kit is sky blue , with thin white hoops on the jersey . Goalkeepers wear a generic kit design from Joma , and are either pink or grey . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Before moving to the Maryhill area in 1909 , Partick Thistle hosted their home games over numerous sites in and around Glasgow including Kelvingrove Park , <unk> Park and Muir Park . In 1891 , the club moved to Meadowside , near the River Clyde . However , in 1908 Thistle were forced to vacate the area to make way for a new shipyard . 
 After playing at numerous other grounds in Glasgow , Greenock , Port Glasgow , Kilmarnock , Edinburgh and even Aberdeen for over a season , Partick Thistle moved to their present home , Firhill Stadium , in 1909 , when they purchased some spare Caledonian Railway land in Maryhill for £ 5 @,@ 500 . The stadium consists of three stands : the Main Stand , where the away support is housed , which was built in 1927 and can seat around 2 @,@ 900 supporters ; the Jackie Husband Stand , which was built in 1994 and has a capacity of approximately 6 @,@ 500 ; and the North Stand , which can house around 2 @,@ 000 supporters . On the south side of the stadium there is a grass embankment , known to home fans as " The Bing " , which had been open terracing until this was demolished in 2006 due to the stand failing to meet the criteria of Scottish Football Association safety regulations . There have been various plans to redevelop the south end of the stadium but thus far none have come to fruition . 
 Firhill has been used by other football teams and for rugby over the years . Between 1986 and 1991 Clyde ground shared with Thistle , following their eviction from Shawfield . Hamilton Academical also ground shared for two spells over seven years , following them being forced out of Douglas Park in 1994 . In December 2005 , Firhill also became the home of Glasgow 's professional rugby union team , Glasgow Warriors , when they moved from their previous base at Hughenden Stadium . After returning to Hughenden in 2006 , the Warriors took up a two @-@ year residency at Firhill from the start of the 2007 – 08 Celtic League season . This was extended in April 2009 for a further five years . Glasgow Warriors left Firhill after the 2011 – 12 season and moved to Scotstoun Stadium . During the 2012 – 13 season the ground was also used by Celtic 's under @-@ 20 squad as their home ground , but following Partick 's promotion this stopped for the 2013 – 14 season . 
 During the 2013 / 14 season , the Main Stand was re @-@ opened to seat the high number of away supporters . In one instance , the North Stand was used for Celtic supporters as fears grew over fire dangers . During early June 2016 the North Stand was renamed The Colin Weir Stand in honour of Colin Weir who was made the first ever patron of Partick Thistle after making numerous donations to the club 's youth team The Thistle Weir Academy . 
 Maryhill railway station , which is served by trains from Glasgow Queen Street , is the closest railway station to Firhill . The walk between the two sites takes between 20 and 25 minutes . On the Glasgow Subway network , <unk> and St George 's Cross are within 15 minutes walk of the stadium . The <unk> road ( Maryhill Road ) , leading to Firhill Road , runs from the M8 motorway . 
 The club train at the <unk> Sports Complex in Bearsden , East Dunbartonshire . 
 = = Notable former players = = 
 All former players or managers listed have been inducted into either the Scottish Football Hall of Fame or Partick Thistle 's own Hall of Fame . These include players who participated in both the 1921 Scottish Cup Final and the 1971 Scottish League Cup Final . 
 = = = Scottish Hall of Fame = = = 
 Mo Johnston 
 Alan Rough 
 Alan Hansen 
 = = = Club Hall of Fame = = = 
 = = Support = = 
 Thistle fans sing songs during matches , some of which are relatively generic but others which are unique . Choruses of " <unk> Army " , " Mary <unk> Maryhill " , " Over Land and Sea " , " Forever and Ever " , " We 've Followed the Thistle for Many a Day " , " Oh Maryhill is wonderful " , " Do Do Do Conrad <unk> " and " Gerry Britton is the King of Spain " are commonly heard in the singing section of the home support , in the North Stand or " New Shed " . 
 During their previous foray into the top flight of Scottish football in season 2002 – 03 attendances exceeded 6 @,@ 000 , whereas in the lower divisions they have tended to range between 2 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 . 
 On the day of their return to the top flight against Dundee United on 2 August 2013 , the attendance at Firhill was 7 @,@ 822 . Average home attendances for Thistle 's maiden season back in the Scottish Premiership was around 5 @,@ 000 , however the 2014 – 15 season saw a 25 % drop with an average home crowd of only 3 @,@ 500 . 
 = = = Notable supporters = = = 
 <unk> Black , MP for Paisley & Renfrewshire South . 
 Maryhill born actor Robert Carlyle is also a famous supporter , stating he would rather watch the Jags than watch Arsenal or Manchester United . 
 Craig Ferguson , former host of the popular American chat show The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson . 
 The historian Niall Ferguson was a supporter while growing up in Glasgow , stating that " they were the atheists ' team . You couldn 't believe in God and support Partick Thistle . " 
 Hollyoaks actor Chris Fountain 
 American actor David Hasselhoff , best known for Knight Rider and Baywatch , has stated his support for the club during his pantomime run in Glasgow , and mentioned they are his " favourite underdogs " . 
 Artist David Shrigley , who designed the club 's mascot Kingsley . 
 Juventus and French international footballer Paul <unk> , according to older brother Mathias ( who plays for Thistle ) , keeps track of Thistle 's results from Italy and is a fan of the club . 
 = = Sponsors = = 
 The club 's main sponsor is Kingsford Capital Management , which was confirmed at the start of the 2015 – 16 season , taking over from beverage company MacB . The new sponsorship deal is thought to be worth around £ 200 @,@ 000 for two years , which includes shirt , mascot and stadium sponsor . Initially , MacB went into administration half way through the season , and was replaced by legal company Just Employment Law for the remainder of the 2011 – 12 season . MacB resumed sponsorship of Partick Thistle in the summer of 2012 , and subsequently signed a two @-@ year extension , keeping them as main sponsors until the end of the 2014 – 15 season . Scottish security system company <unk> also started sponsoring Thistle for the 2014 – 15 season . Thistle 's mascot is a large yellow sun @-@ like character called Kingsley , who replaced MacB 's <unk> <unk> at the start of Kingsford Capital 's tenure . 
 Thistle 's kit maker is Spanish manufacturers Joma , having replaced Puma Sports at the start of the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = Mascot = = 
 Partick Thistle 's current mascot is named Kingsley , and was designed by the Turner Prize nominated artist David Shrigley . Kingsley was unveiled on 22 June 2015 to coincide with Thistle 's new sponsorship with California based investment firm Kingsford Capital Management . The mascot gained widespread notoriety online , having trended worldwide on Twitter , as well as being publicised by major networks such as CNN and The Washington Post . Partick Thistle 's general manager Ian Maxwell hailed the success of Kingsley in drawing attention to the club , stating that the worldwide interest and TV coverage amounted to the " biggest amount of publicity from a sponsorship launch in Scottish football history " . The Kingsley mascot has become a major source of merchandising potential for the club , with demand outstripping supply . 
 Between 2011 – 2015 , Thistle 's mascot had been <unk> <unk> , a large bumble bee that had been introduced as part of the clubs sponsorship with MacB Water . Before that , Thistle had used a brightly coloured toucan called Pee Tee as its official mascot . 
 = = Community trust = = 
 = = = Partick Thistle Ladies = = = 
 Following a successful set @-@ up of women 's football in Glasgow , with teams such as Celtic L.F.C. and Glasgow City , Partick Thistle entered a women 's team into the 2013 Scottish Women 's Football League Second Division season . 
 The team train at the Firhill Complex in Maryhill . 
 = = = Thistle Weir Youth Academy = = = 
 In October 2013 , millionaires and long time Thistle fans Chris and Colin Weir donated £ 750 @,@ 000 to Partick Thistle to set up a new advanced youth academy . The academy was named the Thistle Weir Youth Academy and is run by former striker Gerry Britton . 
 = = Current squad = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 11 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 For recent transfers , see List of Scottish football transfers summer 2015 
 = = Club staff = = 
 = = Individual achievements = = 
 = = Full internationalists = = 
 The following players have participated in full internationals for their respective countries whilst playing for Thistle . Statistics include all caps gained in their international career , including those before or after their Thistle careers . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Major = = = 
 Scottish Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1920 – 21 
 Runners up ( 1 ) : 1929 – 30 
 Scottish League Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1971 – 72 
 Runners up ( 3 ) : 1953 – 54 , 1956 – 57 , 1958 – 59 
 = = = Minor = = = 
 Scottish Football League First Division , second tier : Winners ( 6 ) : 1896 – 97 , 1899 – 1900 , 1970 – 71 , 1975 – 76 , 2001 – 02 , 2012 – 13 
 Runners up ( 3 ) : 1901 – 02 , 1991 – 92 , 2008 – 09 
 Scottish Football League Second Division , third tier : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2000 – 01 
 Play @-@ off Winners ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 Scottish Challenge Cup : Runners up ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 Glasgow Cup : 
 Winners ( 7 ) : 1934 – 35 , 1950 – 51 , 1952 – 53 , 1954 – 55 , 1960 – 61 , 1980 – 81 , 1988 – 89 
 Runners up ( 11 ) 1888 – 89 , 1900 – 01 , 1911 – 12 , 1914 – 15 , 1917 – 18 , 1919 – 20 , 1932 – 33 , 1936 – 37 , 1959 – 60 , 1966 – 67 , 1968 – 69 
 British Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1921 
 Glasgow Merchants ' Charity Cup : 
 Winners ( 3 ) : 1926 – 27 , 1934 – 35 , 1948 – 49 
 Summer Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1945 
 West of Scotland FA Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1879 
 Glasgow Dental Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1929 
