 Greenock Charity Cup : Winners ( 1 ) : 1893 
 Paisley Charity Cup : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1936 
 Yoker Cup : Winners ( 3 ) : 1881 , 1882 , 1883 
 <unk> <unk> Trophy : Winners ( 1 ) : 2012 
 <unk> ' Sixes : Winners ( 1 ) : 1993 ( final winners ) 
 = = Club records = = 
 Highest record home attendance : 49 @,@ 838 vs Rangers , Scottish First Division , 18 February 1922 
 Most league appearances : Alan Rough , 410 
 Most league goals in a season : Alec Hair , 41 , 1926 – 27 
 Record defeat : 0 – 10 v Queen 's Park , Scottish Cup , 3 December 1881 
 Record victory : 16 – 0 v Royal Albert , Scottish Cup 1st round , 17 January 1931 
 Record points total : 78 , Scottish First Division , 2012 – 13 
 Record transfer fee paid : £ 85 @,@ 000 to Celtic for Andy Murdoch , February 1991 
 Record transfer fee received : £ 200 @,@ 000 from Watford for Mo Johnston 1982 
 = = European record = = 
 Thistle have participated in European competition on three different occasions . On the first occasion , they qualified having finished third in the First Division . They progressed to the second round of the Fairs Cup before being eliminated by Spartak Brno . They qualified for the UEFA Cup in 1972 – 73 after winning the League Cup the previous season ; Hungarian side Honvéd eliminated them in the first round . Their most recent European campaign was the 1995 UEFA Intertoto Cup , when they finished 4th with four points in Group 6 . 
 = Georges @-@ Antoine Belcourt = 
 Georges @-@ Antoine Belcourt ( April 22 , 1803 – May 31 , 1874 ) , also George Antoine Bellecourt , was a Canadian Jesuit missionary and priest . Born in Baie @-@ du @-@ Febvre , Quebec , Belcourt was ordained in 1827 . He established missions in areas of Quebec and Manitoba . On the frontier , he became involved in a political dispute between the local First Nations population and the Hudson 's Bay Company , the monopoly fur trading company . 
 At the urging of the Company 's Governor , Belcourt was recalled to Montreal . He was next assigned to Pembina , North Dakota . He established two missions in the 1840s to convert the local Ojibwe ( also called Chippewa ) and Métis to Catholicism . In 1859 , Belcourt left Pembina for Quebec , but was quickly redeployed to North Rustico , Prince Edward Island . He established the Farmers ' Bank of Rustico ( the first community @-@ based bank in Canada ) . 
 Belcourt retired from his post in 1869 to live out his life in New Brunswick , but was recalled in 1871 , this time to the Magdalen Islands . In May 1874 , Belcourt was forced to retire due to ill health . He died in Shediac , New Brunswick on May 31 , 1874 . He was designated a National Historic Person by the Government of Canada in 1959 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Georges @-@ Antoine Belcourt was born on April 22 , 1803 at Baie @-@ du @-@ Febvre , Quebec to Antoine Belcourt and <unk> Lemire , who had married on February 23 , 1802 . His parents , devout Roman Catholics , brought their son up in the same faith , and the young Belcourt received his first Holy Communion in 1814 . At age 13 , Belcourt enrolled in Le Petit Séminaire de Québec to undertake a philosophical course of study , which he completed in 1823 . Belcourt studied to become a priest , and on March 10 , 1827 , Bernard @-@ Claude <unk> , the Archbishop of Quebec , performed Belcourt 's ordination in the chapel at the Seminary . 
 Belcourt was appointed as an assistant at several parishes in the area , before becoming pastor of a parish at Sainte @-@ Martine , Quebec in 1830 . As he was bilingual and spoke English as well as French , he was able to minister to his parish of mostly Irish Catholic Canadians . 
 = = Early missionary work = = 
 During his time at Sainte @-@ Martine , the young priest aspired to do missionary work in the west of British North America and applied for it . In 1830 , Archbishop <unk> requested that the young priest accompany him on a journey to Manitoba . Following an interview in February 1831 , Belcourt was enlisted to go on the trip . After spending two months learning the Algonquian language , Belcourt departed from his home town on April 27 of that year in a canoe of the Hudson 's Bay Company . On June 17 , the priest 's party arrived at Saint Boniface , Manitoba , and Belcourt was assigned as one of three priests there . He was to assist the Bishop at the town 's cathedral , and study the Anishinaabe language . He was to work with the Ojibwe people to convert them to Christianity . Although the language was not yet documented in written form , Belcourt made rapid progress . Within a year , he had learned enough to be considered ready to work directly with those whom he termed the " savages , " as was customary at the time . 
 In 1832 , Belcourt established the first native @-@ only mission west of Saint Boniface , but Gros Ventre raids forced its closure the following year . In 1834 , he established a mission at Baie @-@ Saint @-@ Paul on the Assiniboine River , where he instructed the local Aboriginal population in European @-@ style agriculture . The priest had a log chapel built , with smaller log cabins on the surrounding land to house the natives . The local bishop opposed his missionary work , as he believed the Aboriginal Canadians would not settle in one spot for long . Belcourt overcame this opposition , and in 1834 built a school at his mission , enlisting the assistance of a Chippewa @-@ speaking woman to serve as a teacher . In 1836 , the missionary admitted five natives to Holy Communion . He was discouraged by the Ojibwe readiness to return to their former spiritual practices after baptism . 
 In 1838 , Belcourt travelled to Rainy Lake to examine sites for a mission . He abandoned the plan after discovering that the First Nations people were unwilling to give up their Hudson 's Bay Company @-@ supplied liquor , as he required for conversion to Christianity . In August 1838 , the priest arranged to have a dictionary published in the Chippewa language , and returned to his mission at Baie @-@ Saint @-@ Paul . In the winter of 1839 , Belcourt carved 280 oak balusters and candlesticks for his log chapel . 
 In 1840 , the missionary established a mission among the Wabaseemoong Independent Nations , where he repeated his Baie @-@ Saint @-@ Paul design : a log chapel at the centre surrounded by small cabins for the local population , with outlying farms . The mission closed ten years later ; Belcourt blamed this on mismanagement by <unk> he had entrusted with its management . In 1845 , Belcourt served as the chaplain to some buffalo hunters , but returned to his first mission at Baie @-@ Saint @-@ Paul to teach the Chippewa language to a group of <unk> . 
 In 1846 , a dysentery epidemic swept communities along the Assiniboine River in Manitoba . On June 22 of that year , Belcourt left his mission at Baie @-@ Saint @-@ Paul to join a group of hunters on their journey south for the summer . The hunters carried the disease , infecting others , and 25 people died of dysentery by July 5 . On the worst days , eight people had to be buried . Belcourt and six of the hunters travelled south to the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation in search of medicine , as the priest 's supply had quickly run out . With his medicine supplies replenished , the missionary headed back to the encampment of hunters before returning to his mission . 
 = = Arrival in North Dakota = = 
 In 1847 , in response to perceived discrimination against First Nations people by the Hudson 's Bay Company in the fur trade , Belcourt prepared a petition to Queen Victoria to seek redress . The petition was signed by 977 First Nations people , but the Colonial Secretary , Earl Grey , consulted with advisors who had little sympathy for the natives and took no action in the case . The Company criticised Belcourt for what it saw as his inciting discontent among the local First Nations . The Company administrators decided that the priest should not be allowed to remain in British North America . The missionary was arrested , but was released after the charges against him were discovered to be unfounded . At the urging of the Company 's Governor , the Archbishop of Quebec asked Belcourt to return to Montreal . Belcourt asked the Governor of the Company to retract the charges for which he was arrested . The Governor apologised for what he described as a mistake on the part of the Company 's chief Factors . 
 The Church assigned Belcourt to Pembina , North Dakota as a missionary to the Chippewa and Métis of the Pembina River basin , a tributary to the Red River of the North . Upon arrival at Pembina , Belcourt constructed a small log cabin of 20 feet long by 30 feet wide , which was not large enough for all of his congregation . On August 14 , 1848 , the missionary baptised his first person in Pembina , and held a Holy Communion class consisting of 92 Native Americans . Needing more resources , Belcourt wrote to the Archbishop of Quebec for money for food and building supplies . He also asked for another Canadian priest well @-@ versed in both French and the Chippewa language , as he noted there were more Métis than Chippewa in the Pembina area . Belcourt described the original territory of the Chippewa in the Pembina district as several hundred miles north to south , and east to west - much larger than the small reservation to which they were later assigned . 
 In November 1849 , the young and recently ordained priest Albert Lacombe arrived in Pembina and immediately started to learn the Chippewa language . Despite claiming to have to resort to manual labour to pay for his food , Belcourt supported a household that included a school teacher , a housekeeper , a Chippewa cook and several servants . Thirty miles to the west , he established a mission at Turtle Mountain to serve as a base for expansion toward the Canadian Rockies . 
 In 1853 , Belcourt moved to what is now Walhalla , North Dakota , and established a school and a church there . The priest envisioned a large metropolis for the area . He began to lay out a city planned in the European @-@ style of a grid , with wide streets and several open squares . Despite his having planned for ample water , and the natural advantages of fertile soil and resources in the area , major development went elsewhere . Since the early twentieth century , agriculture has declined as a mainstay of family economies in the area . The town has 885 residents . 
 A strong advocate of prohibition of alcohol , especially among Native Americans and First Nations peoples , Belcourt petitioned the US Congress to prevent the illicit trafficking of liquor from Canada into the United States . In March 1859 , Belcourt left North Dakota to return to Canada . 
 = = Return to Canada = = 
 Belcourt returned to Quebec , but was quickly sent out to serve at a parish at Rustico , Prince Edward Island . Arriving there in November 1859 , the priest performed his first baptism among the local people the following month . Belcourt built a parish hall out of stone ( which was used into the 1950s ) and established the Farmers ' Bank of Rustico . He founded a high school , where he taught until recruiting a teacher from Montreal to the island . The priest created a study group , the members of which had to agree to be teetotalers . He established a parish library , built with the assistance of 1 @,@ 000 French francs a year from Emperor Napoleon III , nephew of Napoleon I. In October 1865 , Belcourt resigned from his position at the parish at Rustico , and returned to Quebec for some weeks . 
 He asked for reassignment to Rustico and returned to the island in November . In 1866 , Belcourt built and demonstrated a steam @-@ powered vehicle , considered the first automobile to be driven in Canada . 
 Belcourt remained pastor of his parish at Rustico until 1869 , when he retired . The priest intended to live on a farm at Shediac , New Brunswick , but was called back to the church in August 1871 . He was asked to pastor a parish on the Magdalen Islands . Ill health forced his retirement from there in May 1874 , and he returned to Shediac before dying on May 31 , 1874 . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 The town of Belcourt , North Dakota was named after the late priest in honour of his efforts in the region . 
 In 1959 , Belcourt was designated a National Historic Person by the Government of Canada . 
 = Jack Fingleton = 
 John " Jack " Henry Webb Fingleton OBE ( 28 April 1908 – 22 November 1981 ) was an Australian cricketer who was trained as a journalist and became a political and cricket commentator after the end of his playing career . A stubborn opening batsman known for his dour defensive approach , he scored five Test centuries , representing Australia in 18 Tests between 1932 and 1938 . He was also known for his involvement in several cricket diplomacy incidents in his career , accused of leaking the infamous verbal exchange between Australian captain Bill Woodfull and English manager Plum Warner during the acrimonious Bodyline series , and later of causing sectarian tension within the team by leading a group of players of Irish Catholic descent in undermining the leadership of the Protestant Don Bradman . In retirement , Fingleton became a prominent political commentator in Canberra , with links to Australian prime ministers . The author of many cricket books , he is regarded as one of Australia 's finest cricket writers , with a perceptive and occasionally sardonic style , marked by persistent criticisms of Bradman . 
 Fingleton had a difficult childhood , forced to leave formal education at the age of 12 to support his family after the death of his father . He worked in a series of odd jobs before joining the media at the age of 15 . He gradually progressed in his newspaper and cricket career . After making his first @-@ grade debut in Sydney district cricket at the age of 16 , he made his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales at the age of 20 in 1928 – 29 . However , Fingleton struggled to establish himself at interstate level , and was unable to maintain a regular position in the team , playing in only seven matches in his first three seasons . 
 In 1931 – 32 , Fingleton capitalised on illnesses to teammates to gain a regular position for New South Wales and then make his debut for Australia . He secured a position in the state team after Archie Jackson developed terminal tuberculosis and made 93 and 117 in his first two innings for the season , his highest scores to that point . He was then called into the Test squad and made his debut in the Fifth and final Test of the season against South Africa after Bill Ponsford fell ill . On a pitch rendered hostile by rain , Fingleton made 40 in an innings victory , surpassing the entire aggregate scored by the South Africans in their first innings . The following season , Fingleton enhanced his reputation for defiance in difficult conditions by scoring an unbeaten century against the Bodyline attack in a tour match despite suffering multiple bruises , and compiling 83 in the low @-@ scoring Second Test , Australian 's only Test win of the series . However , he made a pair in the next Test and the controversy over England 's bowling peaked with the leaking of Woodfull 's admonishment of Warner over England 's tactics . At the time , Fingleton was widely believed to be responsible for the leak , although he always denied it and blamed Bradman . Over time , Fingleton 's view has become more widely accepted . 
 Fingleton was dropped after this Test , and was controversially overlooked for the 1934 tour of England despite strong performances for New South Wales . His omission was thought to be influenced by the belief that he was responsible for leaking Woodfull 's comments as well as Bradman 's criticism of his performance . Other factors speculated to have contributed to his omission included a dispute that Fingleton had with Woodfull during a Sheffield Shield match , and interstate rivalries between New South Wales and Victoria causing Fingleton 's omission at the expense of an additional Victorian . 
 After the 1934 tour , Woodfull and Ponsford — Australia 's first @-@ choice opening pair — retired , leaving vacancies in the Test team . Fingleton scored four centuries and was the leading run @-@ scorer during the 1934 – 35 domestic season to earn a recall to the Australian team for the 1935 – 36 tour of South Africa . From that point onwards until the outbreak of World War II , he opened the batting with his New South Wales partner Bill Brown . With Bradman absent due to illness , it was the happiest time of Fingleton 's career , and he scored centuries in three consecutive innings as Australia won each of the last three Tests by an innings . In the Fourth Test , he and Brown put on the first double century opening partnership for Australia in a Test . 
 In 1936 – 37 , with Bradman back in the team as captain , Fingleton made a century in the First Test to become the first player to score consecutive centuries in four Test innings . He then made 136 in the Third Test , featuring in a partnership of 346 with Bradman after Australia had lost the first two Tests ; their stand set up victory and Australia came back to win the series 3 – 2 . Fingleton made his only tour of England in 1938 , and he was not successful , averaging only 20 @.@ 50 in the Tests . Upon returning to Australia he played sporadically for his state before retiring in 1939 – 40 . 
 Fingleton enlisted in the military during World War II and was eventually sent to work on media matters for Prime Minister John Curtin and one of his predecessors , Billy Hughes . After the war , Fingleton worked as a political correspondent in Canberra and commentated on cricket during the summer months in Australia and England . He was a prolific author , regarded as one of the finest and most stylish cricket writers of his time , producing many books . Fingleton was known for his forthright opinions and willingness to criticise , and his cricket reports were published by newspapers in several countries . He was known for his ongoing feud with Bradman — the pair repeatedly spoke out against one another 's judgement and play on the field long after they retired . 
 = = Style = = 
 A right @-@ hand opening batsman , Fingleton was noted primarily for his obdurate defense rather than for his strokeplay . Like most successful opening batsmen , he had a small back @-@ lift and was rarely surprised by the quicker half @-@ volley or yorker . Fingleton was often described as " courageous " , in particular for his defiant batting against Bodyline . Fingleton often made self @-@ deprecating comments about his batting , telling English cricket writer Alan Gibson that he " missed nothing " by not seeing him bat . He was also an athletic and gifted fieldsman , who built his reputation in the covers . Later he became noted along with Vic Richardson and Bill Brown in South Africa in 1935 – 36 as part of Bill O 'Reilly 's leg @-@ trap . Neville Cardus , once described the Fingleton @-@ Brown combination as " crouching low and <unk> , each with as many arms as an Indian God " . 
 His partnership with Brown was regarded as one of the great opening pairings in the history of Australian Test cricket . In ten Tests together as an opening partnership , the pair averaged 63 @.@ 75 for the first wicket , higher than any other Australian pair with more than 1 @,@ 000 runs . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born at Waverley in the inner eastern suburbs of Sydney , Fingleton was the third of six children . His parents were James , a tram driver and union organiser who became a member of the New South Wales Parliament , and Belinda May Webb . The family was Irish Catholic — Fingleton 's paternal grandfather had immigrated to Australia in the 1870s . 
 In 1913 , at the age of five , Fingleton 's father was elected into state parliament as a representative of the centre left , labour @-@ union oriented Australian Labor Party , and the family moved into a larger house . It was here that Fingleton learned to play street cricket . Fingleton was educated at the Roman Catholic St Francis 's School , in the inner city suburb of Paddington before moving to Waverley College . There he began a lifelong association with prose . 
 In 1917 , the family fell upon hard times when the elder Fingleton lost his seat and resumed his job as a tram driver , but in 1918 contracted tuberculosis . The father succumbed in 1920 when Jack was twelve , and the funeral director was Australian Test wicket @-@ keeper Sammy Carter . 
 Without their breadwinner , the Fingleton family were in further trouble and Belinda opened a seafood shop and withdrew her eldest son Les to support her . However , the business failed and the family home was at risk , so Jack was forced to quit school at the age of 12 . He did a variety of jobs such as selling food at cinemas , washing bottles and sweeping floors . 
 At the age of fifteen , Fingleton took the first steps in his journalism career , when his cousin helped him to become a copy boy with the now defunct Sydney Daily Guardian . Encouraged by his former headmaster , who had prompted his interest in writing , Fingleton quickly eased into his new career . Fingleton started as a sports reporter , and had a narrow escape when he was sacked by Robert Clyde Packer for breaking a pot , but then reinstated . Fingleton then risked being fired by removing cricket articles written by the famed Neville Cardus from the newspaper 's archive against policy for his personal use . 
 Fingleton was unable to distinguish himself on the field while at school , but after joining Waverley , he made quick progress . Fingleton trained early in the morning , before heading to the office and working in the afternoon so that the articles would be printed in the evening . He was unable to afford the club membership so a patron sponsored him . At the age of 16 , he broke into the First XI of a grade team which included Test players Alan Kippax , Hanson Carter and Arthur Mailey . Australian Test captain Herbie Collins missed a match due to his work as a bookmaker , and Fingleton stood in at late notice . Under the leadership of Carter , Fingleton batted last and made 11 not out . Forced to follow on , he made 52 not out and cemented his position for the remainder of the season . Within a year , Fingleton 's grade performances were being reported in Sydney newspapers . Playing on a Waverley pitch notorious for uneven bounce , Fingleton developed a style of <unk> centred around solid defence . 
 In the same year , his journalistic mentor <unk> Palmer moved to The Sydney Morning Herald and Fingleton became disenchanted . He was coaxed by cricketer @-@ journalist to move his publication , the Telegraph Pictorial where he worked for several years before the outbreak of the Second World War . However , Fingleton 's initiation into his new workplace was difficult as the Telegraph Pictorial had just merged with the Daily Telegraph and around half the workforce were to be made redundant . Fingleton was demoted from the main staff to a freelance correspondent covering events in the inner @-@ city suburbs of Redfern and Newtown . In such crime @-@ ridden and turbulent working @-@ class area , Fingleton was productive in break stories and was soon restored to the regular staff . 
 = = First @-@ class debut = = 
 Having scored a century for Waverley against Petersham the week before , Fingleton made his first @-@ class debut in 1928 – 29 , playing in two matches and having two innings . On debut against Victoria , Fingleton was allowed to bat no higher than No. 8 by captain Tommy Andrews , despite being a specialist batsman . More than 600 runs had been scored by the time the sixth wicket had fallen , bringing him to the wicket to join Don Bradman , who had already brought up his double century . The pair put on an unbroken stand of 111 before Andrews declared at 7 / 613 , of which Fingleton made 25 not out . During the partnership , Bradman farmed most of the strike , much to Fingleton 's chagrin . The pair 's first meeting had been prickly and Bradman glared angrily at Fingleton after a mix @-@ up almost ended in a run out . The match was drawn , and Fingleton then made a duck against Tasmania in an innings victory . The following summer , with no Test matches , New South Wales ' international representatives were available for the entire season , and Fingleton missed selection for every match . 
 In 1930 – 31 , aged 22 , Fingleton regained his position at the start of the Sheffield Shield season for New South Wales , and first came to prominence when he withstood a ferocious opening spell against the express pace of Eddie Gilbert in Brisbane against Queensland . On one occasion , a particularly fast Gilbert delivery supposedly evaded both the batsman and wicket @-@ keeper , travelled more than 60 metres and crashed through a fence before hitting and killing a dog on the other side . Fingleton scored 56 as a full strength team with Test players fell for 143 . The visitors were set 392 for victory and played for a draw , with Fingleton adding 71 to prevent a collapse as the match was saved . He failed to pass single figures in his next four innings , and was dropped twice , before adding 32 not out and 26 as New South Wales lost to the touring West Indies . Fingleton did not play a full season and ended with 210 runs at 35 @.@ 00 in five matches , including the two half @-@ centuries . 
 = = Test debut = = 
 In the opening match of the 1931 – 32 season , which was against Queensland , New South Wales were in trouble . Gilbert famously knocked the bat out of Donald Bradman 's hand , before removing him for a duck . Gilbert cut down the New South Wales top order with a spell of 3 / 12 and forced Alan Kippax to retire hurt after hitting him in the upper body . Fingleton was going to be twelfth man before Archie Jackson — who was to die of tuberculosis just over a year later — collapsed just before the start of the match . Undeterred , Stan McCabe came in and counterattacked ; Fingleton assisted him with a stubborn 93 and featured in a 195 @-@ run fourth wicket partnership . New South Wales reached 432 and won by an innings . 
 Fingleton then scored his maiden first @-@ class century of 117 in less than four hours in the following match , against the touring South Africa , helping his team to 3 / 430 in their runchase . The hosts were 18 runs short of victory when time ran out . Although Fingleton made only five in New South Wales ' second match against the South Africans , Fingleton was selected for the Test series against the same team . This came after only ten matches for his state . Starting with the Second Test , he was twelfth man for three consecutive Tests , and as a result , did not play any cricket for six weeks before he added a pair of 40s in a win over arch @-@ rivals Victoria . 
 Fingleton made his debut in the Fifth and final Test in similar circumstances to his break at the start of the season ; Bill Ponsford fell ill and Bradman twisted an ankle . As Bradman later took a hard @-@ running catch as a substitute fielder on the same day , some suspected that he had feigned injury to avoid playing on a rain @-@ affected wicket hostile to batting — he had appeared uncomfortable against aggressive bowling in the previous Test . In a low @-@ scoring match , Fingleton 's first action on the field was to let a ball go between his legs as South Africa batted first . Opening with captain Bill Woodfull in the absence of Ponsford , Fingleton saw his skipper removed from the first ball of the innings . He was allowed to ease into his first innings when the first ball he faced , from Neville Quinn , was a deliberate full toss to give him an opportunity to score his initial runs easily . The pair became friends from this point onwards . Fingleton was second top @-@ scorer with 40 as Australia made 153 recorded an innings victory . The match lasted less than one day 's playing time as the hosts fell for only 36 and 45 . The cricketer @-@ journalist Richard Whitington later wrote that " for courage and skill ... [ Fingleton 's 51 ] was worth quadruple that number " . The Sydney Mail predicted that Fingleton 's display on the rain @-@ affected wicket , the likes of which were common , proved that he would " someday be a great success " there . Fingleton ended the season with 386 runs at 42 @.@ 88 with one century and a fifty in six matches . 
 = = Bodyline turmoil = = 
 In the following summer came the Bodyline series , when England toured under Douglas Jardine and targeted the upper bodies of the Australian batsmen with short @-@ pitched bowling , using a close leg side cordon to catch balls fended away from the body . In one of the tour matches before the Tests , Fingleton scored a defiant 119 * , carrying his bat for New South Wales against the bumper barrage of Harold Larwood and Gubby Allen , ensuring his selection for the First Test . Despite his unbending resistance , his state fell to an innings defeat . In a warm @-@ up for the Tests , he scored 29 and 53 not out for an Australian XI against the tourists , while most of his teammates struggled . His earlier experience held him in good stead as he scored 26 and 40 as Australia were crushed by ten wickets in the First Test in Sydney . Fingleton stood his ground and was hit several times . He then made a defiant four @-@ hour innings to top @-@ score with 83 in the first innings of Australia 's only win of the series in the Second Test in Melbourne , although he did run out his batting partner Leo O 'Brien in the process . This helped the Australians to reach 228 and they took a 59 @-@ run first innings lead before winning the match despite Fingleton making only one in the second innings . He appeared as well equipped as any Australian to combat England 's strategy . 
 = = = Adelaide leak = = = 
 However , the Third Test at the Adelaide Oval was disastrous for Fingleton , who scored a pair as Australia were hammered by 338 runs . He was blamed for leaking the details of the dressing room exchange between captain Bill Woodfull and English manager Plum Warner , which almost caused the abandonment of the Test series . Warner had visited Woodfull to express sympathies after the Australian captain was struck in the heart by Larwood 's short pitched bowling , to which Woodfull retorted " I do not want to see you Mr. Warner . There are two sides out there . One is playing cricket and the other is not . " The leak caused a <unk> , as Woodfull had publicly remained composed in the face of the body barrage , neither complaining nor retaliating . Fingleton was dropped for the remaining two Tests of the series . New South Wales played England after the Third Test and Fingleton had a chance to show his credentials against Bodyline but made only 19 and 7 in a four @-@ wicket defeat , and was unable to force his way back into the Test team . Fingleton always denied responsibility for the leak , blaming Bradman . This incident was the first in a string of open disagreements between Fingleton and Bradman . 
 The Bodyline season also marked the beginning of Fingleton 's opening combination with Bill Brown , who made his New South Wales debut in the same season . Fingleton scored four half @-@ centuries for the remainder of the first @-@ class season and ended with 648 runs at 38 @.@ 11 as New South Wales won the Sheffield Shield . 
 Fingleton had a prolific 1933 – 34 Australian season in which he scored 655 runs at 59 @.@ 54 with two centuries and four fifties . He scored 105 in the Test trial for Richardson 's XI and then struck 145 against arch @-@ rivals Victoria in the last match of the season ; New South Wales were unable to force a victory and thus ceded the Sheffield Shield to their southern neighbours . He had scored 76 in the return match earlier in the season and added 33 and 78 against the Rest of Australia . 
 Despite this , Fingleton was an overlooked for the Australian side selected to tour England in 1934 . With captain Woodfull and Bill Ponsford the established openers , there was only one place for a spare opener , and Brown won the position over his partner , who had performed to a similar standard during the season . The selectors asked Don Bradman , Australia 's leading batsman and state team @-@ mate to Brown and Fingleton , for advice . Bradman nominated Brown , believing that his style was better suited to English pitches . On the day that the team was selected , Bradman wrote in his newspaper column , criticising Fingleton 's running between the wickets . When the pair next met , Fingleton 's only words were to blame Bradman for his omission ; Bradman claimed that as a result of the selection controversy , Fingleton relentless pursued a vendetta against him from there on . Fingleton also suspected that Woodfull wanted him out of the team because he held the journalist responsible for the leaked exchange with Warner . 
 Some incidents in Fingleton 's century in the last match of the season were also believed to have reflected badly at the selection table . Having retired hurt on 78 , he returned the next day and was then dropped on 86 in the slips . Fingleton had moved out of his crease to pat out the pitch before the ball had gone dead and Victorian wicket @-@ keeper Ben Barnett broke the stumps . A displeased Fingleton was given out by umpire George Borwick and walked off the ground , only to be called back by captain Woodfull . Fingleton refused Woodfull 's offer and did not return until Woodfull successfully asked Borwick to reverse his decision . The media reported that Fingleton had quarrelled with Woodfull and several teammates told him that his apparent rebuff of the national captain would prejudice his chances of selection , and the NSWCA made an inquiry into the matter ; Fingleton failed to respond . During the same innings , Bradman also wrote in his newspaper report that Fingleton had been responsible for the run out of teammate Ray Rowe , which angered Fingleton for an extended period . 
 A disappointed Fingleton wrote to Woodfull , saying " You have chosen chaps who do not like fast bowling " . He also questioned what he perceived to be Woodfull 's coldness towards him since the Bodyline series and decried unnamed " fellow pressmen , naturally jealous " . Wisden speculated that Fingleton 's omission may have been due to cricket diplomacy reasons following the incident in Adelaide , while others thought that regionalism was to blame ; this view posited that Ernest Bromley was selected so that seven Victorians and New South Welshmen would be on the tour . Bromley scored only 312 runs in 20 innings in England . 
 Fingleton was selected for a second string Australian team to tour New Zealand for two months at the end of the season while the Test team <unk> for England . However , captain Victor Richardson and his deputy Keith Rigg withdrew , dissatisfied with the pay , leaving Fingleton as the most senior member of the team . The tour was then cancelled by New Zealand , who feared that the large number of absentees would result in a large financial loss . 
 = = Test recall = = 
 With retirements of both Woodfull and Ponsford following the 1934 tour to England , positions at the top of the Australia 's batting order became available . Fingleton also found state cricket more attractive now that Bradman had decided to move to South Australia to take up stockbroking . Fingleton responded to his omission from the Ashes tour by leading the run @-@ scoring aggregates in the 1934 – 35 season . He scored 880 runs at 58 @.@ 66 with four centuries and four fifties , almost 200 runs more than the second most prolific batsman , Brown . After Fingleton started the summer with a fifty in Woodfull 's testimonial match , the pair started the Shield campaign with a 249 @-@ run stand in New South Wales ' first match of the season against South Australia , both scoring centuries in an innings victory . Fingleton made 134 in just over three hours . Fingleton reached 49 at least once in the remaining five matches , including a 108 against Queensland . Despite the form of the openers , New South Wales failed to win the Sheffield Shield after losing both of their matches against Victoria . Fingleton ended the season with consecutive centuries , 124 and 100 , against Western Australia , and took the first of two first @-@ class wickets in his career in the first of the two matches . 
 As a result of his performances , Fingleton was recalled to the Test team for the tour of South Africa in 1935 – 36 , where he partnered Brown at the top of the innings . Under normal circumstances , the Australians would have been captained by Fingleton 's rival Bradman , who had been vice @-@ captain to Woodfull . However , Bradman was unable to tour for medical reasons and Vic Richardson led the team instead . With Bradman out of the way , the tour was to be the most prolific and peaceful phase of Fingleton 's international career and included several large opening stands with Brown . During the tour , Fingleton played with an attacking flair that contrasted with his established reputation for doggedness . For Fingleton , it was the happiest tour he had been on , in large part due to Bradman 's absence . 
 Fingleton nearly failed to make the trip . His newspaper editor Eric Baume ordered to write a column attacking the Australian Board of Control for vetoing players from going on a private tour of India , threatening to sack him if he refused — criticism of the board typically resulted in exclusion from selection . Fingleton was reluctant to comply , and was reprieved when the editor @-@ in @-@ chief overruled Baume . 
 Fingleton scored 66 for the Australians in an innings victory over Western Australia before sailing for South Africa . It was to be the start of a very productive campaign . In the three matches leading up to the Tests , against Natal , Western Province and Transvaal respectively , Fingleton scored 121 , 53 , 99 and seven not out . Australia won the latter match by ten wickets and the others by an innings . In the match by Natal , Fingleton and Brown both made centuries and combined in a double century stand . 
 After almost three years in the wilderness , Fingleton returned to the Test arena in the First Test at Durban . After making two in the first innings , he was unbeaten on 36 when Australia reached their second innings target with nine wickets in hand . During the first innings , a 140 km / h gale hit the ground , uprooting trees and forcing balls that were heading into the wind to do U @-@ turns . He followed this with 62 — the innings top @-@ score — and 40 in the Second Test at Johannesburg . After taking a 93 @-@ run first innings lead , Australia needed a Test record of 399 in the second innings to win on a turning wicket , and after the early demise of Brown , Fingleton joined McCabe in a 177 @-@ run partnership that pushed the score to 1 / 194 . Such was the dominance of McCabe that he scored more than 80 % of the runs during this partnership . Australia needed only 125 with half the day remaining and eight wickets in hand when poor visibility ended play . McCabe had flayed the attack and reached 189 not out when the South Africans had the match called off , claiming that the fieldsmen were endangered by the batsman 's vigorous hitting . 
 Fingleton finished the series with centuries in each of the last three Tests , all in consecutive innings ; 112 at Cape Town , 108 at Johannesburg and 118 in Durban . In the Third Test , Fingleton and Brown set a new Australian Test record opening stand of 233 , which laid the foundation for a total of 8 / 362 declared and an innings victory . It was Australia 's first double @-@ century opening stand in Test cricket , and remains a national record for the first wicket against South Africa . On a rain @-@ affected wicket , Fingleton reached his maiden Test century in only 180 minutes before wickets began falling steadily . 
 Before the Fourth Test , Fingleton added 52 against Border and 110 in an innings win over Transvaal . His 108 in the Fourth Test was more than South Africa 's entire second innings of 98 , and scored at almost a run a minute . In the Fifth Test , the pair combined for another century stand . Each of the three matches resulted in an innings victory for Australia as the series was taken 4 – 0 . Fingleton ended the Test series with 478 runs at 79 @.@ 66 . Against Natal at Durban , he made his highest first class score of 167 , his second century against the provincial side for the season . He ended the tour with a total of 1192 runs at 74 @.@ 50 , including six centuries . Despite his rapid scoring in South Africa , Fingleton 's achievements went largely unheralded at home ; at the time , England and Australia were by far the strongest Test teams and media coverage of the tour was scant . There was little detail in the reports apart from the scores and Fingleton was still described as a slow scorer , something that angered him . 
 = = Under the captaincy of Bradman = = 
 The following 1936 – 37 season in Australia , saw more success for Fingleton , although with the return of Bradman as captain , team harmony became strained . Gubby Allen 's Englishmen toured Australia , and after failing to pass 10 in his first three innings for the season , Fingleton scored 39 , 42 and 56 in matches for New South Wales and an Australian XI against the tourists . 
 Fingleton became the first player to score centuries in four consecutive Test innings when he scored 100 in the first innings of the First Test at Brisbane , reaching the <unk> on 7 December . He top @-@ scored as Australia replied to England 's 358 with 234 . Fingleton 's feats was later equalled by Alan Melville , ( whose four centuries were scored on either side of World War II ) and surpassed by the West Indian , Everton Weekes in 1948 – 49 . Fingleton 's run ended in the second innings , falling for a golden duck as Australia were skittled for 58 on a sticky wicket and crushed by 322 runs . 
 After scoring 12 in a total of 80 as Australia were caught on a sticky wicket , Fingleton then made 73 in the second innings of the Second Test in Sydney , one of few Australians to resist as the home side fell to an innings defeat after being forced to follow on . Australia were facing a dilemma in the Third Test in Melbourne . The home team scored 200 , Fingleton contributing 38 , before rain caused a sticky wicket and England declared at 9 / 76 . However , Australia still had to bat on the treacherous surface , captain Bradman reshuffled the batting lineup , putting the bowlers in first and Fingleton and himself in at Nos. 6 and 7 to save them for more favourable batting conditions . The bowlers managed to survive to the end of the day 's play and the wicket improved overnight . The pair came together with the score at 5 / 97 and made a Test record sixth @-@ wicket partnership of 346 , with Fingleton making 136 . It turned the Test and saw Australia ended at 564 . The hosts bowled England out for 323 to win the match by 365 runs and prevent England from taking an unassailable 3 – 0 lead . Fingleton did not pass 20 in his last three innings of the series , as Australia won the remaining two matches to win the series . Fingleton ended with 398 runs at 44 @.@ 22 in the Tests , and 631 runs at 33 @.@ 21 overall . 
 Fingleton followed up with 862 runs at 50 @.@ 70 in the 1937 – 38 domestic season , with two centuries and six fifties . This effort placed him third in the run @-@ scoring aggregates for the season . He saved his best for arch @-@ rivals Victoria , scoring 59 and 160 to salvage a draw after New South Wales had conceded a first innings lead of 231 . New south Wales went on to win the title . Fingleton finished his season with 66 , 1 , 47 and 109 in two warm @-@ up matches for the Australian team against Western Australia before they headed to England for the 1938 Ashes series . 
 In 1938 , Fingleton made what turned out to be his international farewell as Australia toured England , a series in which he found runs difficult to come by . He later attributed this to his inability to play the pull shot . However , Fingleton started the tour well . He passed 30 in each of his first seven innings on English soil , and converted three of these starts into centuries , scoring 124 against Oxford University , 111 against Cambridge University and 123 not out against Hampshire in the first month of cricket . Fingleton 's form tapered just at the wrong time , falling three times for single figures in the last two matches before the Tests . He carried this into the First Test at Trent Bridge , where he made only 9 and 40 in a high @-@ scoring draw in which every innings passed 400 . 
 An infamous incident occurred in Australia 's second innings . As Australia were 247 runs behind on the first innings and forced to follow on , they played for a draw and Brown and Fingleton batted slowly in the second innings . Sections of the crowd heckled his slow batting by using a slow hand clap . Bradman then sent Mervyn Waite out to deliver orders to the openers that they should back away from their positions and hold up proceedings until the barracking stopped . Fingleton said that he was not perturbed by the crowd but obeyed ; umpire Frank Chester and England captain Wally Hammond had no issues with this . At one point , Fingleton theatrically decided to take off his gloves , put down his bat and sit down on the pitch and refusing to resume before the gallery quietened , but this only caused a huge uproar . Wisden later criticised him , saying that he lost " all true sense of the situation ... an extraordinary action on the part of a cricket in a Test match . " They regarded the gesture as disrespectful as a majority of the spectators had not heckled him . 
 Fingleton rediscovered his form between the Tests , scoring 121 against the Gentlemen of England and 96 against Lancashire . Again however , Fingleton was unable to maintain the momentum in the Tests , making 31 and 4 against England in the Second Test at Lord 's , which ended in another draw . 
 Fingleton then aggregated only 36 in four innings in next three county fixtures , and after the Third Test at Old Trafford never started due to persistent rain , he was concussed in the match against Warwickshire at Edgbaston . A long hop from Waite was pulled into his head at point @-@ blank range , and Fingleton managed to duck enough that it glanced his forehead and went into the air , to the cries of " catch it " from Bradman . The ball did not go to hand and Fingleton was hospitalised . 
 Fingleton made 30 and 9 in a low @-@ scoring Fourth Test at Headingley , which Australia won by five wickets to retain the Ashes . He remained unproductive in the lead @-@ up to the final Test , scoring 51 in three first @-@ class innings . His Test career ended disappointingly at The Oval in " Hutton 's Match " . In the course of England 's marathon innings of 7 / 903 he sustained a leg injury , which prevented him from batting in either Australian innings . With Bradman also unable to bat , Australia collapsed to the heaviest defeat in Test history , by an innings and 579 runs . It capped off a tour that ended poorly after a promising start . Fingleton made 123 runs in six innings at an average of 20 @.@ 50 . With the outbreak of World War II , Australia was not to play another Test until the 1945 – 46 season , ending Fingleton 's international career . 
 Fingleton returned to Australia and played in only three matches in the 1938 – 39 domestic season , scoring 81 runs at 16 @.@ 20 , before being sidelined at the end of December . His top @-@ score for the season was 45 as New South Wales lost by four wickets to Victoria . In 1939 – 40 , Fingleton had another quiet season with only 39 runs at 6 @.@ 50 in three matches . He passed single figures only once in six innings and ended with a duck and three as New South Wales lost to arch @-@ rivals Victoria by 82 runs . Fingleton retired at the end of the season . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After the start of World War II , he enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force in November 1941 in the artillery . He was sent to Warwick Farm , then on the western outskirts of Sydney , for training . A non @-@ conformist known for being forthright , Fingleton did not enjoy military discipline . In May 1942 , he went AWOL from his post at Double Bay on the shores of Sydney Harbour to visit his wife . As a result , he was missing when a Japanese midget submarine launched an attack in the harbour . Soon after , he was deployed to Townsville in northern Queensland in anticipation of a Japanese land invasion , which never materialised . He was then transferred to the Press Relations unit . There he did work in intelligence analysis and censorship . 
 The military then made him the press secretary for former Prime Minister of Australia Billy Hughes . From his appointment onwards , he lived and worked in Canberra . Hughes had changed political parties several times and was infamous for his erratic style and the government wanted Fingleton to moderate him . The leader of the United Australia Party , Hughes had particularly worried Prime Minister John Curtin by frequently and publicly excoriating US General Douglas Macarthur , who was commanding the Allied forces in the Pacific . Curtin needed someone to quieten Hughes , as Macarthur had threatened to leave if the denouncements continued . Fingleton spent three months working for the temperamental Hughes and was not successful in curbing his aggressive oratory . He then worked in censorship , deciding which portions of Curtin 's press briefings were reportable ; Fingleton tried to take a liberal line on press freedom . Fingleton also worked for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's Radio Australia while serving in the censorship department . 
 = = Post @-@ war writing and journalism career = = 
 After the end of the war , Fingleton divided his time between Canberra , where until his retirement in 1978 he was political correspondent for Radio Australia , and cricket journalism . He forged close relationships with several Prime Ministers . In particular , Sir Robert Menzies , Australia 's longest serving Prime Minister , provided him with a laudatory foreword in his book , Masters of Cricket . Fingleton 's Test coverage resulted in a number of books that placed him at the forefront of Australian cricket writers . The books included Cricket Crisis ( mainly an account of the 1932 – 33 Bodyline series ) , Brightly Fades the Don ( the 1948 Invincibles tour ) , Brown & Company : The Tour in Australia ( the English tour of Australia in 1950 – 51 ) , The Ashes Crown the Year ( the Australian tour of England in 1953 ) , Masters of Cricket , Four <unk> to Australia ( the English tour of Australia in 1958 – 59 ) , The Greatest Test of All ( the Tied Test of 1960 ) , Fingleton on Cricket and The Immortal Victor Trumper . His final book , the autobiographical Batting From Memory , was to have its Australian launch during the week in which he died of a heart attack . His cricket writing , regarded as one of the most stylish by an Australian , often left a sour taste with observers because of the persistent anti @-@ Bradman jibes . 
 During his war years , Fingleton decided to take up book writing , in addition to newspaper journalism , and began compiling a book about the Bodyline series during his spare time in the army , a topic that was still deep in the Australian consciousness , using his inside knowledge as a participant in that Ashes campaign . As Fingleton had worked for the government 's censors , he was one of only a few who knew of the effect of the Bodyline controversy in politics , as he had been aware of the cables that had been sent by government officials . Fingleton received advice and encouragement from the eminent British cricket writer Neville Cardus , and suffered a setback when , after finishing half the book , he sent his manuscript to be reviewed . It was lost in the post , and he had forgotten to make a copy . Fingleton finished his book Cricket Crisis in 1946 but it was rejected by the publishers Collins , who had already published a book by Ray Robinson named Between Wickets on the same topic . They were also concerned about the marketability of a book that criticised Bradman — still the dominant player of the time and an idolised figure — strongly . Fingleton then published with Cassell , and the book was widely acclaimed and is still regarded as the best first @-@ hand account of the Bodyline controversy and of the classic cricket books at large . It was well known for its stylish writing and analytical value . Fingleton expressed his views forthrightly and interspersed the account with analyses and profiles of those involved in the Bodyline series , including Bradman , Jardine , Larwood , Warner and McCabe . He criticised Bradman 's unorthodox approach in backing away from the bowling and questioned his aloof attitude towards his teammates . This angered Bradman , who wrote in his 1949 book Farewell to Cricket in reply to Fingleton , claiming that as Fingleton was an inferior batsman , his record gave him " scarcely ... any authority to criticise my methods . " The debate continued on , with replies in subsequent publications citing statistics . 
 As parliament is usually in recess during the summer months , Fingleton 's political journalism did not often interfere with his cricket radio commentary for the ABC or his cricket writing , except during tours of England in the Australian winter . Fingleton mainly freelanced for overseas newspapers as he regarded Australian editors as being difficult to work with , and because the pay was lower . In 1946 – 47 , England toured Australia for the first full Test series since the war . Fingleton criticised Bradman for not walking after hitting a disputed catch to Jack Ikin . Fingleton and most in the press box thought that the catch was clean but the umpire ruled in favour of Bradman . At the time Bradman had been making a comeback from ill health and had been struggling , and it was thought that he would retire if he could not discover his old form . After the dispute catch however , Bradman began timing the ball and went on to score 187 . Fingleton openly criticised the decision to give Bradman not out in his writing . Later in the series , he decried Bradman 's tactics of having his pacemen bowl frequent bouncers at the English batsmen , pointing out that it was hypocritical for the Australian captain to vociferously condemn Jardine 's tactics years earlier . As Fingleton was one of the few who were forthright enough to question the actions of national hero Bradman , many sources within the Australian cricket community chose to confide in him , most notably all @-@ rounder Keith Miller , whose cavalier attitude brought him into conflict with Bradman 's ruthless approach to victory . The following season , during the Indian team 's tour of Australia , Fingleton began his association with The Hindu . 
 After his death , a disused historic scoreboard from the MCG , dated to 1901 , was taken out of storage and transported to Canberra , where it was installed on the top of hill at Manuka Oval , and renamed the Jack Fingleton Scoreboard . At the dedication ceremony , Governor @-@ General of Australia Sir Ninian Stephen said that Fingleton not merely a Test cricketer who became a parliamentary journalist in the national capital , but " an institution " in Canberra . 
 In addition to his writing , Fingleton was a witty , perceptive and occasionally sardonic commentator for the BBC and at various times a contributor to The Times , The Sunday Times , The Observer , and various newspapers in Australia , South Africa and elsewhere . In 1976 , he was awarded an OBE for services " to journalism and to cricket " . He was the subject of three appearances in 1979 and 1980 on Parkinson 's TV interview show . Fingleton 's judgements were characterised by careful first @-@ hand evidence and was known for sensing the emergence of a possible story . E W Swanton stated that " Fingleton remains surely , as cricket writer and broadcaster , the best his country has " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Fingleton met his wife Philippa " Pip " Street in 1938 during the sea voyage from Australia to England for the Test series . Philippa was the daughter of Kenneth and Jessie Street . Her father later became the Chief Justice of New South Wales , while her mother was a prominent left @-@ wing women 's rights activist and the Streets were a wealthy family of the Protestant establishment . Jessie had taken her daughter with her to a meeting of the League of Nations and then for a long tour of Europe . At the time , Philippa was only 18 , and Fingleton 30 , and Jessie was concerned when the pair fell in love , anticipating that problems would arise over religion . She hoped that the young couple would drift apart , but Fingleton gave the family tickets to the Fifth Test in London , only to injure himself during the match and not be able to bat . Upon returning to Australia , the couple wanted to marry , but the Streets forbade their daughter from marrying until 21 . Fingleton wanted Philippa to adopt Catholicism , something that concerned her mother , as she had clashed with Catholic leaders in her advocacy of birth control . The wedding went ahead in January 1942 after Philippa agreed to convert and Fingleton fitted in easily with his in @-@ laws ' left @-@ wing orientation . 
 = = Conflict with Bradman = = 
 Throughout his career as player and journalist , Fingleton persistently came into personal conflict with Don Bradman , one of the captains under whom Fingleton played , damaging the reputations of both . Bradman characteristically held his silence during Fingleton 's lifetime . Bradman was known for his reserved personality , did not drink and often eschewed social activities with teammates , preferring to privately listen to music or read . Combined with his success , he gained a reputation for cockiness . In the 1930s , Australia had been divided along sectarian lines , with those of Irish descent such as Fingleton being Catholic and Anglo @-@ Australians such as Bradman being predominantly Protestant , leading to speculation that the tension was fuelled by religion . During the 1936 – 37 Ashes series in Australia , four Catholics , leading bowler Bill O 'Reilly , leading batsman and vice @-@ captain Stan McCabe along with Leo O 'Brien and Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith were summoned by the Board of Control to respond to allegations that they were undermining Bradman . Fingleton was not invited , speculated to be due to his journalistic background , but Bradman later alleged that he was the ringleader . After that , Bradman 's relationship with O 'Reilly and Fingleton never recovered . When Bradman was dismissed in his final Test innings in 1948 for a duck , Fingleton and O 'Reilly were reported to be laughing hysterically in the pressbox . E W Swanton said that " I thought they were going to have stroke " . Bradman later wrote after both had died : " With these fellows out of the way , the loyalty of my 1948 side was a big joy and made a big contribution to the outstanding success of that tour " . 
 = = Test statistics = = 
 = King Kong ( 2005 film ) = 
 King Kong is a 2005 epic adventure monster film co @-@ written , produced , and directed by Peter Jackson . A remake of the 1933 film of the same name , the film stars Naomi Watts , Jack Black , Adrien Brody , and , through motion capture , Andy Serkis as the title character . Set in 1933 , King Kong tells the story of an overly ambitious filmmaker who coerces his cast and hired ship crew to travel to the mysterious Skull Island . There they encounter Kong , a legendary giant gorilla , whom they capture and display in New York City , with tragic results . 
 The film 's budget climbed from an initial US $ 150 million to a then @-@ record @-@ breaking $ 207 million . It was released on December 14 , 2005 in Germany and on December 16 in the United States , and made an opening of $ 50 @.@ 1 million . While it performed lower than expected , King Kong made domestic and worldwide grosses that eventually added up to $ 550 million , becoming the fourth @-@ highest grossing film in Universal Pictures history . It also generated $ 100 million in DVD sales upon its home video release . The film garnered positive reviews from critics and appeared on several " top ten " lists for 2005 , who tended to praise it for its special effects , performances , sense of spectacle and comparison to the 1933 original , though some reviewers criticized it for its three @-@ hour running time . It won three Academy Awards for Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Visual Effects . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1933 , at the height of the Great Depression , New York City vaudeville actress Ann Darrow has lost her job and is hired by financially troubled filmmaker Carl Denham to star in his new film . Ann signs on when she learns her favorite playwright , Jack Driscoll , is the screenwriter . As their tramp steamer , the SS Venture , makes the lengthy journey to the remote and mysterious Skull Island , Ann and Jack fall in love . Captain Englehorn begins having second thoughts about the voyage , prompted by crew speculation of trouble ahead . 
 Deep in the southern waters , the Venture receives a radio message informing Englehorn that there is a warrant out for Carl 's arrest due to his defiance of the studio 's orders to cease production . The message instructs Englehorn to divert to Rangoon , but despite his attempt to comply , the ship becomes lost in fog and runs aground on the rocky shore of Skull Island . Carl and his crew explore the island to film and are attacked by vicious natives . Mike , the sound technician and one of the sailors are killed . Ann screams as she is captured , and a loud roar is heard beyond the wall . The matriarch of the tribe vows to sacrifice her to " Kong " , a 25 ft ( 8 m ) tall gorilla . Englehorn kills one of the natives and his crew break up the attack and return to the ship . They lighten their load to float off the rocks and carry out repairs , but Jack discovers Ann has been kidnapped by natives . On the island , Ann is offered as a sacrifice to Kong by the natives . The crew returns armed , but is too late as Kong takes Ann and flees into the jungle . Ann gradually wins Kong over with juggling and dancing , and eventually begins to grasp Kong 's intelligence and capacity for emotion . 
 Englehorn organizes a rescue party led by First Mate Hayes and includes Jack Driscoll , Carl Denham , Jimmy , Bruce Baxter , Preston , Lumpy , Herb , Choy , and several sailors . The party barely gets outside of the walls before they run into a <unk> that Hayes kills with his machine gun . The rescue party is then caught in the middle of a pack of <unk> <unk> hunting a herd of Brontosaurus baxteri , and Herb is killed along with four sailors . The rest of the rescue party come across a swamp where actor Bruce Baxter and two others leave the group . The rescue party makes their way across a giant fallen log , when Kong attacks the rescue party . Hayes , Choy and several other crewmen are killed after being thrown off the log by Kong to the bottom of the cliff , and the rest of the crew is shaken off the log into a ravine ; Carl 's camera is destroyed as well . Kong returns to Ann and rescues her from three <unk> rex , killing them . Kong then takes her to his lair in the mountains . The remaining crew wakes up to find themselves in a pit full of giant insects where Lumpy and two others are killed . Englehorn , Baxter and the rest of the crew returns , and save the last four members of the rescue party ( Jack , Carl , Jimmy , and Preston ) from the pit . As Jack continues to search for Ann , Carl decides to capture Kong . Jack goes to Kong 's lair , inadvertently waking him . As Kong fights a swarm of flying <unk> , bat @-@ like rodents , Ann and Jack escape . They arrive at the wall with the angry Kong following them , and Ann becomes distraught by what Carl plans to do . Kong bursts through the gate and attempts to get her back , killing several sailors in the process , but is subdued when Carl knocks him out with chloroform . 
 Back in New York City , Carl presents " Kong , the Eighth Wonder of the World " on Broadway , starring Baxter and an imprisoned Kong . Ann is played by an anonymous chorus girl , and Kong becomes enraged after realizing that the girl on stage is not Ann . After breaking free from his chrome @-@ steel chains , he wrecks the theater . Kong wreaks havoc around the city and chases Jack in a taxi across town . He knocks him out by stopping his taxi and flipping it , then encounters Ann again . Kong and Ann share a moment on a frozen pond in Central Park until the army attacks . Kong climbs with Ann onto the top of the Empire State Building , where he fights off six <unk> @-@ 5 Helldiver Navy planes , downing three . At the end of the confrontation , Kong is mortally wounded by the gunfire and gazes at Ann for the last time before falling from the building to his death . As Ann is reunited with Jack , civilians , photographers , police and soldiers gather around Kong 's corpse . Carl takes one last glimpse at him and says , " It wasn 't the airplanes . It was Beauty killed the Beast . " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 In addition , director Jackson with makeup artist Rick Baker ( who played Kong in the 1976 version ) as the pilot and gunner on the airplane that kills the title character , his children appear as New York children , The Lord of the Rings co @-@ producer Rick <unk> appears as a gunner in an airplane , and Bob Burns and his wife appear as New York bystanders . Frequent Jackson collaborator Howard Shore makes a cameo appearance as the conductor of the New York theater from where Kong escapes . 
 Watts , Black , and Brody were the first choices for their respective roles with no other actors considered . In preparation for her role , Watts met with the original Ann Darrow , Fay Wray . Jackson wanted Wray to make a cameo appearance and say the final line of dialogue , but she died during pre @-@ production at 96 years old . Black was cast as Carl Denham based on his performance in the 2000 film High Fidelity , which had impressed Jackson . For inspiration , Black studied P. T. Barnum and Orson Welles . " I didn 't study [ Welles ] move for move . It was just to capture the spirit . Very reckless guy . I had tapes of him drunk off his ass . " The native extras on Skull Island were portrayed by a mix of Asian , African , Maori and Polynesian actors sprayed with dark makeup to achieve a consistent pigmentation . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Peter Jackson was nine years old when he first saw the 1933 film , and was in tears in front of the TV when Kong slipped off the Empire State Building . At age 12 , he attempted to recreate the film using his parents ' Super 8 mm film camera and a model of Kong made of wire and rubber with his mother 's fur coat for the hair , but eventually gave up on the project . King Kong eventually became his favorite film and was the primary inspiration for his decision to become a filmmaker as a teenager . He read books about the making of King Kong and collected memorabilia , as well as articles from Famous Monsters of Filmland . Jackson paid tribute to the 1933 film by including Skull Island as the origin of the zombie plague in his 1992 film Braindead . 
 During the filming of Jackson 's 1996 film The Frighteners , Universal Pictures was impressed with Jackson 's dailies and early visual effects footage . The studio was adamant to work with Jackson on his next project and , in late 1995 , offered him the chance to direct a remake of the 1954 film Creature from the Black Lagoon . He turned down the offer , but Universal became aware of Jackson 's obsession with King Kong and subsequently offered him the opportunity to direct that remake . The studio did not have to worry of lawsuits concerning the film rights from RKO Pictures ( the studio behind the 1933 film ) because the King Kong character is held in the public domain . Jackson initially turned down the King Kong offer , but he " quickly became disturbed by the fact that someone else would take it over , " Jackson continued , " and make it into a terrible film ; that haunted me and I eventually said yes to Universal . " 
 At the same time , Jackson was working with Harvey Weinstein and Miramax Films to purchase the film rights of the The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings , while 20th Century Fox was trying to hire him for the 2001 remake of Planet of the Apes . Jackson turned down Planet of the Apes and because Weinstein was taking longer than expected to buy The Lord of the Rings rights , Jackson decided to move forward on King Kong . Weinstein was furious , and , as a result , Jackson proposed a deal between Universal and Miramax that the two studios would equally finance King Kong with Jackson 's production company Wingnut Films . Universal would receive distribution rights in the United States , while Miramax would cover foreign territories . Jackson was also warranted the right of final cut privilege , a percentage of the gross profits , as well as artistic control ; Universal allowed all filming and visual effects to be handled entirely in New Zealand . The deal was settled in April 1996 , and Jackson , along with wife Fran Walsh , began working on the King Kong script . In the original draft , Ann was the daughter of famed English archaeologist Lord Linwood Darrow exploring ancient ruins in Sumatra . They would come into conflict with Denham during his filming , and they would uncover a hidden Kong statue and the map of Skull Island . This would indicate that the island natives were the last remnants of a cult religion that had once thrived on Asia 's mainland . Instead of a playwright , Jack was the first mate and an ex @-@ World War I fighter pilot still struggling with the loss of his best friend , who had been killed in battle during a World War I prologue . The camera @-@ man Herb is the only supporting character in the original draft who made it to the final version . The fight between Kong and the three T. rex also changed from the original draft . In the draft , Ann is actually caught in the T. rex 's jaws , where she becomes wedged , and slashed by the teeth ; after the fight , Kong gets her out but she is suffering from a fever , from which she then recovers . 
 Universal approved of the script with Robert Zemeckis as executive producer , and pre @-@ production for King Kong started . The plan was to begin filming sometime in 1997 for a summer 1998 release date . Weta Digital and Weta Workshop , under the supervision of Richard Taylor and Christian Rivers , began work on early visual effects tests , specifically the complex task of building a CGI version of New York City circa 1933 . Jackson and Walsh progressed with a second draft script , sets were being designed and location scouting commenced in Sumatra and New Zealand . In late 1996 , Jackson flew to production of the 1997 film Titanic in Mexico to discuss the part of Ann Darrow with Kate Winslet , with whom he previously worked with on his 1994 film Heavenly Creatures . Minnie Driver was also being reportedly considered . Jackson 's choices for Jack Driscoll and Carl Denham included George Clooney and Robert De Niro . However , development for King Kong was stalled in January 1997 when Universal became concerned over the upcoming release of the 1998 film Godzilla , as well as other ape @-@ related remakes with the 1998 film Mighty Joe Young and the 2001 film Planet of the Apes . Universal abandoned King Kong in February 1997 after Weta Workshop and Weta Digital had already designed six months worth pre @-@ production . Jackson then decided to start work on The Lord of the Rings film series . 
 With the financial and critical success of the 2001 film The Fellowship of the Ring and the 2002 film The Two Towers , Universal approached Jackson in early 2003 , during the post @-@ production of The Return of the King , concerning his interest in restarting development on King Kong . In March 2003 , Universal set a target December 2005 release date and Jackson and Walsh brought The Lord of the Rings co @-@ writer Philippa Boyens on to help rewrite their 1996 script . Jackson offered New Line Cinema the opportunity to co @-@ finance with Universal , but they declined . Universal and Jackson originally projected a $ 150 million budget , which eventually rose to $ 175 million . Jackson made a deal with Universal whereby he would be paid a $ 20 million salary against 20 % of the box office gross for directing , producing and co @-@ writing . He shared that fee with co @-@ writers Walsh ( which also covered her producing credit ) and Boyens . However , if King Kong were to go over its $ 175 million budget , the penalties would be covered by Jackson . 
 Immediately after the completion of The Return of the King , Weta Workshop and Weta Digital , supervised by Richard Taylor , Christian Rivers and Joe <unk> , started pre @-@ production on King Kong . Jackson brought back most of the crew he had on The Lord of the Rings series , including cinematographer Andrew <unk> , production designer Grant Major , art directors Simon Bright and Dan <unk> , conceptual designer Alan Lee , and editor Jamie Selkirk . Jackson , Walsh and Boyens began to write a new script in late October 2003 . Jackson acknowledged that he was highly unsatisfied with the original 1996 script . " That was actually just Fran and Peter very hurriedly getting something down on paper " , Boyens explained . " It was more one of many possible ways the story could go . " The writers were adamant to base the new script on the 1933 film , rather than the 1996 script . They also included scenes that were either uncompleted or entirely omitted from James Ashmore <unk> 's original script in the cutting room floor . In the scene where Kong shakes the surviving sailors pursuing Ann and himself from a log into the ravine , it was originally the intention of directors Merian Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack to feature giant spiders emerging from the rock to devour their bodies . This was cut from the original release print , and remains known to Kong fans only via a rare still that appeared in Famous Monsters of Filmland . Jackson included this scene and elaborated upon it . Jackson , Walsh and Boyens also cited Delos W. Lovelace 's 1932 novelization of King Kong as inspiration , which included the character Lumpy ( Andy Serkis ) . To make the relationship between Ann Darrow and Kong plausible , the writers studied hours of gorilla footage . Jackson also optioned Early Havoc , a memoir written by vaudeville performer June Havoc to help Walsh and Boyens flesh out Ann Darrow 's characterization . Carl Denham was intentionally modeled after and inspired by Orson Welles . Their new draft was finished in February 2004 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography started on September 6 , 2004 at Camperdown Studios in Miramar , New Zealand . Camperdown housed the native village , and the Great Wall , while the streets of New York City were constructed on its backlot . The majority of the SS Venture scenes were shot aboard a full @-@ scale deck constructed in the parking lot at Camperdown Studio and then were backed with a green screen , with the ocean digitally added in post . Scenes set in the Broadway theater from which King Kong makes his escape were filmed in Wellington 's Opera House and at the Auckland Civic Theatre . Filming also took place at Stone Street Studios , where a new sound stage was constructed to accommodate one of the sets . Over the course of filming the budget went from $ 175 million to $ 207 million over additional visual effects work needed , and Jackson extending the film 's running time by thirty minutes . Jackson covered the $ 32 million surplus himself and finished filming in March 2005 . 
 The film 's budget climbed from an initial US $ 150 million to a then @-@ record @-@ breaking $ 207 million , making it at one point the most expensive film yet made . Universal only agreed to such an outlay after seeing a screening of the unfinished film , to which executives responded enthusiastically . Marketing and promotion costs were an estimated $ 60 million . The film 's length also grew ; originally set to be 135 minutes , it soon grew to 200 , prompting Universal executives to fly to New Zealand to view a rough cut , but they liked it so their concerns were addressed . 
 Other difficulties included Peter Jackson 's decision to change composers from Howard Shore to James Newton Howard seven weeks before the film opened . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Jackson saw King Kong as opportunity for technical innovations in motion capture , commissioning Christian Rivers of Weta Digital to supervise all aspects of Kong 's performance . Jackson decided early on that he did not want Kong to behave like a human , and so he and his team studied hours of gorilla footage . Serkis was cast in the title role in April 2003 and prepared himself by working with gorillas at the London Zoo . He then traveled to Rwanda , observing the actions and behaviors of gorillas in the wild . Rivers explained that the detailed facial performance capture with Serkis was accomplished because of the similarities between human and gorilla faces . " Gorillas have such a similar looking set of eyes and brows , you can look at those expressions and transpose your own interpretation onto them . " Photos of silverback gorillas were also superimposed on Kong 's image in the early stages of animation . Serkis had to go through two hours of motion capture makeup every day , having 135 small markers attached to different spots on his face . Following principal photography , Serkis had to spend an additional two months on a motion capture stage , miming Kong 's movements for the film 's digital animators . 
 Apart from Kong , Skull Island is inhabited by dinosaurs and other large fauna . Inspired by Dougal Dixon 's works , the designers imagined what 65 million years or more of isolated evolution might have done to dinosaurs . 
 = = Release = = 
 The marketing campaign started in full swing on June 27 , 2005 , when the teaser trailer made its debut , first online at the official Volkswagen website at 8 : 45 p.m. EDT , then 8 : 55 p.m. EDT across media outlets owned by NBC Universal ( the parent of Universal Studios ) , including NBC , Bravo ! , CNBC , and MSNBC . That trailer appeared in theatres attached to War of the Worlds , which opened on June 29 . 
 Jackson also regularly published a series of ' Production Diaries ' , which chronicled the film 's production . The diaries started shortly after the DVD release of The Return of the King as a way to give Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings fans a glimpse of his next project . These diaries are edited into broadband @-@ friendly installments of three or four minutes each . They consist of features that would normally be seen in a making @-@ of documentary : a tour of the set , a roving camera introducing key players behind the scene , a peek inside the sound booth during last @-@ minute dubbing , or Andy Serkis doing his ape movements in a motion capture studio . 
 A novelization of the film and a prequel entitled The Island of the Skull was also written . A multi @-@ platform video game , entitled Peter Jackson 's King Kong , was released , which featured an alternate ending . There was a hardback book entitled The World of Kong , featuring artwork from Weta Workshop to describe the film 's fictional bestiary . 
 Jackson has expressed his desire to remaster the film in 3 @-@ D at some point in the future . Jackson was also seen shooting with a 3 @-@ D camera at times during the shoot of King Kong . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In North America , King Kong grossed $ 9 @,@ 755 @,@ 745 during its Wednesday opening and $ 50 @,@ 130 @,@ 145 over its first weekend for a five @-@ day total of $ 66 @.@ 1 million . Some analysts considered these initial numbers disappointing , saying that studio executives had been expecting more . The film went on to gross $ 218 @,@ 080 @,@ 025 in the domestic market and ended up in the top five highest @-@ grossing films of the year there . The film grossed an additional $ 332 @,@ 437 @,@ 332 in the international box office for a worldwide total of $ 550 @,@ 517 @,@ 357 , which not only ranked it in the top five highest @-@ grossing films of 2005 worldwide , but also helped the film bring back more than two and a half times its production budget . 
 During its home video release , King Kong sold over $ 100 million worth of DVDs in the largest six @-@ day performance in Universal Studios history . King Kong sold more than 7 @.@ 6 million DVDs , accumulating nearly $ 194 million worth of sales numbers in the domestic market alone . As of June 25 , 2006 , King Kong has generated almost $ 38 million from DVD rental gross . In February 2006 , TNT / TBS and ABC paid Universal Studios $ 26 @.@ 5 million for the television rights to the film . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . The films holds an 84 % " Certified Fresh " rating on aggregate review site Rotten Tomatoes , with an average score of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 258 reviews . The site 's consensus from the collected reviews was " Featuring state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art special effects , terrific performances , and a majestic sense of spectacle , Peter Jackson 's remake of King Kong is a potent epic that 's faithful to the spirit of the 1933 original . " The film 's most common criticism was its excessive length and lack of pace but was regarded as one of " a few good epics " and was placed on several ' top ten ' critics lists . Roger Ebert gave the film four stars , and listed it as 2005 's eighth best film . 
 The film received four Academy Award nominations for Visual Effects , Sound Mixing ( Christopher Boyes , Michael <unk> , Michael Hedges , Hammond Peek ) , Sound Editing , and Production Design , winning all but the last . Entertainment Weekly called the depiction of Kong the most convincing computer @-@ generated character in film in 2005 . Some criticized the film for retaining racist stereotypes present in the 1933 film , though it was not suggested that Jackson had done this intentionally . King Kong ranks 450th on Empire magazine 's 2008 list of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . The Guardian reviewer Peter Bradshaw said that it " certainly equals , and even exceeds , anything Jackson did in Lord of the Rings " . 
 = = Cinematic and literary allusions = = 
 Jack Black and critics have noted Carl Denham 's similarity to Orson Welles . 
 When Driscoll is searching for a place to sleep in the animal storage hold , a box behind him reads Sumatran Rat Monkey — Beware the bite ! – a reference to the creature that causes mayhem in Jackson 's 1992 film Braindead ( in that film , the rat monkey is described as being found only on Skull Island ) . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 King Kong : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was composed by James Newton Howard . Originally , Howard Shore , who worked with Peter Jackson on The Lord of the Rings , was to compose the film 's score . Shore completed and recorded several cues before he and Jackson parted ways . Shore 's appearance as the conductor in the New York theatre from which Kong escapes remained in the film . 
 Howard 's score was later nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score . 
 = = Home media = = 
 King Kong was released on DVD on March 28 , 2006 in the United States and Canada . The three versions that came out were a single disc fullscreen , a single disc widescreen , and a two @-@ disc Widescreen Special Edition . 
 A three @-@ disc Deluxe Extended Edition was released on November 14 , 2006 in the U.S. , and on November 3 in Australia . Twelve minutes were reinserted into the film , and a further forty minutes presented alongside the rest of the special features . The film was spread onto the first two discs with commentary by Peter Jackson and Philippa Boyens , and some featurettes on discs one and two , whilst the main Special Features are on disc three . Another set was released , including a WETA figurine of a bullet @-@ ridden Kong scaling the Empire State Building , roaring at the army with Ann in hand . The extended film amounts to 200 total minutes . 
 A special HD DVD version of King Kong was part of a promotional pack for the release of the external HD DVD Drive for the Xbox 360 . The pack contained the HD DVD drive , the Universal Media Remote and King Kong on HD DVD . It was also available separately as a standard HD DVD . The film 's theatrical and extended cuts were released together on Blu @-@ ray Disc on January 20 , 2009 . 
 = Matt Bevin = 
 Matthew Griswold " Matt " Bevin ( born January 9 , 1967 ) is an American businessman and the 62nd and current Governor of Kentucky . He is the third Republican elected Governor of Kentucky since World War II , after Ernie Fletcher ( 2003 – 2007 ) and Louie B. Nunn ( 1967 – 1971 ) . 
 Born in Denver , Colorado , and raised in Shelburne , New Hampshire , Bevin earned a bachelor 's degree at Washington and Lee University in 1989 , then served four years of active duty in the U.S. Army , attaining the rank of captain . He became wealthy in the investment business and moved to Louisville , Kentucky , in 1999 . In 2011 , he assumed the presidency of Bevin Brothers Manufacturing Company , the last remaining American manufacturer of bells . When Bevin took over , the business , which had been in his family since its founding in 1832 , was struggling and on the verge of closure . Bevin revived the company and restored its profitability . 
 In 2013 , Bevin announced he would challenge Kentucky 's senior U.S. Senator , Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , in the 2014 Republican primary . Although he gained the support of various groups aligned with the Tea Party Movement , McConnell attacked him repeatedly for inconsistencies in his public statements and policy positions and defeated him by almost 25 percentage points . After announcing he would seek the governorship in 2015 , Bevin emerged from a four @-@ way Republican primary , besting his nearest competitor , Agriculture Commissioner James Comer by 83 votes . On November 3 , 2015 , he defeated the state 's attorney general , Democrat Jack Conway , in the general election . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born January 9 , 1967 , in Denver , Colorado , Matt Bevin was the second of six children born to Avery and Louise Bevin . He grew up in the rural town of Shelburne , New Hampshire , in a small farmhouse heated by wood @-@ fired stoves . His father worked at a wood mill , and his mother worked part @-@ time in a hospital admissions department . The family raised livestock and grew much of their own food . At age 6 , Bevin made money by packaging and selling seeds to his neighbors . He credits his involvement in 4 @-@ H , where he served as president of the local and county chapters and as a member of the state teen council , with developing his public speaking and leadership skills . He was also involved with the county 's Dairy Club . 
 Initially attending a small Christian school , in tenth grade Bevin enrolled as a student at Gould Academy , a private high school across the state line in Bethel , Maine . He paid his tuition through a combination of financial aid and wages from an on @-@ campus dishwashing job and various summer jobs . After graduation , he attended Washington and Lee University in Lexington , Virginia , on a partial ROTC scholarship . During his matriculation , he studied abroad in Japan and became fluent in Japanese . He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in East Asian Studies in 1989 . 
 After taking eight weeks off to complete a 3 @,@ 800 @-@ mile ( 6 @,@ 100 km ) bicycle ride from Oregon to Florida , Bevin enlisted in the United States Army and was commissioned as a second lieutenant . In 1990 , he completed a six @-@ week Junior Officer Maintenance Course at Fort Knox in Kentucky . He later commented that the area reminded him of where he grew up , and that if he had a chance to raise a family there , he would like to do so . He was assigned to the 25th Field Artillery Regiment of the Army 's 5th Mechanized Infantry Division at Fort Polk in Louisiana . During his assignment , he also trained at Fort Sill in Oklahoma , completing 40 credit hours of Central Michigan University coursework offered on base . He rose to the rank of captain – earning the Army Achievement Medal , National Defense Service Medal , Army Service Ribbon , Parachutist Badge , and Army Commendation Medal with one Oak Leaf Cluster – before joining the Army Reserve in 1993 . He left the Individual Ready Reserve in 2003 . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 While stationed at Fort Polk , Bevin went on a blind date with his future wife , Glenna . The two married in 1996 and had six children . In 2003 , their oldest child , 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter <unk> , was killed in a car accident near the family 's home . In memory of their daughter , the Bevins created <unk> 's Wish , a non @-@ profit organization that funds domestic and international mission trips for high school students , and started an endowment that allowed Louisville 's Southern Baptist Theological Seminary to open its Bevin Center for Missions Mobilization in 2012 . 
 In 2011 , Bevin took all of his children out of school for a year for a 26 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 42 @,@ 000 km ) tour of the United States , visiting sites of educational or historical interest , including the Lorraine Motel in Memphis , Tennessee , where Martin Luther King , Jr. was assassinated and the Topeka , Kansas , schoolhouse at the center of the landmark Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision . After their application to adopt a daughter from Kentucky 's foster care system was denied because they already had five children , the Bevins adopted four children – between the ages of 2 and 10 – from Ethiopia in June 2012 . By 2015 , Bevin said all of his children were homeschooled . 
 The Bevins attend Southeast Christian Church in Louisville . After his election as governor , he announced he would hold an invitation @-@ only inaugural worship service at Frankfort 's Buck Run Baptist Church , but the service was moved to the Frankfort Convention Center and the invitation requirement was dropped following an " overwhelming response from the public " . 
 = = Business career = = 
 After leaving active duty in 1993 , Bevin worked as a financial consultant for SEI Investments Company in Pennsylvania and Boston , then served as a vice president with Putnam Investments . In 1999 , he was offered a stake in National Asset Management and moved to Kentucky to take the job . After the firm was sold in 2003 , Bevin recruited a group of managers from National City Corp. to found Integrity Asset Management . The company was handling more than $ 1 billion in investments when Bevin sold it to <unk> Capital Management in 2011 . 
 In 2008 , Bevin took over management of the struggling Bevin Brothers Manufacturing Company of East Hampton , Connecticut . Founded in 1832 by Bevin 's great @-@ great @-@ great grandfather and remaining in the family continuously since , Bevin Bros. is the last American company that exclusively manufactures bells . By 2011 , the company owed $ 116 @,@ 000 in delinquent taxes and was named the number one delinquent tax firm in East Hampton . Collectively , the Bevins decided that Matt was the only family member with the business acumen and financial wherewithal to keep the company solvent . In 2011 , Bevin became the company 's president . Within a year , he paid the company 's delinquent taxes ; he subsequently made the company profitable and raised his employees ' pay . 
 A lightning strike sparked a fire that destroyed the factory on May 27 , 2012 . Although he carried little more than liability insurance on the business and his losses were compounded by looters who stole 4 @,@ 500 bells , Bevin vowed to rebuild , telling the Hartford Courant , " I 'm a Bevin , and Bevins make bells . " In late June 2012 , Connecticut Governor <unk> Malloy announced that Bevin Brothers would receive $ 100 @,@ 000 in grants from the state 's Small Business Express program to assist in the rebuilding effort . Flanked by Senator Richard Blumenthal , Bevin announced in July 2012 that he would sell souvenirs including T @-@ shirts , and bells and bricks salvaged from the gutted factory , to raise additional funds for rebuilding . Working from a temporary location , the company resumed limited production in September 2012 . 
 Bevin is also a partner at Waycross Partners , an investment management firm in Louisville , Kentucky . 
 = = Political campaigns = = 
 Bevin said that in 2011 , Mitch McConnell recruited him to challenge incumbent Democrat John <unk> to represent Kentucky 's 3rd congressional district in 2012 . McConnell 's chief of staff said Bevin requested the meeting and McConnell never asked Bevin to enter the race . Ultimately , Bevin and his advisors decided that legislative redistricting had made <unk> 's district unwinnable for a Republican , and Bevin chose not to run . 
 = = = 2014 U.S. Senate campaign = = = 
 On July 24 , 2013 , Bevin announced that he would challenge McConnell , the Senate Minority Leader and a five @-@ term incumbent , in the 2014 Republican primary because he did not believe that McConnell was conservative enough . Despite a Wenzel Strategies poll immediately following Bevin 's announcement that showed him polling only 19 @.@ 9 % to McConnell 's 58 @.@ 9 % , the National Journal listed McConnell number nine on its list of ten lawmakers who could lose a primary election in 2014 . 
 = = = = McConnell 's early attacks = = = = 
 McConnell immediately launched ads accusing Bevin of taking taxpayer bailouts , citing his acceptance of state grants to rebuild Bevin Brothers . Bevin responded with ads accusing McConnell of voting for higher taxes , government bailouts , increases in the debt ceiling , and confirmation of liberal judicial nominees . McConnell 's next ad featured Bevin telling an audience " I have no tax delinquency problem , nor have I ever , " then claimed his businesses had failed to pay taxes eight times and Bevin was late on a tax payment on his $ 1 @.@ 2 million vacation home in Greenwood , Maine , in 2007 . <unk> rated the ad " Mostly False " , saying that Bevin Brothers incurred the delinquent taxes in 2008 and the second quarter of 2009 , when the extent of Bevin 's involvement with the company was " unclear " . Regarding the vacation home , PolitiFact noted that Bevin 's escrow company changed in 2007 , and the new company failed to pay the property taxes on the home from escrow on time . Town records show that the taxes were paid by February 2009 , and Bevin had paid them on @-@ time every year before and after 2007 . McConnell 's third ad in as many weeks targeted Bevin for falsely claiming on his LinkedIn page that he attended a seminar affiliated with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . The three @-@ year program , which Bevin attended from 2006 to 2008 , was actually sponsored by the MIT Enterprise Forum , which is technically unaffiliated with MIT . The discrepancy was first reported by The Hill in March 2013 , and was clarified on his LinkedIn page at that time . 
 By mid @-@ October 2013 , McConnell 's campaign indicated it would look beyond Bevin and focus its advertising against Allison <unk> Grimes , the frontrunner in the race for the Democratic senatorial nomination , calling her " my real opponent " . In the aftermath of McConnell negotiating a deal to end the 16 @-@ day government shutdown in 2013 , the Senate Conservatives Fund endorsed Bevin . McConnell 's campaign then launched another ad , based on a story published by BuzzFeed , claiming Bevin had failed to disclose a federal tax lien when applying for the state grant to rebuild his family business , which could be a Class A misdemeanor , punishable by up to a year in jail and a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine under Connecticut law . Bevin said that he had been paying the lien in $ 5 @,@ 000 installments prior to the fire that destroyed the business , a condition he said was allowed by the grant application , but after the fire , the Internal Revenue Service suspended the payments . Bevin was never charged . Lexington Herald @-@ Leader columnist Sam Youngman speculated that McConnell 's pivot back to Bevin was a proxy war against Tea Party fundraising groups , hoping that a decisive win over their chosen candidate in the primary would hamper the groups ' fundraising in future elections . 
 = = = = Bevin 's Tea Party support = = = = 
 During the campaign , Bevin criticized the Affordable Care Act and called for repealing it in its entirety . His proposed alternatives included allowing insurance providers to compete across state lines , capping damages awarded for pain and suffering , allowing individuals to purchase health insurance with pre @-@ tax earnings , and providing federal block grants to states to allow them to cover individuals with pre @-@ existing conditions . He opposed tax increases and the allocation of federal earmarks . He called for massive spending cuts in the federal bureaucracy , specifically the Department of Education and the Veterans Administration , and for reforming eligibility requirements for entitlement programs , including raising age requirements , imposing means tests , and ending federal benefits to illegal immigrants . He opposed U.S. intervention in the Syrian Civil War and the disbursement of foreign aid to countries that deny basic freedoms to their citizens or are guilty of human rights violations . He opposed federal agribusiness subsidies and <unk> federal surveillance and called for simplifying the child adoption process . Endorsed by Gun Owners of America , he pledged to resist any restrictions on the types of guns or ammunition that citizens could purchase . A supporter of congressional term limits , Bevin signed a pledge authored by the non @-@ profit U.S. Term Limits stating that , if elected , he would co @-@ sponsor and vote for a bill restricting individuals to three terms in the U.S. House of Representatives and two terms in the U.S. Senate . 
 Bevin complained that McConnell refused to speak at any Lincoln Day events around the state if Bevin was also invited to speak at the event . McConnell also steadfastly refused to participate in any formal debates with Bevin , although his campaign manager , Jesse Benton , debated Bevin at a Constitution Day event at the University of Kentucky in September 2013 . 
 In January 2014 , the conservative Madison Project political action committee announced it would open field offices in Louisville , Florence , Owensboro , Glasgow and Bowling Green from which to launch get @-@ out @-@ the @-@ vote efforts on Bevin 's behalf . The group also sponsored billboard advertising criticizing McConnell in the heavily Republican counties of Clay , Laurel , Madison , Pulaski and Whitley . Bevin was endorsed by FreedomWorks and conservative talk radio hosts Mark Levin and Glenn Beck . 
 In February 2014 , Politico reported that in October 2008 , Bevin had signed a report for his investment fund that praised the federal Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) and the government takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . During the campaign , Bevin criticized McConnell for voting in favor of those actions as a senator . When Beck asked Bevin about the issue during an interview , Bevin said the content of the report had been written by the fund 's chief investment officer , and that he had only signed it because he was legally required to do so as president of the fund . Later , Bevin added that he had not physically signed the letter , but that his signature was added to the document digitally . Lawyers interviewed by the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader said it would have been legal for Bevin to change the content of the letter , but not the accompanying facts and financial data . The Herald @-@ Leader further noted that Bevin had not signed some previous investor letters . His campaign offered no explanation for the inconsistency . 
 Both Bevin and McConnell were critical of a February 2014 ruling by U.S. District Judge John G. Heyburn II that held that an amendment to the Kentucky Constitution banning same @-@ sex marriage violated the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . Bevin pointed out that Heyburn once worked for McConnell , who supported his nomination to the bench by President George H. W. Bush . Later in the month , Bevin told The Janet Mefford Show , " If it 's all right to have same @-@ sex marriages , why not define a marriage – because at the end of the day , a lot of this ends up being taxes and who can visit who in the hospital and there 's other repercussions and things that come with it – so a person may want to define themselves as being married to one of their children so that they can then in fact pass on certain things to that child financially and otherwise . " Critics charged that Bevin was suggesting that the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage could lead to the acceptance of incestuous relationships ; a Bevin spokesperson responded , " [ Bevin ] sees no comparison between gay marriage and incest . He was discussing the implications of the legal rights related to this issue such as hospital visitations and benefits . To imply otherwise is ridiculous . " 
 = = = = Cockfighting rally incident = = = = 
 On April 2 , 2014 , the News Journal reported that Bevin spoke at a pro @-@ cockfighting rally in Corbin , Kentucky . Asked about his attendance , Bevin said he understood that the rally was a states ' rights event : " I was the first person to speak and then I left . " Organizers of the event , which was closed to the media , said there was " never any ambiguity " regarding its purpose , and WAVE in Louisville published an undercover video from the event showing that Bevin was the third speaker ; the speaker who immediately preceded Bevin said the rally was held " for the sole purpose of legalizing <unk> fighting at the state level . " Bevin told a WAVE reporter , " I honestly wasn 't even paying attention . I was thinking about what I was going to say . I don 't even remember him saying that . " The WAVE video also showed an attendee asking Bevin if he would support the legalization of cockfighting in Kentucky , to which he replied , " I support the people of Kentucky exercising their right , because it is our right to decide what it is that we want to do , and not the federal government 's . <unk> behavior , if it 's part of the heritage of this state , is in my opinion a bad idea . A bad idea . I will not support it . " Bevin was referencing the Agricultural Act of 2014 , commonly called the " farm bill " , which contained a provision that criminalized spectators at cockfighting events . 
 Scott Lasley , a political science professor at Western Kentucky University and chairman of the Warren County Republican Party , criticized Bevin 's appearance at the rally , saying , " Either they were totally <unk> and unprepared for it , which says a lot about the campaign and its ability to compete at this level , or ... they think that message is going to be receptive . Otherwise you don 't go there . " On April 25 , 2014 , Bevin apologized for attending the event , saying " I am genuinely sorry that my attendance at an event which , other than my comments , appears to have primarily involved a discussion of cockfighting , has created concern on the part of many Kentucky voters . I understand that concern . I am not and have never been a supporter of cockfighting or any other forms of animal cruelty . " The Daily Beast said the issue could be the " nail in the coffin " for Bevin 's campaign , while The Washington Post wrote , " On its own , the cockfighting story isn 't enough to sink Bevin 's campaign . But viewed in the context of the string of other distractions he 's had to deal with , it reinforces the reality that his campaign is in serious need of repairs down the stretch . " 
 = = = = Result and aftermath = = = = 
 When Bevin told the media he would have an announcement at his campaign headquarters on April 28 , speculation raged that he would drop out of the race . Instead , Bevin announced that he would release his jobs plan later in the week and chided the local media for focusing on issues other than the economy . On May 1 , Bevin released the promised jobs plan , which called for a gradual reduction of the federal corporate tax rate to 10 % over five years , allowing companies to return overseas profits to the United States with a 10 % tax assessment , and passage of a federal right @-@ to @-@ work law . Saying that burdensome regulations from agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency were harmful to business ' ability to create jobs , he endorsed the <unk> Act , which would require congressional approval of any executive regulation with an economic impact of more than $ 100 million . He also proposed a flat income tax and opposed an increase in the federal minimum wage . 
 Concerned about a divide in the party costing the party McConnell 's seat in the general election , the Republican Party of Kentucky asked both candidates to sign a pledge to support the party 's eventual nominee in the general election . McConnell signed the pledge , but Bevin did not . All Republican members of Kentucky 's congressional caucus joined McConnell in signing the pledge except 4th District congressman Thomas Massie , a legislator aligned with the Tea Party . 
 On election day , Bevin garnered 125 @,@ 759 votes – 35 @.@ 4 % of the vote – to McConnell 's 213 @,@ 666 votes ( 60 @.@ 2 % ) ; the remaining votes were scattered among three lower @-@ profile candidates . In his concession speech , Bevin opined " there is zero chance that the solutions for what ails us is going to come from the Democratic Party " , but did not endorse McConnell . He appeared onstage with McConnell on a few occasions during the general election campaign but steadfastly refused to explicitly endorse him . During his remarks at an October 29 Restore America rally , Bevin said " I say with all due respect to a lot of folks who might say otherwise , sometimes we might need to get over it and move on . We have new races to run and new decisions to make . There is too much at stake . " Asked if the comment amounted to an endorsement of McConnell , Bevin told reporters , " You 've got ears . " McConnell defeated Grimes in the general election , and Bevin eventually told reporters that he voted for McConnell . 
 = = = 2015 gubernatorial primary = = = 
 In June 2014 , <unk> reported that Bevin had remained politically active in the aftermath of his defeat by McConnell , and an email to his followers calling on Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear , a Democrat , to denounce new carbon regulations issued by the EPA fueled speculation that Bevin would seek the Republican gubernatorial nomination in 2015 . The station also cited an anonymous source that said Bevin would campaign for Rand Paul 's Senate seat in 2016 if Paul 's expected presidential bid kept him from running for re @-@ election . An August 2014 survey by Public Policy Polling showed that 25 % of Republicans wanted Bevin to be the party 's gubernatorial nominee , ahead of declared candidates James Comer ( 20 % ) and Hal Heiner ( 18 % ) . 
 On January 27 , 2015 , the last day for candidates to file , Bevin announced he would seek the Republican nomination for governor . During his announcement , he introduced his running mate , <unk> Hampton , a Tea Party activist who lost her bid to unseat State Representative Jody Richards the previous year . Bevin joined a field that included Commissioner of Agriculture James Comer , former Louisville Councilman Hal Heiner , and former Kentucky Supreme Court Justice Will T. Scott . The National Journal predicted that Bevin would draw support away from Comer , the early front @-@ runner , who had been appealing to Tea Party groups and already secured Congressman Massie 's endorsement . The crowded primary was also projected to damage the Republican nominee 's chances in the general election , since Attorney General Jack Conway was the only major Democratic candidate , allowing him to conserve resources for the general election . McConnell allies also predicted that Bevin 's refusal to endorse McConnell would hurt him with primary voters . 
 = = = = Platform = = = = 
 Harper Polling conducted the first voter survey after Bevin 's announcement ; it showed Comer leading the field with 25 % support compared to Heiner 's 19 % , Bevin 's 18 % , and Scott 's 9 % . Thirty percent of those surveyed were undecided . Bevin 's platform , " Blueprint for a Better Kentucky " , centered around economic rather than social issues . The seven major themes of the platform included : 
 passage of right @-@ to @-@ work legislation ; 
 reforming the state tax code by eliminating the inheritance tax and reducing personal and corporate tax rates ; 
 ensuring the solvency of the state pension system , including transitioning new and existing employees to 401 ( k ) plans ; 
 reforming state government , including reducing the number of state employees by 20 percent and expanding competitive bidding ; 
 reforming the state 's education system by repealing the Common Core State Standards Initiative and allowing charter schools and school vouchers ; 
 reforming the state healthcare system by ending kynect , the state 's health insurance exchange , transitioning enrollees to the federal health insurance exchange , and reversing the state 's expansion of Medicaid effected by Governor Beshear under the Affordable Care Act ; and 
 combating expanding federal influence . 
 Scott also advocated ending kynect , but Comer advocated maintaining and reforming it and Heiner said he opposed the Affordable Care Act , but remained non @-@ committal on his plans for kynect . Bevin was the first of the four to advocate reversing the Medicaid expansion , telling reporters " No question about it . I would reverse that immediately . The fact that we have one out of four people in this state on Medicaid is unsustainable , it 's unaffordable and we need to create jobs in this state , not more government programs to cover people . " 
 = = = = Campaign advertising = = = = 
 By early April , pro @-@ Heiner ads from Citizens for a Sound Government revived charges of taking bailouts and tax delinquency against Bevin and attacked Comer for accepting thousands of dollars in farm subsidies . Within days , the candidates appeared at a debate where Bevin challenged Heiner to publicly denounce the ads ; Heiner responded with a silent smile . Bevin 's public challenge to the ad prompted a Lexington television station to pull it after two weeks on the air . Bevin made a $ 200 @,@ 000 combined television and radio ad buy to defend himself against the ads and began a telephone survey that touted his conservative credentials while highlighting Heiner 's past positions on issues such as gun control before asking how these statements affect the person 's view of each candidate . Heiner said the survey was a negative push poll , but Bevin insisted it was a legitimate poll . By the end of April , polls showed that Heiner 's lead had evaporated and that the race was essentially a three @-@ way dead heat between him , Bevin , and Comer . 
 = = = = Accusations against Comer = = = = 
 Less than three weeks before the primary , the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader reported allegations by Comer 's former girlfriend that he mentally and physically abused her in 1991 , and that he accompanied her to an abortion clinic . The paper reported that the Lexington @-@ area blogger who had been publishing stories about the woman 's claims for months had been in contact with the husband of Heiner 's running mate , K. C. Crosbie . Heiner apologized for any role members of his campaign may have had in perpetuating the accusations against Comer , but the story touched off a feud between Heiner and Comer that some analysts predicted would benefit Bevin . Bevin declared that Heiner 's alleged connection to the Comer accusations had " disqualified [ Heiner ] from being the GOP nominee for governor " . During a candidate call @-@ in segment on Kentucky Sports Radio , Bevin said , " I don 't know if [ Heiner 's ] behind the Comer story , but I 'm telling you his people have been pushing this for a long time . And Hal himself has personally told me months and months ago before I even got in this race , that he knew things , not had heard things , that he knew things based on conversations that his people had had about Jamie Comer . " Bevin also released an ad depicting Comer and Heiner as children in a food fight , with the narrator promising that Bevin would bring " grown up leadership " to the governor 's race . The first opinion poll conducted after the allegations against Comer showed Bevin leading the race with 27 % support to Heiner 's 26 % , Comer 's 25 % , and Scott 's 8 % , with 14 % still undecided . 
 = = = = Result and aftermath = = = = 
 On election night , May 19 , the Associated Press reported that Bevin received 70 @,@ 479 votes , just 83 more than Comer ; Heiner garnered 57 @,@ 948 and Scott received 15 @,@ 364 . At approximately 10 : 00 pm ( EDT ) that night , Comer told his supporters , " I owe it to our supporters to ask for a canvass to this election . " The <unk> showed that Bevin remained 83 votes ahead , and Comer conceded the nomination to Bevin , foregoing a full recount . 
 Bevin financed his primary campaign with over $ 2 @.@ 5 million of his own money , representing 95 % of the money he spent , and the National Journal opined that attracting donors from supporters of Comer , Heiner , Scott , and McConnell would be critical to his success in the general election . Almost immediately after his primary win , Bevin was asked about his support for McConnell , telling reporters , " I literally know of no other elected official in this state who went to more events between May and November in support of candidates and support of Mitch McConnell and other down ticket races than I did . I knocked on doors , I made phone calls , I wrote checks myself , and I physically attended fundraiser after fundraiser . " Federal Election Commission records showed no evidence of contributions by Bevin to McConnell 's campaign , and a McConnell advisor cited by Bevin to corroborate his support refused to do so when contacted by Insider Louisville . 
 In the election 's aftermath , McConnell issued a one @-@ sentence endorsement of Bevin . Bevin deleted all posts from his Twitter feed prior to February 2015 , including several critical of McConnell . At a statewide Lincoln Day dinner , Bevin showed a humorous montage of him supporting McConnell , including staged scenes of him waking up in a McConnell T @-@ shirt , applying <unk> bumper stickers to his vehicle , and getting a " Team Mitch " tattoo . McConnell was not in attendance , but a spokesperson read a letter again endorsing Bevin . Paul was in attendance and pledged to do " anything humanly possible " to elect Bevin ; State Senate President Robert Stivers and State House Minority Leader Jeff Hoover , a Comer ally , both endorsed Bevin as well . Comer , Heiner , nor Scott attended the dinner . 
 = = = 2015 gubernatorial general election = = = 
 In the general election , Bevin faced state Attorney General Jack Conway , marking the first gubernatorial race in state history featuring two candidates from Louisville , the state 's largest city . The Kentucky Democratic Party attempted to play up the fractures in the Republican Party over Bevin 's candidacy , launching a web site featuring fellow Republicans ' criticisms of Bevin , drawn mostly from his primary race against McConnell . Bevin responded with a web site tying Conway to President Barack Obama , who was very unpopular in Kentucky , saying that Conway would support environmental regulations that harm the coal industry and support the Affordable Care Act , which was also unpopular in the state , despite its nationally praised insurance exchange . 
 = = = = Fiscal issues = = = = 
 Bevin advocated shifting the state 's tax code away from " productivity " taxes , such as income taxes , to " consumption taxes " such as sales taxes , a move that Conway called " regressive " . He repeated his call to eliminate the inheritance tax and added that the state should " aim for " the elimination of corporate taxes . Bevin also called for the elimination of many of Kentucky 's $ 10 billion in " tax expenditures " , which he called " Frankfort @-@ speak for loopholes " . Asked to specify which expenditures he would eliminate , Bevin said , " I 'm not going to give you specifics at this point in time . There are many of these loopholes that frankly are not conducive to developing the economy . There are some that make sense , and those will continue . ... [ W ] e have already identified what many of them will be . But at this point , we 're going to have to look at them in totality . I 'm not gonna give you specifics at this time . I 'm just not . " 
 During the candidates first public appearance together on June 19 , 2015 , Conway promised to increase funding for early childhood education and expand its availability for those in poverty . He then referenced Bevin 's statements in a May Republican debate citing studies suggesting educational gains effected by the federal Head Start Program are lost by the third grade . Bevin said the state could not afford additional funding for early childhood education ; he advocated outcomes @-@ based education funding , but added , " The comment that I 'm not a proponent of early childhood education is absolutely bunk , it 's baloney . " 
 In a late July debate sponsored by the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce , Bevin continued to insist that the state could not afford the Medicaid expansion authorized by Governor Beshear . He then advocated modifying the state 's Medicaid system to require those insured by Medicaid to contribute small premiums or co @-@ payments , citing a system similar to Indiana 's . The Kentucky General Assembly would have to effect such changes through legislation , but the debate moderator told Bevin he could end the expansion entirely with an executive order . Bevin responded , " And create what degree of chaos ? " Alessi then cited Bevin 's February promise to end the Medicaid expansion " immediately " , to which Bevin replied , " I said I would address it . I didn 't say I would end it immediately . Go back and look at what I said . " In the post @-@ debate press conference , Lexington Herald @-@ Leader columnist Sam Youngman confirmed that Bevin had said he would " end " the Medicaid expansion . Bevin then said , " Yeah , well , here 's the bottom line : We need to address the situation . We need to effectively come up with a program that works for folks . " At a September campaign stop at a local Dairy Queen , Bevin promised only to " tweak " Beshear 's Medicaid expansion . Later in the month , he told a reporter " [ W ] e will not continue to enroll people at 138 percent of the federal poverty level [ as allowed under the Affordable Care Act ] , " adding " The bottom line is this : Even if we don 't continue to enroll people at 138 percent , there will be the 850 @-@ some odd thousand that were on it before the expansion and the other 400 @-@ and some odd thousand that are on it right now . They will continue to be on it until we come up with a solution . But we are not going to re @-@ enroll people at 138 percent . " In an email to reporters , Bevin 's communications director said , " Matt has been consistent on the issue of Medicaid expansion from day one . What he has called for is repeal of Obama 's Medicaid expansion by applying to [ the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ] for 1115 waivers ( as other states have successfully done ) in order to better customize a solution to address the healthcare needs of the commonwealth . " 
 = = = = Social issues = = = = 
 Bevin said he " strongly disagreed " with the Supreme Court 's decision in Obergefell v. Hodges legalizing same @-@ sex marriage , continuing " When the definition of marriage was put on the ballot 10 years ago , 74 percent of Kentuckians made it clear that they supported traditional marriage . Since that time , however , activist judges have chosen to ignore the will of the people , and to ignore the Constitutional principle of state 's rights . " He then attacked Conway , who refused to appeal the 2014 federal court opinion that Kentucky 's defense of marriage amendment violated the federal constitution : " Jack Conway 's failure to do his job and defend our laws in Kentucky disqualifies him from being elected to the office of Governor . " Conway responded that he " used the discretion given to me by statute to inform Gov. Beshear and the citizens of the Commonwealth that I would not waste the scarce resources of this office pursuing a costly appeal that would not be successful . " Bevin contended that Conway 's decision cost Kentucky taxpayers $ 2 @.@ 3 million , citing the cost of private attorneys that Beshear hired to defend the amendment in Conway 's place . 
 Three Kentucky county clerks refused to issue same @-@ sex marriage licenses in the aftermath of Obergefell , citing religious objections . Bevin criticized Beshear for not calling a special legislative session to seek a means of accommodating the clerks ' objections . " He advocated replacing Kentucky marriage licenses with a " marriage contract template " . " The form would then be presented to those with authority to approve or <unk> a marriage contract . That duly @-@ executed marriage contract could then be filed and recorded at the county clerk 's office just like a mortgage , a lien , a deed , etc . " , Bevin 's public statement said . 
 After Rowan County clerk Kim Davis defied Judge David L. Bunning 's order to issue marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples , Bevin commended her " willingness to stand for her First Amendment rights " . Davis was confined to the Carter County jail for six days on contempt of court charges for refusing to comply with Bunning 's order . On September 8 , 2015 , Bevin met with Davis in the jail and later attended a rally organized by Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee celebrating her subsequent release . Following a September debate at Bellarmine University , Bevin said , " My intention has always been to execute this race on financial issues , on economic issues . In the last several weeks , 85 percent of what people talk about are these social issues . ... I think the issue has redefined this race whether any of us candidates want that to be the case or not . " Associated Press reporter Adam Beam wrote that the Davis case " ignited the passions of religious conservatives in an already conservative state " , and University of Kentucky political science professor Stephen Voss opined that a campaign focused on cultural and social issues would be " bad for Conway " . 
 After the Center for Medical Progress released series of videos it said showed Planned Parenthood representatives illegally negotiating the sale of body parts from aborted fetuses , Bevin pledged that , " As governor , I will direct my secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services not to distribute federal taxpayer dollars from that department to Planned Parenthood clinics . Federal taxpayer dollars appropriated to Planned Parenthood flow through the governor 's administration . As governor , I will prevent those dollars from being distributed , and order them returned to the federal government . " In the 2015 @-@ 16 fiscal year , Kentucky 's two Planned Parenthood affiliates , neither of which performs abortions , received $ 331 @,@ 300 in federal funding . 
 = = = = Bevin 's personal finances = = = = 
 Conway continued McConnell 's line of attack on Bevin 's finances , specifically the issue of delinquent taxes . While McConnell 's charges involved delinquent taxes against Bevin Brothers Manufacturing , Theo Keith of Louisville 's WAVE reported in June that Bevin had been late at least 10 times paying property taxes on his vacation homes in Maine and Louisiana between 2002 and 2009 . He further reported in July that Bevin 's company , Integrity Holdings , also had multiple past delinquency issues . In total , Keith estimated that Bevin had paid about $ 1 @,@ 800 in penalties for late tax payments . Bevin became irritated with Keith 's reporting and refused to answer questions from him at subsequent press conferences ; he did not buy ads on WAVE , despite running ads on Louisville 's other three network broadcast stations . The Associated Press ' Adam Beam eventually reported that Bevin had paid his taxes late on 30 different occasions . In an October interview with Beam , Bevin said , " Sometimes you do pay it late and you pay interest on having paid it late . But you pay the taxes . ... You do this all the time in business . " He added that his critics " could have done just as breathless a story of all the times I paid my taxes early and gotten a discount on it . " He also reiterated that , as of the time of the interview , he had paid all of his taxes : " Do I actually owe taxes to anyone , anywhere ? The answer is no . " 
 = = = = Result = = = = 
 On August 10 , Fark.com founder Drew Curtis submitted the requisite number of petition signatures to appear on the gubernatorial ballot as an Independent candidate with his wife , Heather , as his running mate . In early October , the first poll released after Curtis entered the field showed Conway leading with 42 percent support among likely voters , compared to Bevin 's 37 percent and Curtis ' 7 percent . Fifteen percent of those polled were undecided . Conway 's five @-@ percentage @-@ point margin held up a month later ; just a week before the election , a Bluegrass poll showed 45 percent support for Conway , 40 percent for Bevin , and 6 percent for Curtis . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader noted that Bevin had trailed in every publicly released poll , and political analyst Stephen Voss said that , given the consistency of the data , " Bevin needs a sudden shift in voter preferences if he hopes to win this contest , and he may be dragging down some of his Republican ticket mates as well . " 
 The polls were off . On November 3 , Bevin garnered 511 @,@ 771 votes ( 53 % ) to Conway 's 426 @,@ 944 ( 44 % ) and Curtis ' 35 @,@ 629 ( 3 % ) . Bevin was only the third Republican elected governor of Kentucky since World War II , and running mate <unk> Hampton became the first African @-@ American elected to any statewide office in Kentucky . Conway had counted on strong support from the state 's urban areas , but managed smaller @-@ than @-@ expected margins in Jefferson , Fayette , and Franklin counties – home to Louisville , Lexington , and Frankfort , respectively – while turnout on Bevin 's behalf was strong in more traditionally Republican rural areas . Ultimately , Conway carried only 14 of Kentucky 's 120 counties , and observers wrote that the loss likely ended his political career . Republicans also won the races for treasurer , auditor , and agricultural commissioner . Analyst Ronnie Ellis speculated that the Republicans ' victories set the stage for the party to take control of the state House of Representatives in the November 2016 elections . With an eight @-@ seat majority , the Kentucky House was the last legislative body in the South controlled by Democrats . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 After a series of terror attacks in Paris – for which the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) claimed responsibility – Bevin announced that , following his inauguration , he would join 25 other U.S. governors in refusing any Syrian refugees seeking to relocate to their respective states " until we can better determine the full extent of any risks to our citizens . " In response , Lexington Herald @-@ Leader political cartoonist Joel Pett published a cartoon depicting Bevin hiding under his desk , his floor strewn with newspapers featuring stories about the Paris attacks , with an aide telling him , " " Sir , they 're not terrorists .... they 're your own adopted kids ! " , a reference to Bevin 's four children adopted from Ethiopia . Bevin responded via Twitter : " The tone of racial intolerance being struck by the @ <unk> has no place in Kentucky and won 't be tolerated by our administration . " 
 Bevin was sworn in as Kentucky Governor on December 8 , 2015 . Observers from both parties praised Bevin 's selection of experienced , relatively moderate individuals for his cabinet , including his former rival , Hal Heiner , as Secretary of the Education and Workforce Cabinet and former University of Kentucky football standout Derrick Ramsey as his Secretary of Labor . The appointments of two Democratic state representatives – John Tilley as Secretary of the Justice and Public Safety Cabinet and Tanya Pullin to a state judgeship – reduced the party 's majority in the House and set up special elections that gave Republicans a chance to win their seats from Democrats . Bevin set the dates of the special elections to fill the seats of Tilley and Pullin , as well as those formerly held by newly elected Auditor Mike Harmon and newly elected Agriculture Commissioner Ryan Quarles , for March 8 , 2016 . Democratic representatives Denver Butler and Jim Gooch also switched their party affiliation to Republican in December , reducing the Democratic majority to 50 – 46 for the beginning of the first General Assembly of Bevin 's governorship , and giving Republicans a chance to evenly split the chamber 's 100 seats by sweeping the special elections . Republicans held only Harmon 's seat , giving Democrats a 53 – 47 advantage in the House for the remainder of the session . 
 Bevin issued the first executive orders of his administration on December 22 , 2015 . Among the issues addressed were removing the names of county clerks from state marriage licenses , and reversing orders by Beshear that restored voting rights for non @-@ violent felons who had completed their sentences and raised the minimum wage for some state workers to $ 10 @.@ 10 per hour . 
 In December , Bevin announced that the state would not renew an advertising contract for kynect . In January 2016 , he notified federal authorities that he plans to dismantle kynect by the end of 2016 and charged Mark <unk> , formerly Secretary of Health under Governor Fletcher , with designing a system to replace kynect . Although the Beshear administration suggested the shutdown would cost the state $ 23 million , Bevin , citing a Deloitte study , promised it would be in the " small single digits [ of millions ] " . As of May 2016 , Bevin had one of the lowest approval ratings among United States governors . 
 = = = 2016 – 18 biennial budget = = = 
 On January 26 , 2016 , Bevin delivered a budget address to the General Assembly detailing his two @-@ year budget proposal . The proposal cut the allocation for most state agencies by 9 percent over the upcoming biennium , with most of the savings being redirected into the state pension system , which was among the worst funded in the nation . Public elementary and secondary education were spared from the cuts , as were social workers , public defenders , corrections officers , and Kentucky State Police employees , all of whom received raises under Bevin 's proposal . Public colleges and universities were not exempt from the cuts , and Bevin called for a gradual move to performance @-@ based funding for higher education , with all higher education funding tied to performance by 2020 . 
 By executive order , Bevin required all state agencies to reduce spending in their current budgets by 4 @.@ 5 percent . House Speaker Greg Stumbo argued that Bevin did not have the authority to order such reductions without legislative approval , but Senate President Robert Stivers defended Bevin 's action , saying it amounted to simply not spending money that was previously allocated . Bevin later compromised with the state 's public college and university presidents to reduce the cuts to 2 percent , but Attorney General Beshear sued to stop the cuts entirely . On May 18 , 2016 , a Franklin Circuit judge ruled Bevin did have the authority to make the cuts . The Kentucky Supreme Court accepted the case on appeal , granting Beshear 's request to bypass the Kentucky Court of Appeals for expediency . The hearing is scheduled for August 18 . 
 On March 7 , 2016 , Bevin released a video on social media claiming that House Democrats were not following through on their obligations to help craft the state budget . Legislators responded with a photo and statements that while Bevin was producing his film designed to chastise them , House leaders were in fact in committee meetings working out details of a budget proposal . House Speaker Greg Stumbo suggested the Governor was either unfamiliar with the legislative process , or intended to deceive people . On March 12 , House Democrats released their own budget , which sustained most of the cuts to executive agencies in Bevin 's budget , but exempted public universities from any cuts . The Republican @-@ controlled Senate countered with a proposal that hewed closely to Bevin 's original budget . 
 The two chambers announced that their negotiations had reached an impasse just days before the constitutionally mandated end of the session on April 15 , but Bevin insisted he would not call a special legislative session for them to continue negotiations . Just before 3 : 00 a.m. on April 14 , negotiators announced they had reached a compromise that would cut public universities ' budgets by 4 @.@ 5 percent over the biennium instead of the 9 percent requested by Bevin and implement a performance @-@ based funding model in 2017 . The money would be reallocated to contribute over $ 1 billion toward the state pension system 's liabilities , which exceeded $ 30 billion . Republicans agreed to fund a Democratic proposal for a scholarship program providing free community college tuition for qualified students , relented on their demands to stop state funding for Planned Parenthood , and spared the state 's prevailing wage guidelines . Bevin signed the budget , but used his line @-@ item veto to strip funding for the scholarship program in the first year of the biennium , saying the guidelines were poorly written and should be revised before implementing the program in 2017 . Because of the constitutional prohibition against the legislative session extending past April 15 , the General Assembly was unable to override the veto . 
 = = = Abortion = = = 
 In January 2016 , Bevin 's administration sent a cease and desist letter to Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky ordering it to stop performing abortions at its clinic in Louisville because it did not have the required license . The clinic claimed it had been given permission to perform the procedures by Beshear 's inspector general just prior to Bevin taking office , but nonetheless halted the procedures on January 28 . Bevin filed suit against Planned Parenthood in February , claiming it had illegally performed 23 abortions without a license ; the suit said Planned Parenthood 's licensure application was deficient because it did not include agreements with a hospital and ambulance service to transport and care for patients in case of complications , as required by state law , and that Beshear 's inspector general was wrong in instructing the organization to begin performing abortions before the license was approved . Planned Parenthood countered that , before the license could be finalized , the abortion facility would have to be subjected to an unannounced inspection , requiring that abortions were already being performed there . In March , the University of Louisville Hospital announced that it had backed out of a transfer agreement with Planned Parenthood , saying it had been pressured to do so and felt that its state funding was in jeopardy by continuing in the agreement . A spokesman for Bevin denied that the pressure had come from anyone in the administration . 
 Two weeks after filing suit against Planned Parenthood , Bevin sued EMW Women 's Clinic in Lexington , claiming that it was an unlicensed abortion facility . The clinic had been operating without a license under an exemption granted to private physician 's offices , but an inspection of the clinic – the first conducted since 2006 – revealed that the facility performed abortions exclusively . Inspectors also reported " several unsafe and unsanitary conditions " including the presence of expired medications . EMW ceased performing abortions March 9 , pending the outcome of the lawsuit . On March 18 , Fayette County Circuit Judge Ernesto Scorsone declined to issue a cease and desist order to EMW , finding that the first trimester abortions performed there " do not require sedation or the services of an anesthesiologist " , suggesting that the clinic was a physician 's office . Scorsone also said the clinic served the public interest by providing abortion services for the eastern half of the state . The administration appealed Scorsone 's decision , and on June 15 , a three @-@ judge panel from the Kentucky Court of Appeals ruled Scorsone 's decision in error and issued a temporary injunction against EMW , prohibiting them from performing abortions until and unless the case was eventually resolved in its favor . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Worlds End State Park = 
 Worlds End State Park is a 780 @-@ acre ( 316 ha ) Pennsylvania state park in Sullivan County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . The park , nearly surrounded by Loyalsock State Forest , is in the Loyalsock Creek valley on Pennsylvania Route 154 , in Forks and Shrewsbury Townships southeast of the borough of Forksville . The name Worlds End has been used since at least 1872 , but its origins are uncertain . Although it was founded as Worlds End State Forest Park by Governor Gifford Pinchot in 1932 , the park was officially known as Whirls End State Forest Park from 1936 to 1943 . 
 The park 's land was once home to Native Americans , followed by settlers who cleared the forests for subsistence farming and later built sawmills . The second growth forests in and surrounding Worlds End State Park are partially a result of the efforts of the young men of the Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression . They helped overcome the clearcutting of the early 20th century , and built many of the park 's facilities , including the cabins that earned it a place on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 A wide variety of wildlife is found in the park , which is also part of an Important Bird Area . Located in the Endless Mountains region of the dissected Allegheny Plateau , Worlds End has a continental climate and rocks and fossils from the Carboniferous period . It is one of " Twenty Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " named by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources , which describes it as " [ v ] irtually in a class by itself , this wild , rugged and rustic area seems almost untamed " . The park offers year @-@ round recreational opportunities , including environmental education , hiking , camping in tents and cabins , whitewater rafting , swimming , cross @-@ country skiing , snowmobiling , hunting , and fishing . 
 = = Name = = 
 An 1872 map uses the name Worlds End for the area around the S @-@ shaped serpentine bend in Loyalsock Creek . Worlds End State Forest Park opened in 1932 , and its name has caused some confusion and controversy over the years . William S. <unk> , Assistant District Forester of Wyoming State Forest ( reorganized as Loyalsock State Forest in 2005 ) , penned this note about the story of the name in 1935 : 
 There was even a dispute as to the proper name of the area . Some people called it Worlds End , others Whirl 's Glen , and still others Whirls End . The first name arose from the topography of the place . Seven mountain ranges converge on the point and one does receive the sensation of being at the ultimate ends of the earth . The proponents of the second name base their claim upon the whirlpool in the Loyalsock Creek , and the third name was probably a contraction of the other two . Since the whirlpool had largely disappeared , it was decided that the name Worlds End would be most appropriate . Hence , the name Worlds End State Forest Park . 
 This was not the end of the controversy . A letter campaign led to the name of the park being changed to Whirls End State Forest Park in 1936 ; opponents of the new name launched another letter @-@ writing campaign to revert the name to Worlds End State Forest Park . This matter was brought before the State Geographic Board , which supervised the official naming of places . The board ruled that the name be changed once again to Worlds End State Forest Park in 1943 . The word Forest was dropped on November 11 , 1954 , when the park was officially named Worlds End State Park by the Pennsylvania Geographic Board . This has been the official name ever since , but the names Whirls End and Whirls Glen are still used , and are synonymous with Worlds End . 
 Two other etymologies have been suggested . The first is that an early road along the gorge had a sheer drop to the creek hundreds of feet below , which prompted thoughts of the world 's end in early travelers . The second is that the bend in Loyalsock Creek , and the surrounding area that became the park , was originally known as <unk> 's Bend , but then " years of mispronunciation turned it into World 's End ( State Park ) " . Whatever the source , as of 2012 the name Worlds End State Park is unique in the USGS Geographic Names Information System and on its maps of the United States . The possessive apostrophe is not part of the official name , although it does appear in older records and in informal usage today . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Humans have lived in what is now Pennsylvania since at least 10 @,@ 000 BC . The first settlers were Paleo @-@ Indian nomadic hunters known from their stone tools . The hunter @-@ gatherers of the Archaic period , which lasted locally from 7000 to 1000 BC , used a greater variety of more sophisticated stone artefacts . The Woodland period marked the gradual transition to semi @-@ permanent villages and horticulture , between 1000 BC and 1500 AD . Archeological evidence found in the state from this time includes a range of pottery types and styles , burial mounds , pipes , bows and arrow , and ornaments . 
 Worlds End State Park is in the West Branch Susquehanna River drainage basin , whose earliest recorded inhabitants were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . They were a <unk> society that lived in stockaded villages of large longhouses . Their numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . 
 After this , the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois . The Iroquois also lived in longhouses , primarily in what is now New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle in the West Branch watershed , including the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) . 
 The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) led to the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin . On November 5 , 1768 , the Province of Pennsylvania acquired the New Purchase from the Iroquois in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix , including what is now Worlds End State Park . After the American Revolutionary War , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania . 
 The land that became Sullivan County was originally part of Northumberland County , then became part of Lycoming County when it was formed in 1795 . Settlers first arrived in the park 's townships in 1794 . Shrewsbury Township was formed from Muncy Township in 1803 , and Forks Township was formed from Shrewsbury Township in 1833 , both while still part of Lycoming County . Sullivan County was formed from the northeastern part of Lycoming County on March 15 , 1847 . 
 = = = Horse trails and lumber era = = = 
 The earliest settlers in the Worlds End area rode on two horse trails to traverse the rugged mountains between Muncy Creek and the confluence of Little Loyalsock Creek with Loyalsock Creek at Forksville . These rugged and rocky trails were used steadily until 1895 , when Pennsylvania Route 154 was constructed to take their place . Part of these old horse trails are still in use and known as Pioneer Road and Double Run Road , and form part of two of the seven hiking trails in the park . Worlds End trail and Pioneer Road meet at the Worlds End Vista , which is thought to be a possible inspiration for the park 's name . 
 Prior to the arrival of William Penn and his Quaker colonists in 1682 , it has been estimated that up to 90 percent of what is now Pennsylvania was covered with woods : over 31 @,@ 000 square miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km2 ) of white pine , eastern hemlock , and a mix of hardwoods . The forests near the three original counties , Philadelphia , Bucks , and Chester , were the first to be harvested , as the early settlers used the readily available timber to build homes , barns , and ships , and cleared the land for agriculture . The demand for lumber slowly increased and by the time of the American Revolution the lumber industry had reached the interior and mountainous regions of Pennsylvania . 
 Lumber thus became one of the leading industries in Pennsylvania . Trees were used to furnish fuel to heat homes , tannin for the many tanneries that were spread throughout the state , and wood for construction , furniture , and barrel making . Large areas of forest were harvested by colliers to fire iron furnaces . Rifle stocks and shingles were made from Pennsylvania timber , as were a wide variety of household utensils , and the first Conestoga wagons . 
 By the mid @-@ 19th century , the demand for lumber reached the area , where eastern white pine and eastern hemlock covered the surrounding mountainsides . Lumbermen came and harvested the trees and sent them down Loyalsock Creek to the West Branch Susquehanna River and to sawmills there . The old @-@ growth forests of eastern white pine and eastern hemlock were soon clearcut and the hills were stripped bare . Nothing was left except the dried @-@ out tree tops , which became a fire hazard , so much of the land burned and was left barren . In the 1920s a sawmill was built on land now in the park , and two more were located about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south . After it was " thoroughly logged " , the area became a tangle of <unk> and brush . 
 = = = Civilian Conservation Corps = = = 
 The history of Worlds End State Park goes back to 1929 , when the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters , a precursor to the modern Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources , began purchasing land devastated by logging and wild fire to create a state forest . The land that specifically became the park was purchased from the Central Pennsylvania Lumber Company in 1929 and Mrs. " Doc " Randall in 1931 . Worlds End State Park was established by forest ranger John Annabelle in 1932 , with a budget of $ 50 that purchased four picnic tables . 
 The Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) was a work relief program for young men from unemployed families , established in 1933 . As part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal legislation , it was designed to combat unemployment during the Great Depression . The CCC operated in every U.S. state . The recreational development of the park began in 1933 , when four CCC camps were built in Sullivan County . One of these , CCC Camp S @-@ 95 , built many of the park facilities , such as the dam for the swimming area , the cabins , hiking trails and roads . The CCC workers blasted out bedrock in the creek for the swimming area and built the Canyon Vista road and lookout . 
 CCC Camp S @-@ 95 , which opened on May 29 , 1933 on the site of an old lumber camp , was able to distinguish itself over the years it operated in Sullivan County . Two floods swept through the area in 1933 and 1936 . The August flood of 1933 caused extensive damage and largely destroyed the newly built camp . During the course of the flooding two young men from Camp S @-@ 95 saved the lives of two drowning children at Worlds End State Park . The flood of 1936 covered a large area within the West Branch Susquehanna River Valley . The young men of the CCC camp were among the leaders in the cleaning up after the flood and rebuilding many destroyed bridges and roads . In 1936 the park was officially expanded beyond the original small picnic area . Camp S @-@ 95 closed in 1941 . 
 = = = = Historic district = = = = 
 In 1987 the CCC architecture earned the Worlds End State Park Family Cabin District within the park a listing on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . The 18 @.@ 4 @-@ acre ( 7 @.@ 4 ha ) historic district includes nineteen cabins and three latrines built by the CCC between 1933 and 1941 . Seven of the cabins have one room , nine have two rooms , and three have three rooms . There are also three modern latrines within the district which are designated as non @-@ contributing structures . The historic structures are examples of CCC work that reflects the standards set forth by the Department of the Interior . The cabins and latrines are constructed with native stones and timber and are placed on the land in a way that minimizes interference with the natural surroundings of the park . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Since the CCC finished their work at the park in 1941 , Worlds End State Park has continued to develop and change . In 1951 the Loyalsock Trail , which passes through the park , was laid out by Explorer Scouts . This trail has been maintained and extended by the Alpine Club of Williamsport since 1953 . While the park was always popular in Pennsylvania , by the 1960s it began to attract attention from outside the state . The park was home to the first annual whitewater slalom race on Loyalsock Creek in 1964 , which attracted over 100 competitors in 1965 . A 1964 The New York Times article featured Worlds End park and its " excellent trout stream " , and one in 1967 mentioned the park 's " peerless wilderness views " , " half @-@ acre swimming pool carved into cool Loyalsock Creek " and " public campsites " . 
 In 1980 , a 900 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 84 m2 ) trailer was added as a temporary park office . The accomplishments of the CCC at Worlds End State Park were recognized in 1987 by the inclusion of the Family Cabin District on the NRHP . In 1997 the park 's Important Bird Area ( IBA ) was one of the first 73 IBAs established in Pennsylvania . On November 12 , 2002 , a new 4 @,@ 300 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 399 m2 ) visitor center and park office was dedicated , which included 1 @,@ 680 square feet ( 156 m2 ) of public space for environmental education and public programs . The building , constructed with an " energy @-@ efficient design and recycled materials " , was part of a $ 1 @.@ 1 million project that included the park 's first flush toilets and sewage treatment plant . In 2003 a $ 2 @.@ 7 million project added flush toilets and running water to all the park 's wash @-@ houses , renovated the cabins , and made major improvements in the day use area . 
 In 2004 , the Loyalsock Creek Watershed Association installed a fence on the creek 's banks near the cabins to limit pedestrian access and erosion . The association planted shrubs and trees in the same area to stabilize the creek 's banks in 2008 , and in September 2010 replaced more than 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) of fence with a less visible version . On January 25 , 2010 flooding caused by heavy rain and melt from 20 inches ( 510 mm ) of snow " washed out a bridge " leading to the cabin area and destroyed 86 feet ( 26 m ) of road there , leaving the park looking like " the set of disaster movie " . The cabin area road needed $ 72 @,@ 120 in repairs , the park was not fully restored until Memorial Day . Two floods hit the park in 2011 , the first from Hurricane Irene on August 29 , and the second from Tropical Storm Lee on September 8 . Lee washed away about 20 to 22 short tons ( 18 to 20 t ) of gravel used to make emergency repairs to roads in the park from Irene damage . Loyalsock Creek reached 20 @.@ 4 feet ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) south of the park , and campers in the park had to be evacuated . Worlds End and Promised Land State Park had " significant damage to roads and bridges " , damage to <unk> State Forest roads was also heavy , and the DCNR estimated the two storms caused $ 3 to $ 4 million of damage to its forests and parks . Worlds End was closed for two weeks after the Lee flood . 
 As of 2012 , post @-@ war facilities include the park office , five wash @-@ houses and other modern restroom facilities , beach house with concession stand , chapel , amphitheater , and modern camping areas . Worlds End State Park is one of twenty @-@ one chosen by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Parks for its " Twenty Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " list . The DCNR describes it as " [ v ] irtually in a class by itself , this wild , rugged and rustic area seems almost untamed " . It goes on to praise the opportunities for camping and hiking at the park , and its scenery and vistas . 
 = = Geology , paleontology , and Marcellus shale = = 
 The land on which Worlds End State Park sits has undergone tremendous change over the last 350 million years . It was once part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a buildup of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found today in the Loyalsock Creek drainage basin : sandstone , shale , conglomerates , coal , and limestone . 
 Four major rock formations are present in Worlds End State Park , all at least partly from the Carboniferous period . The youngest of these , which forms the highest points in the park , is the early Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal . The Loyalsock gorge rim and the upper part of its walls are the late Mississippian Mauch Chunk Formation , which is formed with grayish @-@ red shale , siltstone , sandstone , and conglomerate . Below this is the Mississippian Burgoon Formation , which comprises buff @-@ colored sandstone and conglomerate . The creek bed and base of the gorge walls are the late Devonian and early Mississippian Huntley Mountain Formation , which is made of relatively soft grayish @-@ red shale and olive @-@ gray sandstone . 
 The park is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 175 feet ( 358 m ) on the Allegheny Plateau , which formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when Gondwana ( specifically what became Africa ) and what became North America collided , forming Pangaea . The local region is known as the Endless Mountains , but despite the name these are not true mountains : instead millions of years of erosion have made this a dissected plateau , causing the " mountainous " terrain seen today . The hardest of the ancient rocks are on top of the ridges , while the softer rocks eroded away forming the valleys : the Loyalsock gorge is approximately 800 feet ( 244 m ) deep in the park . Loyalsock Creek and its tributaries have been a primary force in the creation of the valleys , as the creek makes its way across the landscape to its mouth at the West Branch Susquehanna River in Montoursville . 
 Fossils have been found in Worlds End State Park , as the area was once a river delta on an ancient coastline . This coast was home to an ancient ancestor of the lungfish , which would burrow in the mud to survive dry spells . Fossils of these burrows have been discovered in the red siltstone formations in and near the park . 
 The Marcellus Formation , a shale rich in natural gas , lies thousands of feet below Worlds End State Park and much of Pennsylvania . As of June 30 , 2012 , there were 127 active gas wells in Sullivan County , with 14 of those in Forks or Shrewsbury Townships . The state did not purchase the mineral rights to much of the land it owns . Energy company Anadarko has " reportedly purchased 50 percent of the mineral rights under the [ Loyalsock ] state forest " , and plans to drill in it . About 80 percent of the mineral rights to its state parks are not owned by Pennsylvania , and the owner of Worlds End State Park 's mineral rights is unknown . According to William Kocher , Worlds End 's manager , " if the owner decided to drill [ in the park ] ... the state would have no right to say no . " Natural gas pipeline construction upstream of the park spilled a " significant amount " of sediment and mud into Loyalsock Creek in September 2012 . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . For the region the park is in , the average minimum temperature in January is 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) , while the average maximum temperature in July is 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) . The mean annual precipitation for Loyalsock Creek is 42 to 48 inches ( 1067 to 1219 mm ) . Pennsylvania receives the most acid rain of any state in the United States . Because Loyalsock Creek is in a sandstone , shale , conglomerates , coal , and limestone mountain region , it has a relatively low capacity to neutralize added acid . This makes it especially vulnerable to increased acidification from acid rain , which poses a threat to the long @-@ term health of the plants and animals in the creek . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 104 ° F ( 40 ° C ) in 1936 , and the record low was − 27 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) in 1994 . On average , July is the hottest month at Worlds End , January is the coldest , and June the wettest . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Worlds End State Park is near Forksville on Pennsylvania Route 154 in the narrow , serpentine valley of Loyalsock Creek . It is nearly surrounded by Loyalsock State Forest , which was known here as Wyoming State Forest until July 1 , 2005 . Common trees found in the state park and forest include black cherry , eastern hemlock , red maple , tulip poplar , yellow birch , and white ash . The northern hardwood and hemlock forests are threatened in general by deer overgrazing , while the woolly adelgid , an invasive <unk> , threatens the hemlock populations . In 2010 Worlds End was part of over 2 @,@ 600 acres ( 1 @,@ 100 ha ) of state forests and parks combating the woolly adelgid with a $ 110 @,@ 000 federal grant to the DCNR 's " Forest Pest Management Division for insecticide treatment of high @-@ value Eastern hemlocks " . Several different interpretive and educational programs on environmental and ecological topics are offered at the park each summer . 
 = = = Wildlife and Important Bird Area = = = 
 Worlds End State Park has an extensive forest cover of hemlock @-@ filled valleys and hardwood tree @-@ covered mountains , which makes it a habitat for " big woods " wildlife . Animals such as white @-@ tailed deer , black bear , wild turkey , red and gray squirrels are seen fairly regularly . Less commonly seen but present in the park are creatures such as bobcats , coyote , fishers , river otters , and timber rattlesnakes . Loyalsock Creek is home to native brook trout and black bass which feed on a variety of insects including mosquitos , dragonflies , and gnats . 
 Bird watchers have observed over 200 species of birds in the park , including the great blue heron , northern harrier , white @-@ throated sparrow and highly sensitive species which are rare as breeding birds in Pennsylvania such as northern goshawk and yellow @-@ bellied flycatcher . The state park and forest are part of the larger Pennsylvania Important Bird Area ( IBA ) # 42 , which encompasses 214 @,@ 839 acres ( 86 @,@ 942 ha ) . The Pennsylvania Audubon Society has designated the IBA as a globally important habitats for the conservation of bird populations . The IBA is home to Swainson 's thrush and ruffed grouse , the state bird of Pennsylvania . Other notable passerine species found in the park and IBA include blue @-@ headed and red @-@ eyed vireos , Acadian and least flycatchers . Breeding warblers in the park include both northern and Louisiana waterthrushes , as well as Blackburnian , black @-@ throated blue , black @-@ throated green , Canada , magnolia , mourning , Nashville , and yellow @-@ rumped . 
 Worlds End State Park is featured in the Audubon Society 's Susquehanna River Birding and Wildlife Trail Guide . Birds of interest in the park include common mergansers along the creek and other riparian species such as belted kingfisher , as well as barred , great horned , and the scarce , elusive northern saw @-@ whet owls . Other avian species seen in the park and believed to nest there include tufted titmouse , brown creeper , red @-@ breasted nuthatch , common raven , scarlet tanager , yellow @-@ bellied <unk> , and winter wren . These bird populations are typical of " mature northern hardwood @-@ hemlock forests and high elevation swamps and conifer swamps " . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 There are over 20 miles ( 32 km ) of hiking trails at Worlds End State Park . Most of the trails are rocky and steep , so hikers are encouraged to wear proper <unk> and to be prepared for icy conditions during the cold winter months . As John Young writes in Hike Pennsylvania , " If you want to do some hiking in the Worlds End region , you should know that hiking here means climbing " . Worlds End State Park is open during the winter months for snow <unk> and cross @-@ country skiing . Most of the trails are too steep or rugged for either activity , but the park roads are open , as are trails on surrounding state forest lands . 
 Loyalsock Trail , often abbreviated LT , is a rugged 59 @.@ 28 @-@ mile ( 95 @.@ 40 km ) hiking trail that stretches from near <unk> , in Lycoming County on Pennsylvania Route 87 to north of Laporte in Sullivan County , just off U.S. Route 220 . This trail follows the ridges and streams of the Loyalsock Creek watershed . The trail is primarily within the boundaries of Loyalsock State Forest and uses some old logging roads and abandoned railroad grades . The Loyalsock Trail was originally blazed in a yellow rectangle with a red stripe , and red can lids with a yellow " LT " . Recently , the trail markers have been changed to a yellow disc with a red " LT " . 
 Link Trail is a moderate 8 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) trail marked with a red X on a yellow circle blaze . The trail starts at the Cabin Bridge in the park and follows Loyalsock Creek before it branches off and follows Double Run . The trail then ascends to Canyon Vista and heads out into Loyalsock State Forest where it links up with the Loyalsock Trail at the 55 @.@ 33 @-@ mile ( 89 @.@ 05 km ) post . The Loyalsock Trail can be followed back for a 17 @.@ 62 miles ( 28 @.@ 36 km ) long loop . 
 Canyon Vista Trail is a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) loop trail with blue blazes that passes through the eastern portion of the park and a stand of ash , sugar maple , and black cherry trees . This trail passes a maze @-@ like jumble of blocky Pottsville Formation rocks known as the Rock Garden , adjacent to Canyon Vista . The vista is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 750 feet ( 530 m ) and " rewards the hiker with a spectacular view of the Loyalsock Creek gorge " . 
 Worlds End Trail is a 3 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 23 km ) trail with yellow blazes that begins at the park office and ascends to an overlook of the swimming area . It then crosses the old Pioneer Road , which was used by some of the first settlers to the area , and enters the Loyalsock State Forest , ending at the 37 @.@ 77 @-@ mile ( 60 @.@ 78 km ) post of the Loyalsock Trail , which can be followed back to the park office to make a loop 11 @.@ 5 miles ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) long . 
 Butternut Trail is a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) trail marked with orange blazes that loops through a hardwood forest and crosses over Butternut Run . Two side trails connect Butternut Trail with the Loyalsock Trail . 
 Double Run Nature Trail is an easy 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) trail , marked with a green stripe on a white rectangle blaze , that loops through woodlands along the west branch of Double Run . Wildflowers like Jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ pulpit , Solomon 's seal and wild ginger can be seen on this trail , which passes by an intermittent waterfall . 
 High Rock Trail is 1 @.@ 0 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) and passes a waterfall on High Rock Run . This steep trail is marked with red blazes and climbs a hollow filled with lichen @-@ covered rocks to a vista . A part of this trail used to pass so close to cliffs that two hikers fell to their deaths ; this part of the trail has been relocated for safety . 
 = = = Fishing , hunting , and whitewater = = = 
 According to John Young , " As soon as you enter Worlds End State Park , you hear it : the never @-@ ending rush of the waters of Loyalsock Creek " . The creek and its tributary Double Run have been designated as approved trout waters within the park by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . This means the waters will be stocked with trout and may be fished during trout season . Hunting is permitted on about half of the lands of Worlds End State Park . Hunters are expected to follow the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Game Commission . The common game species are ruffed grouse , eastern gray squirrels , turkey , white @-@ tailed deer and bears ; however , the hunting of groundhogs is prohibited . 
 Edward Gertler , author of Keystone Canoeing , writes that Loyalsock Creek 's " exciting whitewater , above Forksville , has long been a favorite of paddlers who are quick and tolerant enough to endure its fickle water levels and weather " . This is the stretch of the creek in and near the park , whose " long , steepening , and complex boulder patch and <unk> rapids demand your attention ... A boater 's chute through the middle of the swimming area dam at Worlds End State Park climaxes this run " . 
 The best time for whitewater boating on Loyalsock Creek at Worlds End State Park is from March to May , and the park hosts a slalom race on Loyalsock Creek each spring . The whitewater gradient is 41 for the section of the creek in and near the park , and its rating on the International Scale of River Difficulty is II to III + , with sections reaching IV . The water is too swift for open canoes , so visitors are asked to use kayaks . The swimming area is closed to whitewater boating during the summer months . 
 = = = Cabins , camping , swimming , and picnics = = = 
 When appointed as manager of the park in 2002 , William C. Kocher said " Camping really is king here at Worlds End , and the rustic cabins are especially popular ... We also have plenty of picnics and reunions , many of them drawing generation after generation , year after year " . Worlds End State Park has three options for visitors interested in staying overnight . There are 19 rustic cabins , each with a refrigerator , stove , fireplace , table with chairs , and beds . There is a 70 @-@ site tent and camper campground along Pennsylvania Route 154 . Some of the campsites have an electric hook @-@ up , and there is a central shower facility with water and restrooms located nearby . Three organized group tenting areas , each capable of accommodating 30 people , are also available north of the cabins . They may also be used for one large group of up to 90 campers . Non @-@ denominational Christian worship services , sponsored by the Pennsylvania Council of Churches , are held in a wooded chapel at the park on Sunday mornings during the summer . 
 The picnic and swimming areas are adjacent to each other , with the building housing the bath house and concession stand between them . There are many picnic tables and several pavilions available for day use by visitors to the park . During the Great Depression the Civilian Conservation Corps built a 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall dam on Loyalsock Creek , which provides a 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) swimming area at Worlds End State Park . Since 2008 , lifeguards are no longer on duty at the park . 
 = = Nearby state parks = = 
 The following state parks are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Worlds End State Park : 
 Mount Pisgah State Park ( Bradford County ) 
 Ricketts Glen State Park ( Columbia , Luzerne , and Sullivan Counties ) 
 Susquehanna State Park ( Lycoming County ) 
 = SMS Kaiser Wilhelm II = 
 SMS Kaiser Wilhelm II ( " His Majesty 's Ship Emperor William II " ) was the second ship of the Kaiser Friedrich III class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . She was built at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven and launched on 14 September 1897 . The ship was commissioned into the fleet as its flagship on 13 February 1900 . Kaiser Wilhelm II was armed with a main battery of four 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 45 in ) guns in two twin turrets . She was powered by triple expansion engines that delivered a top speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II served as the flagship of the Active Battle Fleet until 1906 , participating in numerous fleet training exercises and visits to foreign ports . She was replaced as flagship by the new battleship SMS Deutschland . After the new dreadnought battleships began entering service in 1908 , Kaiser Wilhelm II was decommissioned and put into reserve . She was reactivated in 1910 for training ship duties in the Baltic , but was again taken out of service in 1912 . 
 With the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sisters were brought back into active duty as coastal defense ships in the V Battle Squadron . Her age , coupled with shortages of ship crews , led to her withdrawal from this role in February 1915 , after which she served as a command ship for the High Seas Fleet , based in Wilhelmshaven . Following the end of the war in November 1918 , Kaiser Wilhelm II was stricken from the navy list and sold for scrap in the early 1920s . Her bow ornament is preserved at the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II was 125 @.@ 3 m ( 411 ft 1 @.@ 07 in ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 4 m ( 66 ft 11 @.@ 15 in ) . Her draft was 7 @.@ 89 m ( 25 ft 10 @.@ 63 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 25 m ( 27 ft 0 @.@ 80 in ) aft . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines that drove three screw propellers . Steam was provided by four marine @-@ type and eight cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers , all of which burned coal . Kaiser Wilhelm II 's powerplant was rated at 12 @,@ 822 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 561 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . She had a normal crew of 39 officers and 612 enlisted men ; while serving as the fleet flagship , she carried an additional admiral 's staff of 12 officers and 51 – 63 enlisted men . 
 The ship 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of eighteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 91 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) SK L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns mounted in casemates . She also carried twelve 37mm machine cannon , but these were later removed . The armament suite was rounded out with six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 72 in ) torpedo tubes , one of which was placed in an above @-@ water swivel mount at the stern , with four submerged on the broadside and one submerged in the bow . The ship 's belt armor was 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 81 in ) thick , and the deck was 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 56 in ) thick . The conning tower and main battery turrets were protected with 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 84 in ) of armor plating , and the secondary casemates received 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 91 in ) of armor protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Construction to 1902 = = = 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II 's keel was laid on 26 October 1896 , at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven , under construction number 24 . Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Friedrich der Grosse , to replace the elderly armored frigate Friedrich der Grosse , she was launched on 14 September 1897 . During the launching ceremony , Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Prince Heinrich christened the ship for his brother , Kaiser Wilhelm II . She was commissioned on 13 February 1900 , assuming the position of fleet flagship , which she held until 1906 . Kaiser Wilhelm II was the first battleship of the German Navy specifically built to serve as a fleet flagship . After completing her sea trials in June 1900 , she was assigned to the II Division of the I Squadron , where she replaced the old armored corvette Bayern in the division and the battleship Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm as flagship of the Active Battle Fleet . 
 In early July 1900 , Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm and the other three Brandenburg @-@ class battleships , which were assigned to the I Division of the I Squadron , were ordered to East Asian waters to assist in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion . As a result , Kaiser Wilhelm II and the other ships of the II Division were transferred to the I Division on 8 July , under the command of Konteradmiral Paul Hoffmann . On 15 August the annual autumn maneuvers began ; initially , the fleet practiced tactical maneuvers in the German Bight . A cruise in battle formation through the Kattegat followed , and the maneuvers concluded in the western Baltic on 21 September . During these exercises , Kaiser Wilhelm II served as the umpire ship , and so Hoffmann temporarily transferred his flag to her sister ship Kaiser Friedrich III . He returned to Kaiser Wilhelm II on 29 September after the conclusion of the exercises in Kiel . 
 On 1 November 1900 , Kaiser Friedrich III replaced Kaiser Wilhelm II as the I Squadron flagship ; the latter , as the fleet flagship , remained assigned to the squadron for tactical purposes . From 4 to 15 December , Kaiser Wilhelm II and the I Squadron went on a winter training cruise to Norway ; the ships anchored at Larvik from 10 to 12 December . At 01 : 30 on 2 January 1901 , she was steaming from Danzig to Kiel with Kaiser Friedrich III when the latter struck an underwater obstacle . The shock from the collision damaged the ship 's boilers and started a fire in the coal bunkers . Kaiser Wilhelm II took her sister in tow , although the engines on Kaiser Friedrich III were restarted along the way . The ships eventually reached Kiel , where temporary repairs were conducted . Kaiser Wilhelm II went into drydock in January 1901 for overhaul and some modernization work . This included the reconstruction of a larger bridge and the removal of some of her searchlights . While the ship was laid up , Admiral Hans von Koester replaced Hoffmann as the fleet commander , a position he would hold until the end of 1906 . 
 The annual training routine began at the end of March 1901 with squadron exercises in the Baltic . On the night of 1 – 2 April , Kaiser Friedrich III ran hard aground on the <unk> , a shoal to the north of Cape Arkona , and Kaiser Wilhelm II lightly brushed the bottom . After a short inspection , it was determined that Kaiser Wilhelm II was undamaged , and so Prince Heinrich transferred his flag to the ship on 23 April , while Kaiser Friedrich III went into drydock for repairs . In the meantime , on 18 April , Wilhelm II commissioned his son Prince Adalbert aboard Kaiser Wilhelm II . On 27 April , the I Squadron conducted gunnery drills and a landing exercise off <unk> . By 17 June , Kaiser Wilhelm II 's sister ship Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse had entered service , and so she took over flagship duties for the squadron , while Kaiser Wilhelm II returned to serving as only the fleet flagship . The squadron then went on a cruise to Spain , and while docked in Cádiz , rendezvoused with the Brandenburg @-@ class battleships returning from East Asian waters . The I Squadron was back in Kiel by 11 August , though the late arrival of the Brandenburgs delayed the participation of the I Squadron in the annual autumn fleet training . The maneuvers began with exercises in the German Bight , followed by a mock attack on the fortifications in the lower Elbe . Gunnery drills took place in Kiel Bay before the fleet steamed to Danzig Bay ; there , during the maneuvers , Wilhelm II and Czar Nicholas II of Russia visited the fleet and came aboard Kaiser Wilhelm II . The autumn maneuvers concluded on 15 September . Kaiser Wilhelm II and the rest of I Squadron went on their normal winter cruise to Norway in December , which included a stop at Oslo from 7 to 12 December , when the ship was visited by King Oscar II . 
 In January 1902 , Kaiser Wilhelm II went into dock at Wilhelmshaven for her annual overhaul . In mid @-@ March , Wilhelm II and his wife , Augusta Victoria , came aboard the ship and waited in the mouth of the Elbe for Wilhelm 's brother Prince Heinrich , who was returning from the United States . The I Squadron then went on a short cruise in the western Baltic before embarking on a major cruise around the British Isles , which lasted from 25 April to 28 May . Individual and squadron maneuvers took place from June to August , interrupted only by a cruise to Norway in July . During these maneuvers , three of Kaiser Wilhelm II 's boiler tubes burst , but the damage was repaired by the start of the autumn maneuvers in August . These exercises began in the Baltic and concluded in the North Sea with a fleet review in the Jade . Kaiser Wilhelm II took no active part in the exercises ; she instead served as an observation ship for the commander of the fleet , as well as her namesake , Kaiser Wilhelm II . The regular winter cruise followed during 1 – 12 December . 
 = = = 1903 – 1905 = = = 
 The first quarter of 1903 followed the usual pattern of training exercises . The squadron went on a training cruise in the Baltic , followed by a voyage to Spain that lasted from 7 May to 10 June . After returning to Germany , Kaiser Wilhelm II participated in the Kiel Week sailing regatta . In July , she joined the I Squadron for the annual cruise to Norway . The autumn maneuvers consisted of a blockade exercise in the North Sea , a cruise of the entire fleet first to Norwegian waters and then to Kiel in early September , and finally a mock attack on Kiel . The exercises concluded on 12 September . Kaiser Wilhelm II finished the year 's training schedule with a cruise into the eastern Baltic that started on 23 November and a cruise into the Skagerrak that began on 1 December . During the latter , the ship stopped in the Danish port of Frederikshavn . 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II participated in an exercise in the Skagerrak from 11 to 21 January 1904 , after which she returned to Kiel . She then went to the Norwegian city of Ålesund to assist with the major fire that devastated the largely wooden city on 23 January . Squadron exercises followed from 8 to 17 March . A major fleet exercise took place in the North Sea in May , and Kaiser Wilhelm II was again present at Kiel Week in June , where she was visited by Britain 's King Edward VII , Lord William Palmer , and Prince Louis of Battenberg . In June , Kaiser Wilhelm II won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery . The following month , the I Squadron and the I Scouting Group visited Britain , including a stop at Plymouth on 10 July . The German fleet departed on 13 July , bound for the Netherlands ; the I Squadron anchored in Vlissingen the following day . There , the ships were visited by Queen Wilhelmina . The I Squadron remained in Vlissingen until 20 July , when they departed for a cruise in the northern North Sea with the rest of the fleet . The squadron stopped in Molde , Norway , on 29 July , while the other units went to other ports . 
 The fleet reassembled on 6 August and steamed back to Kiel , where it conducted a mock attack on the harbor on 12 August . During its cruise in the North Sea , the fleet experimented with wireless telegraphy on a large scale and searchlights at night for communication and recognition signals . Immediately after returning to Kiel , the fleet began preparations for the autumn maneuvers , which began on 29 August in the Baltic . The fleet moved to the North Sea on 3 September , where it took part in a major landing operation , after which the ships took the ground troops from the IX Corps that participated in the exercises to Altona for a parade for Wilhelm II . The ships then conducted their own parade for the Kaiser off the island of Helgoland on 6 September . Three days later , the fleet returned to the Baltic via the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , where it participated in further landing operations with the IX Corps and the Guards Corps . On 15 September , the maneuvers came to an end . The I Squadron went on its winter training cruise , this time to the eastern Baltic , from 22 November to 2 December . 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II took part in a pair of training cruises with the I Squadron during 9 – 19 January and 27 February – 16 March 1905 . Individual and squadron training followed , with an emphasis on gunnery drills . On 12 July , the fleet began a major training exercise in the North Sea . The fleet then cruised through the Kattegat and stopped in Copenhagen , where Kaiser Wilhelm II was visited by the Danish King Christian IX . The fleet then stopped in Stockholm , where Kaiser Wilhelm II , the battleship Brandenburg , and the armored cruiser Friedrich Carl all ran aground , though only Friedrich Carl was seriously damaged . The summer cruise ended on 9 August , though the autumn maneuvers that would normally have begun shortly thereafter were delayed by a visit from the British Channel Fleet that month . The British fleet stopped in Danzig , Swinemünde , and Flensburg , where it was greeted by units of the German Navy ; Kaiser Wilhelm II and the main German fleet was anchored at Swinemünde for the occasion . The visit was strained by the Anglo @-@ German naval arms race . 
 As a result of the British visit , the 1905 autumn maneuvers were shortened considerably , from 6 to 13 September , and consisted only of exercises in the North Sea . The first exercise presumed a naval blockade in the German Bight , and the second envisioned a hostile fleet attempting to force the defenses of the Elbe . During October , Kaiser Wilhelm II conducted individual training and , in November , joined the rest of the I Squadron for a cruise in the Baltic . In early December , the I and II Squadrons went on their regular winter cruise , this time to Danzig , where they arrived on 12 December . While on the return trip to Kiel , the fleet conducted tactical exercises . 
 = = = 1906 – 1914 = = = 
 Kaiser Wilhelm II and the rest of the fleet undertook a heavier training schedule in 1906 than in previous years . The ships were occupied with individual , division and squadron exercises throughout April . Starting on 13 May , major fleet exercises took place in the North Sea and lasted until 8 June with a cruise around the Skagen into the Baltic . The fleet began its usual summer cruise to Norway in mid @-@ July . Kaiser Wilhelm II and the I Squadron anchored in Molde , where they were joined on 21 July by Wilhelm II aboard the steamer SS Hamburg . The fleet was present for the birthday of Norwegian King Haakon VII on 3 August . The German ships departed the following day for Helgoland , to join exercises being conducted there . The fleet was back in Kiel by 15 August , where preparations for the autumn maneuvers began . On 22 – 24 August , the fleet took part in landing exercises in Eckernförde Bay outside Kiel . The maneuvers were paused from 31 August to 3 September when the fleet hosted vessels from Denmark and Sweden , along with a Russian squadron from 3 to 9 September in Kiel . The maneuvers resumed on 8 September and lasted five more days . 
 On 26 September 1906 , now @-@ Großadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) von Koester lowered his flag aboard Kaiser Wilhelm II , ending her tenure as the fleet flagship ; the new battleship Deutschland replaced her in this role . Kaiser Wilhelm II was now assigned to the I Squadron , where she served as the second command flagship , under Konteradmiral Max <unk> . The ship participated in the uneventful winter cruise into the Kattegat and Skagerrak from 8 to 16 December . The first quarter of 1907 followed the previous pattern and , on 16 February , the Active Battle Fleet was re @-@ designated the High Seas Fleet . From the end of May to early June the fleet went on its summer cruise in the North Sea , returning to the Baltic via the Kattegat . This was followed by the regular cruise to Norway from 12 July to 10 August , during which Kaiser Wilhelm II anchored in Trondheim . During the autumn maneuvers , which lasted from 26 August to 6 September , the fleet conducted landing exercises in northern Schleswig with the IX Corps . The winter training cruise went into the Kattegat from 22 to 30 November . 
 In May 1908 , the fleet went on a major cruise into the Atlantic instead of its normal voyage in the North Sea . Kaiser Wilhelm II stopped in Horta in the Azores . The fleet returned to Kiel on 13 August to prepare for the autumn maneuvers , which lasted from 27 August to 7 September . Division exercises in the Baltic immediately followed from 7 to 13 September . At the conclusion of these maneuvers , Kaiser Wilhelm II was taken out of service . In 1909 – 1910 , she underwent a major reconstruction in Wilhelmshaven . The superstructure amidships was cut down to reduce top @-@ heaviness , new circular funnels were installed , and the conning tower was enlarged . The fighting tops from the masts were removed , and the secondary battery was significantly revised . Four of the 15 cm guns were removed and two 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were added ; most of the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were moved from the upper decks into casemates in the main deck . On 14 October 1910 , Kaiser Wilhelm II was recommissioned for service in the Baltic reserve division . She underwent short sea trials from 21 to 23 October before proceeding to Kiel , where she was based with her four sister ships . 
 From 3 to 29 April 1911 , the ship participated in maneuvers off Rügen . Together with the North Sea reserve division , Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sister ships went on a training cruise to Norway , starting on 8 June . During the visit , she stopped in Arendal , Bergen , and Odda . In July , the ship conducted gunnery training near the northern coast of Holstein , followed by training cruises off the coast of Mecklenburg . Kaiser Wilhelm II served as the flagship of the III Squadron , which was organized for the autumn maneuvers in August . The III Squadron was attached to the High Seas Fleet for the maneuvers , which lasted from 28 August to 11 September . The following day , the III Squadron was disbanded and Kaiser Wilhelm II returned to service with the Baltic reserve division . In February 1912 , Kaiser Wilhelm II was sent to the Fehmarn Belt to assist in freeing several freighters that were stuck in ice . She and her sisters were again decommissioned on 9 May , and remained out of service until 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 As a result of the outbreak of World War I , Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sisters were brought out of reserve and mobilized as the V Battle Squadron on 5 August 1914 ; Kaiser Wilhelm II served as the flagship of the squadron . The ships were readied for war very slowly , and they were not ready for service in the North Sea until the end of August . They were initially tasked with coastal defense , though they served in this capacity for a very short time . In mid @-@ September , the V Squadron was transferred to the Baltic , under the command of Prince Heinrich . He initially planned to launch a major amphibious assault on Windau , but a shortage of transports forced a revision of the plan . Instead , the V Squadron was to carry the landing force , but this too was cancelled after Heinrich received false reports of British warships having entered the Baltic on 25 September . Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sisters returned to Kiel the following day , disembarked the landing force , and then proceeded to the North Sea , where they resumed guard ship duties . Before the end of the year , the V Squadron was once again transferred to the Baltic . 
 Prince Heinrich ordered a foray toward Gotland . On 26 December 1914 , the battleships rendezvoused with the Baltic cruiser division in the Bay of Pomerania and then departed on the sortie . Two days later , the fleet arrived off Gotland to show the German flag , and was back in Kiel by 30 December . The squadron returned to the North Sea for guard duties , but was withdrawn from front @-@ line service in February 1915 . Shortages of trained crews in the High Seas Fleet , coupled with the risk of operating older ships in wartime , necessitated the deactivation of Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sisters . During this period , her sister Kaiser Karl der Grosse briefly served as the squadron flagship , but Kaiser Wilhelm II resumed the post starting on 24 February . The following month , on 5 March , her crew was reduced and she steamed to Wilhelmshaven , where she was converted into the headquarters ship for the commander of the High Seas Fleet , commencing on 26 April . The ship had its wireless equipment modernized for use by the commander when the fleet was in port . 
 After the end of the war , Kaiser Wilhelm II continued in her role as headquarters ship for the fleet commander and his staff , along with the commander of the minesweeping operation in the North Sea . She was decommissioned for the last time on 10 September 1920 . The naval clauses of the Treaty of Versailles , which ended the war , limited the capital ship strength of the re @-@ formed Reichsmarine to eight pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Deutschland and Braunschweig classes , of which only six could be operational at any given time . As a result , Kaiser Wilhelm II was stricken from the navy list on 17 March 1921 and sold to shipbreakers . By 1922 , Kaiser Wilhelm II and her sisters had been broken up for scrap metal . The ship 's bow ornament is preserved at the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden . 
 = Stairmageddon = 
 " Stairmageddon " is the nineteenth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office . It originally aired on NBC on April 11 , 2013 . The episode features guest appearances from Roseanne Barr as Andy 's agent Carla Fern and Paul Feig as a man auditioning his act for Carla . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , the office workers are forced to walk up the stairs while the elevator is being serviced . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) kidnaps Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) to assist in an important sales call . Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) talk with Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) and Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) about marital troubles . Meanwhile , Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) supports her husband during a press conference . 
 " Stairmageddon " received mixed reviews from television critics . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 84 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 9 / 5 perfect among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked second in its timselot and The Office was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Everyone in the office grows anxious as the premiere of the PBS TV documentary The Office : An American Workplace draws near . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) combines an unflattering appraisal of himself from an early newspaper of the program and his blunt self @-@ assessment that he 's unlikely to remain employed at Dunder Mifflin for very long after it airs , and decides it 's time to pursue his dreams of stardom . After many fruitless calls to dismissive talent agencies , he finds himself at the dual talent agency / real estate office run by Carla Fern ( Roseanne Barr ) . Carla agrees to represent Andy , who is thrilled that he only has to pay $ 5 @,@ 000 for the privilege . 
 The office workers are forced to use the stairs while the elevator is being serviced , a situation everyone deems " Stairmageddon " . A badly out @-@ of @-@ shape Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) undergoes a painful struggle in climbing the stairs , only to be greeted at the top by Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) ordering him to take part in an important sales call . Unwilling to climb the stairs a second time , Stanley refuses . Since the client is a friend of Stanley , Dwight ( who is operating without concern for niceties now that the documentary has driven home the point that he will never be the branch manager at Dunder Mifflin ) cannot take no for an answer , so he shoots Stanley with bull tranquilizers . With help from Clark , Dwight gets Stanley to the car . The tranquilizers inexplicably make Stanley intoxicated , and his unusually jolly mood helps them close the sale . When Stanley regains full awareness , he is pleased to learn that he made a sale with no effort whatsoever , but still refuses to take the stairs again . He instead knocks himself out with one of Dwight 's darts , leaving Dwight and Clark to figure out how to get him back upstairs . 
 Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) talks with Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) about his going to marriage counseling with Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Pam does the same with Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) . Toby points out to Jim that it 's not fair to tell Pam that he needs an indeterminate amount of time before Athlead pays off for the family like he says it will , Pam vents to Nellie that Jim is always making unilateral decisions involving her and they each agree they 're not leaving Philly for Scranton or vice versa . The <unk> leave the office looking sad and awkward together . 
 Meanwhile , Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) agrees to be the supportive " good wife " for her state senator husband Robert at a press conference in the aftermath of the documentary 's reveal of his affair with Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) . Angela assumes this means he intends to deny the affair and reassert his devotion to family values . Instead , Robert tells the press that he is gay and further humiliates Angela by insinuating that his relations with her drove him to homosexuality . Oscar is also dumbstruck when Robert , while openly proclaiming his affair with Oscar , says that he is in love with his chief of staff , Wesley Silver . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) happily gloats to the office staff about his keeping Oscar 's secret to the very end . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stairmageddon " was written by executive producer Dan Sterling , his second writing credit for the series after the ninth season entry , " The Boat " . It was directed by series cinematographer Matt Sohn , his eighth directorial effort for the series , following the ninth season entry , " Suit Warehouse " . Comedian Roseanne Barr guest stars in this episode . It was announced on January 31 , 2013 that she would be doing a two episode arc and would play a talent agent named Carla Fern . Barr began filming her scenes the week following January 31 . Director Paul Feig also guest stars in the episode , his first time appearing on the series . He previously directed several episodes of the series , with his last entry being " Goodbye , Michael " in season seven . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Stairmageddon " originally aired on April 11 , 2013 on NBC . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 83 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 5 percent share . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight increase in the ratings from the previous episode , " Promos " . The Office ranked second in its timeslot , being beaten by an installment of the Fox series Glee which received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 rating . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Stairmageddon " received mixed reviews from television critics , with praise going to the drama in the Jim @-@ Pam storyline , while the zaniness of other storylines received more mixed opinions . The A.V. Club reviewer Erik Adams complimented the drama between Jim and Pam , writing that it 's " been given just the right amount of weight " . He criticized the episode for being " one of the loudest tonal clashes in the history of The Office " , comparing it negatively to the previous episode , " Promos " . He said that the other storylines seemed crammed into the episode , particularly due to the writers ' decision to flesh out the supporting cast . Adams gave the episode a C. M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " B " . 
 Roth Cornet of IGN called " Stairmageddon " an " odd one " for feeling like both a standalone episode that utilized the full ensemble , but also " one of the final five episodes of this nine @-@ year series " , due to the Jim @-@ Pam and Dwight @-@ Angela storylines . He praised the Jim @-@ Pam storyline for its realism and depth , but worried that their eventual reconciliation would not feel earned , due to the few episodes left in the series . He praised the Dwight @-@ Clark @-@ Stanley storyline , writing that " the true comedy in the episode came primarily from Dwight " and called it Clark Duke 's " strongest appearance to date " . Cornet gave the episode a 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 , calling it " Good " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic called the episode " the funniest episode on television this week " , considering it a " gem " from the season . Forcella also praised the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Dwight dynamic throughout the episode and the humor coming from Andy 's storyline . He awarded the episode 5 stars out of 5 . 
 Roseanne Barr 's performance was later submitted by the producers of The Office for an " Outstanding Guest Actor in Comedy Series " Emmy consideration . 
 = Roses in Portland , Oregon = 
 The city of Portland , Oregon is ideal for growing roses outdoors due to its location within the marine west coast climate region , its warm , dry summers and rainy but mild winters , and its heavy clay soils . Portland has been known as the City of Roses , or Rose City , since 1888 , after Madame Caroline Testout , a large pink variety of hybrid tea rose bred in France , was introduced to the city . Thousands of rose bushes were planted , eventually lining 20 miles ( 32 km ) of Portland 's streets in preparation for the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in 1905 . 
 The Rose City Park neighborhood in northeast Portland was formed in 1907 , the same year of the first annual Portland Rose Festival . During World War I , nursery owners in Portland began planning a large rose garden to protect European rose species from the war . The garden was established in Washington Park as the International Rose Test Garden in 1917 . Today , the Portland Rose Festival occurs each June with a carnival , parades , and navy ships docked along the Tom McCall Waterfront Park to promote the city . The International Rose Test Garden is currently one of the oldest public rose test gardens in the United States , covering 4 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 8 ha ) with over 8 @,@ 000 rose plants and more than 550 different species . In 2003 , Portland adopted the " City of Roses " as its official nickname . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1888 , Georgiana Burton Pittock , the wife of Oregon newspaper publisher and business tycoon Henry Pittock , invited friends and neighbors to display their roses in a tent set up in her garden in the area now known as Pittock Block . In 1889 , lawyer and civic leader Frederick Van Voorhies Holman helped found the Portland Rose Society . The rose cultivar Mme. Caroline Testout , a hybrid tea rose variety named after a French dressmaker , was introduced by French <unk> Joseph Pernet @-@ <unk> in 1890 . The cultivar gained popularity , and by 1905 , Portland had 20 miles ( 32 km ) of rose @-@ bordered streets , attracting visitors to the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition . About half a million of these rose bushes were planted along Portland 's streets for the Lewis and Clark Exposition . 
 In 1915 , rose hobbyist and Oregon Journal editor Jesse Currey convinced city officials to establish a rose test garden to protect hybrid roses grown in Europe during World War I. Portland 's Park Bureau approved the idea in 1917 , allowing rose enthusiasts in England to send roses to Portland for preservation . City landscape architect Florence Holmes Gerke began designing the International Rose Test Garden and accompanying amphitheatre in 1921 . The garden was dedicated in June 1924 with Currey as the first curator . He served until his death in 1927 . A stone bench in the garden honors Currey 's work as founder . 
 = = City of Roses = = 
 The official and most common nickname for Portland is the " City of Roses " , or " Rose City " . According to Charles Paul Keyser , Portland Parks Superintendent from 1917 to 1950 , the first known reference to Portland as " The City of Roses " was made by visitors at an Episcopal Church convention in 1888 . The city 's first annual rose show was held the following year , and by 1904 , the Portland Rose Society began sponsoring fiestas to accompany the shows . The nickname grew in popularity after the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition , where mayor Harry Lane suggested that the city needed a " festival of roses " . The first Portland Rose Festival was held two years later and remains the city 's major annual festival a century later . The Portland Rose Society , which offers educational programs on " rose culture " and advocates the use of roses in the landscape , remains in operation today . 
 In Portland , the nickname is often attributed to Leo Samuel , who founded the Oregon Life Insurance Company in 1906 ( known today as Standard Insurance Company ) . Samuel grew roses outside his home and placed a pair of shears outside his garden , so people could snip a rose from his garden to take for themselves . 
 On June 18 , 2003 , the city council unanimously approved a resolution adopting " the City of Roses " as the city 's official nickname . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 Many rose gardens are found throughout Portland , the most prominent of which is the International Rose Test Garden . Peninsula Park became the city 's first public rose garden in 1909 when it was purchased for $ 60 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 580 @,@ 222 in 2016 ) with funds raised in a 1908 bond measure . Designed by Emanuel L. Mische , the 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) garden contains 8 @,@ 900 plantings featuring 65 rose varieties . Mme. Caroline Testout , the official rose of Portland , was grown at Peninsula Park . In 1913 , the park was chosen as the location for an annual rose show , where it remained until Washington Park was selected as the location of the International Rose Test Garden in 1917 . The park remains a popular Portland tourist destination , with more than 9 @,@ 500 rose bushes representing over 600 varieties . 
 The Ladd 's Addition neighborhood contains four diamond @-@ shaped rose gardens originally designed by William Sargent Ladd in the 1890s . Emanuel Mische designed landscaped areas in the park in 1909 . Mische planted roses in the diamond gardens giving it a " stained glass effect " . The park was acquired by Portland Parks & Recreation in 1981 and currently features 3 @,@ 000 roses representing sixty varieties that were popular in the early 20th century . 
 Other rose gardens surrounding the Portland metropolitan area include Esther Short Park in Vancouver , Washington , Avery Park Rose Garden in Corvallis , Owen Rose Garden in Eugene , and Heirloom Roses in St. Paul . 
 = = Events = = 
 The Portland Rose Festival is an annual civic festival held during the month of June . Events , including multiple parades , a carnival , fleet week , and the crowning of a queen , are organized by the volunteer non @-@ profit Portland Rose Festival Association with the purpose of promoting the Portland region . Coinciding with the festival is the Annual Spring Rose Show , considered to be one of the largest and longest @-@ running in the nation . The Portland 's Best Rose event , sponsored by the Portland Rose Society , began in 1996 . The competition includes 100 judges ranking varieties in a blind contest . One day prior to the competition , the public is invited to vote for the People 's Choice award recipient . 
 = = Local namesakes = = 
 Rose City Park is a neighborhood and park in northeast Portland . The neighborhood formed in 1907 , the year of the first Portland Rose Festival . The headquarters of the rose festival are at the Visitors Information Center , also known as the Rose Building . The building was designed by architect John Yeon in 1948 and served as a chamber of commerce office and visitor center , city offices , and a restaurant , as well as the rose festival 's headquarters . Located along Tom McCall Waterfront Park , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2010 and features a rose garden and neon rose sign . Other namesakes include murals depicting roses painted on sides of buildings in Portland , and the private company Rose City Transit , which provided most mass transit service in Portland from 1956 to 1969 . 
 Roses have long been associated with sports in Portland . The Moda Center , an indoor sports arena , was known as the Rose Garden for many years ; the venues lies within the Rose Quarter , a sports and entertainment center in the Lloyd District neighborhood . The venue remains one of only a handful of National Basketball Association ( NBA ) facilities for which naming rights have not been sold . In addition , three professional sports teams were named the Portland Rosebuds during the first half of the 20th century ; they were two professional men 's ice hockey teams that played home games at the Portland Ice Arena and one Negro league baseball team in the West Coast Baseball Association that was also known as the " Portland Roses " . The first hockey team played in the Pacific Coast Hockey Association from 1914 – 1918 . During the 1915 – 1916 season the Rosebuds became the first American team to participate in the Stanley Cup finals . The second hockey team played in the Western Hockey League 's fifth and final season ( 1925 – 1926 ) . Other teams have incorporated the " Rose City " nickname into their brand . The Rose City Rollers , an all @-@ female roller derby league within the Women 's Flat Track Derby Association , was established in 2004 and supports four local teams and two traveling teams . The Rollers support a junior league known as the Rosebuds . Two women 's professional football teams have been named the Rose City Wildcats , the first formed for the 2001 season of the Women 's American Football League and the second for the 2011 season of the Women 's Spring Football League . A women 's soccer team named Portland Thorns FC was formed in 2012 by the Portland Timbers and have played in the National Women 's Soccer League since 2013 . 
 = Teresa Lewis = 
 Teresa Wilson Bean Lewis ( April 26 , 1969 – September 23 , 2010 ) was an American murderer who was the only woman on death row in Virginia prior to her execution . She was sentenced to death by lethal injection for the murders of her husband and stepson in October 2002 . Lewis sought to profit from a $ 250 @,@ 000 life insurance policy her stepson had taken out as a U.S. Army reservist in anticipation of his deployment to Iraq . 
 In September 2010 , Lewis became the first female inmate to die by lethal injection in the state of Virginia . The state had last executed a woman in 1912 . The case led to debate over capital punishment due to Lewis 's gender as well as questions regarding her mental capacity . 
 = = Background = = 
 Teresa Wilson grew up in poverty in Danville , Virginia , where her parents both worked in a textile mill . Teresa sang in a church during her youth . At 16 , she dropped out of school and married a man she met at that church . The couple had one daughter , Christie Lynn Bean , but the marriage soon ended in divorce , after which Teresa turned to alcohol and painkillers . Her mother @-@ in @-@ law , Marie Bean , described Teresa as " not right " . 
 After migrating between dozens of low @-@ paying jobs , Teresa Wilson Bean eventually found work in the spring of 2000 at the Dan River textile mill , where her supervisor was Julian Clifton Lewis , Jr . He was a recent widower with three children , Jason , Charles , and Kathy . Teresa moved into Julian 's home in June 2000 and the two married soon after . In December 2001 , Julian 's older son , Jason Clifton Lewis , was killed in a car accident , leaving his father $ 200 @,@ 000 from a life insurance policy . Julian used the money to buy a manufactured home on five acres of land in Pittsylvania County , Virginia . 
 In August 2002 , Julian 's younger son , Charles J. Lewis , obtained a $ 250 @,@ 000 insurance policy in preparation for his impending deployment to Iraq as part of the United States Army Reserve . Charles designated his father as the primary , and Teresa Lewis as the secondary beneficiaries . 
 = = Murders = = 
 In the fall of 2002 , Teresa Lewis met 21 @-@ year @-@ old Matthew Jessee Shallenberger and 19 @-@ year @-@ old Rodney Lamont Fuller at a Wal @-@ Mart in Danville and began a sexual relationship with both of them . In October 2002 , Charles came home on a visit from Army training in Maryland . On October 23 , Shallenberger and Lamont were given $ 1 @,@ 200 by Lewis to purchase firearms and ammunition to kill Julian Lewis and his son Charles for the insurance money . Their first attempt to kill Julian while on the road did not succeed . 
 A week later , on the night of October 30 , Shallenberger and Fuller entered the Lewis ' trailer through a back door that Teresa had left open . While she waited in the kitchen , Shallenberger shot the sleeping Julian several times , while Fuller shot Charles in his bedroom with a shotgun . After discovering Charles was not dead , Fuller shot him twice more . Teresa waited 45 minutes before calling for help , and while waiting for the police to arrive , she removed money from her dying husband 's wallet . She divided $ 300 with Shallenberger and Fuller before they left . However , sheriff 's deputies arrived prior to Julian dying , and heard him say , " My wife knows who done this to me , " while she had claimed the two had been killed by unidentified assailants in a home invasion . 
 Shortly after , Teresa Lewis was caught attempting to withdraw $ 50 @,@ 000 from her dead husband 's account with a forged check . Within a week , she confessed to law enforcement officers that she had offered money to have her husband killed . During the investigation , prosecutors found that Lewis had been trying to gather the assets of her late husband and stepson even before they had been buried . 
 During the murder trial , the judge deemed Lewis the mastermind of the crime and called her " the head of this serpent . " Barbara G. Haskins , a court appointed , board @-@ certified forensic psychiatrist , stated that " Cognitive testing showed a Full Scale IQ of 72 . Verbal IQ was 70 , and Performance IQ was 79 . " Dr. Haskins also stated that Teresa Lewis was and is able to make a plea agreement and enter pleas . Lewis ' lawyer stated that “ She ’ s not mentally retarded , but she is very , very close to it . " 
 = = = Sentencing and appeals = = = 
 Defense attorneys thought the evidence against Lewis was overwhelming and advised her to plead guilty to the capital charges in order to avoid a jury , and hope that the judge would show some leniency since Lewis had been cooperating with investigators . However , she was sentenced to death , since under Virginia law , multiple murders within a three @-@ year period are subject to the death penalty . The two co @-@ conspirators who actually did the shooting , Shallenberger and Fuller , were sentenced to life imprisonment at separate trials . Lewis was granted an automatic review by the Supreme Court of Virginia , which rejected the argument that it was unfair to execute Lewis while the co @-@ conspirators got life sentences , as well as rejecting Lewis ' challenges to the constitutionality of Virginia 's death penalty law . Lewis was placed on death row at the Fluvanna Correctional Center for Women in Troy , Virginia . 
 Lewis ' daughter , Christie Lynn Bean , served five years because she knew about the plan but failed to report it . 
 In November 2004 , a private investigator met Shallenberger at <unk> Ridge State Prison in Big Stone Gap , Virginia on behalf of Lewis . Shallenberger wrote in a partially transcribed affidavit : " Teresa was in love with me . She was very eager to please me . She was also not very smart . " However , Shallenberger tore off and ate the parts of the document that he had signed . Shallenberger said , " What will happen will happen . " Shallenberger committed suicide at the prison in 2006 . 
 Over 7 @,@ 300 appeals for clemency were reportedly sent to Virginia governor Bob McDonnell . Her supporters stated that " Lewis is deeply remorseful and has been a model prisoner , helping fellow female inmates cope with their circumstances . " Her father , Melvin C. Wilson , Sr. , testified how Lewis took care of her invalid mother prior to her death . Lewis herself stated that " I just want the governor to know that I am so sorry , deeply from my heart . And if I could take it back , I would , in a minute ... I just wish I could take it back . And I 'm sorry for all the people that I 've hurt in the process . " On September 17 , 2010 , McDonnell decided not to stop Lewis ' upcoming execution , stating : " Having carefully reviewed the petition for clemency , the judicial opinions in this case , and other relevant materials , I find no compelling reason to set aside the sentence that was imposed by the Circuit Court and affirmed by all reviewing courts . " 
 Her attorneys filed motions for a writ of certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court to stay the execution , but were denied on September 21 , 2010 . Dissenting Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor indicated that they would have granted a stay . 
 = = Execution = = 
 Lewis ' last meal consisted of two fried chicken breasts , sweet peas with butter , a Dr Pepper and German chocolate cake for dessert . Lewis addressed stepdaughter Kathy Lewis Clifton , who came to witness her execution , to apologize for killing her brother and father . 
 I just want Kathy to know that I love you , and I 'm very sorry . 
 Lewis was executed on September 23 , 2010 , at 9 p.m. by lethal injection , at <unk> Correctional Center in Jarratt . This made her the 12th woman to be executed in the United States since the death penalty was reinstated in 1976 . Lewis was the first woman to be executed in Virginia by lethal injection ; the last woman to be executed in the state was Virginia Christian , who died in the electric chair in 1912 . Lewis was also the first woman to be executed in the U.S. since Frances Newton in 2005 in the state of Texas , and the second woman to be executed since serial killer Aileen <unk> in 2002 in the state of Florida . 
 = = = Public reaction and aftermath = = = 
 Lewis ' execution started a debate in the U.S. and other parts of the world concerning capital punishment , and more specifically the application of death sentences on women in murder cases . Richard Dieter , executive of the Death Penalty Information Center , argued that " so few women are involved in more heinous murders that , when they are , they cause greater offense than if they had been men . Virginia 's attorney general really pushed the fact that she had committed adultery with a co @-@ defendant and that she was somehow dishonored and should be looked down upon " . Ken Cuccinelli , the Attorney General of Virginia , stated that " the brutal nature of the crimes themselves as well as Lewis ' callous , manipulating , adulterous , greedy , egregious behavior " justified the death sentence . 
 Thousands of supporters argued that her death sentence should have been commuted to life imprisonment . Lewis ' attorney James E. <unk> III said , " A good and decent person is about to lose her life because of a system that is broken ... it is grossly unfair to impose the death sentence on her while Shallenberger and Fuller received life . " Her low IQ also became a matter of discussion , with supporters citing this as a reason she should not have been sentenced to death . Legal novelist John Grisham echoed those sentiments and argued that evidence indicated Shallenberger , who had an IQ of 113 , was the actual mastermind . Grisham quoted from an affidavit by co @-@ conspirator Rodney Lamont Fuller : " As between Mrs. Lewis and Shallenberger , Shallenberger was definitely the one in charge of things , not Mrs. Lewis . " 
 Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad cited the case to denounce Western media coverage of <unk> <unk> <unk> , a woman in Iran who had been sentenced to death by stoning for adultery . He claimed the media 's " heavy propaganda " campaign was perpetrating a double standard by not responding with similar outrage over Lewis ' impending execution . Executive director Larry Cox of Amnesty International , which opposes the death penalty under all circumstances , stated : " Proceeding with this execution would come dangerously close to violating the U.S. Constitution , which prohibits capital punishment for those with ' mental retardation ' — a precedent established thanks to Atkins v. Virginia . " 
 = Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII = 
 Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII ( ライトニング <unk> ファイナルファンタジーXIII , Raitoningu <unk> : Fainaru Fantajī Sātīn ) is action role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . It was released on November 2013 in Japan and February 2014 in Europe and North America . A port to Microsoft Windows through Steam was released in December 2015 followed by iOS and Android in Japan on February 17 , 2016 . The game is a direct sequel to Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , concludes the storyline of Final Fantasy XIII , and forms part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries . Lightning Returns employs a highly revamped version of the gameplay system from the previous two games , with an action @-@ oriented battle system , the ability to customize the player character 's outfits , and a time limit the player must extend by completing story missions and side quests . 
 The game 's story takes place five hundred years after the previous game 's ending . Lightning , the main protagonist of the first game and a key character in the second , awakes from a self @-@ imposed hibernation 13 days before the world 's end , and is chosen by the deity Bhunivelze to save the people of the dying world , including former friends and allies who have developed heavy emotional burdens . As she travels , she learns the full truth behind both the world 's fate and Bhunivelze 's true agenda . 
 Development of the game started in May 2012 , shortly after the release of XIII @-@ 2 's final piece of DLC , and was unveiled at a special 25th Anniversary Event for the Final Fantasy series in September that year . Most of the previous games ' key creative minds and developers returned , and it was developed by Square Enix 's First Production Department , with developer tri @-@ Ace helping with the graphics . The development team wanted the game to bring a conclusive end to the story of both Lightning and the XIII universe , and to address criticisms leveled against the last two games . During its first week on sale in Japan , it sold 277 @,@ 000 units , and by the end of 2013 become the 17th best @-@ selling game of the year selling over 400 @,@ 000 copies . It has sold 800 @,@ 000 copies as of May 2014 . The Windows PC version has sold over 150 @,@ 000 copies according to SteamSpy . It has received mixed reviews : while the main praise went to the game 's battle system , opinions were more mixed for the graphics , time limit and other aspects of gameplay , while the story and characters were criticized for being weak or poorly developed . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player directly controls the character Lightning through a third @-@ person perspective to interact with people , objects , and enemies throughout the game . The player can also turn the camera around the character , which allows for a 360 ° view of the surroundings . The world of Lightning Returns , as with Final Fantasy XIII and its sequel XIII @-@ 2 , is rendered to scale with the character , who navigates the world on foot . In one of the areas , the player can use chocobos , a recurring animal in the Final Fantasy series . The player is able to freely navigate the game 's open world layout , explore towns and country areas , and accept quests from various non @-@ playable characters ( NPCs ) . Lightning is also able to sprint for limited periods , climb up ladders and jump freely . The game features three difficulty levels : Easy , Normal and Hard , the latter of which is unlocked after first completing the game . There is also a New Game + option , whereby players can start a new game while carrying over their equipment and stats from a previous playthrough . The in @-@ game clock runs continuously during normal navigation , with one in @-@ game day equating to two to three hours in real time on Easy mode and one hour on Normal and Hard modes . The timer starts out at seven in @-@ game days , but can be extended to a maximum of thirteen days . The timer stops during cutscenes , conversations and battles . Lightning can also pause time using an ability called <unk> . 
 Quests are directly linked to Lightning 's growth : as she completes quests , her stats are boosted , with the main story quests yielding the biggest boosts . Many side quests can only be obtained at certain times , since the real @-@ time build of the world means NPCs are in constant movement , and only appear in certain places at a given time . Lightning can also accept quests from the Canvas of Prayers , a post board found in all the main locations . Upon completing NPC quests , Lightning is rewarded with a portion of <unk> , spiritual energy retrieved when a person 's burden is lifted . Every day at 6 AM game @-@ time , Lightning is drawn back into the Ark , a location where the in @-@ game clock does not progress . Once there , Lightning gives her gathered <unk> to a tree called Yggdrasil : if she has gathered enough , the in @-@ game clock is extended by a day . She can also restock on supplies and collect new equipment . Another feature in the game was <unk> Services , a feature where players could take photos and share them , along with their personal stats and battle scores , on Facebook and Twitter . The Facebook features were disabled in April 2015 . All <unk> services were terminated in April the following year . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 The battle system , called the Style @-@ Change Active Time Battle system , uses elements from the Active Time Battle ( ATB ) -based Paradigm system from the first and second XIII games and bears similarities to the dressphere system featured in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . Lightning has access to several customizable outfits ( garb ) with different power sets ( plural : <unk> ; singular : Schema ) . Each garb has its own separate ATB gauge , and actions for them are mapped onto the controller 's face buttons , meaning that the usual menu @-@ style ATB battle system is no longer needed : this enables Lightning to be moved around the battle field to a limited degree . The majority of the garbs and their accessories are either purchasable in the in @-@ game shops or received upon completing quests . Stronger garbs , items , shields and weapons are unlocked in Hard Mode , along with access to more challenging areas and boss battles . Lightning can equip three <unk> directly , while having additional slots for backup costumes which can be equipped outside battle . She can be equipped a close @-@ combat weapon ( sword , spear , etc . ) , a shield and a cosmetic accessory . The color scheme of each garb can be customized using both pre @-@ set and custom color : there are options to alter both specific portions and all portions of the costume . 
 As with the previous game , enemies appear in the open field and can be avoided or engaged . The number of enemies increases during nighttime , and their strength and ability to deal damage increases the more days pass in @-@ game . By killing all the standard versions of an enemy , a final version appears as a boss . Defeating it will yield a high reward and make the enemy type extinct in an area of the game . When Lightning attacks an enemy , or they attack her , the battle starts . If Lightning strikes a monster , they lose a small portion of health , while if the enemy strikes Lightning first , she will lose health . As Lightning performs attacks , her ATB meter is drained and she must switch to another assigned garb : the depleted garb 's meter recharges while not being used . Lightning utilizes her many swords for short @-@ range melee attacks and magic for long @-@ range attacks . She can block enemy attacks using her shield and has the option to evade an attack , which can be assigned to any garb . Each enemy has a stagger meter , represented by a line behind their health bar . As Lightning lands certain kinds of magical or physical blows on the enemy , their meter oscillates more . Eventually , the enemy is staggered , rendering them vulnerable to damaging attacks . Lightning can also spend Energy Points to perform special moves or activate abilities , such as <unk> ( which slows time for Lightning 's opponents and enables her to land more hits ) ; and Army of One , Lightning 's signature move . By winning battles , Lightning earns gil , the in @-@ game currency , and replenishes a portion of her Energy Point gauge . In Normal and Hard modes , if Lightning flees from or dies in battle , one in @-@ game hour is lost . Unlike the last two games , the player character does not automatically recover HP after battles , instead needing to use remedies bought from merchants and shops , and there is no auto @-@ battle mode , with Lightning needing to be controlled manually at all times . In Easy Mode , Lightning regenerates health if she stands idle . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Lightning Returns is set after the stories of Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . In XIII , Lightning is one of six people who are turned by a fal 'Cie — one of a race created by the gods — into l 'Cie , servants of the fal 'Cie gifted with magical powers and a ' Focus ' — an assigned task to be completed within a time limit ; those that succeed in their Focus go into crystal stasis , while those that fail turn into monsters called Cie 'th . The six were intended to cause the large , floating sphere named Cocoon to fall onto the world below , named Gran Pulse , killing all of the humans of Cocoon . At the finale of the game , two of the l 'Cie transformed into a crystal pillar to support Cocoon , preventing the catastrophe . The remaining l 'Cie were made human again by the Goddess Etro , the deity responsible for maintaining the balance between the mortal world and the Unseen Realm . In XIII @-@ 2 , it is revealed that Etro 's interference allowed Chaos , an energy trapped in the Unseen Realm , to escape and distort the timeline as written after the fall of Cocoon . Lightning was drawn to Valhalla , Etro 's citadel , and decided to stay and act as her protector . Three years after Cocoon 's fall , Lightning 's sister Serah sets out to correct the distortions and reunite with Lightning , while the people of Gran Pulse construct a new Cocoon , since the old one is destined to collapse . The protagonists unwittingly end up instigating the death of Etro , which allows Chaos to spill into the mortal world and bring an end to time itself . Serah also dies , causing Lightning to nearly lose hope . Reassured by her sister 's spirit , Lightning chooses to enter crystal stasis to preserve her sister 's memory and keep hope alive . 
 Lightning Returns is set five hundred years after the ending of XIII @-@ 2 , during the final thirteen days of the world 's existence . Because of the unleashing of Chaos , the world of Gran Pulse has been consumed , leaving only a set of islands called Nova Chrysalia . The new Cocoon , called " Bhunivelze " after the key deity of the XIII universe , acts as the world 's moon . The Chaos has halted human aging and no new children are born due to Etro 's death , causing the human population to stagnate and shrink . Over the intervening centuries , two opposing religions have formed and dominate the life of Nova Chrysalia 's people : the Order of Salvation , that worships Bhunivelze , and the Children of Etro , a rebel cult who worship the Goddess . The world itself is divided into four regions , each dominated by a specific mood and environment . The city of Luxerion is a capital of worship whose people are loyal to the Order . The pleasure capital of Yusnaan is a city of revelry where people live in a constant state of celebration . The Dead Dunes is a desert area dominated by ruins . The Wildlands is an untamed area where the human city of Academia used to stand ; it also houses the remains of Valhalla , the capital of Etro . Within the New Cocoon is the Ark , a zone where time is frozen . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Lightning , a central character from both XIII and XIII @-@ 2 , is the game 's main protagonist , sole playable character , and narrator . The other main characters from the previous games also make appearances : Hope Estheim aids Lightning using a wireless communicator ; Snow Villiers , devastated by the death of Serah Farron — his fiancée and Lightning 's sister — becomes the leader of Yusnaan and the world 's last l 'Cie ; Oerba Dia Vanille and Oerba Yun Fang , released from crystal stasis , go separate ways , with Fang becoming the leader of <unk> , a bandit gang in the Dead Dunes , and Vanille gaining the power to hear the voices of the dead , thus being deemed a saint and falling under the constant protection of the Order in Luxerion . Noel Kreiss , feeling guilty over his role in the deaths of Etro and Serah and the world 's current state , becomes a vigilante in Luxerion . Sazh Katzroy and his son Dajh , who fell into a comatose state , reside in the Wildlands . The region also becomes the home of Mog , Noel and Serah 's former moogle companion from XIII @-@ 2 ; Caius Ballad , Lightning 's old adversary and the one responsible for the unleashing of Chaos into the mortal world ; and Paddra Nsu @-@ Yeul , a former seeress and pivotal character in the previous game whose cycle of early death and reincarnation was the motivation behind Caius 's actions . The game also introduces Lumina , a mysterious near @-@ doppelganger of Serah who both aids and taunts Lightning during her quest ; and Bhunivelze , the main deity of the Final Fantasy XIII universe who chooses Lightning as the world 's savior . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII begins with Lightning being woken from crystal stasis by the god Bhunivelze after 500 years . The world is set to end in 13 days , and to this end Lightning is made the savior , a figure who will free the souls of humanity from the burdens on their hearts and guide them to a new world that Bhunivelze will create once the 13 days are up . Lightning undertakes this task to rescue and ensure the rebirth of Serah 's spirit . Hope acts as her guide from the Ark , which houses the rescued souls of humanity : Bhunivelze chose him and changed his physical form to his 14 @-@ year @-@ old self from XIII . As she journeys and performs her task , she encounters her former allies and adversaries , many of whom now carry heavy emotional burdens . She is also followed about by Lumina , who both gives her advice and taunts her at regular intervals . 
 In Luxerion , Lightning investigates a series of murders where all the victims match the physical description of the savior . During her journey , she is followed by Noel , who has become obsessed with a prophecy that he must kill Lightning to realize a better world and reunite with Yeul . The two briefly ally to rout the Children of Etro , responsible for the murders , then later do battle . Lightning uses Noel 's rage to make him realize and accept his mistakes , lifting his burden . After this , she meets up with Vanille in the Order 's cathedral . Vanille shows Lightning a place within the cathedral where the souls of the dead have gathered . Vanille is being prepared for a ritual to take place on the final day that will apparently purify the souls . She hopes to atone for past actions by doing so . In the Dead Dunes , Lightning encounters Fang and goes with her on a journey through the region 's dungeons in search of a relic called the Holy <unk> . When they find it , Fang reveals that it is key to the ritual in Luxerion as it has the power to draw in the souls of the dead , and that the ritual will kill Vanille . Fang attempts to destroy the relic , but the forces of the Order arrive and take it . On the eleventh day , the souls of the dead speak to Lightning through the visage of Cid Raines , a man Lightning encountered during XIII . He tells her that the Order has deceived Vanille and plans to sacrifice her to destroy the dead , so the living will forget their existence and be ' purified ' for rebirth in the new world . Lightning decides to stop the ritual , though Cid warns her that she will be defying Bhunivelze 's will . 
 In the Wildlands , Lightning saves a white chocobo called the " Angel of Valhalla " from monsters and nurses it back to health . The chocobo is revealed to be Odin , one of the Eidolon race who acted as her ally in XIII . She encounters Sazh , whose son Dajh has fallen into a coma and become unwilling to wake because of his father 's current state . Lightning retrieves the fragments of Dajh 's soul , lifting Sazh 's emotional burden and waking his son . Traveling to the ruins of Valhalla , Lightning encounters Caius and multiple versions of Yeul . After fighting with Caius , Lightning learns that he has become tied to life by the <unk> and thus cannot be saved . She also learns that it was Yeul 's perpetual rebirth that caused the Chaos to seep into the mortal world and trigger the events of XIII @-@ 2 . Encountering Mog as the leader of a moogle village , she helps him fend off attacking monsters . In Yusnaan , Lightning infiltrates Snow 's palace and finds him preparing to enter a concentration of Chaos contained inside the palace . He plans to absorb the Chaos , transform into a Cie 'th , and have Lightning kill him . Though he performs the act and they fight , Lightning manages to renew his hope of seeing Serah again , reverse his transformation and lift his burden . On Nova Chrysalia 's final day , Hope reveals to Lightning that Bhunivelze used him to watch over Lightning and that the deity will dispose of him now that his task is completed . 
 After Hope disappears , Lightning is transported to Luxerion and enters the cathedral , where Noel , Snow and Fang help her fight the Order to save Vanille . Lightning manages to convince her to free the souls of the dead . This act allows Lightning to find Serah 's soul , kept hidden inside Lumina to keep it safe , but Bhunivelze arrives using Hope as his host and captures everyone but Lightning . Transported to an otherworldly realm , Lightning meets Bhunivelze in person , and learns that he has been conditioning Lightning to replace Etro . After wounding the god in battle , she frees Hope and prepares to become the new goddess and protect the new world by trapping herself and Bhunivelze in the Unseen Realm . An illusion of Serah then confronts Lightning , revealing Lumina as the physical manifestation of Lightning 's suppressed vulnerabilities . Accepting Lumina as a part of herself , Lightning calls for aid . Hope , Snow , Noel , Vanille , Fang and the Eidolons answer her call , and they sever Bhunivelze 's hold on the souls of humanity , including Sazh , Dajh , Mog , and a revived Serah . The souls then unite and defeat Bhunivelze . In the aftermath , Caius and the multiple versions of Yeul choose to remain in the Unseen Realm and protect the balance between worlds in Etro 's stead . The final incarnation of Yeul , who alone wishes for a new life , is allowed to accompany Lightning and her friends . After the Eidolons and Mog depart for the Unseen Realm , Lightning , her allies , and the souls of humanity travel to a new world where they can decide their own fate . In a post @-@ credits scene , Lightning is seen in normal clothes arriving in a rural town , going to reunite with one of her friends . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept of Lightning Returns originated during development of XIII @-@ 2 , while the development team was brainstorming ideas for possible continuations of the story and universe of the games , though there was no solid decision to make a second sequel to XIII at the time . Development of Lightning Returns started in May 2012 , soon after the release of Requiem of the Goddess , the final story @-@ based DLC episode for XIII @-@ 2 . According to Motomu Toriyama , he had wanted to tell more stories about Lightning , and the DLC had not provided a satisfactory ending for her . The game was designed in a shorter time than the other games in the series ; Yoshinori Kitase explained that this was because the team did not want players to forget the story of the previous games , and the team needed to work especially hard as a result . Another reason was that the team wished to bring the XIII series to a close before the release of the next generation of gaming hardware . The title was also chosen to be the last original Final Fantasy game on seventh generation consoles , and next @-@ gen versions of the game were not considered . Developer tri @-@ Ace , who had previously worked with the team on XIII @-@ 2 , returned to help with the graphics . 
 One of the key story concepts behind the game was the " rebirth " of Lightning as a character : this was cited as the main reason why the game was called Lightning Returns and not XIII @-@ 3 , alongside the team 's desire to attract new players to the series . Lightning was also made into a darker and more vulnerable character , partly because Kitase felt that her previous stoic depictions might have alienated earlier players . The main scenario and script was written by Daisuke Watanabe , the main writer for the previous XIII games . During the concept process , Watanabe , Toriyama and other members of staff brainstormed ideas for important scenes and events leading up to them . The process of writing the script was slow , causing difficulties for the rest of the team . In response to this , Watanabe worked extra hard to create an appropriate finale for the characters and story . He also wrote the script as more hard @-@ edged than those for the previous XIII games . 
 The game was designed as the final entry in the XIII storyline ( generally dubbed the " Lightning Saga " by the production team ) , but was also intended to stand independent of the Final Fantasy series as a whole . One example of the breakaway from series norms is the game 's logo , which was not designed by regular series logo artist Yoshitaka Amano , and which was one of several created during the early stages of development . The concept of the story 's progression was termed as " world @-@ driven " , a concept whereby the world the player interacted with moved independently of their actions : i.e. NPCs would appear in different locations depending on the time of day . That concept partially gave rise to the game 's time limit , which was suggested by the game 's battle designer Yuji Abe after having read of the Doomsday Clock . Another inspiration behind the story pacing and time limit was the 2011 movie In Time . The open world aspect of the game was heavily influenced by The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim , and some of the hard @-@ edged gameplay ideas were borrowed from Dark Souls . The majority of the hardcore @-@ gaming elements were eventually trimmed out in order to make the game accessible to newcomers . 
 In terms of assets , the team reused very little from the previous two games , choosing to build a large proportion of the game from the ground up , especially when it came to the overworld design and NPC behaviors . The Crystal Tools engine , used in the last two XIII games , required a major overhaul as it was not designed for open @-@ world games . In contrast to the previous games , a lot of the game 's cutscenes were created while the game was still in development , meaning many placeholder objects and models had to be used until the final assets could be put in place . The team also had to thoroughly check Lightning 's various outfits and weapons , to ensure that there were no mistakes in cutscenes with the weapons going through the scenery , and that the character 's underwear remained concealed during active battles even for her more revealing outfits . Because the team was mostly using new assets to create the game , the various continents took longer to create than the environments in XIII @-@ 2 , and story scenes sometimes needed to be redone as the game 's overall plot had yet to be finalized when development began . The voice actors , in contrast to the normal procedure doing their performances first and those being used to create the game characters ' facial expressions , recorded their lines for the characters well after the various cutscenes had been created . 
 The concept of Lightning Returns ' battle system originated while ideas were being discussed for the battle system in Final Fantasy XIII , but technical limitations and problems implementing it in a party @-@ based battle system prevented it from being used in that game . It reemerged when some of the development team wanted Lightning to change her appearance during battle , and reducing to one playable character opened up the memory space necessary for such a system to be implemented . In making the system revolve around one character , the developers ended up removing any opportunity for story scenes between party members , which was cited by Abe as its main weakness . The time limit sprang from the story concept of a world with a set time to live . When the feature was first announced , there were some who felt it was too new a thing , as a time limit was seen as a taboo in role @-@ playing video games . The mechanic originally received negative feedback from test players who were unable to complete the game in time . In response to this , the team made adjustments so that players were given a more comfortable amount of time . Along with sharing design elements with the previous two XIII games , the system also bears similarities to the battle system of Final Fantasy XV , although the developers said that they were not directly inspired by it . 
 Lightning 's multiple outfits were designed by Isamu Kamikokuryo , the game 's art director , Toshitaka Matsuda , the lead art designer , and Toshiyuki Itahana , a designer who had worked on Final Fantasy IX and the Crystal Chronicles series . The three drew inspiration from character designs done by Amano and the atmospheres of game locations . Matsuda and Itahana also respectively did the character designs for Bhunivelze and Lumina . Tetsuya Nomura returned to design Lightning and Snow 's new looks . Kamikokuryo used the game 's theme of a dying world to create Nova Chrysalia , as well as incorporating cultural and architectural influences from the Middle East , Asia , and London during the Industrial Revolution . Nova Chrysalia was originally conceived as a single island , but as the game 's development advanced , the world grew into its final , four @-@ island configuration . The world 's open design was inspired by MMORPGs such as Final Fantasy XI , described by Abe as a " tourist guide style " . Each island was designed to have a definite feel and theme , while their construction was handled by separate small teams , with the content for each area held and quality @-@ controlled by each team . The art team used multiple real world locations as inspiration : Luxerion and Yusnaan were inspired by Paris and Las Vegas , while the Dead Dunes and Wildlands were influenced by Cairo and Costa Rica . The scenery for the final FMV was based on southern Europe . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Lightning Returns was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , who composed the music for XIII , Naoshi Mizuta and Mitsuto Suzuki , who co @-@ composed the music for XIII @-@ 2 with Hamauzu . Others involved in recording the soundtrack were Japanese band Language and the Video Game Orchestra , founded by Shota Nakama . Multiple tracks used " Blinded by Light " , a recurring theme in the XIII games , as a leitmotif . Unlike the previous XIII games , a theme song was not created , with the composers instead creating a purely orchestral piece for the finale . The main soundtrack album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack , was released on four compact discs on November 21 , 2013 . A bonus album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Soundtrack Plus , featuring unreleased tracks and rearrangements of classic themes used in the game , was released on March 26 , 2014 . A promotional album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Pre Soundtrack , was released in July 2013 . The game featured multiple musical Easter eggs , including tunes from previous entries in the franchise . The commercial albums respectively reached # 29 and # 211 on the Oricon charts . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Rumors about a second sequel 's existence started even before XIII @-@ 2 's release , when a domain name was registered in the name of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 3 , however it turned out that the domain was registered by the company 's western branch without the main company 's knowledge . After XIII @-@ 2 's cliffhanger ending became common knowledge , the game 's creators released a statement saying that the ending was meant to prepare fans for coming DLC packets that would expand upon the game 's story . However , after the release of the last piece of DLC , company officials stated that they would be releasing future content related to XIII . By August 2012 , during the run @-@ up to a special 25th Anniversary commemoration event for the Final Fantasy series , a teaser site titled " A Storm Gathers " was released , promising new developments for the XIII series and its main protagonist . The game itself was finally unveiled at the event , with Toriyama , Kamikokuryo , Abe and Kitase detailing the core concepts of the game . Because character dialogue varied due to the time of day in @-@ game , the western release of the game was delayed by over two months after the local release , as there was far more translation , dubbing work and lip @-@ synching than in previous titles . For the promotion and marketing of the game , the development team rethought their strategy . They worked closely with Yohei Murakami , the publicity and marketing agent for many Square Enix games . Lightning Returns was heavily promoted at gaming events throughout 2013 . As part of the promotion campaign , Lightning and monsters from the XIII series featured in a series of player events in Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 While the previous game had a large amount of downloadable content in the form of character costumes , extra story episodes and battles in the game 's fighting arena , the reaction to these was mixed . The costumes were liked by fans , despite some complaints of them being purely cosmetic , but the presence of story DLC caused many to criticize the original game as incomplete . In reaction to this , the developers decided to package the game 's entire story with the retail edition . However , they did create pre @-@ order DLC for the game in the form of outfits Lightning could use in battle . One of these featured the clothing , weapon and equipment of Cloud Strife from Final Fantasy VII , available with the game 's limited edition Pre @-@ Order Bonus Pack , while another featured a collection of Samurai @-@ inspired outfits . In addition to this , as part of a cross @-@ game promotional campaign , Square Enix of Japan also made Yuna 's costume from Final Fantasy X a playable garb for those who had purchased the Japanese HD Remaster of the game on either PS3 or Vita . The garb was later made available as a pre @-@ order exclusive from Amazon.com. After the game 's release , an additional set of DLC costumes was released , among them a moogle outfit . In the Western release of the game scheduled on February 11 , 2014 , a free DLC pack was released that enabled players to play the localized version of the game with Japanese voice acting and lip @-@ synching . The DLC was free for the first two weeks , and then became paid DLC . 
 = = = Versions and merchandise = = = 
 Lightning Returns was released on November 21 , 2013 in Japan and on February 11 , 13 and 14 , 2014 in North America , Australia and Europe respectively . Alongside the standard release , a special box set titled " Lightning Ultimate box " was released . It included Final Fantasy XIII , XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns , a figurine of Lightning , selected music from the games , a special stand from the game and a book of artwork . A limited edition of the PlayStation 3 version containing a specially @-@ themed <unk> 3 controller was also released in Asia . A Collector 's Edition exclusive to North America was released through Square Enix 's online store . It contained a copy of the game , an artwork book , a pocket watch embossed with the game 's logo and codes for costume DLC . The game is also being ported to Microsoft Windows platforms via Steam for release in 2015 . After a long delay , Kitase announced in October 2015 that the game would release in December that year . Its official release date was announced in November 2015 . It features all DLC outfits apart from the Aerith @-@ themed one , and removes the ability to name customized outfits and the Angel of Valhalla chocobo . A release on iOS & Android followed on February 17 , 2016 in Japan and later on the Amazon Appstore . It also available on PlayStation Now . 
 As part of the game 's promotion in Japan , Square Enix teamed up with Japanese confectionery company Ezaki Glico to market a range of <unk> snacks in packaging promoting the game . A Play Arts Kai figurine of Lightning as she appears in the game was also created by Square Enix Merchandise . After the game 's release , an Ultimania guide to the game was also released , containing concept and character artwork , interviews with staff members , and guides to the game 's enemies , continent layouts and times for events . A book set between XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns , Chronicle of Chaotic Era , was originally scheduled to be released alongside the game in Japan , but was eventually cancelled due to the author falling ill . After the game 's release , a three @-@ part novella set after Lightning Returns ' ending was released through Famitsu Weekly magazine , titled Final Fantasy XIII Reminiscence : tracer of memories . Written by Watanabe based on and incorporating the material written for Chronicle of Chaotic Era , the book takes the form of a series of interviews with the main characters of the XIII series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In Japan , the PS3 version of Lightning Returns reached the top of the Top 20 in software sales in its first week , selling just over 277 @,@ 000 units and beating Nintendo 's Super Mario 3D World . In the same period , the Xbox 360 version sold 4 @,@ 000 units , under half of the initial sales of XIII @-@ 2 for that platform . By the end of 2013 , the PS3 version was 17th among the 100 best @-@ settling titles of the year , selling over 400 @,@ 000 copies . In the United Kingdom , Lightning Returns debuted at third place in the top ten debut video games . The game was 8th in the top ten best @-@ selling video games of February . By May 2014 , the game had sold approximately 800 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . According to Steam Spy , a further 150 @,@ 000 copies of the Windows PC version were sold by March 2016 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Lightning Returns has received mixed reviews from critics . The game scored 37 / 40 in Famitsu magazine , with the reviewers giving scores of 10 , 10 , 9 and 8 out of 10 for each console version of the game . Famitsu later gave the game an " Excellence " award during the 2013 Famitsu Awards . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox 360 version 71 @.@ 69 % based on 16 reviews and 69 / 100 based on 21 <unk> and the PlayStation 3 version 66 @.@ 15 % based on 40 reviews and 66 / 100 based on 62 reviews . 
 The battle system gained the highest amount of praise . Matt Elliot of Official PlayStation Magazine said the battle system was fun and " [ felt ] like Final Fantasy : an energetic , modern approximation of combat that was previously turn @-@ based . " IGN 's Marty Sliva greatly enjoyed the battle system , saying that " Lightning Returns did a great job of empowering me to create a [ trio of Schema ] that felt unique and personal . " Joe Juba of Game Informer was also pleased with the system which he considered to be an improvement over the previous two XIII games , noting that the switching of Schema created " a fast @-@ paced , high @-@ tension system that makes fights exciting . " Eurogamer 's Simon Parkin called it " perhaps the best and certainly most flexible version yet " when compared to the other XIII games , while GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd stated that if it were not for a few flaws such as the blocking , " it may have even found a place among Final Fantasy 's better battle systems . " Famitsu generally cited the battle system as " excellent " , noting it as fast @-@ paced and fun , but also noting that some enemies were tricky even on Easy mode . It also praised the level of " uniqueness " available in garb customization . 
 The quest gameplay was less @-@ well received , with Sliva saying it made him " feel like [ he ] was stuck in the opening hours of an MMO " , while Juba called the tasks " dull " . Parkin stated that the quests " can seem trivial under the eye of the apocalyptic clock " . VanOrd commented that while many quests were " absorbing on their own " , he admired their ability to get the player out into the world . Destructoid 's Dale North felt that the time limit made the quests " a waste of the precious time left " . The time limit itself received mixed reviews . Sliva said the time limit gave the game " a sense of urgency ... that I really enjoy . " , while VanOrd said the limit worked against the player and " collides with almost every other aspect of the game . " Juba enjoyed planning out his days , but on the other had felt that the time limit prevented exploration , and that it " severely [ limited ] your ability to fully dive into some of the systems . " Elliot said the limit overly pressured him , and became unpleasant when coupled with the time penalty for fleeing battle . The Famitsu reviewers said that the time limit was not an overly stressful factor . 
 The graphics received mixed reviews . Sliva referred to the locations as " visually interesting and varied " , while VanOrd said the player " can 't help but gawk at the beautiful spectacle before [ them ] . " Juba liked the overall look and design of the main cast and environment , but critiqued the environment textures and NPCs . Elliot praised the CG cutscenes , but said that " the tired , boxy side streets feel unfinished . " However , he further said that the expansive nature of environments balanced this issue out . The environments were praised by Famitsu , which stated that due to the expansive nature of the environments and the lack of hints concerning quests , new players might take a bit of time getting used to it . It also generally called the game " quite nice " . 
 The game 's story was poorly received by most reviewers . Sliva said the narrative was " drenched in uninteresting pathos that failed to give me a reason to care about these characters that I 've spent well over 100 hours with . " Juba called the story " a joke " , saying that there was little development for Lightning as a character , and that the narrative " killed whatever lingering investment [ he ] had in the universe . " VanOrd found the large amount of character dialogue a distracting and jarring feature , while Parkin said that the game 's narrative could not fix the issues present in the previous two XIII games , although the side @-@ quests and dialogue helped lighten Lightning 's character . Elliot spoke of it as one of the reasons to play the game , terming it a " typically bonkers narrative " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Final Fantasy XIII series won a Sound Division : Award of Excellence at the <unk> AWARDS 2014 for the sound development team . 
 = = = Official response = = = 
 Both Toriyama and Kitase have responded to the mixed review scores the game received . Speaking to Siliconera about the Japanese reviews , Toriyama said that most of the negativity stemmed from the time limit , and that " opinions on the game become more positive after some time since Lightning Returns ' initial release [ after players get used to the nuances ] . " Speaking with Joystiq , Kitase said that he " wasn 't really shocked . There are negative reviews and positive reviews , it 's a real mixture . When I started making this game I took on very new challenges , so in a way I had anticipated that there would be mixed opinions , so this is more or less what we had anticipated . " 
 = Down Town = 
 for the Greek magazine see Down Town ( magazine ) 
 " Down Town " was the a 1987 release by The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu ( better known as The KLF ) . The song is gospel music driven by house music rhythms , incorporating a sample of Petula Clark 's 1964 single " Downtown " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 1987 , Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty formed The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu ( The JAMs ) , and busily released provocatively sample @-@ heavy electronic music with beatbox rhythms and Drummond 's socially aware raps . Their debut single " All You Need Is Love " and album 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) were both investigated by the Mechanical Copyright Protection Society , who ordered The JAMs to recall and destroy all unsold copies of 1987 . A new single , " Whitney Joins The JAMs " , followed , along with a satirically edited version of the album , 1987 ( The JAMs 45 Edits ) , and the debut release from spinoff project Disco 2000 , " I Gotta CD " . By the time of the release of " Whitney Joins The JAMs " , the duo 's independent record label had been renamed KLF Communications , and in the coming year The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu would mutate into The KLF . In the meantime , " Down Town " was The JAMs ' and KLF Communications ' final release of 1987 , a 7 " and 12 " single release of 30 November . It did not enter the UK Singles Chart , but made inroads into the UK independent chart . 
 In an interview with NME , Drummond and Cauty maintained that the record was originally intended to be sample @-@ free , but , quoting the Book of Proverbs 26 : 11 , Drummond admitted that " as a dog <unk> to his vomit so a fool <unk> to his folly " . In addition to Petula Clark 's " Downtown " , " Down Town " used elements of the distinctive bassline to Harold Faltermeyer 's 1984 # 1 single " Axel F " . Indeed , the labels of the record claimed that : " All sounds on this recording have been captured by The KLF . In the name of Mu , we hereby liberate these sounds from all copyright restrictions , without prejudice " . Although The JAMs sought permission from Tony Hatch , who wrote Clark 's " Downtown " , Drummond admitted in KLF Communications newsletter : " We were surprised to read in the papers that Pet Clarke [ sic ] had given her permission for us to sample her classic ' Downtown ' on our record of the same name . When we attempted to contact her , at her Swiss home , to do just this thing , we didn 't get further than her refusing to accept our transfer charge . " 
 The inclusion of Petula Clark 's " Downtown " was claimed by Drummond to be a striking coincidence : 
 One day I was in the studio and I just started humming the chorus of ' Downtown ' over the intro . I thought ' That 's funny I wonder what key it 's in ? ' I dug out the record that night and found that it was in the same key . I took it into the studio the next day and found out that it was absolutely the same number of beats per minute ( bpm ) — 118 . Most pop songs are between 80 and 160 bpm so that 's 80 times 12 , so it was a one in 960 chance that it would be the right bpm and the right key , so we couldn 't resist it . 
 " Down Town " was not included on either of The JAMs ' albums , instead featuring on their 1988 compilation and remix album , Shag Times , along with an instrumental remix credited to The KLF . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Down Town " is , like most of Drummond and Cauty 's work of 1987 , a social critique of Great Britain realised as house music . Its central theme is social exclusion , poverty and homelessness , in which snatches of Clark 's " Downtown " — an awestruck ode to hedonistic city nightlife — are juxtaposed with raps by Drummond , wailing sirens and original choral gospel vocals full of Christmas optimism , provided by the London Community Gospel Choir . These disparate elements are held together by a beatbox rhythm , a bassline borrowed from " Axel F " , and an accompaniment of piano and Hammond organ . 
 During one verse , Drummond raps : " Downtown , down and out , dying in the dead of night , with your Special Brew and your special view of a world that could be right " . Joined by the gospel choir 's refrain of " Glory ! " , Drummond continues " [ Glory ! ] What glory ? [ Glory ! ] In a wine bar world ? [ Glory ! ] in a tenement block ? [ Glory ! ] OK , let 's hear it ! " . In each chorus , the gospel choir sing of Jesus ' birth . This juxtaposition of Christmas with urban homeless alcoholism was revisited by Drummond and Cauty 's later arts project , the K Foundation , whose final act to date involved distributing thousands of cans of strong lager to London 's homeless on Christmas Eve in 1995 . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 " Down Town " was , after " All You Need Is Love " , the second of The JAMs ' three 1987 singles to become NME " single of the week " . The British music paper called it " One massive hell @-@ hating holler of a song " , and concluded : " [ The JAMs ] may not be the hippest , <unk> or sweetest band to stalk the Earth this year but they 're certainly the most imaginative ... [ T ] hey 've fired a musical trail so shocking they couldn 't have kept you more on your toes if they 'd stuffed a <unk> up your ass and sent you out to tap dance in a pair of stilettos " . 
 The following week , NME journalist James Brown interviewed June Montana and Cressida Cauty ( Jimmy Cauty 's wife ) , vocalists for Disco 2000 , a KLF Communications side @-@ project produced by Drummond and Cauty . Brown noted the accomplished dance music production of recent KLF Communications releases : 
 When I <unk> [ " Down Town " ] throughout the NME offices last week everyone present from punk , to yuppie , to club basher , to Alexander O 'Neal fan gathered round to ask what it was . The same reactions had greeted " Whitney Joins The JAMs " but none of the writers had gone off and ordered a copy immediately . Likewise the accessibility of [ Disco 2000 's ] " I Gotta CD " can 't go ignored . And although [ The JAMs ] only produced it , the surprising dance @-@ awareness .. has come as a surprise to both the KLF and myself . If they were prepared to destroy their abstract political ideas the KLF could quite rapidly become something akin to <unk> , Rockman , and Waterman . 
 However , Record Mirror did not approve of The JAMs ' comparatively sample @-@ free offering , calling " Down Town " " a creature tamed " and wondering " without outlaw credentials what 's left ? " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 7 " single ( UK ) 
 " Down Town ( 118 BPM ) " ( edit ) - 4 : 01 
 " Down Town " ( voxless ) - 5 : 55 
 12 " single ( UK ) 
 " Down Town ( 118 BPM ) " - 7 : 23 
 " Down Town " ( voxless ) - 5 : 55 
 12 " single ( UK ) ( one @-@ sided white label , 500 pressed ) 
 " Down Town " ( voxless ) - 5 : 55 
 = Ralph Patt = 
 Ralph Oliver Patt ( 5 December 1929 – 6 October 2010 ) was an American jazz @-@ guitarist who introduced major @-@ thirds tuning . Patt 's tuning simplified the learning of the fretboard and chords by beginners and improvisation by advanced guitarists . He invented major @-@ thirds tuning under the inspiration of first the atonal music of Arnold Schoenberg and second the jazz of John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman . 
 He graduated with a degree in geology from the University of Pittsburgh . After his career as a guitarist , he worked as a geologist and as a hydrologist , often consulting on projects related to the U.S. Department of Energy . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Patt was born in Kittanning , Pennsylvania on 5 December 1929 and studied geology at the University of Pittsburgh . 
 = = = Guitar and music theory = = = 
 While in Pittsburgh , Patt studied guitar under Joe Negri . Patt played rhythm guitar in the style of Freddie Green , who played a Stromberg in the Count Basie Orchestra . Having earned his baccalaureate degree , he joined the United States Army and played guitar in an Army band . Following his 1955 discharge from the Army , Patt played with touring bands , for example , Neal Hefti , Frankie Carle , Les <unk> , Benny Goodman , Richard Maltby , and The Glenn Miller Orchestra . 
 After touring for five years , Patt settled in New York City , where he worked as musician both at ABC and on Broadway from 1960 to 1970 ; during this period he regarded Barry Galbraith as his mentor . He studied under George Russell , whose ( 1959 ) Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization Patt edited . Patt also studied with Gunther Schuller , who himself was a student of Arnold Schoenberg and who used Schoenberg 's twelve @-@ tone technique for atonal composition . Patt wanted to be able to play and then to improvise twelve @-@ tone music . 
 = = = = Major @-@ thirds tuning = = = = 
 Patt was inspired by the jazz of Ornette Coleman and John Coltrane and the atonal music of Schoenberg . Seeking a guitar @-@ tuning that would facilitate improvisation , he introduced major @-@ thirds tuning by 1964 , perhaps in 1963 . Patt 's tuning is a regular tuning in the sense that all of the intervals between its successive open strings are major thirds ; in contrast , the standard guitar @-@ tuning has one major @-@ third amid four fourths . Patt used major @-@ thirds tuning during all of his work as a session musician after 1965 in New York . 
 Major @-@ thirds tuning packs the chromatic scale ( the consecutive twelve @-@ notes of the octave ) onto four consecutive frets of three consecutive strings , an arrangement that reduces the extensions of the little and index fingers ( " hand stretching " ) . Major and minor chords are played on two successive frets , and so require only two fingers ; other chords — seconds , fourths , sevenths , and ninths — are played on three successive frets . For each regular tuning , chord patterns may be moved around the fretboard , a property that simplifies beginners ' learning of chords and that simplifies advanced players ' improvisation . In contrast , chords cannot be shifted around the fretboard in the standard tuning E @-@ A @-@ D @-@ G @-@ B @-@ E , which requires four chord @-@ shapes for the major chords ; standard tuning has separate chord @-@ forms for chords having their root note on the third , fourth , fifth , and sixth strings . 
 Having exactly three pitch classes for its open notes ( for example { C , E , G ♯ } ) , each major @-@ thirds tuning repeats every note in a higher octave , because guitars have six strings . Being regular , M3 tunings repeat each note after two strings : this repetition simplifies the learning of chords and improvisation . Chord inversion is especially simple in major @-@ thirds tuning . Chords are inverted simply by raising one or two notes three strings . The raised notes are played with the same finger as the original notes . 
 = = = = = Guitars with seven and eight strings = = = = = 
 Major @-@ thirds tuning has a smaller scope than standard guitar @-@ tuning , and so Patt started using seven @-@ string guitars , which enabled major @-@ thirds tuning to have the E @-@ e ' range of the standard tuning . He first experimented with a wide @-@ neck Mango guitar from the 1920s , which he modified to have seven strings in 1963 . In 1967 he purchased a seven @-@ string by José Rubio . Patt used major @-@ thirds tuning when he performed as a session musician in New York City after 1965 . 
 Later , he purchased six @-@ string <unk> hollow @-@ body guitars that were then modified by <unk> to have wider necks , wider pickups , and eight strings . Patt 's Gibson ES @-@ 150 was modified by Vincent " Jimmy " <unk> , a luthier who worked in the firm of John D <unk> , circa 1965 . <unk> Saul Koll modified a sequence of guitars : a 1938 Gibson Cromwell , a Sears Silvertone , a circa 1922 Mango <unk> , a 1951 Gibson L @-@ 50 , and a 1932 Epiphone Broadway ; for Koll 's modifications , custom pick @-@ ups accommodated Patt 's wide necks and high G ♯ ( equivalently A ♭ ) ; custom pick @-@ ups were manufactured by Seymour Duncan and by Bill Lawrence . 
 Besides these guitars , Patt regularly played other stringed instruments as a recording musician : classical guitar , 12 @-@ string guitar , 6 @-@ string bass guitar , mandolin , banjo , and oud . Patt stated that " the only guys that didn 't have to double on dates were the Tony <unk> and the Johnny Smiths " ; Tony Mottola and Johnny Smith were famous jazz @-@ guitarists , and " doubling " refers to a musician 's switching from one instrument to another , particularly within a family of instruments . Patt worked primarily as a studio musician from 1970 to 1975 . 
 = = = = Scholarship = = = = 
 Patt developed a webpage with extensive information about major @-@ thirds tuning . This webpage was part of website with extensive information for jazz guitarists . Patt 's website published his Vanilla book , which contains the chord progressions for four @-@ hundred jazz standards , from " After you 've gone " to " Zing ! went the strings " . Its title refers to " Just play the vanilla changes " , advice to young pianists from Lester Young . It was updated in 2008 . 
 His website followed earlier contributions to guitar scholarship and instruction . In 1962 , Patt wrote his Guitar chord dictionary ( 1962 ) . Living in New York City in the 1960s , he studied with Chuck Wayne , with whom he wrote The guitar <unk> dictionary ( 1965 ) , one of the bestselling titles from the music @-@ publishing firm of Henry Adler . 
 = = = Return to geology = = = 
 As a studio musician in the 1970s , Patt had to play less jazz and more rock and roll , and so he changed careers . He returned to geology while continuing to pursue jazz as an avocation . Around 1975 he began working on his doctoral degree in <unk> . Employed by the US Department of Energy , he specialized in ground @-@ water contamination from nuclear waste ; as a research <unk> , he accepted assignments world @-@ wide and had extensive travels in Ukraine and Russia . 
 He was employed by Oregon 's Department of Water Resources , where he served as its expert on the risks to the Columbia River from the Hanford Site . As a hydrological geologist ( hydrologist ) , he was appointed to a panel of outside experts that reviewed and then " slammed " the U.S. Department of Energy 's report on the safety of the underground storage of high @-@ level nuclear waste at Hanford . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In 2002 and 2010 , Patt 's hometown was listed as Canby , Oregon , near Portland . Having been diagnosed with kidney cancer in 2007 , Ralph Oliver Patt died at the age of 80 on 6 October 2010 in Canby at home . To honor his memory , the Ralph Patt Memorial Scholarship provided full tuition , room , and board for a college student to attend the Mel Brown Jazz Camp in 2011 . 
 = Red River Trails = 
 The Red River Trails were a network of ox cart routes connecting the Red River Colony ( the " Selkirk Settlement " ) and Fort Garry in British North America with the head of navigation on the Mississippi River in the United States . These trade routes ran from the location of present @-@ day Winnipeg in the Canadian province of Manitoba across the international border and by a variety of routes across what is now the eastern part of North Dakota and western and central Minnesota to Mendota and Saint Paul , Minnesota on the Mississippi . 
 Travellers began to use the trails by the 1820s , with the heaviest use from the 1840s to the early 1870s , when they were superseded by railways . Until then , these <unk> provided the most efficient means of transportation between the isolated Red River Colony and the outside world . They gave the Selkirk colonists and their neighbours , the Métis people , an outlet for their furs and a source of supplies other than the Hudson 's Bay Company , which was unable to enforce its monopoly in the face of the competition that used the trails . 
 Free traders , independent of the Hudson 's Bay Company and outside its jurisdiction , developed extensive commerce with the United States , making Saint Paul the principal entrepôt and link to the outside world for the Selkirk Settlement . The trade developed by and along the trails connecting Fort Garry with Saint Paul stimulated commerce , contributed to the settlement of Minnesota and North Dakota in the United States , and accelerated the settlement of Canada to the west of the rugged barrier known as the Canadian Shield . For a time , this cross @-@ border trade even threatened Canada 's control of its western territories . The threat diminished after completion of transcontinental trade routes both north and south of the border , and the transportation corridor through which the trails once ran declined in importance . That corridor has now seen a resurgence of traffic , carried by more modern means of transport than the crude ox carts that once travelled the Red River Trails . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 1812 , Thomas Douglas , 5th Earl of Selkirk , started a colony of settlers in British North America where the Assiniboine River joins the Red River at the site of modern Winnipeg . Although fur posts were scattered throughout the Canadian northwest , and settlements of Métis fur traders and bison hunters were located in the vicinity of Selkirk ’ s establishment , this colony was the only agricultural settlement between Upper Canada and the Pacific Ocean . Isolated by geology behind the rugged Canadian Shield and many hundreds of miles of wilderness , settlers and their Métis neighbours had access to outside markets and sources of supply only by two laborious water routes . 
 The first , maintained by the Hudson 's Bay Company ( in which Lord Selkirk was a principal investor ) , was a sea route from Great Britain to York Factory on Hudson Bay , then up a chain of rivers and lakes to the colony , 780 miles ( 1250 km ) from salt water to the Assiniboine . The alternative was the historic route of the rival North West Company 's voyageurs from Montreal through Lake Huron to Fort William on Lake Superior . Above Superior , this route followed rivers and lakes to Lac la Croix and west along the international border through Lake of the Woods to Rat Portage , and then down the Winnipeg River to the Red . The distance from the Selkirk settlement to Lake Superior at Fort William was about 500 miles ( 800 km ) , but Lake Superior was only the start of a lengthy journey to Montreal where furs and supplies would be transshipped to and from Europe . 
 Neither of these routes was suitable for heavy freight . Lighter cargoes were carried in York boats to Hudson Bay or in canoes on the border route . Both routes required navigation of large and hazardous lakes , shallow and rapid @-@ strewn rivers , and swampy creeks and bogs , connected by numerous portages where both cargo and watercraft had to be carried on men 's backs . 
 But geology also provided an alternate route , albeit across foreign territory . The valleys of the Red and Minnesota Rivers lay in the beds of Glacial Lake Agassiz and its prehistoric outlet Glacial River Warren ; the lands exposed when these bodies of water receded were flat plains between low uplands covered by prairie grasslands . At the Traverse Gap , only a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of land separated the Bois des Sioux River , a source stream of the Red ( which flowed north to Hudson Bay ) and the Little Minnesota River , a source stream of the Minnesota River ( tributary to the Mississippi , which flowed south to the Gulf of Mexico ) . The valley floors and uplands of the watercourses along this gently graded route provided a natural thoroughfare to the south . The eyes of the colonists therefore turned to the new United States , both as a source of supplies and an ( illegal ) outlet for their furs . 
 = = Development of the routes = = 
 The rich fur areas along the upper Mississippi , Minnesota , Des Moines , and Missouri Rivers , otherwise occupied only by peoples of the First Nations , were exploited by independent fur traders operating from Prairie du Chien , Wisconsin in the late eighteenth century . At the beginning of the nineteenth century , these traders established fur posts in the Minnesota River valley at Lake Traverse , Big Stone Lake , Lac qui Parle , and Traverse des Sioux . The large fur companies also built posts , including the North West Company 's stations at Pembina and St. Joseph in the valley of the Red River . The paths between these posts became parts of the first of the Red River Trails . 
 In 1815 , 1822 , and 1823 , cattle were herded to the Red River Colony from Missouri by a route up the Des Moines River Valley to the Minnesota River then down the Red River to the Selkirk settlement . In 1819 , following a devastating plague of locusts which left the colonists with insufficient seed even to plant a crop , an expedition was sent by snowshoe to purchase seed at Prairie du Chien . It returned by flatboat up the Mississippi and Minnesota Rivers and down the Red River , arriving back at the settlement in the summer of 1820 . In 1821 , five dissatisfied settler families left the colony for Fort Snelling , the forerunners of later tides of migration up and down the valley between the two nations . Two years later in 1823 , Major Stephen Harriman Long was the first official U.S. representative to reach Pembina ; his expedition came by way of the Minnesota and Red Rivers . These early expeditions on the watersheds of these two streams were among the earliest known through trips on the route of the first Red River Trail . 
 = = = West Plains Trail = = = 
 The West Plains Trail had originated with Native Americans , and before the ox cart traffic it connected the fur @-@ trading posts of the Columbia Fur Company . In fact , that company introduced the Red River ox cart to haul its furs and goods . It also developed the trails , and by the early 1830s , an expedition from the Selkirk settlement driving a flock of sheep from Kentucky to the Assiniboine found the trail to be well @-@ marked . 
 From the Red River Settlement , the trail went south upstream along the Red River 's west bank to Pembina , just across the international border . Pembina had been a fur @-@ trading post since the last decade of the eighteenth century . From there , some traffic continued south along the river , but most cart trains went west along the Pembina River to St. Joseph near the border and then south , or else cut the corner to the southwest in order to intercept the southbound trail from St. Joseph . This north @-@ south trail paralleled the Red River about thirty miles ( 50 km ) to the west . By staying on the uplands west of the Red River , this route avoided crossing the tributaries of that river near their confluences with the Red , and also kept out of the swampy , flood @-@ prone , and mosquito @-@ ridden bottomlands in the lakebed of Glacial Lake Agassiz which the river drained . 
 In what is now southeastern North Dakota , the trail veered to the south @-@ southeast to close with the Red River at Georgetown , Fort Abercrombie , and Breckenridge , Minnesota , all of which came into existence in consequence of the passing cart traffic . From Breckenridge , the trail continued upstream along the east bank of the Red and Bois des Sioux Rivers to the continental divide at Lake Traverse . Some traffic went along the lakeshore through the Traverse Gap on the continental divide , then down either side of Big Stone Lake , source of the Minnesota River , while other carters took a short cut directly south from the Bois des Sioux across the open prairie through modern Graceville , Minnesota thereby avoiding the wet country in the Traverse Gap . 
 The trail continued on intertwined routes down both sides of the valley of the Minnesota River past fur posts at Lac qui Parle and downstream locations , and the Upper Sioux and Lower Sioux Indian Agencies and Fort Ridgely , all established in the 1850s . From Fort Ridgely , the trail struck across the open prairie to the Minnesota River at Traverse des Sioux near modern @-@ day St. Peter , Minnesota , where the furs and goods were , at first , usually transshipped to flatboats . In later years , most cart trains crossed to the east bank and proceeded northeast along the wooded river bottoms and uplands to Fort Snelling or Mendota , where the Minnesota River joined the Mississippi . From there furs were shipped down the Mississippi River to Saint Louis and other markets . 
 Sporadic at first , trade between Fort Garry and the Mississippi became more regular in 1835 , when a caravan of traders from the Red River came to Mendota . The efforts of the Hudson ’ s Bay Company to enforce its monopoly only induced the fur traders to avoid the company 's jurisdiction by moving across the border to the United States . These included Norman Kittson whose enormous fur @-@ trading and shipping enterprise along the West Plains Trail started with one six @-@ cart train in 1844 . In later years , trains consisting of hundreds of ox carts were sent from Kittson ’ s post at Pembina , just inside U.S. territory and safely outside the reach of the Hudson ’ s Bay Company . While some of this fur traffic was shifted to other routes in 1854 , the forts , missions , Indian agencies , and remaining through traffic to Fort Garry kept the trails busy , and they were improved in the 1850s and supplemented by military roads . 
 = = = Woods Trail = = = 
 The West Plains Trail , although relatively level , went by a lengthy route through the lands of the Dakota people , and the shorter East Plains Trail also skirted Dakota land . The Dakota were the enemy of the Ojibwa , to whom the Métis carters were related by blood and marriage . These tensions led to conflicts . One such bloody confrontation in the summer of 1844 ( caused by an attack by Métis carters on Dakota hunters ) occurred when that year 's expedition of free traders were in Saint Paul . This meant that they could not safely return by the normal route . The traders therefore struck northwest up the Mississippi to Crow Wing at the mouth of the Crow Wing River , west up that river and across the height of land to the fur post at Otter Tail Lake , then northwest across the prairie to a crossing of the Red River near its confluence with the Forest River . The next year , a southbound party followed its tracks , and by the year after ( 1846 ) , the final route had been well @-@ established inland from the Red River bottomlands . This trail was known as the Woods or Crow Wing Trail ; it was also known locally as the Saint Paul Trail and Pembina Trail . 
 As the first of these names indicates , the path was partially wooded , as its southern reaches crossed the transition zone between the western prairies and eastern woodland . From Fort Garry , southbound cart trains followed the east bank of the Red River , crossing the Roseau River and the international border . In Minnesota , the trail was joined by a route coming from Pembina to the northwest , and continued south on a level prairie in the former lakebed of prehistoric Lake Agassiz . It ascended to and followed a firm gravelly ridge which was once among the higher beaches or <unk> of that ancient lake , forded the Red Lake River at the Old Crossing near modern Huot , and angled south by southeast to the fur post at White Earth . At Otter Tail Lake , the route left the plains and turned east into a forest in the Leaf Mountains on the continental divide . Taking a difficult but scenic path east through the woods , the trail crossed the Mississippi River at Old Crow Wing . It then went south down the east bank of that river on a smooth and open glacial outwash sandplain to Sauk Rapids and East Saint Cloud . 
 The final lap of the trail to Saint Paul , which had replaced Mendota as the principal entrepôt for the cart trade , continued along the sandplain on the east bank of the Mississippi . This route ran within a few miles of the river to Saint Anthony Falls and the community of that name which was growing on the east bank of the Mississippi . The trail then left the river and crossed open country to Saint Paul . The carters camped on the uplands west of the steamboat landing during the interval between their arrival with the furs and their return to the north with supplies and trade goods . 
 Inferior in terrain to other routes , the Woods Trail was superior in safety , as it was well within the lands of the Ojibwa . It was less well used during times of relative calm . In the late 1850s , its utility was increased by improvements made by the U.S. Army , which straightened and improved the winding ox path through the woods along the Leaf and Crow Wing Rivers , and also replaced the old trail along the Mississippi River between Fort Ripley ( near Crow Wing ) and Sauk Rapids with a military road . 
 = = = East Plains Trail = = = 
 The Middle or East Plains Trail also came into common use in the 1840s . Shorter than the competing West Plain Trail , it became the route of the large cart trains originating from Pembina when well @-@ known trader Henry Sibley retired from the fur trade in 1854 . His successor and former partner Norman Kittson moved their company 's cart trains from the West Plains Trail in the Minnesota River valley to the East Plains route . 
 The East Plains Trail followed the older routes of the West Plains Trail from Pembina to Breckenridge , Minnesota , then struck east by a variety of routes out of the Red River Valley across the upper valleys of the Pomme de Terre and Chippewa Rivers ( tributaries of the Minnesota River ) , to Saint Cloud and Sauk Rapids on the Upper Mississippi . Soon however , a branch was added to connect the East Plains Trail with the Woods Trail . This link skirted the west slope of the Leaf Mountains and joined the East Plains routes at Elbow Lake or near the Otter Tail River . At times , this eastern connection may have been the better @-@ travelled of the two variants . 
 At Saint Cloud , the furs of some of the cart brigades were transshipped to river craft on the Mississippi , which operated to Saint Anthony Falls at Minneapolis . Other cart trains crossed the Mississippi and travelled on to Saint Paul on a route shared with the Woods Trail . 
 Over most of its route , the East Plains Trail went through a post @-@ glacial landscape of lakes , moraines , and <unk> , with beautiful scenery and difficult swamps . As the area became settled during Minnesota ’ s territorial and early statehood days , the routes were improved , stagecoach service was instituted , towns were established , and permanent settlement began . 
 = = Commerce = = 
 The trails were first used to obtain seed and supplies for the Selkirk colony . They soon became trade routes for local fur traders , and in the 1830s began to be heavily used by American fur traders operating just south of the international border . The Americans acquired furs from Métis fur traders in British North America who were evading the Hudson 's Bay Company monopoly on trade within its chartered domain . 
 The settlement at Fort Garry was isolated and at the end of a 700 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) water and land route from York Factory , which was served by only one or two ships each year . Orders from Britain had to be placed a year in advance . But from Saint Paul , the settlers could obtain staples and other goods in the span of a single summer . In the face of these relative inconveniences and the economy of shipping over the trails , the Hudson ’ s Bay Company was unable to compel all trade to go by way of York Factory on Hudson Bay , and by 1850 the company ’ s monopoly was broken . In fact , the company itself all but abandoned the York Factory route for heavy trade in 1857 , and instead shipped its own traffic in bond through the United States and over the Red River Trails . 
 The principal export from the Red River settlements was fur , but as the colony passed from a subsistence economy to one producing more than could be consumed locally the agricultural surplus was also sent south by ox cart . The imports were more varied ; originally they were seed , spices , and other staples , liquor , tools , implements , and hardware . In midcentury the buffalo herds declined , and traffic in furs began to be replaced by the produce and needs of settlers . As settlement developed the trails became a " common carrier " for all manner of goods that could be carried by ox cart , including lamps and coal oil to burn in them , fine cloth , books , general merchandise , champagne , sheet @-@ metal stoves , disassembled farm machinery and at least one piano , and a printing press and other accoutrements for the first newspaper in the Fort Garry region . 
 = = Life on the trail = = 
 The typical carter was a Métis descended from French voyageurs of the fur trade and their Ojibway spouses . His conveyance was the Red River ox cart , a simple vehicle derived either from the two @-@ wheeled <unk> used in French Canada , or from Scottish carts . From 1801 on , this cart was modified so that it was made solely from local materials . It contained no iron at all . Instead it was constructed entirely of wood and animal hide . Two twelve @-@ foot @-@ long parallel oak shafts or " trams " bracketed the draft animal in front and formed the frame of the cart to the rear . Cross @-@ pieces held the floorboards , while front , side and rear boards or rails enclosed the box . These wooden pieces were joined by <unk> and <unk> . The axle was also made of seasoned oak . It was lashed to the cart by strips of wet bison hide known by its Cree name of <unk> , which shrank and tightened as they dried . The axles connected two spoked wheels , five or six feet in diameter , which were " dished " or in the form of a shallow cone , the apex of which was at the hubs , which were inboard of the rims . The carts were originally drawn by small horses obtained from the First Nations . After cattle were brought to the colony in the 1820s , oxen were used to haul the carts . They were preferred because of their strength , endurance , and cloven hooves which spread their weight in swampy areas . 
 The cart , constructed of native materials , could easily be repaired . A supply of <unk> and wood was carried as a cart could break a half @-@ dozen axles in a one @-@ way trip . The axles were <unk> , as grease would capture dust which would act as sandpaper and immobilize the cart . The resultant squeal sounded like an <unk> violin , giving it the sobriquet of " the North West fiddle " . One visitor wrote that " a den of wild beasts cannot be compared with its hideousness " . The noise was audible for miles . The carts were completely unsprung , and only their flexible construction cushioned the shocks transmitted from the humps and hollows of the trail . 
 Southbound , the carts were loaded with fur , packed into the 90 @-@ pound ( 40 kg ) bundles known in the fur trade as pièces . A cart could handle up to 800 – 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 360 – 450 kg ) . On their return the traders carried staples , trade goods , and manufactured goods unavailable at Fort Garry . In both directions , the cargo was covered with hide or canvas . The carts were lashed together in brigades of ten carts , with three drivers and an overseer . These brigades could join in trains up to two miles ( three km ) in length . Carts numbering in the low hundreds annually used the trails in the 1840s , many hundreds in the 1850s , and thousands in the late 1860s . These cart trains travelled about two miles ( three km ) an hour , and about twenty miles ( thirty km ) in a day . 
 After breaking camp in the morning , the carters set out across the prairie ; transits of the unprotected open prairie between places of refuge were known as traverses . Streams often had to be forded ; where the water was too deep , the carts were unloaded , the wheels were taken off and lashed together or affixed under the cart , the assemblage was covered with hide to form a hull , and the makeshift craft was reloaded and floated across . The traders endeavoured to ford a stream at the end of the day rather than start the next day with the crossing , to allow time to dry out overnight . 
 <unk> camps offered wood , water , and some protection from the hazards of open land . The prairie could be dangerous in time of native unrest , and trade ceased entirely for a time during the Dakota War of 1862 . Prairie fires , driven by winds , were a risk in dry spells . Wet weather turned rivers into torrents , approaches to streams into bogs , and worn paths into <unk> . Blizzards could strand traders and threaten them with starvation . Insects harassed both the traders and their draft animals , depriving them of sleep and weakening them . 
 There were compensations . Game was plentiful and the traders rarely lacked fresh meat . Some saw in the seemingly boundless prairies a colourful ocean of grass , and summer storms could be awe @-@ inspiring , although dangerous . While the prairie had its own grandeur , after weeks of travel over treeless steppe the rivers , lakes , and woods of central Minnesota were a welcome relief . 
 After six or so weeks on the trail , the brigades reached Saint Paul . There the carters camped on the bluff above the town growing on the riverfront . Not all was harmonious . To the locals , the swarthy @-@ <unk> carters up on the hill had a " devil @-@ may @-@ care " aspect , with their " curious commingling of civilized garments and barbaric adornments " . One trader from the north called his host city " a wretched little village " where " drinking whisky seems to occupy at least half the time of the worth [ y ] citizens " , while the rest were " employed in cheating each other or imposing upon strangers . " The economic benefits of trade , and the separation of the carters ' camp from the village below , may have helped keep relations civil . After about three weeks of trading , the " wild " carters from the north , now laden with goods , took their leave of the " den of blackguards " that was Saint Paul , returning to what they felt was a more civilized world . Their erstwhile hosts , on the other hand , thought their visitors were returning to an uncivilized and frozen wilderness . 
 = = End of the trails = = 
 At times , some ox cart trains did not go all the way through , but were supplemented by river craft . First flatboats and then shallow @-@ draft steamboats ascended the Minnesota River to Traverse des Sioux and upstream points , where they were met by cart brigades travelling the West Plains Trail . In 1851 , weekly steamboat service on the Mississippi began between Saint Anthony Falls and Sauk Rapids on the Middle and Woods trails . In 1859 , steamboat machinery was carried overland to the Red River where a boat was built , but service was intermittent . The Dakota War of 1862 and the American Civil War delayed further improvements . 
 After the Civil War , the age of steam came to the region . After Ojibwe title to the Red River Valley had been extinguished on the United States side of the Canadian border by the Treaty of Old Crossing in 1863 , steamboat service was revived on the Red River , and railways were built west from Saint Paul and Duluth , Minnesota on Lake Superior . A branch of the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad reached St. Cloud in 1866 . Its mainline reached Willmar in 1869 and Benson , Minnesota the following year . Each end @-@ of @-@ track town in its turn became the terminus for many of the cart trains . In 1871 , the railway reached the Red River at Breckenridge , where revived steamboat service carried the traffic the rest of way to Fort Garry . The long trains of carts drawn by oxen were replaced by railway trains powered by steam , and the trails reverted to nature . 
 A few traces of the vanished trails still exist . Some local roads follow their routes ; depressions in the landscape show where thousands of carts once passed , and even after more than a century of winters and springs , freezing and thawing the land , there are still places where soils remain compacted and resistant to the plow . Some of these subtle artifacts are marked or are visible to one with a discerning eye , but in most places the trails have been obliterated . Their locations are noted at parks and wayside signs , and trail locations near Baxter , St. Hilaire , and West Union , Minnesota are recognized on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Red River Trails are less well known today than many other pioneer trails and trade routes in North America , and do not occupy as large a place in folklore as the great western trails in the United States and the fur @-@ trading canoe routes of Canada . They were neither fought over nor the locus of battles ( with the exception of the Dakota War of 1862 ) , and although hazardous at times , other trails presented greater dangers . It may be that this relative lack of attention is due to the fact they did not lead to annexation of any territory to either of the nations in which the trails were located . 
 The trails nevertheless were instrumental in the development of central North America . Traffic over the West Plains Trail sustained the Selkirk Settlement in its early years . The trails also gave settlers of that colony and their Métis neighbours a route for migration as well as a highway for trade that was not dependent on the Hudson 's Bay Company . As usage grew , old fur trading posts became settlements and new communities were established along the cart routes . The trails pioneered by the fur brigades accelerated development of Minnesota and North Dakota , and facilitated settlement of the Canadian northwest . 
 The trails had profound political effects during a time of Anglo @-@ American tension . Both Britain and the U.S. were concerned about each other ’ s cross @-@ border influences . Born out of commercial needs and located by the dictates of geography , the trails helped create and contribute to these international influences and the tensions which resulted . The United States sent military expeditions along the route of the trails to assert national interests in the face of the continued British presence in the northwestern fur posts on soil which the U.S. claimed . The Americans were also concerned about the establishment of Lord Selkirk ’ s colony as well as British claims to the Red River Valley . Finally the U.S. wanted to curtail Britain ’ s attempts to get access to the Mississippi , access implicit in the Treaty of Paris ending the American War of Independence , and which Britain sought into the nineteenth century . The United States ' assertion of dominion over its new territories parried and reversed the British domination of the fur trade in the upper Mississippi valley , which had continued for decades after the Revolutionary War settlement which had assigned those territories to the new nation . 
 Later , the economic dependence of the Selkirk Settlement and the Canadian northwest on the Red River trade routes to U.S. markets came to pose a threat to British and Canadian control of their territory . At a time when a sense of Canadian nationality was tenuous in the northwest , that region relied on the Red River Trails and its successor steamboat and rail lines as an outlet for its products and a source of supplies . An active Manifest Destiny faction in Minnesota sought to exploit these commercial ties as a means of acquiring northwestern Canada for the United States . This pressure prompted Canada to take over the Hudson 's Bay Company territory in return for monetary and land compensation . It contributed to Canadian Confederation and the establishment of Manitoba . It also led to the decision that there should be an all @-@ Canada route for the Canadian Pacific Railway . Not until completion of that line in 1885 did Manitoba and the northwest finally have reliable and efficient access to eastern Canada by a route located entirely on Canadian soil . 
 Today , the international border is firmly established and peaceful ; there is a greater sense of Canadian nationality , and fears of U.S. Manifest Destiny have all but disappeared . Canada and the U.S. have formalized their trading partnership with the North American Free Trade Agreement , leading to increased trade between the two nations . This trade now coursing up and down the valleys of the Red and Mississippi rivers more than fulfils Lord Selkirk 's predictions made nearly two centuries ago ; while he first sought access over U.S. territory for the succour of his nascent colony , now commerce in manufactures and commodities goes in both directions . The trade corridor once occupied by the long @-@ gone Red River Trails continues to be employed for its historic purposes . 
 = Sathyamangalam Wildlife Sanctuary = 
 Sathyamangalam Wildlife Sanctuary and Tiger Reserve is a protected area and tiger reserve along the Western Ghats in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu . First declared as a wildlife sanctuary in 2008 and enlarged in 2011 , it covers a forest area of 1 @,@ 411 @.@ 6 km2 ( 545 @.@ 0 sq mi ) and is the largest wildlife sanctuary in Tamil Nadu . In 2013 , it became the fourth tiger reserve as a part of Project Tiger in the state of Tamil Nadu . 
 Sathyamangalam forest range is a significant wildlife corridor in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve between the Western Ghats and the rest of the Eastern Ghats and a genetic link between the four other protected areas which it adjoins , including the Billigiriranga Swamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary , Sigur Plateau , Mudumalai National Park and Bandipur National Park . The sanctuary covers parts of Sathyamangalam taluk and Gobichettipalayam taluk of Erode District in north western Tamil Nadu . 
 = = History = = 
 The Sathyamangalam forests were declared as a sanctuary with effect from 3 November 2008 by the Governor of Tamil Nadu as per the Wild Life Protection Act of 1972 . In 2008 , the Government of Karnataka sent a proposal to declare the contiguous Billigiriranga Swamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary as a tiger reserve which was subsequently approved in 2010 . In a wildlife survey conducted by the Government of Tamil Nadu in 2010 , 46 tigers were sighted in the Sathyamangalam forest area . In July 2010 , the Minister of State for Environment and Forests Jairam Ramesh requested the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu to consider the possibility of proposing the Sathyamangalam wildlife sanctuary as a Project Tiger tiger reserve as per the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 as the area is contiguous with the forests of Bandipur and Mudumalai tiger reserves . On 1 April 2010 , the Government of Tamil Nadu announced that it would initiate action to declare the sanctuary as a tiger reserve because of the consistent sighting of tigers in the forest area and the tiger reserve declaration would strengthen wildlife conservation efforts , as the sanctuary managers will get more financial support from the central government and the Government of India may also provide support to appoint an additional anti @-@ poaching watchers and fund the establishment of anti @-@ poaching camps . 
 On 10 March 2011 , the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests said that the proposal for according tiger reserve status for the Sathyamangalam Reserve Forests is under consideration . He said that studies using camera traps indicated there could be 19 to 25 tigers in Sathyamangalam forests . A 2011 camera trap tiger density study conducted by World Wildlife Fund indicated that the sanctuary is home to at least 25 tigers . In the same year , a DNA based project initiated by the state forest department collected 150 samples of <unk> from Sathyamangalam forests and 69 of them were found positive for tigers by tests conducted at the Center for Molecular Biology in Hyderabad . The findings also indicated that the region is home to as many as 30 tigers . 
 Supported by the reports of tiger sightings , the Tamil Nadu Forest Department submitted a detailed report to the state government supporting the tiger reserve proposal . The proposal came up for consideration before the Tamil Nadu Council of Ministers in 2012 . On 6 April 2012 , the Chief Wildlife Warden said that the proposal to have a tiger reserve in Sathyamangalam has been sent to the Ministry of Environment and Forests for approval and funding . On 18 March 2013 , the Government of India order declared that the Sathyamangalam wildlife sanctuary will become the fourth tiger reserve in the state , with the other three being Mudumalai , Anamalai and <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Expanse = = 
 The total area originally declared as a sanctuary was 524 @.@ <unk> km2 ( 202 @.@ 452 sq mi ) . The boundaries of the sanctuary were the <unk> range of Thalamalai forests and <unk> , <unk> ranges of Gobichettipalayam taluk of Guthiyalathur forests , contiguous with Billigiriranga Swamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary in the north and the rivers of Moyar and Bhavani , contiguous with Mudumalai National Park and Sigur Plateau in the south . The eastern boundary is formed by the <unk> reserved forests in <unk> taluk and Bandipur National Park in the west . The sanctuary includes the areas of Guthiyalathur reserved forests ( 299 @.@ 47 km2 ( 115 @.@ 626 sq mi ) ) , Guthiyalathur extension ( 1 @.@ 6231 km2 ( 0 @.@ 627 sq mi ) ) , Thalamalai reserved forests ( 210 @.@ 85 km2 ( 81 @.@ 410 sq mi ) ) and Thalamalai extension ( 12 @.@ <unk> km2 ( 4 @.@ 790 sq mi ) ) . 
 In September 2011 , the Department of forests increased the sanctuary area by declaring an additional 887 @.@ 26 km2 ( 342 @.@ 57 sq mi ) in seven reserve forests of Sathyamangalam forest division . The largest chunks of additional area are 487 @.@ 92 km2 ( 188 @.@ 39 sq mi ) from Guthiyalathur and 319 @.@ 87 km2 ( 123 @.@ 50 sq mi ) from Thalamalai reserve forests , thus increasing the total sanctuary area to 1 @,@ 411 @.@ 6 km2 ( 545 @.@ 0 sq mi ) . Of the total area , the core zone comprises 917 @.@ 27 km2 ( 354 @.@ 16 sq mi ) reserved forests and tourism is allowed in the buffer zone with only forest officials permitted entry into the core zone . 
 = = Flora = = 
 The Sathyamangalam forest is mostly tropical dry forest , part of the South Deccan Plateau dry deciduous forests ecoregion . There are five distinct forest types : tropical evergreen ( Shola ) , semi @-@ evergreen , mixed @-@ deciduous , dry deciduous and thorn forests . Evergreen forests are restricted to small patches in a few high altitude hill tops of <unk> between 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) and 1 @,@ 649 metres ( 5 @,@ 410 ft ) . These patches are threatened on account of land use changing to hill agriculture and plantation crops , including fruit . Semi @-@ evergreen forests are found at high altitude . Mixed and dry deciduous forests are located on middle altitude slopes and the thorn forests are usually found in the foot hills and some times , due degradation of dry deciduous forests , at the middle elevations . About 65 % of the forest division is under forest cover . Significant areas of mixed shrubland and grasslands support a large population of herbivore ungulates , the preferred prey of tigers . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 The Sathyamangalam forests link the Eastern Ghats and Western Ghats allowing gene flow between diverse fauna populations of the two eco @-@ regions . The 2009 wildlife survey conducted by Government of Tamil Nadu enumerated 10 Bengal tigers , 866 Indian elephants , 672 gaurs , and 27 leopards . The survey party observed four additional species of horned antelope including 2 @,@ 348 spotted deer , 1 @,@ 068 <unk> , 304 sambar deer , 77 barking deer and four @-@ horned antelopes , 843 wild boars , 43 sloth bears and 15 striped hyenas . Herds of the famous feral buffaloes can also be spotted in places near the Moyar river . 
 The 2010 wildlife survey counted 12 Bengal tigers . In December 2011 , the Conservator of Forests of Tamil Nadu stated that the sanctuary is home to at least 28 tigers as confirmed by a camera trap study conducted by World Wildlife Fund . In the 2012 national wildlife survey , 25 tigers were recorded . As per the 2011 census , the Sathyamangalam forests was home to over 850 Indian elephants and is part of a protected area , which consists of the largest Asian elephant population in the world . 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Many bird species including <unk> , bulbuls , babblers , <unk> and crows were noted . In 2010 , the first ever bird survey was conducted in the Sathyamangalam forests . A total of 230 species of birds were recorded in the survey . In 2010 , a small population of critically endangered Indian vulture ( Gyps indicus ) and three other species of vultures were discovered to be thriving in the Moyar river valley . 20 nests were sighted and the population was estimated to consist up of 40 adults . Last sighted in the region in the 1970s , the rediscovery of the vulture , a bird rapidly disappearing from India , has been significant . <unk> , which caused the decline of vulture population was banned in 2006 and since then , vulture numbers have started to grow back . 
 = = Issues and conservation = = 
 Conservation of the Sathyamangalam Forest Division is administered by the Tamil Nadu Forest Department governed through Conservator of Forests , Erode , Divisional Forest Officer , Gobichettipalayam and District Forest Officer , Sathyamangalam . The wildlife sanctuary is part of Project Tiger and Project Elephant conservation programmes run by the Government of India . The sanctuary is listed among the top five places in India for poaching tigers by the international wild life trade monitoring network , <unk> . In February 2016 , the National Tiger Conservation Authority announced that drones will be used to monitor tiger population in five tiger reserves including Sathyamangalam . 
 The reserve also faces issues due to forest fires , uncontrolled grazing of cattle and growth of invasive plant species , damaging the ecosystem . Man @-@ animal conflicts are common especially with elephants and leopards . Elephants raid crop fields and illegal electric fences used to protect crops mortally wound elephants and five elephants were electrocuted in three @-@ month period between January and April 2013 . As of 2011 , Solar powered fencing that give a short and safe electric shock was laid over a length of 239 kilometres ( 149 mi ) to prevent the entry of elephants into agricultural lands . The state forest department also dug trenches at a cost of ₹ 1 @.@ 51 crore ( US $ 220 @,@ 000 ) to prevent the elephants from entering human habitats . Leopards prey on domestic cattle with as many as 27 goats killed by them in a single month in November 2012 . National highway 948 passes through the wildlife sanctuary and wildlife deaths have been reported due to vehicular movement in the highway at night . 
 = = Tribal population = = 
 These forests are home to indigenous tribal people belonging largely to the Irula tribe ( also known as the <unk> ) and <unk> communities . In 2011 , the Tamil Nadu state forest department officials conducted a study on the cattle and human population in the seven forest settlements and 12 revenue settlements inside the protected area . As of 2013 , tribals engage in collecting honey , more than 900 families live in 138 villages within a 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) radius surrounding the park . The tribals engage in agriculture , grazing of animals and collecting minor forest produce such as honey , tubers , fuel wood and fish . According to the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers ( Recognition of Forest Rights ) Act , 2006 , the tribals were entitled to use designated land within the park area for agriculture and the title deeds for the same are to be distributed within 2016 after the Supreme Court of India vacated a stay order issued by the Madras High Court prohibiting the same . 
 The forests were also the home of notorious criminal and bandit <unk> , who made a living poaching ivory and sandalwood from the forests and selling them on the black market . <unk> was killed by the Tamil Nadu Police in October 2004 . 
 = Sakura ( Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle ) = 
 Sakura ( <unk> ) , also known as Princess Sakura ( <unk> , Sakura Hime ) , is a fictional character and one of the protagonists from Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle , a manga series written and illustrated by Clamp . In the series , Sakura is a princess from the Kingdom of Clow who has her memories separated from her body and sent to parallel dimensions in the form of feathers . Finding Sakura catatonic and near death , Syaoran , her childhood friend , goes on a quest to recover her memories . As a payment for travelling , Sakura will never recover her memories regarding Syaoran , who she was in love with . Nevertheless , as the journey continues , Sakura forms new bonds with Syaoran , and together they learn how the sorcerer Fei @-@ Wang Reed was responsible for the loss of her memories and will benefit from their recovery . Besides Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle , Sakura also appears in other works from Clamp including xxxHolic and the drama CD series Holitsuba . 
 The character of Sakura and her relationship with Syaoran were both based on Sakura Kinomoto , the protagonist from Cardcaptor Sakura . Her character has been well received by Japanese readers and audiences , appearing in various popularity polls not only from Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle but also for anime and manga series in general . She has also received praise from media publications for her personality , her relation with Syaoran , and her development across the series . 
 = = Character outline = = 
 = = = In Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle = = = 
 First introduced in Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle , Sakura is the princess of the Kingdom of Clow . A force fragments her soul , including her memories , into feathers , which are scattered across various parallel worlds . To retrieve the feathers and save her life , she and Syaoran go to Yūko Ichihara , who gives them Mokona Modoki to help them travel to parallel worlds . The cost for her help is Sakura 's memory of Syaoran , which causes him to be absent from any memories restored to her . Sakura is initially confused , and constantly tired , but she grows stronger as she regains her feathers . She becomes very friendly with the group 's new members , Fai D. Flowright , Kurogane and Mokona , and she grows close to Syaoran again . Even though she notices that she has forgotten somebody from her memories , whenever Sakura realizes the one missing is Syaoran , her memories revert to before her realization . Over time she also starts recover various abilities , including seeing spirits of nature , ghosts , and visions of the future . 
 As the journey continues , Sakura comes to regard Syaoran as her most important person , but at the same time he betrays the group to Fei @-@ Wang Reed , the sorcerer who can control him and created him based on another teenager . Sakura learns that Fei @-@ Wang was responsible for scattering her memories and set up the journey to recover them for his own plans , but she still decides to continue in order to save Syaoran . From that point on , Sakura becomes very distant from the group , especially the newly arrived original Syaoran , because of his similarities to the clone whom she has come to know . When she sees a future involving Fai killing the original Syaoran as part of Fei @-@ Wang 's curse , Sakura attempts to change it and succeeds in taking Fai 's place , in that moment sending her soul to the Dream World and her body to Celes . Her soul is destroyed by the Syaoran clone when trying to recover her feathers . Just before her death , Sakura reveals that she is a clone of the original Sakura and asks Syaoran to go back to his previous self . Fei @-@ Wang created the clone Sakura to increase the power from the feathers , and as a backup in case the original Sakura died in the journey . After the destruction of her soul , the power stored in her soulless body is used by Fei @-@ Wang as part of his plan to revive Yūko . 
 Since clones cannot properly die , the Sakura and Syaoran clones are reconstructed by Yūko , who wishes to compensate them for how their existences were used . She causes them to be reborn as humans , who eventually meet and start living together . Sakura gives birth to the original Syaoran and they realize they are in their own past . They raise him until it is time for him to begin the events of the series , then they seal themselves in a glass tube in order to await the time when Fei @-@ Wang will attempt to shatter reality . After breaking free from the tube , Sakura and Syaoran reverse Fei @-@ Wang 's damage to the dimension using the magic they inherited from the sorcerer Clow Reed during their reincarnation . They disappear after Fei @-@ Wang is killed by Kurogane , leaving behind only a feather which the original Sakura and Syaoran absorb . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Besides the manga and anime series from Tsubasa , Sakura also appears in the animated film The Princess in the Birdcage Kingdom in which she still travels with Syaoran , Fai , Kurogane and Mokona across dimensions . She is also a playable character in the two Nintendo DS video games from Tsubasa . In the drama CD series , The Matinée of the Palace , the group performs a play that reenacts the series ' story while searching for one of her feathers . 
 Outside Tsubasa , Sakura makes various appearances in Clamp 's manga xxxHolic , showing some of the events happening in Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle . Sakura also appears in later volumes when her soul is separated from her body and sent to the Dream World . There , she meets Yūko 's assistant , a teenager named Kimihiro Watanuki , whom she finds similar to the original Syaoran . One of her feathers – that of her memories of Syaoran – appears in Watanuki 's world and gives the medium <unk> <unk> the ability to exorcise spirits . After <unk> wishes for the removal of her ability , the feather stays with a black Mokona Modoki . Sakura does not appear in the animated adaptions of xxxHolic until the original video animations series xxxHolic <unk> , in which she appears in the Dream World talking with Watanuki . 
 The drama CD series Holitsuba Gakuen features Sakura as one of the students from the fictional school Holitsuba , which includes characters from both Tsubasa and xxxHolic . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Similarly to the characters created by Osamu Tezuka and his Star System , Sakura was based on the protagonist of Clamp 's previous manga Cardcaptor Sakura , Sakura Kinomoto , and her relationship with Syaoran Li . Both Sakura and Syaoran 's counterparts from Cardcaptor Sakura had a happy ending ; Clamp said that the Tsubasa protagonists would have to overcome trials throughout the series to get their " own happy ending " . Sakura losing her memories of Syaoran and struggling to once again develop feelings for him is one of the main themes of Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle , showing the value of relationships throughout the series . 
 = = = Voice actresses = = = 
 Sakura is voiced by Yui Makino in the anime adaptation , and by Monica Rial in the English adaptation . Sakura 's character was Makino 's first work as a voice actress and she states she did not have to adjust her voice for that , finding the character similar to her . During the series ' original video animations ( OVAs ) , Makino mentioned that one of Sakura 's scenes was very sad , and worked to make it appealing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Singer Maaya Sakamoto wrote the anime 's insert song " Spica " based on Sakura 's character , describing how she moves forward across the series but still shows weakness at times . Various types of merchandising have also been made based on her appearance , such as plushes and keychains . 
 Sakura 's character has been well received by publications for manga , anime and other media . While commenting on the series ' protagonists , Ed Sizemore from Comics Worth Reading stated that Sakura had " natural grace and charm " , indicating how she changes as the series continues . Comparing her with her Cardcaptor Sakura counterpart , Carl Kimlinger from Anime News Network found Sakura a likeable female lead character based on her personality and how she cares for others . Animefringe writer Lesley Smith commented that Sakura was " becoming a much larger character " the more feathers she recovered , but even so " her relationship with Syaoran can never be the same . " Sakura 's change in the second half of the manga has also received many comments . Carlo Santos of Anime News Network called it a large improvement , as she starts manipulating events in order to obtain what she wants . On the other hand , Mania Entertainment 's Sakura Eries had mixed feelings about this , stating that while it is not surprising she volunteers to get involved in a dangerous task , the outcome was " unbelievable " due to how she ended facing the creatures from Tokyo . Megan Lavey from the same site found Sakura 's death in a later volume unexpected , and the revelation that Sakura was a clone like Syaoran made her feel " cheated " since the two of them were the series ' initial protagonists . 
 Sakura 's relationship with Syaoran and the way in which she begins caring for him again even without her memories has often been described as one of the series ' strongest points . Carlo Santos stated that the relationship even makes up for the issues in the anime , while Active Anime 's Christopher Seaman found such a romantic relationship one of the most mature developments of the series . IGN 's N.S. Davidson mentioned that the series would still be appealing to those who dislike romance , because of the " haunting " situation of these two characters . Megan Lavey called it a " pretty simple love story " , but liked their personalities though . 
 Sakura has been popular among readers readers from series , placing second among all the characters in Tsubasa : Reservoir Chronicle in a popularity poll held by Weekly Shōnen Magazine in 2005 right behind the Syaoran clone . She took a lower spot in the following poll behind Fai and the Syaoran clone , but has maintained a high ranking in other related polls from the series . In the Animage 's Anime Grand Prix poll from 2006 , Sakura was voted as the fifth most popular female anime character , and the following year she was seventh . In the Animedia " 2006 Animedia Character Awards " , Sakura ranked highly in several of its categories . The most notable include second place in the categories " Most Beautiful / <unk> Character Award " and " Most Heroic Character Award " . 
 = The Boat Race 1998 = 
 The 144th Boat Race took place on 28 March 1998 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge , with the heaviest crew in the history of the event , won by three lengths in a record time of 16 minutes 19 seconds . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis defeated Cambridge 's Goldie in a time which equalled the record , while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1997 race by two lengths , and led overall with 74 victories to Oxford 's 68 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Oxford boat club president Andrew Lindsay acknowledged the weight difference : " We are quite happy , it presents a challenge . They have got the equivalent of another cox to carry along . " Cambridge 's president David Cassidy ( who would row for Goldie ) was blunt in his assessment : " A powerful car will beat a less powerful car . " Cambridge , coached by Robin Williams , suffered a setback : their number five , Toby Wallace , was ill in the run @-@ in to the race , and did not participate in the outings just prior to the main event . Despite that , The Times reported that the Light Blue boat looked " ominously powerful " . 
 The race was sponsored for the final time by Beefeater Gin who had invested £ 1 @.@ 4 million in the event over the previous three @-@ year contract period . They would be replaced by Aberdeen Asset Management for the 1999 race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The official weigh @-@ in was held at The Hurlingham Club in London on 23 March . The Cambridge crew , the heaviest in the history of the Boat Race , weighed an average of 13 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents , the second @-@ largest disparity between the Universities since 1829 . Oxford saw five members of their 1997 crew return , while Cambridge welcomed back two in Brad Crombie and Alex Story . Two German world champions rowed for Cambridge : Stefan Forster and Marc Weber won gold in the men 's eight at the 1995 World Rowing Championships . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge were pre @-@ race favourite for the sixth consecutive year . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , only the eighth time such a decision has been made since 1945 . The river conditions were described as " smooth " . Despite holding a brief early lead , a series of blade clashes disrupted Oxford and Cambridge 's cox Potts called for a push which saw his boat pass the Mile Post with a canvas ' lead . At Hammersmith Bridge , by which time Umpire Mike Sweeney had issued fifty separate warnings to the crews , Cambridge were a length ahead and stretched away to win by three lengths in a record time of 16 minutes 19 seconds , 26 seconds quicker than the previous best time set by Oxford in the 1984 race . Cambridge beat the existing course record by 26 seconds , while Oxford finished 9 seconds behind them . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , their first victory in nine years , and in a time of 17 minutes 2 seconds which equalled the 1996 record . Cambridge won the 50th Women 's Boat Race by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 6 minutes and 25 seconds , their seventh consecutive victory . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Weber remarked " we practised our pushes and made them really effective . " Oxford 's president Lindsay conceded " Cambridge had that extra gear to increase their base for short times . It demolished us . " His stroke , Nick Robinson , commented : " It was going pretty well until the clash , but they came out better than we did . " Umpire Mike Sweeney was unperturbed : " They were both fighting for the same water . That is not a question of disqualification . " Cambridge 's Story said his crew were confident before the race : " We were never in doubt that we would win " and despite the record time , he remarked " We can row a lot better than that . " 
 = New City , New Drama = 
 " New City , New Drama " is the pilot episode of The Hills , the first spin @-@ off of Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County . It originally aired on MTV on May 31 , 2006 . In the episode , Lauren Conrad and Heidi Montag move into an apartment in Los Angeles . Conrad befriends fellow Teen Vogue intern Whitney Port , while Montag bonds with their neighbor Audrina Patridge . Conrad is later scolded after Montag and her companions arrive uninvited to a corporate event . 
 " New City , New Drama " was produced by Tony DiSanto , Adam DiVello , Liz Gateley , Colin Nash , and Andrew Perry . The episode received generally favorable reviews from critics , who appreciated its plotline and production . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 2 @.@ 9 million viewers . The episode was released on DVD on February 13 , 2007 , packaged with the remainder of the first season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lauren and her housemate Heidi move into their shared apartment in Los Angeles . Shortly after arriving , Lauren 's interview for an internship with Teen Vogue is unexpectedly changed to an earlier time . While Lauren meets with the magazine 's West Coast editor Lisa Love , Heidi befriends their neighbor Audrina . That evening , the women , Heidi 's boyfriend Jordan Eubanks , and his roommate Brian Drolet eat dinner at the sushi restaurant Geisha House . 
 The following morning , Lauren and Heidi meet with the administrators at the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising . While Lauren impresses her superiors , they question if Heidi is prepared for college . Upon returning home , Blaine Zuckerman calls Lauren on behalf of Teen Vogue and offers her an internship with the magazine . On her first day , she befriends another intern Whitney , and the two begin preparing for the launch party of Teen Vogue 's " Hollywood " edition . 
 As Lauren and Whitney learn that they will be working during the party , Heidi wants to attend the event , which Lauren is unwilling to risk her internship for . Nonetheless , as Heidi , Audrina , Jordan , and Brian arrive unexpectedly that evening , Lauren and Whitney allow the group in . Blaine and Lisa scold Lauren for an argument between Heidi and Jordan , in addition to allowing the group to sit in a reserved seating area . Lisa tells her that they will " discuss this on Monday " . 
 = = Production = = 
 After the first two seasons of Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County enjoyed continued ratings success , MTV approved production of the spin @-@ off series The Hills in 2005 . Like its predecessor , the reality television program was filmed in a narrative format more commonly seen in soap operas . Conrad , who served as the parent series ' first season narrator , became the focal point of the show as she moved to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the fashion industry . 
 The pilot episode introduced three additional primary cast members . Montag , who was previously featured on Laguna Beach in a limited capacity , became Conrad 's housemate by the time production had begun on the first season of The Hills . On the series , it was depicted as if Montag had befriended Patridge by her own doing , though Patridge claimed that a producer offered her a position on the series to become friends with Conrad and Montag . Port was introduced to the series as Conrad 's co @-@ intern at Teen Vogue . 
 " New City , New Drama " was produced by Tony DiSanto , Adam DiVello , Liz Gateley , Colin Nash , and Andrew Perry . The latter four individuals had previously served as producers for Laguna Beach . DiVello and Gateley served as the series ' executive producers until its conclusion in July 2010 . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 " New City , New Drama " was met with generally favorable reviews from critics , who appreciated its plotline and production . Kelly West from Television Blend noted that The Hills commented that MTV " [ keeps ] things simple " , noting the similarities it shares with Laguna Beach , but given the network 's success with reality programming since the 1990s , opined that the series was " sure to be as much of a hit " as its predecessor . Writing for The New York Times , Virginia Heffernan enjoyed watching " charmed " work experiences and the " hammy deadbeat " Montag , further stating that she saw the program as being more fictional than reality . Kara <unk> of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said that she missed Kristin Cavallari from Laguna Beach , but enjoyed Montag as " the new troublemaker in [ Conrad 's ] life " . 
 In its original broadcast in the United States on May 31 , 2006 , " New City , New Drama " was watched by 2 @.@ 9 million viewers . The remainder of the season maintained a steady viewership of about two million viewers for each weekly episode , and was subsequently picked up for a second season . In the country , the first season was released as a two @-@ disc DVD set on February 13 , 2007 . 
 = Conduit ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Conduit " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on October 1 , 1993 . It was written by Alex Gansa and Howard Gordon , directed by Daniel Sackheim , and featured a guest appearance by Carrie <unk> as the mother of an abducted teenager . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully , when investigating the possible alien abduction of a teenage girl , find that the missing girl 's younger brother may be capable of receiving satellite transmissions , and that her mother may also have been party to a UFO encounter over twenty years earlier . Mulder finds himself becoming emotionally attached to the case due to its similarities to his own childhood experiences , when his younger sister Samantha was abducted from their home . 
 The episode , although not directly tied to the series ' ongoing story arcs , provides more information on how Fox Mulder 's younger sister , Samantha Mulder , had been abducted as a child ; a plot thread which would go on to become one of the more prominent of the series . The episode was filmed in British Columbia , with Buntzen Lake being used as Lake Okobogee . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a campground at Lake Okobogee [ sic ] National Park in Sioux City , Iowa , Darlene Morris witnesses a flash of light outside of her RV . When she ventures outside to find her young son , Kevin , he claims that his teenaged sister , Ruby , has vanished . 
 In Washington , FBI Division Chief Scott Blevins informs Dana Scully that , unbeknownst to her , Fox Mulder has requested travel expenses to Sioux City based on a tabloid article about Ruby 's disappearance . Blevins also shows Scully an X @-@ File on the disappearance of Mulder 's sister Samantha . When Scully asks Mulder about the travel expenses , he explains that Lake Okobogee was the scene of a series of UFO sightings in 1967 ; Darlene Morris , then a member of a Girl Scout troop , was one of the witnesses . 
 When Mulder and Scully travel to Iowa and meet the Morrises , Mulder observes Kevin writing down binary code on a piece of paper ; Kevin claims they are coming from static on a television screen . After submitting Kevin 's code for analysis , the agents meet with the local sheriff , who tells them that Ruby was a juvenile delinquent who likely ran away . They also meet a young woman , Tessa , who says that Ruby had gotten pregnant and was planning to run away with her boyfriend , Greg Randall . The agents are unable to find Greg at the bar where he works ; however , his boss tells them about UFO activity at Lake Okobogee . 
 Kevin 's code is revealed to be part of a Defense Department satellite transmission . NSA agents ransack the Morris household , looking for any other documentation that might supposedly compromise national security . After the Morrises are taken into custody , Mulder examines the charred roof of their RV , prompting him to head to Lake Okobogee . There , the agents discover sand turned to glass and a burned tree line , indicating the presence of a massive heat source . Upon encountering some white wolves , Mulder and Scully find Greg Randall 's body in a shallow grave . 
 On his person , they find a note in his wallet that eventually leads Scully and Mulder to conclude that it was Tessa , not Ruby , who was pregnant . Under interrogation , Tessa confesses to killing Greg but denies Ruby was at Lake Okobogee that night . Mulder and Scully return to the Morris ' house , and , finding it deserted , discover the binary @-@ covered pieces of paper laid out across the living room floor , forming an image of Ruby 's face . The agents return to Lake Okobogee , where they find Darlene and Kevin in the nearby woods . A motorcycle gang appears , and as Mulder hurries to rescue Kevin from their wake , Scully discovers Ruby nearby . 
 Ruby is then seen in a hospital bed , with Kevin by her side . When questioned about her experience , she says she was told by an unnamed group not to say anything . Darlene also refuses to cooperate any further , given the ridicule that she faced after her experiences . Back in Washington , Scully listens to a tape of hypnotic sessions in which Mulder recalls the night his sister vanished . Mulder , meanwhile , sits in a church , crying as he looks at a picture of his sister . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was filmed in British Columbia , with Buntzen Lake being used as Lake Okobogee . Several crew members became lost in the surrounding area after the van responsible for installing signage got lost itself . The mural of Ruby made up of binary code was designed by assistant art director Greg Loewen and Vivien Nishi , who hand @-@ wrote all the numbers on the mural . 
 Co @-@ writer Howard Gordon said of the episode , " Alex [ Gansa ] and I made an effort to play to our own strength , which is character . We thought this was an interesting place to reiterate Mulder 's quest for his sister . We set out to tell a simple abduction story , which was played out behind the shadows . We wanted to create an air of tension . With everything that happened , we wanted to explain what it could be . At every point , everything can be explained . Was she taken or killed by her boyfriend , who she was seeing against her mother 's wishes ? Is it Twin Peaks or an alien abduction ? That was the theme of the show . " Gordon and Gansa were afraid that series creator Chris Carter would not like the script , but Carter liked the script and approved the episode they wrote . 
 Gordon praised the episode 's ending , saying " I think we 're most proud of the ending : Mulder 's quest is re @-@ established ( and Daniel Sackheim directed it beautifully ) with Mulder sitting alone in a church with only his faith . The story , again , was fueled by Mulder 's belief and emotional connection with this case . Another girl taken from her family . And , in a way , the little boy who is the conduit , who is also perhaps touched by the aliens , is essentially Mulder . These little touches the fans seem to respond to . It was difficult for us , but in the end satisfying . It came out of frustration on our parts , and creative uncertainty " . 
 Producer Glen Morgan felt that the episode 's writers , Alex Gansa and Howard Gordon , " have a better character @-@ dramatic sense " , adding that he believed the episode " really helped define Mulder " . Chris Carter felt the episode 's highlights were the ending and the realization by Scully that Mulder may not be a crackpot , feeling it was very important to the show in establishing its point of view . He also felt that the episode proved effective at highlighting that the series was told from Scully 's point of view , citing instances of the character " pulling Mulder back " from his fringe theories and emotional attachment . 
