 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Conduit " premiered on the Fox network on October 1 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 10 , 1994 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 3 with an 11 share — meaning that in the US , 6 @.@ 3 percent of television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of all households actively watching television , were watching the program . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 9 million households . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Conduit " was rated a B , with the episode being described as " excellent for background " for the series , though it was noted that Duchovny gave " a performance that makes wood look lively " . Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , reviewed the episode positively , rating it a B + , feeling that the episode worked well to expand on the motivations of the two lead characters , noting that " the work done here will pay off well later " . The episode has been seen as laying the foundation for the recurrence of Fox Mulder 's obsession with finding his missing sister , which would come to be one of the main plot threads of the series . 
 Duchovny 's portrayal of Fox Mulder in this episode has been cited as an example of the character 's reversal of traditional gender roles — his openness and vulnerability when dealing with the similarities between the Morris case and that of his sister casts him " in a pattern typically engendered as female " . He represents a break from past archetypes , with his " emotional and empathic balance " providing a contrast to previous male detectives in fiction . 
 = Hurricane Alma ( 1970 ) = 
 Hurricane Alma was one of only four Atlantic tropical cyclones to reach hurricane status in the month of May . It developed on May 17 , 1970 north of Panama , and rapidly intensified on May 20 to peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , near Jamaica and the Cayman Islands . It stalled south of Cuba and deteriorated due to wind shear , and by May 22 it weakened to tropical depression status . After progressing northwestward and crossing western Cuba , Alma reorganized in the Gulf of Mexico , although continued shear prevented strengthening . It moved across Florida on May 25 , and on May 27 it dissipated off the coast of Virginia . 
 The storm first brought gusty winds and heavy rainfall to Jamaica and the Cayman Islands . While it was weakening , Alma produced flooding in central and eastern Cuba , causing seven deaths and forcing 3 @,@ 000 people to evacuate . Moderate precipitation spread across Florida , while thunderstorms from the storm caused light damage and killed one girl . Moisture from the storm spread up the Atlantic coast . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on May 17 , the US National Hurricane Center , reported that a tropical depression had formed about 470 miles ( 760 km ) to the southeast of Kingston , Jamaica . Over the next couple of days , the depression became better organized as it moved towards the northwest ; on May 19 it entered an area of favorable environmental conditions , which enabled the depression to rapidly intensify . On May 20 it strengthened into a tropical storm , at which point it was given the name Alma . That day , it rapidly strengthened under favorable developmental conditions , which included low wind shear , strong upper @-@ level outflow , and apparent eastward inflow . Later on May 20 , a Navy reconnaissance plane recorded winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , which proved to be the peak intensity of Alma . It became one of only four Atlantic hurricanes on record in the month of May . 
 Subsequent to its peak intensity , increasing westerly shear disrupted the storm 's circulation and thermal pattern , which caused rapid weakening to tropical storm strength and later tropical depression status . By May 22 , the low pressure area became poorly defined after stalling south of Cuba ; with only a few squalls and showers , advisories were discontinued on Alma . The remnants of Alma continued westward near the Cayman Islands , and later turned to the north , passing over western Cuba . 
 On May 24 , the low pressure area reorganized as spiral rainbands became more evident on radar , and Alma was re @-@ classified as a tropical depression . As the depression approached the Florida coast , radar imagery indicated the system remained well @-@ organized , with a spiral band structure around an eye feature ; however , wind shear limited convection and strength , and Alma moved ashore as a depression near Cedar Key on May 25 . It turned northeastward and moved across the southeastern United States , becoming extratropical in North Carolina on May 27 . After moving off the coast of Virginia , the remnants of Alma were absorbed by an approaching cold front . 
 = = Impact = = 
 After Alma weakened from hurricane status , it passed near the Cayman Islands on May 21 , where winds of up to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) were recorded . Gale force winds and heavy rainfall also occurred in Jamaica . Heavy rains ahead of the storm caused flash flooding in central and eastern Cuba . Seven people died as a result , and several homes were destroyed . The flooding forced the evacuation of 3 @,@ 000 people in Oriente Province . Inclement weather closed 16 sugar mills , which stalled harvesting that was already behind schedule in the country . 
 In Florida , the remnants of Alma brought rainfall across most of the state , with some isolated areas experiencing 5 inches ( 12 @.@ 70 cm ) or more . The highest rainfall from the storm was near Miami , Florida , with 6 @.@ 66 inches ( 16 @.@ 92 cm ) of rain . The rainfall was beneficial in alleviating drought conditions , although thunderstorms caused hazardous driving conditions in the Florida Keys and elsewhere in the state . Small craft warnings were posted along the coast . One girl died from lightning in Miami , and a thunderstorm near Fort Myers damaged some roofs and outbuildings . In Saint Petersburg , flooding disrupted <unk> in about 400 households . Merritt Island experienced 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) wind gusts . In Georgia , South Carolina , North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland , Alma dropped moderate rainfall , with some isolated areas receiving up to 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 62 cm ) . Near Columbia , South Carolina , the remnants of Alma spawned a tornado which destroyed a roof . 
 = Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut = 
 Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut is an enhanced remake and director 's cut of the classic 1996 point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars developed by Revolution Software . It was released for Wii , Nintendo DS , iOS , Microsoft Windows , OS X , Android and Linux spanning 2009 to 2012 . The player assumes the roles of George Stobbart and Nicole Collard , who was a pivotal but not a playable character in the original version . 
 After being petitioned to bring Broken Sword to the Wii and Nintendo DS , Charles Cecil and Revolution decided to create a director 's cut . Comic book artist Dave Gibbons created additional artwork for the game . The game received positive reviews from critics , and is often listed as one of the best games on the Wii , DS and iOS / Android mobile devices . It was also a commercial success , outselling the third and fourth Broken Sword installments . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut is a 2D adventure game played from a third @-@ person perspective . Unlike in the original game , where George Stobbart is the only playable character , Nicole " Nico " Collard is controllable for selected game sections . As a result of its release on various platforms , the game can be played through a point @-@ and @-@ click interface , touch user interface , and Wii Remote . While certain puzzles from the original segments were simplified , new first @-@ person puzzles were also added . Hotspots are highlighted , and a diary in which the player character takes notes and a hint system is added . Some of the original game 's dialogue and cutscenes were removed , with the blood edited out of retained cutscenes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game opens in Paris , a day before the original game 's start , with journalist Nicole Collard receiving a request to go to the Palais Royale , to interview a famous media tycoon and potential candidate for President of France , Pierre Carchon . A mime hangs around outside Carchon 's home , but Nico ignores him and goes on inside the house . She meets Carchon 's wife , Imelda , as well as Carchon , who reveals that he knew Nico 's father , Thierry Collard , very well . Soon , there is a noise in the drawing room ; Carchon investigates only to be shot . Nico rushes to the scene to see the mime over Pierre 's corpse . She is knocked to the ground before she can do anything and wakes up to find Imelda going to call the police . 
 After persuading her that she wants to find the truth and help , Imelda allows Nico to access Carchon 's room , which contains an elephant carving – the same as one Nico received from her father , who had carved it himself , and a stone cylinder , which contained a hidden letter code . On Carchon 's corpse , Nico discovers a ticket stamped " <unk> de la <unk> " and goes to investigate the dock where the <unk> was . By using the letters on the cylinder , she discovers a secret office area where Carchon and many others met for business . After she writes her story up , her editor Ronnie tells her to drop it , at which Nico becomes angry . However , she receives a mysterious phone call from a man called Plantard , who tells her he needs to speak to her about her story . 
 The next day , the American tourist George Stobbart witnesses a terrorist attack at a cafe in Paris , during which a clown steals an old man 's briefcase and detonates a bomb . Soon after , George meets Nicole Collard , a journalist who is photographing the scene . George investigates the area to help Nicole gather information about the attack . He finds the clown 's discarded nose and learns that a man was seen escaping with a briefcase . After Nicole discovers the address of a costume shop inside the clown nose , George learns from that shop 's owner that the nose had been purchased by a man named Khan . 
 George travels to the hotel where Khan is staying , where he obtains an ancient manuscript from Khan 's hotel safe . After evading two hired thugs , Flap and Guido , George takes the manuscript to Nicole , who deduces that it is related to the Knights Templar . In a nearby museum , George finds a tripod that is illustrated in the manuscript . He soon travels to the excavation site in Lochmarne , Ireland where the tripod had been discovered ; and , there , he obtains a gem identical to one on the manuscript . In a Templar chapel beneath the local castle ruins , George discovers a mural of a hanged man with " Montfauçon " written underneath . 
 Nico attempts to find out more about her father 's involvement with Carchon . She deduces quickly that Imelda is in danger and rushes to the Palais Royale to save her . Nico is too late , but the dying Imelda gives Nico a key that fits a box Nico 's father gave her . Nico opens the box and finds out the truth . Her father and Imelda were lovers , and her father worked for the government as a sort of spy against Carchon 's secret organisation , meaning that Nico 's father was " one of the good guys " ; she decided to keep this a secret and not tell anyone , as did her father , out of respect for him . George returns to Paris and learns from Andre Lobineau , a colleague of Nicole 's , that Montfauçon is a location in Paris . Flap and Guido attempt to steal the tripod from the museum ; but they are beaten to the theft by Nicole , who gives the artifact to George . In the sewers of Montfauçon , George spies on a secret meeting of people who claim to be the Templars , and he learns of their plan to find the Sword of Baphomet . After the group leaves , George uses the tripod and gem in the underground chamber to reveal the name of a village in Syria : Marib . He travels to the village and discovers that Khan has been looking for him . At a nearby rock formation called the Bull 's Head , George finds a lens and deduces that it is represented on the manuscript as a crystal ball . He also discovers an idol with three bearded faces , Baphomet ; and a Latin inscription that describes Britain . Khan arrives and holds George at gunpoint , but George manages to escape . 
 Back in Paris , George learns from Andre that the manuscript mentions the Spanish De Vasconcellos family , who were once connected with the Templars . At the family 's villa , George speaks to the family 's sole surviving member , a Countess , who leads him to the De Vasconcellos mausoleum . There , George discovers the family 's chalice , which the Countess entrusts to George . She asks him to find her missing ancestor , Don Carlos . In Paris , George uses the lens in the church at Montfauçon and discovers a hidden image of a burning man . In the church , George find Don Carlos ' tomb , which is inscribed with a series of biblical references . 
 Andre reveals that an idol of Baphomet has been discovered in Paris , and George gains access to the excavation . Using the chalice , he discovers an image of a church with a square tower . George returns to the Countess , and he discovers that the biblical references show a secret area inside a well containing a chessboard mural with a river running through it . Compiling their clues , George , Nicole and Andre decide that the Templars are going to Bannockburn , Scotland . George and Nicole board a train , but she and an old woman in their compartment soon go missing . He reaches the conductor 's carriage , where the old woman , Khan in disguise , throws Flap out of the carriage . However , Khan is shot and killed by another man . George and Nicole reach the church in time to see the Grand Master of the Templars acquire a power from two huge Baphomet idols — the Sword of Baphomet , or the Broken Sword . After trying to tempt George to join their ranks , the Grand Master orders the couple to be killed , but they escape with the aid of explosives . The church explodes , killing Guido , the Templars and — presumably — the Grand Master . The game ends with George and Nico on their last date on the Eiffel Tower . 
 = = Development and marketing = = 
 On March 21 , 2009 , Ubisoft released a " director 's cut " of The Shadow of the Templars for the Wii and Nintendo DS . According to Cecil , the Director 's Cut came about thanks to a group of Broken Sword fans , who started an online petition begging him to bring the series to the Wii and DS . Rather than only porting the original game , as he did on the Game Boy Advance , Cecil thought it was time to reward fans with something new and different – hence the Director 's Cut 's additional material . 
 Cecil decided the game would start a day before the Parisian cafe explosion in the original game , filling in some of Nicole Collard 's back @-@ story . To this end , Cecil also drafted in the acclaimed comic book artist Dave Gibbons , with whom Revolution worked previously on their 1994 cult classic adventure Beneath a Steel Sky . In addition to working on the visual references for the game , Gibbons also produced a comic book to accompany the game 's DS release . Gibbons stated that he decided to return to video game work on this game because he knew producing character shots with a range of expressions would be challenging , and he knew he would enjoy it , based upon past experience . 
 The game was programmed by Tony Warriner and Joost Peters . In the Director 's Cut , Hazel Ellerby returns to voice Nicole Collard in the new sections , playing Nico again for the first time since the original game 's release . Rolf Saxon , as in every sequel , also returns to voice George Stobbart . Due to the platform 's size limits , the DS version contains no spoken dialogue , only subtitles . 
 Unlike in the original game , players control Nicole Collard for selected game sections . Besides the new character artwork by Gibbons during conversations , the Director 's Cut also features a new first person view for certain puzzles . In the DS version , there is no spoken dialogue , only subtitles . A version of the Director 's Cut for iPhone and iPod Touch was released on January 20 , 2010 . In May 2010 , a version with higher resolution and a digital comic was released on the iPad . A PC version was released on August 27 , 2010 on various digital distribution services . An Android version , which is an enhanced version of the iPhone version , was released on Google Play on June 28 , 2012 . The Wii and Nintendo DS versions of the Director 's Cut are available only in stores . 
 The Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut Original Soundtrack was released on the iTunes Store on December 28 , 2009 . With Director 's Cut purchases on GOG.com , the consumer also receives the original game , original manual , high @-@ definition wallpapers , the soundtrack , eleven avatars , and the comic book . 
 The comic book of the same name was created by Cecil and artist Dave Gibbons for the DS release of the Director 's Cut in March 2009 . The short comic provides a further glimpse back into Nico 's past , showing readers what happened prior to the events of her playable segments in the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut was met with positive reception , particularly the iOS versions . The iPad version also received highly positive reviews . According to Cecil , the game 's sales were higher than The Sleeping Dragon 's and The Angel of Death 's . In 2011 , the Director ' Cut and The Smoking Mirror – Remastered together sold around 500 thousand copies on iOS alone and had around five million downloads . 
 VideoGamer.com called it " the best of its platform " and " a great example of the genre " , praising its " excellent plot and puzzles " , and saying it makes good use of the DS ' screens . However , the magazine stated that fans may miss the spoken dialogue . Official Nintendo Magazine UK praised the Wii version 's puzzles , story , and art direction , and complimented the new hint system , finishing with : " One of the best point @-@ and @-@ click games ever , this will appeal to both newcomers and fans " . James Woodcock said of the iPhone version : " There are quite a few point and click adventures to choose from on the Apple iTunes Store and Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars is one of the finer selections if not the best to give your heartfelt attentions to and best of all travels with you in your pocket . " He also praised its story , puzzles , writing and art direction . Slide to Play also complimented the iPad version , saying : " Broken Sword : Director 's Cut HD is a great game that nearly anyone can enjoy . Our one caveat is that if you played through it on the iPhone , then the HD version probably doesn 't offer enough new content to warrant another purchase . But if you 're new to the game or you haven 't played it in a while , this is the version to get . The iPad truly is the ideal platform for adventure games . " <unk> praised the PC version 's , puzzles , story , characters , new content and interface , but stated that audiovisual quality of older scenes is noticeably " ropey " , that there are too many sliding tile puzzles , and that " the new jarring transition between old and new aesthetics lets it down . " 
 The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut received several awards and nominations . It was nominated for the award for Best Story at the 2009 British Academy Video Games Awards . Pocket Gamer awarded the iPhone version the Pocket Gamer Gold Award when it was released in 2010 . The Wii and DS versions were nominated for the award for Best Port / Updated Re @-@ release at Adventure Gamers ' 2010 Aggie Awards . The iPhone version was nominated for the award for Best Adventure / RPG Game at the 2011 Pocket Gamer Awards . The Wii version won the award for Best European Adventure at the 2011 European Games Awards . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut received several awards and nominations . It was nominated for the award for Best Story at the 2009 British Academy Video Games Awards . Pocket Gamer awarded the iPhone version the Pocket Gamer Gold Award when it was released in 2010 . The Wii and DS versions were nominated for the award for Best Port / Updated Re @-@ release at Adventure Gamers ' 2010 Aggie Awards . The iPhone version was nominated for the award for Best Adventure / RPG Game at the 2011 Pocket Gamer Awards . The Wii version won the award for Best European Adventure at the 2011 European Games Awards . 
 The Director 's Cut edition is often listed as one of the greatest games on the iOS , Wii , and DS . <unk> listed it as one of " The Top 5 Nintendo DS Games " in 2009 , and placed it at No. 1 on its list of " The Top 5 iPhone Adventure Games " in 2011 . In 2010 , PCWorld listed it as one of the " 25 Best iPad Games " . Pocket Gamer listed it on its lists of " Top 10 point @-@ and @-@ click adventure games on iPhone and iPad " in 2010 , " Top 10 point @-@ and @-@ click adventures for iPad " , along with The Smoking Mirror – Remastered , and " Top 10 iOS games with Game Center " in 2011 . Metacritic ranked it ninth on its list of " The Best iPhone and iPad Games of 2010 . " Trusted Reviews ranked it at number 31 on its " 100 Best iPhone Games Ever " list in 2011 . Gameranx ranked it at number 10 on its list of " Top 25 Best iOS Games " in 2011 . It is currently VideoGamer.com 's fifth @-@ best @-@ reviewed Wii adventure game and best reviewed DS adventure game of all time . 
 = Canterbury city walls = 
 Canterbury city walls are a sequence of defensive walls built around the city of Canterbury in Kent , England . The first city walls were built by the Romans , probably between 270 and 280 AD . These walls were constructed from stone on top of an earth bank , and protected by a ditch and wall towers . At least five gates were placed into the walls , linked to the network of Roman roads across the region . With the collapse of Roman Britain , Canterbury went into decline but the walls remained , and may have influenced the decision of Augustine to settle in the city at the end of the 6th century . The Anglo @-@ Saxons retained the defensive walls , building chapels over most of the gates and using them to defend Canterbury against Viking incursions . 
 The Norman invaders of the 11th century took the city without resistance , and by the 12th century the walls were ill @-@ maintained and of little military value . Fears of a French invasion during the Hundred Years ' War led to an enquiry into Canterbury 's defences in 1363 . The decision was taken to restore the city walls and for around the next thirty years the old Roman defences were freshly rebuilt in stone , incorporating the older walls where they still remained . 24 towers were constructed around the circuit , and over the coming years many of the gatehouses were rebuilt in stone and brick , defended by some of the first batteries of guns in England . Parts of the wall were deliberately damaged by Parliament during the English Civil War of the 17th century and the doors to the city 's gates burnt ; with the restoration of Charles II in 1660 , new doors were reinstalled . 
 During the 18th and 19th centuries , Canterbury 's city walls came under extensive pressure from urban development . All the gates but one , West Gate , were destroyed and extensive parts of the walled circuit were knocked down to make way for new roads and buildings . German bombing during the Second World War caused further damage . Despite this , the remaining walls and gatehouse survived post @-@ war redevelopment intact and some portions were rebuilt entirely . Over half the original circuit survives , enclosing an area of 130 acres ( 53 ha ) , and historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham consider the city wall to be " one of the most magnificent in Britain " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 3rd – 4th centuries = = = 
 The first city walls in Canterbury were built by the Romans . Canterbury , then called <unk> Cantiacorum , was initially probably defended by a small fort but had not required any other civic defences . The security situation in Britain deteriorated in the late 3rd century AD and a circuit of defensive walls were built around the city , probably between 270 and 290 . They enclosed an area of 130 acres ( 53 ha ) , cutting off the old industrial parts of the western side of the city , but incorporating a cemetery area to the south @-@ east that had formerly been outside the city boundary . New coastal forts were also built across the region at around the same time , and a headquarters for them may have been established in Canterbury . 
 The walls were typically 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) inches thick and built of flint and mortar , with some limited use of larger sandstone blocks . The height of these walls is uncertain , but sections have survived that are up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high . The walls stood on a bank of earth between 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide and at least 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high , protected by a ditch , typically 59 feet ( 18 m ) wide and 16 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) deep , but in places up to 82 feet ( 25 m ) wide . A 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide cobbled berm ran between the ditch and the wall . 
 The walls had at least five gates , typically positioned near angles in the city wall , although , judging from the location of Roman roads , it is possible that another two Roman gates may also have existed . The gates linked to the network of major roads that ran across Kent . The Riding Gate , which took its name from the red bricks with which it was built , had two protective towers and a pair of entrance arches for pedestrians and carriages , as probably did Burgate . The Worth Gate , the London Gate and the Queningate had simpler entrance arches . A sequence of square towers protected the walls , and at least one additional wall tower was constructed following the Saxon invasion of Britain in 367 . 
 = = = 5th – 11th centuries = = = 
 During the 5th century , Canterbury went into decline and its Roman institutions and buildings crumbled , although the city walls survived . In 597 , Augustine was sent to Kent by Pope Gregory I to convert the local population to Christianity . Augustine established Canterbury Cathedral within the city , possibly because the walled site gave them additional protection or because it was symbolically important as a former Roman city . Canterbury , now called <unk> , prospered and its population and trade increased . Much of the land within the walls had become water meadows and farmland , and an palisade may have built around the cathedral and its precinct to form a secure inner stronghold . 
 In the late Anglo @-@ Saxon period , the internal street layout of Canterbury was remodelled , but the line of the outer walls remained the same . A cattle market was created outside the city to the south @-@ east , and Newingate , later renamed St George 's Gate , was inserted into the walls to allow easy access to it . During this the period the main axis of the city shifted from the older line of streets running from London Gate and Riding Gate , to the new route between West Gate and Newingate . A lane was built running around the inside of the walls , in a similar way to the intramural streets built around the same time at Exeter and Winchester . Churches and chapels were built over the gates , including St Mary 's above the North Gate ; the Holy Cross over West Gate ; St Michael 's over Bargate ; St Edmund 's within Riding Gate ; and , potentially , St George 's Chapel over Newingate . Canterbury 's walls were mentioned by the early chronicler , Bede , in his history of England . 
 Despite Canterbury 's walls , a Viking army successfully attacked the city in 835 , killing many of the inhabitants . Scandinavian raids recommenced from 991 onwards and in 1011 a Danish army demanded fresh tribute from the city . The city walls were used to defend the city during an 11 @-@ day siege , and the chronicler Roger of Hoveden recounts how the attacking Danes were thrown off the tops of the walls to their deaths by the citizens . Roger 's account may be an exaggeration , but the story shows that the city walls were in sufficiently good condition for such a story to be considered plausible at the time . After a fire broke out in the city , however , the Danes entered and pillaged Canterbury . 
 = = = 11th – 13th centuries = = = 
 The inhabitants of Canterbury put up no resistance to the Normans during their conquest of England in 1066 . William the Conqueror instructed that a castle was to be built in the city ; Canterbury Castle was built on the south side of the city and formed part of the circuit of defence , with property being destroyed to make room for it . Despite its location along the walls , historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham have observed that the castle was not an " addition " to the defences , but more an " imposition " on the town within it . The first timber motte and bailey castle was later abandoned and a second , with a square , stone keep , built in 1123 . The Worth Gate became the south entrance to the castle site , and a new gate was put into the walls to the east for general use . 
 In 1086 , the Domesday Book recorded that 11 houses had been built in the ditches around the city walls , which by then appear to have been in a poor condition . The encroachment was possibly the result of population pressures on the inner , walled city , as Canterbury had spread out well beyond the walls by the mid @-@ 11th century . It is unclear how the walls were maintained during this period , and by the 12th century they were in ruins and of little practical defensive value . In the late @-@ 12th century , the walls were assigned some limited royal funding through the local sheriff , probably for the maintenance of existing structures , and just over £ 5 was spent in 1166 – 67 on these repairs . 
 Wooden " bars " had been placed outside many of the city gates to regulate the flow of traffic by the 12th century , including Riding Gate , Worth Gate and North Gate . One area of the city beyond the wall , called the <unk> , may also have been protected by its own earthworks during the middle of the 12th century . Canterbury was divided into wards by the 12th century , although these may potentially have been created as early as the Anglo @-@ Saxon period . These administrative districts , named after the city gates , were termed <unk> and were linked to maintenance and manning of the city walls . The wards took the form of segments , spreading out from the centre of the city , incorporating the relevant gate and sometimes the suburbs beyond that had spread outside the walls . By the 1160s Canterbury 's wards included Burgate , Northgate and Newingate , with the wards of Riding Gate , <unk> and West Gate being formed by the end of the century . 
 After the 12th century , work on the walls appears to have stopped until the second half of the 14th century . The city walls fell further into disrepair as a result . In some places , over 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of debris came to cover the remaining stonework of the old Roman walls , while in another case a building was constructed directly over the top of the former defences . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 In the early 1360s , during the Hundred Years War , there was an increased level of concern about potential French raids or invasion along the south of England . Canterbury was particularly important for the defence of the south @-@ east , as it formed a potential barrier to any invaders marching on London . An enquiry was carried out in 1363 into the state of Canterbury 's defences , which concluded that the city was in a parlous position , as " the walls of Canterbury are for the most part fallen because of age , and the stones thereof carried away , and the ditches under the walls are obstructed " . 
 Canterbury 's bailiffs were ordered to repair the walls , with similar instructions being issued to the authorities in vulnerable cities such as Colchester , Bath and Rochester . The result was what historian Hilary Turner has described as a " well @-@ planned operation " , designed to build the walls rapidly , but which still took around 30 years to complete . The city and the cathedral authorities worked closely together on the project , an unusual situation , given the local political tensions that existed between them . 
 Money was needed to pay for this work . During the previous century , a method of taxation had been introduced to support the creation or maintenance of city walls , called murage , which was authorised by the king and applied to trade entering a city . In total , Canterbury was assigned 31 years of murage grants for its walls , starting in 1378 , when five years of murage was granted by Richard II , along with a writ allowing them to use stonemasons from across the county . In 1379 , a new 10 @-@ year murage grant was issued . In 1385 , £ 100 from the issues of Kent was given to Canterbury , and the murage tax extended for a further five years . In the financial year of 1385 – 86 , approximately £ 619 was spent on the walls . Despite the walls , during the Peasants Revolt of 1381 , Wat Tyler and his army were able to enter Canterbury unopposed . 1399 saw another five years of murage granted , followed in 1402 by a final grant of three years . 
 Despite this , progress was not fast enough to suit the royal authorities . Richard II ordered the city to force workmen to repair the defences , and intervened in Canterbury 's local elections in 1387 to ensure that two trusted bailiffs – Henry Lincoln and John <unk> – were returned to office , in order for the King to have confidence in the walls being maintained . In 1403 , Henry IV sent messages to the city complaining that the defences were not being adequately maintained , and that the city was still insecure . 
 = = = 15th – 16th centuries = = = 
 A survey in 1402 suggested that most of the city was walled , except for part of the stretch between the West Gate and North Gate . In 1409 , the city 's bailiffs were allowed to acquire lands worth £ 20 a year to support the maintenance of the walls , and Canterbury was permitted to draw funding from the royal customs duties for the walls . <unk> taxes in Canterbury gave way to the introduction of support through a system of rates , with each ward being tasked to raise money through local taxes on its citizens . The walls became an important symbol of the city , and 15th @-@ century art from Canterbury presents the cathedral and the city wall as having equal status as key features of the city . 
 The resulting circuit of walls followed the line of the former Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon defences , incorporating them where they survived in good condition . Parts of the 14th century walls , for example along Burgate Lane , have been shown to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) thick at the base and built of Kentish ragstone ; other sections incorporated the original Roman wall , which was still up to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high in places . The new walls had a continuous wall walk and were crenellated . Most of the circuit was protected by an external ditch . The city walls retained the older system of Roman and Anglo @-@ Saxon gates . West Gate was rebuilt around 1380 by the prominent mason , Henry Yevele , an unusually prominent architect for a city wall programme . As part of this work , Holy Cross Church was moved from over the gate to a nearby site . The old Roman Riding Gate was cut through by a new archway . 
 Defensive towers were built around the city walls , and archaeological and historical evidence suggests that there were 24 of these . The towers had a generally uniform appearance , with 16 half @-@ circular , or " horse @-@ shoe " , hollow @-@ backed towers and eight square towers . The horse @-@ shoe towers followed a fashion that had been popular from around 1260 to 1390 , making Canterbury 's towers a late example of the trend . The square towers were a newer design , and were built around the turn of the 14th and 15th century by Thomas Chillenden of Christchurch Priory . 
 The reconstructed walls also saw the introduction of gunports . West Gate was an innovative piece of defensive design in this regard , forming a powerful battery , carefully designed to have a wide angle of covering fire . Positioning of the gunloops is similar to those at Cooling Castle , built around the same time , and gave particular focus to the left flank along North Gate , the most likely route for any attackers . Gunports in south @-@ west corner of the city walls are put at alternate heights , for overlapping fire . The first documentary record of Canterbury 's guns appears in 1403 , when it is clear that there were several kept in the West Gate . 
 A second wave of work took place on the city walls in the late 15th century . Backed by substantial communal effort and financial contributions , Newingate was rebuilt between 1450 and 1470 , and probably closely resembled the West Gate in style . Burgate was rebuilt in brick from 1475 onwards , again thanks to public contributions , but it was not completed until 1525 , furnished with gunports and anachronistic battlements . Queningate was closed up at shortly after the 15th century , probably following the construction of a new postern gate nearby . West Gate was appointed the city gaol in 1453 by Henry VI , with Canterbury Castle serving as the county gaol . 
 In contrast to Wat Tyler 's entrance in 1381 , in 1450 , Jack Cade and 4 @,@ 000 rebels were barred entry from the city at West Gate . In 1533 , Canterbury reacted with concern to the news of Thomas Wyatt 's rebellion in Kent ; repairs were made to the walls , guns and ammunition mobilised , and the Riding Gate was blocked up . Queen Mary later thanked the city for their efforts . 
 = = = 17th – 19th centuries = = = 
 By 1614 , the ditch outside the walls appears to have been partially filled in and the reclaimed land rented out . During the English Civil War , Canterbury was initially held by Parliamentary forces . In 1647 , however , riots broke out in protest over the actions of the city 's Puritan mayor and Canterbury declared its loyalty for Charles I. Parliamentary forces intervened and reoccupied the city , burning the wooden city gates and deliberately damaging , or slighting , the walls near Canterbury Castle . With the restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660 , new wooden doors were installed at the West Gate . 
 Towards the end of the 18th century , horse @-@ drawn coaches became much more common in Canterbury , which lay at the centre of a new turnpike road system . This required extensive changes to the city streets and gateways , which were typically too narrow to be easily navigated by these vehicles . By 1779 , Northgate and Burgate had been destroyed to allow wider entrances for the city . Riding Gate was demolished in 1782 , but in 1791 the local citizen James Simmons built a new , brick archway on the old foundations , which was rapidly occupied by a new house , blocking most of the gateway . An iron bridge was later built over the site of Riding Gate . The Worth Gate was demolished in 1791 and reused in a local garden , a new entrance being built in its place . Newingate 's drum towers were used as a water reservoir for the city , and the gatehouse was not demolished until 1801 . Sections of the wall were cut away to allow new roads to be built ; the walls near St <unk> 's Public Baths were demolished in 1794 and the city wall around London Gate was demolished around 1800 . 
 In other parts of Canterbury , the city walls became used for promenades by the more fashionable citizens . The Dane John Gardens were built between 1790 and 1803 by Simmons in the south @-@ east corner of the walls , remodelling the old castle motte , and incorporating the Roman bank and the medieval wall @-@ walk into the design . The ownership of the land was disputed , and the park was taken into the control of the city shortly after its construction . 
 West Gate continued to be used as the city gaol , resulting in it surviving the destruction of the other city gates . When the reformer John Howard visited the gaol in the mid @-@ 1770s , he noted that it contained a large day room for male and female prisoners and two small night rooms , but no courtyard for exercise . Prison reform became an important issue during the early 19th century , and the West Gate gaol was considered unsatisfactory , being condemned as dirty , cramped and insecure , resulting in the extension of the gaol into Pound Lane and the consequent dismantling of the adjacent city wall . There was a legal attempt to demolish the West Gate altogether in 1859 , in order to allow the Wombwell Circus to march a parade of elephants into the city ; the gatehouse was only saved by the casting vote of Canterbury 's mayor . In 1865 the prison was closed and the West Gate became used first for the storage of archives and then as a museum . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 During the Second World War , part of the city walls near the Dane John Gardens were turned into an ammunition depot , dug into the bank of the wall . German bombing campaigns in 1942 caused extensive damage to Canterbury , including the city walls around Riding Gate . The bomb damage provided fresh opportunities for archaeological investigation , however , and work by the Canterbury Excavation Committee began in 1944 . This research disproved older theories about the shape of the Roman city walls , demonstrating that the Roman and medieval defences formed an identical circuit . 
 In the post @-@ war years , the city walls shaped the route of Canterbury 's modern ring road system , protecting the inner core of the ancient city , despite proposals under the Holden Plan of 1945 for a radical reshaping of the city 's road network . During the 1950s , a stretch of Canterbury 's walls were reconstructed , including two circular towers , as part of the redevelopment of the St George district . In the early 1980s , the volume of traffic around the West Gate was causing damage to the structure of the building . The remaining walls and West Gate are protected under UK law as scheduled monuments and as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Canterbury 's city walls in the 21st century are a mixture of survivals from the multiple periods of building , from Roman to the 20th century , but the majority of the visible walls are medieval in origin . Over half the original circuit survives , and historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham consider it " one of the most magnificent in Britain " . Of the original 24 medieval towers along the walls , 17 remain intact , and one entranceway into the city , the West Gate , also survives . 
 North Gate was destroyed in the 19th century , but its former location is marked by a " <unk> Stone " , a marker laid down by amateur archaeologist Walter Cozens in the interwar years . Moving clockwise around the circuit from Northgate , St Mary 's Church incorporates parts of the walls into its structure , and the original medieval crenellations can be seen in the stonework . Four square towers survive around the walls here , mostly somewhat reduced in height from their original medieval form , and with their gunports converted to windows . The outline of Queningate is marked out on the local road , and parts of the Roman wall discovered in archaeological investigations are presented in a local display . A further two towers beyond Queningate survive , complete with their original gunports . The former site of Burgate is marked by another <unk> Stone , and on the next stretch of wall , one tower survives , used for a period as a water cistern and now incorporated into the 19th century Zoar Chapel . 
 The south @-@ east stretch of the walls beyond the former site of Riding Gate , marked by a 19th @-@ century plaque , are particularly well preserved , including the Dane John Gardens , used as a public park and decorated with sculptures . The two towers near this stretch of wall are reconstructions from the 1950s on the original medieval foundations . Another four towers survive between the former sites of Riding Gate and Wincheap Gate , one of which remains near its original height and retains its defensive crenellations . Beyond the former site of Wincheap Gate the wall has mostly been destroyed , although one tower survives , converted into a private house ; the former site of Worth Gate is marked by a memorial stone . 
 The West Gate has survived in excellent condition , and Creighton and Higham describe it as " one of the most monumental of all examples of town gate architecture " . Constructed from ragstone and flint , it has two large circular towers at the front , but has a square @-@ facing interior ; although fireplaces were built into each tower in the 14th century , their flues were designed to be hidden from sight so as not to spoil its military appearance . The West Gate hosts a local museum and cafe . A final three towers survive on the stretch of the walls between West Gate and the former North Gate . 
 = Brown thrasher = 
 The brown thrasher ( Toxostoma rufum ) is a bird in the family Mimidae , which also includes the New World catbirds and mockingbirds . The dispersal of the brown thrasher is abundant throughout the eastern and central United States , southern and central Canada , and is the only thrasher to live primarily east of the Rockies and central Texas . It is the state bird of Georgia . 
 As a member of the genus Toxostoma , the bird is a large @-@ sized thrasher . It has brown upper parts with a white under part with dark streaks . Because of this , it is often confused with the smaller wood thrush ( Hylocichla mustelina ) , among other species . The brown thrasher is noted for having over 1000 song types , and the largest song repertoire of birds . However , each note is usually repeated in two or three phrases . 
 The brown thrasher is an omnivore , with its diet ranging from insects to fruits and nuts . The usual nesting areas are shrubs , small trees , or at times on ground level . Brown thrashers are generally inconspicuous but territorial birds , especially when defending their nests , and will attack species as large as humans . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The brown thrasher was originally described by Linnaeus in his 18th century work Systema Naturae as Turdus rufus . The species name is the Latin adjective rufus " red " . 
 Although not in the thrush family , this bird is sometimes erroneously called the brown thrush . The name misconception could be because the word thrasher is believed to derive from the word thrush . The naturalist Mark Catesby called it the fox @-@ coloured thrush . 
 Genetic studies have found that the brown thrasher is most closely related to the long @-@ billed and Cozumel thrashers ( T. longirostre & <unk> ) , within the genus Toxostoma . 
 = = Description = = 
 The brown thrasher is bright reddish @-@ brown above with thin , dark streaks on its buffy underparts . It has a whitish @-@ colored chest with distinguished teardrop @-@ shaped markings on its chest . Its long , rufous tail is rounded with paler corners , and eyes are a brilliant yellow . Its bill is brownish , long , and curves downward . Both male and females are similar in appearance . The juvenile appearance of the brown thrasher from the adult is not remarkably different , except for plumage texture , indiscreet upper part markings , and the irises having an olive color . 
 The brown thrasher is a fairly large passerine , although it is generally moderate in size for a thrasher , being distinctly larger than the sage thrasher ( <unk> montanus ) but similar or somewhat smaller in size than the more brownish Toxostoma species found further west . Adults measure around 23 @.@ 5 to 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 9 @.@ 3 to 12 @.@ 0 in ) long with a wingspan of 29 to 33 cm ( 11 to 13 in ) , and weigh 61 to 89 g ( 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 1 oz ) , with an average of 68 g ( 2 @.@ 4 oz ) . Among standard measurements , the wing chord is 9 @.@ 5 to 11 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail is 10 @.@ 9 to 14 @.@ 1 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 6 in ) , the culmen is 2 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 87 to 1 @.@ 14 in ) and the tarsus is 3 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 4 in ) . There are two subspecies : the ' brown thrasher ' ( T. rufum rufum ) , which lies in the eastern half of Canada and the United States , and the ' western brown thrasher ' ( T. rufum longicauda ( Baird , 1858 ) ) , which resides in the central United States east of the Rocky Mountains and southern central Canada . The western brown thrasher is distinguished by a more cinnamon upper part , whiter wing bars , and darker breast spots than <unk> rufum . 
 The lifespan of the brown thrasher depends on a year @-@ to @-@ year basis , as the rate of survival the first year is 35 % , 50 % in between the second and third year , and 75 % between the third and fourth year . Disease and exposure to cold weather are among contributing factors for the limits of the lifespan . However , the longest lived thrasher in the wild is 12 years , and relatively the same for ones in captivity . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The similar @-@ looking long @-@ billed thrasher has a significantly smaller range . It has a gray head and neck , and has a longer bill than the brown thrasher . The brown thrasher 's appearance is also strikingly similar to the wood thrush , the bird that it is usually mistaken for . However , the wood thrush has dark spots on its under parts rather than the brown thrashers ' streaks , has dark eyes , shorter tail , and is a smaller bird . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The brown thrasher resides in various habitats . It prefers to live in woodland edges , thickets and dense brush , often searching for food in dry leaves on the ground . It can also inhabit areas that are agricultural and near suburban areas , but is less likely to live near housing than other bird species . The brown thrasher often vies for habitat and potential nesting grounds with other birds , which is usually initiated by the males . 
 The brown thrasher is a strong , but partial migrant , as the bird is a year round resident in the southern portion of its range . The breeding range includes the United States and Canada east of the Rocky Mountains , but has been occasionally spotted West of the Rockies . The increase in trees throughout the Great Plains during the past century due to fire suppression and tree planting facilitated a westward range expansion of the brown thrasher as well as range expansions of many other species of birds . Studies indicate that thrashers that reside in the New England region of the United States during the breeding season fly toward the Carolinas and Georgia , birds located in the east of the Mississippi winter from Arkansas to Georgia , and birds located in the Dakotas and the central Canadian provinces head towards eastern Texas and Louisiana . When the species does migrate , it is typically for short distances and during the night . There are also records of the bird wintering in Mexico , as well as a British record of a transatlantic vagrant . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The brown thrasher has been observed either solo or in pairs . The brown thrasher is usually an elusive bird , and maintains its evasiveness with low @-@ level flying . When it feels bothered , it usually hides into thickets and gives cackling calls . Thrashers spend most of their time on ground level or near it . When seen , it is commonly the males that are singing from unadorned branches . The brown thrasher has been noted for having an aggressive behavior , and is a staunch defender of its nest . However , the name does not come from attacking perceived threats , but is believed to have come from the thrashing sound the bird makes when digging through ground debris . It is also thought that the name comes from the thrashing sound that is made while it is smashing large insects to kill and eventually eat . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 This bird is omnivorous , which has a diet that includes insects , berries , nuts and seeds , as well as earthworms , snails , and sometimes lizards and frogs . Across seasons and its breeding range , it was found 63 % of stomach contents were made of animal matter , the remaining 37 % being plant material . During the breeding season , the diet consists primarily of beetles , grasshoppers , and other arthropods , and fruits , nuts and seeds . More than 80 % of the diet of brown thrasher from Illinois is made of animal matter , about 50 % being beetles . In Iowa , about 20 % of the summer diet was found to consist of grasshoppers . By the late summer , it begins to shift towards more of a herbivore diet , focusing on fruits , nuts , seeds , and grains , 60 % of the food in Illinois being fruits and seeds . By winter , the customary diet of the brown thrasher is fruit and acorns . Wintering birds in Texas were found to eat 58 % plant material ( mainly sugar berry and poison ivy ) and 42 % animal material in October ; by March , in the dry period when food supply is generally lower , 80 % of the food became animal and only 20 % plants . Vertebrates are only eaten occasionally and are often comprised by small reptiles and amphibians , such as lizards , small or young snakes , tree frogs and salamanders . 
 The brown thrasher utilizes its vision while scouring for food . It usually forages for food under leaves , brushes , and soil debris on the ground using its bill . It then swipes the floor in side @-@ to @-@ side motions , and investigates the area it recently foraged in . The brown thrasher forages in a similar method to the Long @-@ billed thrasher and Bendire 's thrasher ( T. longirostre & <unk> ) , picking food off the ground and under leaf litter , whereas thrashers with sharply decurved bills are more likely to dig into the ground to obtain food . Foraging success is 25 % greater in dry leaf litter as compared to damp leaf letter . The brown thrasher can also hammer nuts such as acorns in order to remove the shell . It has also been noted for its flexibility in catching quick insects , as the amount of vertebrae in its neck exceeds giraffes and camels . In one case , a brown thrasher was observed to dig a hole about 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) deep , place an acorn in it and hit the acorn until it cracked , considered to be a form of tool usage . In a laboratory experiment , a brown thrasher was found to be able to discern and reject the toxic eastern newt ( Notophthalmus viridescens ) and a palatable mimic of that species , the red salamander ( <unk> ruber ) , but continued to eat palatable dusky salamanders ( Desmognathus spp . ) . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Brown thrashers are typically monogamous birds , but mate @-@ switching does occur , at times during the same season . Their breeding season varies by region . In the southeastern United States , the breeding months begin in February and March , while May and June see the commencement of breeding in the northern portion of their breeding range . When males enter the breeding grounds , their territory can range from 2 to 10 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 to 4 @.@ 05 ha ) . Around this time of the year the males are usually at their most active , singing <unk> to attract potential mates , and are found on top of perches . The courting ritual involves the exchanging of probable nesting material . Males will sing gentler as they sight a female , and this enacts the female to grab a twig or leaf and present it to the male , with flapping wings and chirping sounds . The males might also present a gift in response and approach the female . Both sexes will take part in nest building once mates find each other , and will mate after the nest is completed . 
 The female lays 3 to 5 eggs , that usually appears with a blueish or greenish tint along with reddish @-@ brown spots . There are rare occurrences of no spots on the eggs . The nest is built <unk> , lined with grass , leaves , and other forms of dead vegetation . The nests are typically built in a dense shrub or low in a tree , usually up to 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) high , but have built nests as high as 6 m ( 20 ft ) . They also on occasion build nests on the ground . Between eleven days to two weeks , the eggs hatch . Both parents incubate and feed the young , with the female doing most of the incubating . Nine to thirteen days after hatching , the nestlings begin to fledge . These birds raise two , sometimes even three , broods in a year . The male sings a series of short repeated melodious phrases from an open perch to declare his territory , and is also very aggressive in defending the nest , known to strike people and animals . 
 = = = Vocal development = = = 
 The male brown thrasher may have the largest song repertoire of any North American bird , which has been documented at least over 1 @,@ 100 . Some sources state that each individual has up to 3 @,@ 000 song phrases , while others stated beyond 3 @,@ 000 . The males ' singing voice usually contains more of a melodic tone than that of the related grey catbird . Its song are coherent phrases that are iterated no more than three times , but has been done for minutes at a time . By the fall , the male sings with smoother sub @-@ songs . During the winter , the males may also sing in short spurts during altercations with neighboring males . 
 In the birds ' youth , alarm noises are the sounds made . As an adult , the brown thrasher has an array of sounds it will make in various situations . Both male and females make smack and <unk> @-@ like alarm calls when provoked , and <unk> sounds at dust and dawn . Others calls may consist of an acute , sudden <unk> , <unk> , a <unk> sound in the beginning that ends with an <unk> , <unk> , and sounds reminiscent of a stick scraping a concrete sidewalk . Brown thrashers are noted for their mimicry ( as a member of the family Mimidae ) , but they are not as diverse in this category as their relative the northern mockingbird . However , during the breeding season , the mimicking ability of the male is at its best display , impersonating sounds from tufted titmice ( <unk> bicolor ) , northern cardinals ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) , wood thrushes , northern flickers ( <unk> auratus ) , among other species . 
 = = Predation and threats = = 
 Although this bird is widespread and still common , it has declined in numbers in some areas due to loss of suitable habitat . Despite the decrease , the rate does not warrant a status towards vulnerable . One of the natural nuisances is the parasitic brown @-@ headed cowbird ( <unk> ater ) , but these incidents are rare . Whenever these situations occur , the brown thrashers usually discard of the cowbirds ' eggs . Occasionally , the thrasher has thrown out their own eggs instead of the cowbird eggs due to similar egg size , and at least one recorded event raised a fledgling . Northern cardinals and grey catbirds are also major competitors for thrashers in terms of territorial gain . Because of the apparent lack of opportunistic behavior around species like these , thrashers are prone to be driven out of zones for territory competition . Brown thrashers have tendencies to double @-@ brood or have failures on their first nesting attempts due to predation . Grey catbirds have been seen invading brown thrashers ' nests and breaking their eggs . Other than the catbird , snakes , birds of prey , and cats are among the top predators of the thrasher . In Kansas , at least eight species of snake were <unk> as potentially serious sources of nest failure . Among the identified avian predators of adults are Cooper 's hawks ( Accipiter <unk> ) , northern goshawk ( Accipiter gentilis ) , broad @-@ winged hawks ( Buteo platypterus ) , merlins ( Falco columbarius ) , peregrine falcons ( Falco peregrinus ) , eastern screech @-@ owls ( <unk> asio ) , great horned owls ( Bubo virginianus ) barred owls ( Strix varia ) and long @-@ eared owls ( Asio otus ) . 
 The brown thrasher methods of defending itself include using its bill , which can inflict significant damage to species smaller than it , along with wing @-@ flapping and vocal expressions . 
 = = State bird = = 
 The brown thrasher is the state bird of Georgia . The brown thrasher also was the inspiration for the name of Atlanta 's former National Hockey League team , the Atlanta Thrashers . 
 = The Boat Race 1986 = 
 The 132nd Boat Race took place on 29 March 1986 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge won by seven lengths and took their first victory in eleven years , in one of the fastest winning times in the history of the event . Isis won the reserve race , while Oxford were victorious in the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by four @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in the previous year 's race . However Cambridge held the overall lead , with 68 victories to Oxford 's 62 , despite Oxford having won the previous ten races . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 The race was sponsored by Ladbrokes for the tenth consecutive year , estimated to be worth about £ 30 @,@ 000 to each boat club , and was umpired by former Cambridge rower Mike Sweeney . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of over 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower more than Cambridge . Cambridge 's crew featured only two rowers over the age of 24 while Oxford had just three men under 25 . Oxford saw three Blues return while Cambridge welcomed back four . The Cambridge crew featured three international rowers , two Canadians in Gibson and Wilson , and the American Pew . Oxford 's MacDonald was the oldest in the race at the age of 30 , he was accompanied in the boat by international rowers Clark and Livingstone from the United States and Jones from Australia . Dan Topolski was the Oxford coach while Cambridge relied on Alan Inns and Canadian Olympic coach Neil Campbell . Cambridge were clear favourites to win , but prior to the race , Topolski claimed his crew had " pulled themselves back into contention by sheer hard work . " 
 = = Races = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . The predicted severe wind did not materialise and from the start , Cambridge pulled ahead . A half @-@ length lead by the end of Putney boathouses became a two length lead by Hammersmith Bridge , and Cambridge 's cox Burton steered towards the safer Surrey side , extending Cambridge 's lead to 14 seconds by Chiswick Steps . Continuing to pull away , Cambridge passed the finishing post 21 seconds and seven lengths ahead of Oxford . It was the sixth fastest time in the history of the race . This was Cambridge 's first victory in eleven years and took the overall record to 69 – 62 in favour of Cambridge . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by six lengths , while Oxford won the 41st Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The trophy was presented by former Cambridge student Prince Edward . Cambridge stroke John Pritchard said " After our initial start we built up for 20 strokes , steadied and then just grinded away . " He added " I was just stirring the tea while the others did the work . " Cambridge cox Carole Burton noted " I went where I wanted to go . " Oxford 's Jones remarked " we were as well prepared as last year but we found no magic . " Topolski conceded that even had Oxford been at their best , they would still have lost the race . 
 = Chapter 27 = 
 Chapter 27 is a 2007 biographical film depicting the murder of John Lennon by Mark David Chapman . It was written and directed by Jarrett Schaefer , based on the book Let Me Take You Down by Jack Jones , produced by Robert Salerno , and stars Jared Leto as Chapman . The film takes place in December 1980 , and is intended to be an exploration of Chapman 's psyche . 
 As an independent production , it was picked up for distribution by Peace Arch Entertainment and premiered at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival where it received polarized reactions from critics . It later went into limited theatrical release in the United States on March 28 , 2008 . Chapter 27 was cited as one of the most controversial films of 2007 . It won the Debut Feature Prize for Schaefer at the Zurich Film Festival , where Leto also received the Best Performance award for his portrayal of Chapman . 
 The similar film The Killing of John Lennon was released the previous year , produced in the United Kingdom , and dealt more extensively with Chapman 's life prior to the shooting than Chapter 27 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On December 8 , 1980 , Mark David Chapman shocked the world by murdering 40 @-@ year @-@ old musician and activist , John Lennon , outside The Dakota , his New York apartment building . Chapman 's motives were fabricated from pure delusion , fueled by an obsession with the fictional character Holden Caulfield and his similar misadventures in J.D. Salinger 's The Catcher in the Rye . In one instant , an anonymous , socially awkward and mentally unstable 25 @-@ year @-@ old fan of The Beatles , who had fluctuated between idealizing Lennon and being overcome with a desire to kill him , altered the course of the history of music . 
 A man whose painfully restless mind thrashes about uncontrollably between paranoia , sociopathic lying and delusion is summed up in such character revealing comments as " I 'm too vulnerable for a world full of pain and lies " and " Everyone is cracked and broken . You have to find something to fix you . To give you what you need . To make you whole again . " 
 From his lies to cab drivers ( identifying himself as The Beatles ' sound engineer ) to his socially unacceptable behavior around Jude , a young fan he meets outside The Dakota , to his argument with paparazzi photographer Paul , Chapman keeps the psychoses bubbling below the surface as his grasp on reality deteriorates into a completely misguided rage . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The real Mark David Chapman is currently incarcerated at Wende Correctional Facility , on a guilty plea . Aside from two interviews with Larry King and Barbara Walters , both in 1992 , he has not spoken with the media . However , Chapman did reveal the mechanics of his unraveling during those three days in New York City to journalist Jack Jones . The interviews were published in 1992 as Let Me Take You Down : Inside the Mind of Mark David Chapman , a book of Chapman 's recollections of his act of violence . Chapter 27 is based on this text . The title " Chapter 27 " suggests a continuation of J. D. Salinger 's novel The Catcher in the Rye , which has 26 chapters , and which Chapman was carrying when he shot John Lennon . Chapman was obsessed with the book , to the point of attempting to model his life after its protagonist , Holden Caulfield . 
 According to the British music magazine Mojo , the title was also inspired by Chapter 27 of Robert Rosen 's book Nowhere Man : The Final Days of John Lennon ( 2000 ) . Rosen 's book explores the numerological meaning of the number 27 , " the triple 9 " , a number of profound importance to John Lennon . Lennon was deeply interested in numerology , particularly <unk> 's Book of Numbers , along with nine and all its multiples . It was Chapman ’ s goal , according to Rosen , to write Chapter 27 " in Lennon ’ s blood " . 
 Like Chapman , Schaefer is a fan of both The Beatles and J.D. Salinger 's novel The Catcher in the Rye , and said he began the script to try to understand " how someone could be inspired to kill anyone as a result of being exposed to this kind of beautiful art . It really bothered me , because Lennon and Salinger have always made me feel so much better , and so much less alone . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The script took Schaefer four years to write , but when it was finished , the film came together quickly . With the help of producers Alexandra Milchan and Robert Salerno , Schaefer cast Jared Leto as Mark David Chapman . For his role , Leto gained 67 pounds ( 30 kg ) by drinking <unk> pints of ice cream mixed with soy sauce and olive oil every night . Gaining the weight , he said , was tougher than dieting himself into skeletal shape for his role as drug addict Harry Goldfarb in Requiem for a Dream ( 2000 ) . The abruptness of Leto 's weight gain gave him gout . He had to use a wheelchair due to the stress of the sudden increase in weight put on his body . 
 After the shooting of the film , Leto quickly went on a liquid diet . He explained , " I 've been fasting ever since . I 've been doing this very strange , like , lemon and cayenne pepper and water fast . I didn 't eat any food for 10 days straight ; I think I lost 20 pounds that first 10 days . " Losing the excess weight after Chapter 27 proved a challenge . " It took about a year to get back to a place that felt semi @-@ normal , " he said ; " I don 't know if I 'll ever be back to the place I was physically . I 'd never do it again ; it definitely gave me some problems . " 
 Twenty @-@ two years prior to this film 's production , actor Mark Lindsay Chapman , while professionally using the name Mark Lindsay , had been almost cast as John Lennon in the biopic John and Yoko : A Love Story ( 1985 ) . Yoko Ono had been deeply involved in the production and had herself been initially impressed with his audition and approved his casting prior to discovering his full name was Mark Lindsay Chapman . She then nixed his casting on the grounds it was " bad karma " , and a great deal of press attention was given to his having almost gotten the role . The director of Chapter 27 , Jarrett Schaefer , auditioned many Lennon impersonators , but was especially impressed with Mark Lindsay Chapman 's tape because he conveyed the " tough town " street @-@ smart quality of Lennon that the impersonators failed to convey , as they always played Lennon as larger @-@ than @-@ life . Schaefer described Lennon as having a " chip on his shoulder and always cracking these cynical one @-@ liners " , and felt that actor Chapman was best at conveying this quality . Schaefer had some difficulty negotiating the casting with the film 's producers because of Chapman 's name . After Chapman was cast , he asked Chapman how he should be billed to which Chapman replied " Mark fucking Lindsay Chapman . That 's my fucking name . " Schaefer remarks that this was so reflective of how Lennon talked , it just reinforced his sense that Chapman was right for the part . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film began shooting in Manhattan , New York in 2006 . " I don 't have much to compare it to , but the challenges were daunting , " said Schaefer , who directed several sequences outside The Dakota , the site of Lennon 's assassination . " I had to go into a place that was very sensitive to our story , with trucks , a crew , and a limited amount of time . It wasn 't easy . " 
 " It was important to Jarrett that we didn 't glorify this event , " said Salerno . " He didn 't want to shoot any of the scenes with John Lennon at The Dakota out of respect for the residents that were there at the time John was killed , so all of that footage was shot separately at another location that we were able keep closed and controlled . " These scenes were shot at the Steiner Studios in Brooklyn . 
 = = Release = = 
 The studio held Chapter 27 's world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2007 . The film was subsequently screened at the Berlin International Film Festival , Athens Film Festival , <unk> International Film Festival , Waterfront Film Festival , Mediterranean Film Festival , Stockholm International Film Festival , Oslo International Film Festival and the Denver Film Festival . 
 The Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) gave the film a Restricted rating for language and some sexual content . Chapter 27 had a limited release in the United States on March 28 , 2008 and earned $ 13 @,@ 910 in a single theater over the opening weekend . The film 's revenues increased by 11 @.@ 4 % in its second weekend in domestic markets , earning $ 15 @,@ 500 in five theaters . Chapter 27 grossed $ 56 @,@ 215 in the United States and $ 131 @,@ 273 overseas . In total , the film has grossed $ 187 @,@ 488 worldwide . Its international releases include Mexico ( $ 107 @,@ 443 ) , Portugal ( $ 20 @,@ 433 ) , and France ( $ 3 @,@ 397 ) . 
 Chapter 27 was released on DVD on April 28 , 2008 in the United Kingdom . In the United States , it was released on the same formats on July 1 , 2008 in exclusives , and everywhere September 30 , 2008 . The British edition contains a making @-@ of and the trailer of the film , while the American edition includes only a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 When Chapter 27 premiered at the Sundance Film Festival , the film was debated fiercely by critics . A website reported , " the audience 's reactions made it obvious that some people would love it and others would not . " Andrew O 'Hehir from Salon wrote , " Some viewers may well find Chapter 27 sleazy or distasteful , and I won 't argue the point . But Schaefer 's movie creates its own highly compelling world , which is pretty much the prime directive in filmmaking . " He stated that " Leto almost makes you feel how it happened , " and called his acting a " highly compelling performance on many levels . " He also enjoyed Lohan 's performance . Duane <unk> of The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " Chapter 27 is a smart attempt to distill the twisted psychology and motivation of Mark David Chapman , which we 've all superficially gleaned through mass @-@ media reports and intermittent updates on Chapman 's incarceration . " He praised Leto 's acting saying , " Jared Leto is mesmeric as the bloated , deranged Chapman . It 's a brilliantly measured performance , evincing the tale of a madman through his own awful rhyme and reason . " He also praised Schaefer 's direction , the other cast and crew . Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three out of four stars saying , " By the end of this modest , strange venture , Leto made me believe it was worth being forced to hang out on the sidewalk with this man , if only to get a creeping sense of what that might 've been like . " 
 Upon the film 's theatrical release , Richard Roeper wrote , " This is a very tough film to watch , especially for Beatles fans that worshipped Lennon , but it does provide a thought @-@ provoking take on the inner workings of Mark David Chapman 's twisted mind . " San Francisco Chronicle 's Joel Selvin praised Schaefer 's direction writing , " The film is impressively mounted and Schaefer has made a directorial debut of distinction , but it is an uncomfortable ride from the opening scenes of Chapman arriving in New York to the inevitable , inexorable final scene . " He also called Leto 's performance utterly convincing . Rex Reed gave the film a positive review writing , " Even if you are only moderately curious about the events that led up to the pointless death of a musical icon , I think you 'll find it a film of arm @-@ twisting fascination . " He praised Leto calling him unforgettable and writing , " it is the pulverizing concentration and almost <unk> intensity of Jared Leto that gives the film its life and pulse . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B saying , " Chapter 27 is far from flawless , but Leto disappears inside this angry , mouth @-@ breathing psycho geek with a conviction that had me hanging on his every delusion . " Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News described Chapter 27 as " a claustrophobic drama that gets uncomfortably into the head of Mark David Chapman , " and praised Leto saying , " Leto 's drawling , blotchy , creepy performance sets it apart . " 
 Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 18 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 47 reviews . The critical consensus is : " Despite Jared Leto 's committed performance , Chapter 27 fails to penetrate to mind of Mark David Chapman , John Lennon 's killer . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 based on reviews from film critics , the film has a rating score of 32 % , aggregating 19 reviews . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Chapter 27 was one of the most controversial films of the 2000s . In April 2006 , an on @-@ line petition group calling themselves <unk> campaigned to " pressurise ( sic ) movie theatres not to show the film , to stop the glorification of a murderer . " Lennon 's widow , Yoko Ono , expressed her thought saying , " This is another thing which will hurt me , I 'm sure . I would rather not make a story out of Mr. Chapman at all , although I sympathize with the actors . They need to work . It 's not just films , you 're always talking about it [ Lennon 's murder ] . " 
 Sean Lennon , Lennon 's son , has gone on record calling the production and making of the film , including Lindsay Lohan 's involvement with it , " tacky . " Lennon also stated that Lohan understood his feelings and , despite his criticism , they were friends and he did not want to hurt her feelings . 
 The film received substantial accolades from critics who praised the depiction of the mental state of Mark David Chapman , in the days leading up the murder of John Lennon in December 1980 . 
 = Development of Red Dead Redemption = 
 The development of Red Dead Redemption began in 2005 . Rockstar Games published Red Dead Redemption on May 18 , 2010 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . One of their studios , Rockstar San Diego , oversaw the work , sharing it with other studios around the world . The development team considered the game a spiritual successor to Red Dead Revolver . Red Dead Redemption was delayed numerous times through its four @-@ year development , often attributed to technological problems . The working hours and managerial style of the studio during development was met with public complaints from staff members . Red Dead Redemption was officially announced in 2009 ; it was heavily promoted and widely anticipated . 
 Rockstar improved their proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) to increase its animation and draw distance rendering capabilities . The game uses the Euphoria and Bullet engines for further animation and environment rendering tasks . The developers felt inspired to create the game after realising the potential power of both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , having exhausted the use of older hardware on previous projects . The development team conducted extensive research , visiting historical American landmarks and analyzing classic Western films , to achieve realism while creating the game . The game 's open world , set in New Austin , Nuevo Paraíso and West Elizabeth , represents iconic features of the American frontier , in which the game is set . 
 In Red Dead Redemption , players mainly control former outlaw John Marston as he sets out to bring his former gang to justice . The team used motion capture to record the body movements of the characters and hired professional actors to provide voices . Red Dead Redemption features an original score composed over fifteen months by two music producers . <unk> , the duo composed over fourteen hours of music , which scores the game 's missions . 
 = = Production = = 
 Preliminary work on Red Dead Redemption began in 2005 ; full development commenced in 2006 , following the formation of a core development team . Rockstar San Diego co @-@ opted a number of other studios owned by parent company Rockstar Games to facilitate development between a full team of over 800 . Media analysts estimated the development budget for the game was between US $ 80 million and US $ 100 million , making Red Dead Redemption one of the most expensive video games ever made . 
 = = = Story and setting = = = 
 Red Dead Redemption primarily takes place in 1911 . The team chose this time period as they felt that exploring the transformation from " the old West " into the modern world was intriguing . Taking inspiration from The Wild Bunch ( 1969 ) , High Plains Drifter ( 1973 ) Unforgiven ( 1992 ) and The Proposition ( 2005 ) , the team felt that most Western fiction takes place between 1840 and 1880 . Game designer and writer Christian Cantamessa explained that the " overarching theme is the ' Death of the West ' rather than the more conventional ' Myth of the West ' that is often seen in the classic John Wayne films " . The team felt that " a classic ' we are conquering this wilderness ' story " was not very interesting in itself , but adding the transformation of the world during the game 's time period sparked their interest . The allusions to politics throughout the narrative are supposed to represent the darker undertones surrounding the foundations of the American Dream . In addition , the game itself exhibits qualities relating to the movement from a " violent freedom " to a situation of " overt state control " , told through a story of innocence and freedom . Vice President for Creativity Dan Houser made parallels with this representation , and the more recent predicament of the modern society of America . Houser also expressed the difficulty in balancing the game 's narrative to avoid feeling both " camp " and " pompous " ; he explained that balancing the two while maintaining realism was where the difficulty spawned . With the story , Houser felt that it does not fully represent the racial attitudes commonly associated with the game 's era . He stated that this was a choice made by the designers due to the unpleasantness of the attitudes . " [ T ] he language people use to describe other races is insanely offensive to modern ears and we hint at that but we maybe don 't do it with quite the vibrancy that people use in some of our research , " he explained . The team focused more on the combination of old and modern America , and the change that was experienced during this period . In terms of the violence depicted throughout the game , Houser spoke about the team 's need for it to feel " slightly raw and unpleasant " ; they tried to achieve realism without exaggerating . The team were hoping for players to display an " emotional response " from the game , and for them to feel immersed in the game world and time period . 
 When designing the game 's fictional locations , the team tried to represent iconic features of the American frontier ; New Austin features small towns and outposts , Nuevo Paraíso includes rebel outposts and Mexican army forts , and Port Elizabeth represents the civilized areas of the world . These three locations represent a developing nation , a province on the brink of war , and an advanced nation , respectively . The American frontier was extensively researched for the game . The team organized field trips to Washington , visited the Library of Congress , captured a multitude of photographs , and analyzed various classic Western films . A challenge that the team faced as a direct result of the world 's size was to include enough content to interest players . Using this challenge as a strength and a major part of the design process , the team tried to make the countryside wild , with a variety of potential events to occur . They initially believed that it was possible to use the formula of Grand Theft Auto IV ( 2008 ) — a large variety of mission styles with different activities and objectives — in Red Dead Redemption ; as development continued , they realized that the emptiness of the world resulted in the inability to use this formula . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 Red Dead Redemption required a large amount of voice work in order to feel alive . The team felt that the amount of voice work required for Redemption had been previously achieved in Grand Theft Auto IV , with prior experience to such amounts dating back to Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas ( 2004 ) and Bully ( 2006 ) . To cast the characters , the team held auditions ; until actors were officially signed to the project , it was only known as an " untitled video game project " , for secrecy . In the game , Rob Wiethoff portrayed John Marston , Jim Bently portrayed Edgar Ross , Steve J. Palmer portrayed Bill Williamson , Benjamin Byron Davis portrayed Dutch van der Linde , Kimberly Irion portrayed Bonnie MacFarlane , and Josh Blaylock portrayed Jack Marston . Rockstar displayed care in the direction of the voice work for the game ; full @-@ time specialist directors were employed to ensure success in the game 's dialogue . The performances of the actors were mostly recorded using motion capture technology , with additional dialogue and sound effects recorded in a studio . In Red Dead Redemption , the team wanted to create a story that mixed with the game 's mechanics to result in a fun and organic experience . As the story developed , a range of characters were organically created based on the period . " The stories are there to serve the game , " Houser explained . 
 The character of John Marston was developed to be a " family man " . The team developed him as a nuanced character , as opposed to a straightforward hero or villain , in order to provide an interesting experience . Wiethoff considered Marston to be very determined about his goals . " He was a man about things , " Wiethoff remarked . Technical director Ted Carson felt that Marston became interesting due to the combination of cynicism and realism . Wiethoff felt that Marston was aware that his past actions were " wrong " , resulting in his attempt to abandon his former life . He stated that Marston 's early decisions in his life were a direct result of his need for acceptance . " I don 't know if he knew that what he was doing was wrong or not , " Wiethoff said . 
 Palmer felt that the characters of Marston and Williamson represented siblings in their former gang , while Dutch was more of a parental figure . He stated that Williamson is envious of Marston , despite Marston being his " moral anchor " . Palmer also felt that , after Marston left the gang , Williamson 's life began to " tailspin " uncontrollably . " [ A ] s John grew into a man who conquered by achieving , Bill fell into a man who achieved simply by conquering , " said Palmer . The character of Edgar Ross was partly inspired by lawyer and political activist Charles Joseph Bonaparte , while the in @-@ game Mexican Revolution of Nuevo Paraíso was somewhat based on the Plan de San Diego . When developing other characters , the team was inspired by various historical figures of the 20th century , including Frank James , Pearl Hart and Tom Horn . In terms of the random non @-@ player character ( NPC ) dialogue , Houser felt that Redemption sits between Bully , in which NPCs remember the protagonist , and Grand Theft Auto , in which NPCs are unaware of the protagonist 's identity . " [ T ] here are countryside environments and people are to some extent bored so they 're looking for thing [ s ] to talk about so your actions get spoken about and people are aware of you more , " said Houser . 
 = = = Technical and gameplay development = = = 
 Like other projects since Rockstar Games Presents Table Tennis ( 2006 ) , the game uses the proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) to perform animation and rendering tasks , and the Euphoria and Bullet engines for further animation and environment rendering tasks . Carson said that Euphoria provides " a physically based character performance system " that is " tightly integrated into RAGE 's proprietary physics engine " . Though the scope of the open world was initially a large challenge from a technical viewpoint , the team used it to their advantage . Overhauling the potential processing power of RAGE allows the game to create a high level of detail , including realistic animations and detailed textures . 
 The technology that became available to Rockstar inspired them to begin development . The potential power of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 experienced through the development kits motivated the team to create a game that could fully render the countryside , which was difficult to achieve on previous hardware . Houser felt that primitive technology prevented game developers to create a game that " really did justice " to the Wild West . As an example , he referred to the animation of a lasso . " [ I ] t seems easy but we 've only now got the power to do that kind of stuff , " he said . Houser felt that previous Western games represented one specific aspect of the period , while Redemption attempts to represent all features . In developing the objects and surfaces of the game 's world , the team utilized a variety of textures and lighting effects . They also found difficulty in creating a realistic representation of nature ; " [ computers ] don 't draw curves , but nature is all about curves " , Houser explained . 
 The game was envisioned to improve the core mechanics of Red Dead Revolver ( 2004 ) , to which Redemption is a spiritual successor , by scaling it up to the standard of other Rockstar games . The fundamental goal for the game was to maintain the shooting mechanic and expand on other game features ; like Revolver , the game 's weapons were inspired by real weaponry . Carson explained that the team attempted to achieve realism with every feature of the game , including the horses , lassos , animal ecosystem , and the open world . To assure that the horse movements were as realistic as possible , the team motion captured a stunt horse , recording all movement . This created various problems ; a gesture used by the stunt rider to communicate with the production team while on the horse was also the same command that made the horse rear . Furthermore , creating the horse 's skeletal and muscular systems also presented a problem , and took several years to overcome . In the early stages of development , Rockstar decided which elements from Red Dead Revolver could be carried over ; beyond the Dead Eye feature and the Western setting , very few other features remained . While Revolver represented many myths and iconic images of the American frontier , in Redemption the team tried to represent the reality of the time period . The tone of Redemption was aimed to be a combination of the primitive Wild West and early 20th century America ; with the latter , America was developing into a modern and contemporary society , which the team tried to portray . In addition , while they felt that Revolver was constrained by its level @-@ based structure , the team saw potential in creating a game similar to that of Rockstar 's Grand Theft Auto series , in terms of quality , scope and detail . 
 = = = Music production = = = 
 Red Dead Redemption is one of the first games by Rockstar to use an original score . Music supervisor Ivan Pavlovich has cited the large scale of the game as one of the largest difficulties when producing the score . He said that , in order to achieve an effective gaming experience , the game could not solely feature licensed music , like previous Rockstar games . " We figured we 'd need to write an original score , " Pavlovich said . To work on the score , Rockstar engaged Bill Elm and Woody Jackson , member and former member of Friends of Dean Martinez , respectively . In collaboration with each other , the duo composed over fourteen hours of music , which scores the game 's missions , across fifteen months . The original score and subsequent album were both recorded and mixed at Jackson 's personal recording studio in Los Angeles , and mastered at Capitol Studios . Following the recording , Irish producer and composer David Holmes listened to the original score , and subsequently spent three weeks compiling fifteen instrumental tracks that could be used as standalone songs for the game 's official soundtrack . Holmes attempted to make the soundtrack representative of the variety of sounds and moods in the game . Four vocal performances were also recorded for use in the soundtrack . 
 Recorded at 130 beats per minute in A minor , most of songs featured are constructed from stems in the game 's dynamic soundtrack . A mix of modern instruments and those featured in traditional Western films , such as the jaw harp , were used . Creative uses of instruments were used to bring unique sounds , such as playing a trumpet onto the surface of a timpani drum . Rockstar also consulted musicians who played traditional Western instruments ; harmonica player Tommy Morgan , who had been featured on several films over his 60 @-@ year career , provided traditional harmonica segments for the game . Beyond trumpets , nylon guitars and accordions , the composers incorporated other instruments , such as flutes and <unk> . When researching music for inspiration , Jackson found that there was no " Western sound " in 1911 ; he felt that the soundtracks of 1960s Western films , such as Ennio Morricone 's work on the Dollars Trilogy , was more representative of Western music . In appropriating the score to the game 's setting , Elm commented that the process was initially " daunting " , taking a long time to discover how the music was to work in an interactive way . 
 From the beginning of development , the sound development team wished to achieve authenticity in the game 's sounds . After the art department sent artwork to the sound department , the latter were inspired to achieve realism , researching all sounds that were to be used in the game . Throughout development , sound editors often presented ideas , which would then be effortlessly achieved by the audio programmers . In the three main areas of the game world , there are unique ambiences ; these are broken down into smaller sounds , such as bugs and animals , which are further refined to reflect the weather and time . The sound department was given specific instructions for the tone of game locations ; for example , Thieves ' Landing was to feel " creepy " and " off @-@ putting " . The sounds of the game 's weapons were also intricately developed ; in order to feel as realistic as possible , each weapon has a variety of similar firing sounds . The development of the game 's Foley began with a week @-@ long session , where two Foley artists from Los Angeles were sent to record thousands of sounds relating to the game 's setting . The sound department also spent time on specific gameplay elements ; Dead Eye was meant to sound " organic " as opposed to " sci @-@ fi or electronic " , while animals — a feature that the team found challenging — was to immerse players in the experience . For the final sound mix , audio director Jeffrey <unk> and lead sound designer Matthew Smith worked together to balance and blend the three main aspects of the soundtrack : dialogue , sound effects , and music . Smith coded systems to blend the three aspects , in order to keep the mix " dynamic " . 
 = = Business = = 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 An early trailer for Red Dead Redemption was sent to a select number of people at a Sony conference in 2005 , promoting the release of the PlayStation 3 . The trailer was a technology demonstration of the Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) . It was referred to as " Old West Project " , and a sequel to Red Dead Revolver . The trailer circulated throughout the Internet . 
 On February 3 , 2009 , Rockstar Games officially announced Red Dead Redemption . The April 2009 edition of Game Informer confirmed that the game would be released for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Microsoft Windows ; Rockstar later confirmed that this listing was a mistake , and that the game would not be released for Windows . On November 25 , 2009 , Rockstar confirmed Red Dead Redemption would be released in April 2010 . On March 4 , 2010 , Rockstar pushed the release date back to May 2010 , citing the " optimal time frame " for release . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The game was extensively marketed through video trailers and press demonstrations . On December 1 , 2009 , the debut trailer , titled " My Name is John Marston " , was released . It depicted several scenes from the game , introducing main protagonist John Marston ( Rob Wiethoff ) . On December 15 , 2009 , the first in a series of gameplay videos , titled " Introduction " , was released . It was the first footage to showcase the gameplay of Red Dead Redemption . The second in this series , titled " Weapons & Death " , was released on January 28 , 2010 , particularly focusing on the game 's weapons . 
 On February 11 , 2010 , a new trailer was released . Titled " The Law " , the trailer introduced the characters who are a part of the law , including Marshal Leigh Johnson and Edgar Ross . This was followed by a new video on February 24 , 2010 , titled " The Women : Sinners , Saints & Survivors " , which focused on the female characters of the game . A trailer for the game 's exclusive pre @-@ order content was released on March 16 , 2010 . The third in the series of gameplay videos , titled " Life in the West " , was released on March 19 , 2010 . It focused on the activities available for players in the game . 
 The game 's cover art was revealed on March 22 , 2010 , followed by a video titled " Gentlemen & Vagabonds " on March 24 , focusing on some of the male characters of the game . The game was exhibited at PAX in March 2010 . An exclusive gameplay demonstration was available at the Red Dead Redemption booth . The fourth gameplay video , titled " Life in the West Part II " , was released on April 2 , 2010 . It further showcased the activities available in the game . This was followed by " Multiplayer Free Roam " on April 8 , 2010 and " Multiplayer Competitive Modes " on April 22 , 2010 , both of which displayed exclusive footage from the online multiplayer mode of the game . From April 27 , 2010 , a trailer for the game was aired as a television commercial in the United States . A further video for the game , titled " Revolution " , was released on May 7 , 2010 . It focused on the Mexican characters of the game . Red Dead Redemption was the focus of the May 7 , 2010 episode of GameTrailers TV with Geoff Keighley , featuring exclusive gameplay footage of the game . The final pre @-@ launch trailer was released on May 13 , 2010 . 
 Viral marketing strategies were used to market the game . The official Red Dead Redemption website was redesigned on March 16 , April 14 , April 21 , April 26 , May 10 , and May 12 , 2010 . To encourage pre @-@ order sales , Rockstar collaborated with several retail outlets to provide pre @-@ order bonuses . These included an exclusive outfit , weapon and horse for players to use in the game . The game 's official soundtrack was also offered as a pre @-@ order bonus . 
 To promote the game , some pieces of artwork depicting the characters were painted as murals in some cities . Art depicting the game was featured on NASCAR driver Joey Logano 's car in April and June 2010 . A machinima short film , titled Red Dead Redemption : The Man from Blackwater , aired on the television network Fox on May 29 , 2010 . Directed by John Hillcoat , the film retells several of the game 's earlier missions in which Marston attempts to find and kill Bill Williamson . Rockstar also developed a Facebook application based on the game , titled Red Dead Redemption : Gunslingers . Released on April 12 , 2010 , the game was a role @-@ playing social game that allowed players to duel their friends ; it is no longer available , due to updates on the Facebook platform . 
 = = = Staff complaints = = = 
 In January 2010 , Gamasutra published a blog post written by an individual using the name " Rockstar Spouse " . The post outlined the unethical working practices in place at Rockstar San Diego during the game 's developing , including twelve @-@ hour work days and six @-@ day weeks , with lower @-@ than @-@ the @-@ industry @-@ average salary increase . Other former Rockstar San Diego employees described the project as " an organic disaster of the most epic proportions " , that the game had been in development for over four years , and that game developers from Rockstar Toronto , Vancouver , Leeds , New England , and the Midnight Club team at San Diego had been transferred over to work on the game . Rockstar responded in a statement , claiming " this is a case of people taking the opinions of a few anonymous posters on message boards as fact " . 
 In April 2010 , an email sent by Rockstar 's public relations department to a journalist of the magazine Zoo was published online . The email reported that Rockstar was requesting Zoo 's review of the game should reflect " the huge achievement " of Red Dead Redemption . Subsequently , Zoo fired the journalist , reiterating that " at no time has Rockstar ever sought a preferential review in return for advertising " . 
 = John Barrymore = 
 John Barrymore ( born John Sidney Blyth ; February 14 or 15 , 1882 – May 29 , 1942 ) was an American actor on stage , screen and radio . A member of the Drew and Barrymore theatrical families , he initially tried to avoid the stage , and briefly attempted a career as an artist , but appeared on stage together with his father Maurice in 1900 , and then his sister Ethel the following year . He began his career in 1903 and first gained attention as a stage actor in light comedy , then high drama , culminating in productions of Justice ( 1916 ) , Richard III ( 1920 ) and Hamlet ( 1922 ) ; his portrayal of Hamlet led to him being called the " greatest living American tragedian " . 
 After a success as Hamlet in London in 1925 , Barrymore left the stage for 14 years and instead focused entirely on films . In the silent film era , he was well received in such pictures as Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde ( 1920 ) , Sherlock Holmes ( 1922 ) and The Sea Beast ( 1926 ) . During this period , he gained his nickname , the Great Profile . His stage @-@ trained voice proved an asset when sound films were introduced , and three of his works , Grand Hotel ( 1932 ) , Twentieth Century ( 1934 ) and Midnight ( 1939 ) have been inducted into the National Film Registry . 
 Barrymore 's personal life has been the subject of much attention before and since his death . He struggled with alcohol abuse from the age of 14 , was married and divorced four times , and declared bankruptcy later in life . Much of his later work involved self @-@ parody and the portrayal of drunken has @-@ beens . His obituary in The Washington Post observed that " with the passing of the years – and as his private life became more public – he became , despite his genius in the theater , a tabloid character . " Although film historians have opined that Barrymore 's " contribution to the art of cinematic acting began to fade " after the mid @-@ 1930s , Barrymore 's biographer , Martin Norden , considers him to be " perhaps the most influential and idolized actor of his day " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1882 – 1903 = = = 
 Barrymore was born John Sidney Blyth in Philadelphia , and was known by family and friends as " Jack " . Although the Barrymore family bible puts his date of birth as February 15 , 1882 , his birth certificate shows February 14 . He was the youngest of three children . His siblings were Lionel ( 1878 @-@ 1954 ) , and Ethel ( 1879 @-@ 1959 ) . His father was Maurice Barrymore , an Indian @-@ born British actor who had been born Herbert Blyth , and had adopted Barrymore as a stage name after seeing it on a poster in the Haymarket Theatre in London . Barrymore 's mother , Georgie Drew Barrymore , was born into a prominent theatrical family . Barrymore 's maternal grandparents were Louisa Lane Drew , a well @-@ known 19th @-@ century American actress and the manager of the Arch Street Theatre , and John Drew , also an actor whose specialty was comedy . Barrymore 's maternal uncles were two more thespians , John Drew , Jr. and Sidney . 
 Much of Barrymore 's early life was unsettled . In October 1882 , the family toured in the US for a season with Polish actress Helena Modjeska . The following year his parents toured again with Modjeska but left the children behind . Modjeska was influential in the family , and she insisted that all three children be baptized into the Catholic Church . In 1884 the family traveled to London as part of Augustin Daly 's theatrical company , returning to the US two years later . As a child , Barrymore was sometimes badly behaved , and he was sent away to schools in an attempt to instill discipline . The strategy was not always successful , and he attended elementary schools in four states . He was sent first to the boys ' annex of the Convent of Notre Dame in Philadelphia . One punishment that he received there was being made to read a copy of Dante 's Inferno ; he later recounted that , as he looked at the illustrations by Gustave Doré , " my interest was aroused , and a new urge was born within me . I wanted to be an artist " . He was expelled from the school in 1891 and was sent to Seton Hall Preparatory School in New Jersey , where Lionel was already studying . Barrymore was unhappy at Seton and was soon withdrawn , after which he attended several public schools in New York , including the Mount Pleasant Military Academy . 
 In 1892 , his grandmother Louisa Drew 's business began to suffer , and she lost control of her theater , causing disruption in the family . The following year , when Barrymore was 11 years old , his mother died from tuberculosis ; her consistent touring and his absence at school meant that he barely knew her , and he was mostly raised by his grandmother . The loss of their mother 's income prompted both Ethel and Lionel to seek work as professional actors . Barrymore 's father was mostly absent from the family home while on tour , and when he returned he would spend time at The Lambs , a New York actors ' club . 
 In 1895 , Barrymore entered Georgetown Preparatory School , then located on Georgetown University Campus , but he was expelled in November 1897 , probably after being caught waiting in a brothel . One of his biographers , Michael A. Morrison , posits the alternate theory that Barrymore was expelled after the staff saw him inebriated . By the time he left Georgetown he was , according to Martin Norden in his biography of Barrymore , " already in the early stages of a chronic drinking problem " . 1897 was an emotionally challenging year for Barrymore : he lost his virginity when he was seduced by his step @-@ mother , Mamie Floyd , and in August his grandmother , the main female role model in his life , died . 
 Barrymore traveled with his father to England in 1898 , where he joined King 's College School , Wimbledon . A year later he joined the Slade School of Fine Art , to study literature and art . After a year of formal study , he left and " devoted much of his subsequent stay in London to bohemianism and nocturnal adventures " , according to his biographer Margot Peters . Barrymore returned to New York in the summer of 1900 , and by November he found work as an illustrator on The New York Evening Journal , at a salary of $ 50 a week . 
 Barrymore had always professed a dislike of the acting profession , but in 1900 he was persuaded by his father to join him on stage for a few performances of a short play , " A Man of the World " . He appeared in the same piece again the following year , but he still thought of the experience as merely a way to supplement his income , rather than as a possible future career . In October 1901 , Ethel was appearing in Philadelphia in Captain Jinks of the Horse Marines when one of the younger actors became temporarily unavailable . She persuaded the director to allow Barrymore to accept the part of the minor character , and Barrymore traveled from New York , learning his lines on the train . In the first act , he stopped in the middle of his dialogue , unable to remember the text , and asked the audience and his fellow actors , " I 've blown up . Where do we go from here ? " , which led the cast to improvise the remainder of the scene . 
 An incident in 1901 had a major impact on Barrymore . In March , his father had a mental breakdown as a result of tertiary syphilis , and Barrymore took him to Bellevue hospital . He was later transferred to a private institution in Amityville , Long Island , where he suffered a " rapid descent into madness " . The Encyclopedia of World Biography states that Barrymore was constantly " haunted by the bright and dark spell of his father " , and his close friend Gene Fowler reported that " the bleak overtone of this breaking of his parent 's reason never quite died away in Barrymore 's mind , and he was haunted by fears he would suffer the same fate " . The same year , Barrymore began an affair with a beautiful artists ' model , " <unk> girl " and aspiring actress named Evelyn Nesbit , who was a mistress of architect Stanford White . Barrymore later described Nesbit as " the most maddening woman . ... She was the first woman I ever loved " , and he proposed marriage to her . Nesbit 's mother did not think that , as a struggling artist , Barrymore was a good match for her daughter . To break off their relationship her mother sent Nesbit away to school in New Jersey . In 1906 , White was shot in public by Nesbit 's then @-@ husband , Pittsburgh millionaire Harry K. Thaw . Barrymore expected to testify at Thaw 's murder trial on the issue of Nesbit 's morality ; he worried that he might be asked whether he had arranged for Nesbit to have an abortion , disguised as an appendectomy , even though Nesbit had undergone two previous " <unk> " . Barrymore was never called as a witness because Thaw pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity . 
 In May 1902 , Barrymore was fired from his newspaper position after producing a poor illustration for the paper while hung over . He spent time as a poster designer but realized it was not lucrative enough for his lifestyle , which was being partly financed by Ethel , who was also paying for their father 's care . While discussing his future with his brother , Barrymore said " it looks as though I 'll have to succumb to the family curse , acting " , and he later admitted that " there isn 't any romance about how I went on stage . ... I needed the money . " 
 = = = Early stage career : 1903 – 13 = = = 
 Barrymore began to contact his family 's theatrical connections to find work and approached Charles Frohman , who had been the producer of Captain Jinks and had also been an employer of Barrymore 's mother Georgie a decade earlier . Frohman thought that Barrymore had comedic potential but needed more experience before making a Broadway debut . Barrymore joined the company of McKee Rankin , Sidney Drew 's father @-@ in @-@ law , on the Chicago leg of their tour , at the W. S. Cleveland Theatre in October 1903 . He first played the minor role of Lt. Max von <unk> in Magda , and in November when the troupe produced Leah the Forsaken , he took the small part of Max , a village idiot with one spoken line . 
 A year later Barrymore appeared in his first Broadway production , in a small role in the comedy Glad of It , which only had a short run . Afterwards he played the role of Charles <unk> in the farce The Dictator at the Criterion Theatre , which starred William Collier . During the play 's run and subsequent tour across the US , Collier became a mentor to the young actor , although his patience was continually tested by Barrymore 's drinking , which led to occasional missed performances , drunken stage appearances , and general misbehavior . Collier taught Barrymore much about acting , including coaching him in comic timing , but " at times regretted his sponsorship " of his apprentice . In March 1905 , while The Dictator was playing in Buffalo , Barrymore 's father died in Amityville and was buried at Glenwood Cemetery in Philadelphia . At the close of the US tour , The Dictator visited Britain from April 1905 , where it played at the Comedy Theatre . The critic for The Observer wrote that Barrymore " admirably seconded " Collier . 
 When he returned to America , Barrymore appeared at the Criterion Theatre in a double bill of works by J. M. Barrie ; he played a clown in Pantaloon opposite his brother , and Stephen Rollo in Alice Sit @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Fire opposite his sister . Both plays ran for 81 performances from December 1905 , and then went on tour . Barrymore continued drinking and lacked discipline , which affected his performances . Ethel was angry with her brother and had the producers fire him from the show , but re @-@ hire him the following day , to teach him a lesson . After a tour of the US and Australia with Collier in On the Quiet and The Dictator , Barrymore joined his sister in the 1907 comedy His Excellency the Governor at the Empire Theatre . He received mixed reviews for his performances , and The Wichita Daily Eagle commented that " Barrymore seems to imitate John Drew too much ever to be a good actor . Why doesn 't young Barrymore imitate a real actor if he must copy someone . " 
 Barrymore gained his first leading role in early 1907 , in the comedy The Boys of Company B at the Lyceum Theatre . Although he was well received by the critics – The Washington Post noted that " his work has been pronounced astonishingly clever by the critics wherever he played " – at times he continued his unprofessional stage behavior , which led to a rebuke from John Drew , who attended a performance . After a short run in <unk> at the Garrick Theatre , Barrymore was given the lead role of Mac in A Stubborn Cinderella , both on tour and at the Broadway Theatre in Boston . He had previously been earning $ 50 a week during his sporadic employment but now enjoyed a wage increase to $ 175 . He briefly appeared in The Candy Shop in mid @-@ 1909 , before he played the lead role in Winchell Smith 's play The Fortune Hunter at the Gaiety Theatre in September the same year . It was his longest @-@ held role , running for 345 performances until May 1911 , initially at the Gaiety Theatre in New York , and then on tour . The critic for The New York Times thought the play was , " acted with fine comedy spirit by John Barrymore ... [ who ] gave indisputable signs last night of grown and growing powers . " 
 In mid @-@ 1910 Barrymore met socialite Katherine Corri Harris , and the couple married in September that year . Harris ' father objected to the relationship and refused to attend the wedding . Shortly after the ceremony , The Dictator went on tour , and Harris was given a small role in the play . According to Peters , Barrymore " began to think of his marriage as a ' bus accident ' " . Film critic Hollis Alpert wrote that , within a week of the wedding , Katherine was complaining that she saw her new husband too infrequently . Barrymore 's increasing dependence on alcohol was also a cause of marital problems , and he explained that " unhappiness increased the drink , and drink increased the unhappiness " . 
 Barrymore 's next two plays – Uncle Sam and Princess Zim @-@ Zim , both from 1911 – were critically and commercially weak , but the second work introduced him to playwright Edward Sheldon , who would " reshape ... [ Barrymore 's ] entire career " . In January 1912 , Barrymore appeared together with his sister in A Slice of Life at the Empire Theatre on Broadway , which ran for 48 performances . Charles Darnton , a critic for The Evening World , observed that " Barrymore takes delight in ' kidding ' his part not only to the limit , but perhaps beyond " . A review in The Washington Times stated that " Barrymore inimitably imitates his uncle John Drew " . 
 Barrymore may have appeared in his first films in 1912 . In four short films , a cast member is listed as " Jack Barrymore " ; this is probably John Barrymore , although Norden notes that " we may never know for certain if [ these ] are in fact Barrymore movies . " The four films were Dream of a Motion Picture Director , The Widow Casey 's Return , A Prize Package ( all 1912 ) and One on Romance ( 1913 ) . The films were produced by the Philadelphia @-@ based Lubin Manufacturing Company and were lost in an explosion and fire at the Lubin vaults in 1914 . 
 In July 1912 , Barrymore went to Los Angeles , where he appeared in three short @-@ running plays at the Belasco Theatre . He returned to New York in October , where he took the lead role in 72 performances of the comedy The Affairs of Anatol at the Little Theatre . Although the critical response was lukewarm , Barrymore 's salary for the play was $ 600 a week . He began the following year by appearing in a short run of A Thief for a Night in McVicker 's Theatre , Chicago , before returning to New York , and the Thirty @-@ Ninth St. Theatre , for a two @-@ month run in Believe Me <unk> . 
 = = = Entry into motion pictures , and theatrical triumphs : 1913 – 24 = = = 
 In late 1913 , Barrymore made his first confirmed feature film , the romantic comedy An American Citizen , with Adolph Zukor 's Famous Players Film Company . When the film was released in January 1914 , Barrymore " delighted movie audiences with an inimitable light touch that made a conventional romance ' joyous ' , " writes Peters . A reviewer for The Oregon Daily Journal thought that Barrymore gave a " portrayal of unusual quality " . The success of the picture led to further film work , including The Man from Mexico ( 1914 ) , Are You a Mason ? , The Dictator and The <unk> <unk> ( all 1915 ) . Except for The <unk> <unk> , all of these early films are presumed lost . 
 Despite the film work and the higher fees he earned from it , Barrymore continued to seek stage work , and in January 1914 he played the lead in The Yellow Ticket at New York 's Eltinge Theatre . The role marked a departure from the light comedy of his previous performances , a result of Sheldon urging him to turn towards more dramatic parts . The Yellow Ticket was not the breakthrough that Barrymore wanted . A few months before the outbreak of World War One , he took a vacation to Italy with Sheldon to enjoy a temporary break from his worsening marriage . He returned from Italy and accepted another serious stage role , that of an ex @-@ convict in Kick In , at New York 's Longacre Theatre . The play was a success , and Barrymore received praise from the critics ; The New York Times reviewer thought that in a play that had " uncommonly able and sincere playing " , Barrymore acted his role with " intelligence and vigor and impart [ ed ] to it a deal of charm " . 
 Barrymore spent the second half of 1915 making three films , including The Red Widow , which he called " the worst film I ever made " in his 1926 autobiography . In April 1916 , he starred in John Galsworthy 's prison drama Justice , again at the instigation of Sheldon . The play was a critical success , and The New York Times thought the audience saw " Barrymore play as he had never played before , and so , by his work as the wretched prisoner in Justice , step forward into a new position on the American stage . " The critic went on to say that Barrymore gave " an extraordinary performance in every detail of appearance and manner , in every note of deep feeling ... a superb performance . " 
 From early 1916 , Barrymore had been living apart from Katherine , and she sued for divorce in November 1916 . By the time the divorce was finalized in December 1917 , he had taken the lead role in the film Raffles , the Amateur Cracksman . He had also tried to enlist in the U.S. Army following the country 's entry into World War I , but Army doctors revealed that he had varicose veins , and he was not accepted for military service . For over a year beginning in April 1917 , he appeared together with Lionel in a stage version of George du Maurier 's 1891 novel Peter Ibbetson . The play and the two Barrymores were warmly regarded by the critics . Around this time , Barrymore began a relationship with a married mother of two , Blanche Oelrichs , a suffragist from an elite Rhode Island family with what Peters calls " anarchistic self @-@ confidence " . Oelrichs also published poetry under the name Michael Strange . While their relationship began in secret , it became more open after Oelrichs ' husband was commissioned into the army and then posted to France . 
 Both Oelrichs and Sheldon urged Barrymore to take on his next role , Fedya Vasilyevich <unk> , in Leo Tolstoy 's play Redemption at the Plymouth Theatre . The critic for The New York Times felt that , although Barrymore 's performance was " marred by vocal monotony " , overall the performance was " a distinct step forward in Mr. Barrymore 's artistic development ... There is probably not another actor on our stage who has a temperament so fine and spiritual , an art so flexible and sure . " In 1918 , Barrymore starred in the romantic comedy film On the Quiet ; the Iowa City Press @-@ Citizen considered the film superior to the original Broadway performance . 
 In 1919 , Barrymore portrayed a struggling lawyer in the film adaptation of the Broadway show Here Comes the Bride , which he followed with The Test of Honor . The latter film marked his first straight dramatic role on screen after years of performing in comedy dramas . Later that year , when Barrymore again appeared on stage with Lionel in Sem Benelli 's historical drama The Jest , audience members " agree [ d ] that the American stage had never witnessed finer acting " , according to Peters . Alexander Woollcott , writing in The New York Times , thought that " John and Lionel Barrymore hold spellbound each breathless audience " , and he commented that Barrymore " contributes to that appeal by every step , every hand , every posture of a body grown unexpectedly eloquent in recent years " . In November , Barrymore began filming Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , playing the dual leading role , and the film was released in theaters the following year . <unk> 's Daily thought that " it is the star 's picture from the very outset , and it is the star that makes it " , going on to say that Barrymore 's portrayal was " a thing of fine shadows and violent emotions " . The Washington Post was in agreement , and considered the performance to be " a masterpiece " , and " a remarkable piece of work " . The film was so successful that the US Navy used stills of Barrymore in its recruiting posters . 
 After planning for over a year – largely in secret – Barrymore played his first Shakespeare part , the title role in Richard III . Conscious of the criticism of his vocal range , he underwent training with Margaret Carrington , the voice and diction trainer , to ensure he sounded right for the part , and the pair worked together daily for up to six hours a day for six weeks . After the debut in March 1920 , the critics were effusive in their praise . The Washington Herald observed that the audience were " held by the sheer power of Barrymore 's performance " , which was " remarkable for ... [ the actor 's ] unexpected vocal richness " , while Woollcott , in The New York Times , thought the performance " marked a measurable advance in the gradual process of bringing [ Barrymore 's ] technical fluency abreast with his winged imagination and his real genius for the theatre " . 
 Although a commercial and critical success , the play closed after 31 performances when Barrymore collapsed , suffering a nervous breakdown . Since appearing in Redemption he had worked ceaselessly , appearing on stage in the evenings , while planning or rehearsing the next production during the day , and by the time he appeared as Richard , he was spending his <unk> filming Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde . He spent six weeks recuperating under the ministrations of his father 's friend , wrestler William Muldoon , who ran a sanitarium . During the summer of 1920 , Oelrichs became pregnant with Barrymore 's child , and a quick divorce was arranged with her husband , which left her and Barrymore free to marry in August that year ; a daughter , Diana Barrymore , followed in March 1921 . Soon after the birth , he began rehearsals for Clair de Lune , which his wife had adapted from Victor Hugo 's 1869 novel The Man Who Laughs . Barrymore persuaded Ethel to play the role of the Queen – it was the first time the two had appeared on stage together in over a decade . The play was a critical flop , although the presence of the siblings ensured that it ran for over 60 performances . 
 In 1921 , Barrymore portrayed a wealthy Frenchman in New York in the film The Lotus Eater , with Colleen Moore . In September , Barrymore and Oelrichs went to Europe on holiday ; cracks were appearing in their relationship , and she fell in love with a poet during their extended stay in Venice . In October , Oelrichs returned to New York and Barrymore traveled to London to film the exterior scenes for his latest movie , Sherlock Holmes , in which he played the title role . He then returned to New York to work on the film 's interior scenes in January 1922 . Barrymore became involved in the pre @-@ production work for the film and provided designs for Moriarty 's lair . The film was released later that year and was generally thought " a little dull and ponderous , with too many intertitles " , although James W. Dean of The Evening News of Harrisburg opined that " the personality of Barrymore is the film 's transcendent quality " . 
 Barrymore decided next to star in Hamlet on stage , with Arthur Hopkins directing . They spent six months preparing , cutting over 1 @,@ 250 lines from the text as they did so , and Barrymore opted to play Hamlet as " a man 's man " , according to Norden . Barrymore later described his Hamlet as a " normal , healthy , lusty young fellow who simply got into a mess that was too thick for him ... he was a great fencer , an athlete , a man who led an active , healthy life . How can you make a sickly half @-@ wit out of a man like that ? " Barrymore again used Carrington as a vocal coach ; rehearsals started in October , and the play opened on November 16 . The production was a box @-@ office success , and the critics were lavish in their praise . Woollcott , writing for the New York Herald , opined that it was " an evening that will be memorable in the history of the American theater " . while John Corbin , the drama critic for The New York Times , agreed , writing that " in all likelihood we have a new and a lasting Hamlet " . The reviewer for Brooklyn Life stated that Barrymore had " doubtless won the right to be called the greatest living American tragedian " . In 1963 , Orson Welles said that Barrymore was the best Hamlet he had seen , describing the character as " not so much princely – he was a man of genius who happened to be a prince , and he was tender , and virile , and witty , and dangerous " . 
 Barrymore and Hopkins decided to end the run at 101 performances , just breaking the record of one hundred by Edwin Booth , before the play closed in February 1923 . In November and December that year , a three @-@ week run of the play was staged at the Manhattan Opera House , followed by a brief tour that closed at the end of January 1924 . 
 = = = Films with the major studios : 1924 – 32 = = = 
 News of Barrymore 's success in Hamlet piqued the interest of Warner Bros. , which signed him as the lead in the 1924 film Beau Brummel . Unhappy in his marriage , Barrymore – aged 40 at the time – sought solace elsewhere and had an affair with his 17 @-@ year @-@ old co @-@ star Mary Astor during filming . Although the film was not an unqualified success , the cast , including Barrymore , was generally praised . Around this time , Barrymore acquired the nickname " the Great Profile " , as posters and photographs of him tended to favor the left @-@ hand side . He later said : " The right side of my face looks like a fried egg . The left side has features that are to be found in almost any normal anthropological specimen , and those are the apples I try to keep on top of the barrel . " 
 In February 1925 , Barrymore staged Hamlet in London at the Haymarket Theatre , which the Manchester Guardian later said had " the most memorable first night for years " . The reviews were positive , and " although none of the London critics found Barrymore superior to [ Henry ] Irving and [ Johnston ] Forbes @-@ Robertson , many were favorable in their comparisons " . Among the audience members was the 20 @-@ year @-@ old actor John Gielgud , who wrote in his program " Barrymore is romantic in appearance and naturally gifted with grace , looks and a capacity to wear period clothes , which makes his brilliantly intellectual performance classical without being unduly severe , and he has tenderness , remoteness , and neurosis all placed with great delicacy and used with immense effectiveness and admirable judgment " . Looking back in the 1970s , he said : " The handsome middle @-@ aged stars of the Edwardian theatre romanticised the part . Even John Barrymore , whose Hamlet I admired very much , cut the play outrageously so that he could , for instance , play the closet scene all out for sentiment with the emphasis on the ' Oedipus complex ' – sobbing on Gertrude 's bosom . Yet Barrymore ... had a wonderful edge and a demonic sense of humour . " 
 At the end of this run of Hamlet , Barrymore traveled to Paris , where Oelrichs had stayed during his residence in London , but the reunion was not a happy one and the couple argued frequently . When he returned to America , she remained in Paris , and the couple drew up a separation agreement that provided Oelrichs with $ 18 @,@ 000 a year and stated that neither could sue for divorce on the grounds of adultery . While he had been in London , Warner Bros and Barrymore entered into a contact for three further films at a salary of $ 76 @,@ 250 per picture . He later claimed that his motivation for moving from stage to films was the " lack of repetition — the continual playing of a part , which is so ruinous to an actor , is entirely eliminated " . 
 Barrymore 's first film under the contract was The Sea Beast ( 1926 ) , loosely based on the 1851 novel Moby @-@ Dick , in which he played Captain Ahab Ceeley . This was one of the biggest money @-@ makers of the year for Warner Bros. Although Barrymore wanted Astor to play the female lead , she was unavailable , and Dolores Costello was cast in her place . He later said that " I fell in love with her instantly . This time I knew I was right " , and the couple began an affair . Costello 's father was angered by the relationship , but his complaints were ignored by both Costello and her mother : Costello 's parents separated and were divorced as a result . The film was well received by critics , and Mordaunt Hall , the film critic of The New York Times , praised the " energy , earnestness and virility " Barrymore displayed in the role of Ceeley . 
 As filming finished on The Sea Beast , work began on Don Juan , the first feature @-@ length film with synchronized Vitaphone sound effects and a musical soundtrack . Although Barrymore wanted to play opposite Costello again , Jack L. Warner , the film 's producer , signed Astor . After completing his Warner Bros. contract with When a Man Loves , with Costello , Barrymore joined United Artists ( UA ) under a three @-@ film deal . For the next three years , according to Morrison , he " enjoyed unprecedented prosperity and spent lavishly " . Nevertheless , he received some harsh reviews . Critic and essayist Stark Young wrote in The New Republic that Barrymore 's films were " rotten , vulgar , empty , in bad taste , dishonest , noisome with a silly and unwholesome exhibitionism , and odious with a kind of stale and degenerate studio adolescence . Their appeal is cheap , cynical and specious " . 
 In 1927 , Barrymore planned to revive Hamlet at the Hollywood Bowl , but in August he canceled the production , without explanation , and began filming the third of the UA pictures , Eternal Love , for which he was paid $ 150 @,@ 000 . In February 1928 , Barrymore obtained a quiet divorce from Oelrichs ; she eagerly agreed to the separation , as she was in a relationship with a lawyer , Harrison Tweed , whom she later married . Barrymore and Costello married in November that year ; their daughter , Dolores , was born in April 1930 and a son , John Drew Barrymore , followed in June 1932 . Barrymore purchased and converted an estate in the Hollywood Hills into 16 different buildings with 55 rooms , gardens , skeet ranges , swimming pools , fountains and a totem pole . 
 By the late 1920s , sound films had become common , following the 1927 sensation , The Jazz Singer . Actors with trained voices were in demand by the studios , and Barrymore was offered a five @-@ film deal with Warner Bros. at $ 150 @,@ 000 per picture , and a share of the profits . Before he began this contract , he played his first speaking role on film : a one @-@ off section in The Show of Shows ( 1929 ) , playing Richard , Duke of Gloucester in Henry VI , Part 3 . His first two films under contract were General Crack and The Man from <unk> 's , each of which were modestly successful . As he had been frustrated at the inability of making The Sea Beast as a sound film , Barrymore returned to Moby Dick as the source for a 1930 film of the same name . Peters thinks little of the film , describing it as " a seesaw between the cosmic and the comic , a travesty of Melville as well as a silly film all on its own " . 
 The following year , Barrymore played the title role of a manipulative voice coach in Svengali , opposite Marian Marsh . Martin Dickstein , the critic for the Brooklyn Daily Eagle , wrote that Barrymore " registers a personal triumph in the role " , calling his performance " brilliant ... one of the best of his movie career " . Later in 1931 , he played a crippled puppeteer , who tries to fulfill his frustrated ambitions by manipulating the life of a young male ballet dancer and the dancer 's lover ( also Marsh ) in The Mad Genius ; the film was a commercial failure . With disappointing box office returns from their five @-@ film deal , Warner Bros. decided not to offer Barrymore a contract renewal . Instead , Barrymore signed a non @-@ exclusive contract with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) and took a $ 25 @,@ 000 salary cut per film . 
 = = = Years of transition : 1932 – 36 = = = 
 Barrymore 's first film for MGM was the 1933 mystery Arsène Lupin , in which he co @-@ starred with his brother Lionel . In The New York Times , Hall called Barrymore 's performance " admirable " and wrote that " it is a pleasure to see [ him ] again in something in a lighter vein . " The same year , Barrymore starred as jewel thief Baron Felix von <unk> together with Greta Garbo in the 1932 film Grand Hotel , in which Lionel also appeared . Critical opinion of Barrymore 's acting was divided ; John Gilbert 's biographer Eve Golden refers to Barrymore as seeming " more like ... [ Garbo 's ] affectionate father than her lover " , while George Blaisdell of International Photographer praised the dialogue and wrote that a viewer would be " deeply impressed with the rarity in screen drama on which he is looking . " Grand Hotel won the Academy Award for Best Picture and was one of the highest @-@ grossing films of the year . It was later added to the National Film Registry . 
 In 1932 , Barrymore appeared in three films . For RKO Pictures he played a borderline @-@ alcoholic lawyer in State 's Attorney , before he returned to MGM to play an escaped lunatic in A Bill of Divorcement , opposite Katharine Hepburn in her screen debut . Film scholar Daniel Bernardi later noted the humanism demonstrated between Barrymore 's character and his family , particularly the " close bond " between father and daughter . In his final film of the year , Rasputin and the Empress , Barrymore , Ethel and Lionel co @-@ starred . Physically , Barrymore had deteriorated since filming Svengali , and he had gained weight because of his drinking . Peters notes the " dissipation of the once ascetic face , a dissipation only underlined by the studio 's attempt to reconstruct with lights , filters and make @-@ up a spiritual beauty that had been corrupted . " The film was a critical and commercial failure , and MGM lost significant amounts of money . The New Yorker thought the three Barrymores had produced their worst work . 
 The year 1933 was a busy one for Barrymore , and his decline began to be evident . He appeared in five films during the year , including as a meek schoolteacher @-@ turned @-@ businessman in Topaze , opposite Myrna Loy , and Dinner at Eight , with Lionel . Peters opines that Barrymore 's portrayal of a washed @-@ up alcoholic actor " could well have fixed ... in the public 's and MGM 's mind that John Barrymore was a drunken has @-@ been . " After the run of films with MGM , the company ended its contact with Barrymore amid its financial woes caused by the Great Depression . He then signed with Universal Studios to portray a troubled Jewish lawyer in Counsellor at Law . During filming he struggled to remember his lines for even small scenes . Filming was stopped on one occasion after more than 25 takes when he struggled to recall the right lines ; it was a problem with which he began to suffer regularly . Despite the problems , Norden believes that this was " one of his best film performances " . 
 In December 1933 , Barrymore agreed with RKO to film Hamlet . He underwent screen tests and hired Carrington to act as vocal coach again , but during one session , his memory failed him again , and the project was eventually scrapped . Barrymore starred in two films released in 1934 , the drama Long Lost Father and the screwball comedy Twentieth Century . In the latter film , Barrymore played madcap Broadway impresario Oscar Jaffe , a role in which he demonstrated a " rare genius as a comedian " . Morrison writes that the portrayal was one " that many consider to be his finest contribution to film " . In 2011 , the picture was added to the National Film Registry , where it was described as Barrymore 's " last great film role " . 
 In May 1934 , Barrymore was filming Hat , Coat and Glove for RKO when , during the filming of one scene , he again forgot his lines and even the name of his character . Filming was postponed until the following day , but the result was the same . After he took a break for a few days , he returned to the set , but he still could not remember any of the script , and RKO replaced him with Ricardo Cortez . Soon afterwards , he suffered a mental and physical breakdown and was hospitalized . Costello confirmed that his drinking over the previous two years had worsened , and she described him as a " hopeless alcoholic " . Barrymore 's relationship with Costello was deeply troubled and , believing she was going to declare him mentally incompetent , he left their home in Los Angeles and traveled first to London and then to India . He returned to the US in early 1935 and settled in New York , leaving his wife in Los Angeles . Shortly after his return , he was hospitalized for a month with bronchitis and influenza . A 19 @-@ year @-@ old fan , Elaine Jacobs , visited him , and the two became good friends . On his release from the hospital , her mother invited him to recuperate at their house . She changed her name to Elaine Barrie , which she explained was to get " as near to Barrymore as I dared " , and they began a relationship . In May , the couple underwent the first of several professional collaborations , when they appeared on Rudy Vallée 's The Fleischmann 's Yeast Hour radio show . 
 The relationship was widely reported in the tabloid press , who labeled the couple Caliban and Ariel . Costello filed for divorce , but after a series of arguments with Barrie , Barrymore considered the relationship with Barrie to be at an end , and he left for Los Angeles . A newspaper editor chartered a plane and flew Barrie to Chicago , to meet Barrymore 's train ; she broadcast a plea for him to return , and her pursuit became national news . Morrison thinks that the headlines established a new reputation for Barrymore of " the aging satyr , the has @-@ been alcoholic , the much @-@ married ham " . This was a blow to his self @-@ respect , but he faced his troubles " with aplomb and a sense of humor " , according to Morrison . To escape from the spotlight , Barrymore took vacations on his yacht ; it cost him over $ 35 @,@ 000 a year to run , and so he sold it in 1938 after encountering financial difficulties . 
 = = = Decline and death : 1936 – 42 = = = 
 Barrymore 's alcohol dependence meant most studios were unwilling to employ him , but MGM risked casting him in the role of Mercutio in their 1936 film Romeo and Juliet . To minimize disruption to the schedule , the studio put Barrymore in Kelley 's Rest Home , a sanatorium for alcoholics , but he continued to drink covertly and was disruptive on set . Basil Rathbone , who was playing Tybalt , later recounted that " he was drinking and unreliable on the set ... It was sad to see him in such a state . " Opinions on his portrayal were divided . Some critics , such as Welford Beaton of the Hollywood Spectator , thought " Barrymore is an acting gem " , although Gielgud was uncomplimentary , writing to Peggy Ashcroft that " Barrymore , who is like a monstrous old male impersonator jumping through a hoop , should really have been shot . " 
 Word about Barrymore 's problems on and off the set spread around the industry , and he did not work on another film for over a year , when he had a supporting role in the musical film Maytime . His divorce from Costello was finalized in October 1936 , and he married Barrie in November the same year . The couple had a heated argument in public shortly afterwards , and he again spent time in Kelley 's Rest Home and hospital , which cost him an average of $ 800 daily , draining his finances . When he came out , he collapsed on the Maytime set . On January 15 , 1937 , he was served with divorce papers , and a month later he filed for bankruptcy protection , with debts of $ 160 @,@ 000 . The divorce was granted in April , but the couple reconciled before it was finalized . 
 Barrymore decided to work on more Shakespeare roles . In June 1937 , he signed up with NBC Radio to produce a series of six episodes under the name <unk> Shakespeare , which also featured Barrie . The first program was Hamlet , which was well received by critics . The New York Times commented that " Shakespeare 's lines uttered dramatically by the voice of John Barrymore sweep through the ' ether ' with a sound of finality ; it seems that they are his words and no one else could speak them with such lifelike force " . Peters disagrees however , and considers that " because he was desperate he pressed too hard and ended by caricaturing , not capturing , his great Shakespearean acting " . 
 Throughout the NBC series , Barrymore had been reliable , sober and responsible , and the studios reacted positively with offers of work . This led to appearances in nine films in 1937 and 1938 , including as Colonel Nielson in three Bulldog Drummond films , and roles in True Confession and Marie Antoinette . He was offered predominantly supporting roles , but he worked conscientiously on the films and as a consequence was able to honor his debts . His memory was still problematic , and he used cue cards as an aid ; his fellow actors and the directors of the films were sympathetic to his condition . When he filmed his last serious role , Gregory Vance in the 1939 film The Great Man Votes , the director , Garson Kanin , ensured that the cast and crew addressed him as " Mr. Barrymore " as a mark of respect . 
 Barrymore and his wife both appeared in supporting roles in the 1939 screwball comedy Midnight , her only film role . The New York Times thought the film was " one of the liveliest , gayest , wittiest and naughtiest comedies of a long hard season " and that Barrymore , " the [ Lou ] Gehrig of eye @-@ brow batting , rolls his phrases with his usual richly humorous effect " . The film was inducted into the National Film Registry in 2013 . Barrymore and his wife appeared together in the stage farce My Dear Children , which opened in March 1939 at Princeton University 's McCarter Theatre . He played the lead role , Allan Manville , an ageing hammy Shakespearean has @-@ been . Because of his failing memory , Barrymore ad @-@ libbed constantly throughout the show . In some points the new additions were an improvement , but he also greeted friends in the audience , and used profanities freely . Nevertheless , the show was a success . Life magazine wrote that " People flock to see [ Barrymore ] , not for polished performance , but because he converts the theater into a rowdy histrionic madhouse . Sometimes he arrives late . Sometimes he is tight . Usually he forgets his lines . But he always puts on a great show . " When the show reached Broadway , Life wrote that " Barrymore 's return to Times Square was a huge professional triumph " . Brooks Atkinson , writing for The New York Times thought that Barrymore was " still the most gifted actor in this country . ... Although he has recklessly played the fool for a number of years , he is nobody 's fool in My Dear Children but a superbly gifted actor on a tired holiday . " Barrymore and his wife continued to argue during the play 's run , and she left the play part way through the tour . They attempted a reconciliation when the production reached New York , but the couple divorced in late 1940 . 
 In 1940 , Barrymore appeared in The Great Profile , a spoof of his life in the months prior to My Dear Children . Barrymore played Evans Garrick , closely modeled on his own experience , and Mary Beth Hughes played his wife . The critics reacted harshly to the film , and to Barrymore 's association with it . The New York Times wrote that " As a play it is a feeble thing , hardly matching the spectacular public accounts of his amours ... for all of Mr. Barrymore 's shenanigans and devastating wit , The Great Profile is more than a little pathetic . In the Winter of his Discontent Mr. Barrymore is selling his talent at cut @-@ rate " . In terms of his reputation , worse was to come in his final film , Playmates ( 1941 ) , which " amply illustrated the depths to which he had fallen ; he played an alcoholic Shakespearean ham named John Barrymore " . 
 In October 1940 , Barrymore returned to the NBC Radio network to work on Rudy Vallée 's show , now called the <unk> Show . Barrymore recorded 74 episodes of the program , continuing in the vein of self @-@ parody , with jokes about his drinking , declining career and marital issues . On May 19 , 1942 , while recording a line from Romeo and Juliet for the show , Barrymore collapsed . He was taken to the Hollywood Presbyterian Hospital and died there on May 29 , from cirrhosis of the liver and kidney failure , complicated by pneumonia . Shortly before his death , Barrymore returned to the faith of the Catholic Church . Although Errol Flynn 's memoirs claim that the film director Raoul Walsh " borrowed " Barrymore 's body before burial to leave his corpse propped in a chair for a drunken Flynn to discover when he returned home , Gene Fowler , a close friend of Barrymore , stayed with the body all night and denies the story . Barrymore was buried at Calvary Cemetery in Los Angeles on June 2 . In 1980 , Barrymore 's son had his father 's body reinterred at Philadelphia 's Mount Vernon Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The New York Times obituary stated that during the period when Barrymore 's performed in Justice , Richard III and Hamlet , the actor " was accepted by most critics as the foremost English @-@ speaking actor of his time ... equipped both by nature and by art . " The Washington Post agreed , noting that during his stage triumphs and early years in film , " he was the great profile , the darling of the ' royal family ' of the stage . " Many of the obituaries made the point that Barrymore fell short of his potential . The Manchester Guardian thought that he " might with some self @-@ discipline have added his name to the list of truly great actors ... yet he dissipated his energies " . The New York Times noted that he could twist his abilities " to parody , burlesque himself and play the clown " , and they considered that it was " unfortunate that the public in recent years saw him in ... [ that ] mood . It was a mood of careless abdication " . The Washington Post observed that " with the passing of the years – and as his private life became more public – he became , despite his genius in the theater , a tabloid character . " 
 According to Morrison , Barrymore 's stage portrayals of Richard III and Hamlet were a model for modern performances of these roles . His interpretation along psychological lines was innovative , and his " dynamic portrayals ... changed the direction of subsequent revivals . " Barrymore 's natural acting style reversed the stage conventions of the time ; his " ' colloquial ' verse speaking introduced to the stage the vocal manner of a postwar gentleman . " 
 Barrymore was honored on few occasions by the entertainment industry and its members . Although both his brother and sister won Academy Awards , the only award Barrymore ever received for his screen work was from Rudolph Valentino in 1925 for Beau Brummel . Valentino created an award in his own name and felt that his fellow actors should receive accolades for their screen work . When Barrymore attended his ceremony at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in 1940 , he left more than the customary hand and footprints in the theater 's forecourt : aided by the owner , Sid Grauman , Barrymore left a cement imprint of his facial profile . In February 1960 , for his contribution to the motion picture industry , Barrymore was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame , with a star at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard ; Barrymore , along with his two siblings , is included in the American Theater Hall of Fame . The Barrymore " Royal Family " of actors continued through two of his children – his son with Costello , John Drew Barrymore and his daughter with Oelrichs , Diana – both of whom became actors , as did John Jr . ' s daughter Drew . Barrymore 's brother Lionel died on November 15 , 1954 , and their sister Ethel died on June 18 , 1959 . 
 Barrymore 's achievements and his colorful life have ensured that several biographical studies followed his 1926 autobiography , Confessions of an Actor . Alma Power @-@ Waters produced a 1941 study , authorized by the subject , John Barrymore : The Legend and the Man ; Fowler , wrote Good Night , Sweet Prince : The Life and Times of John Barrymore ( 1943 ) ; Alpert published The Barrymores ( 1964 ) ; and John <unk> wrote Damned in Paradise : The Life of John Barrymore ( 1977 ) , although Norden noted in 2000 that many of these earlier works are less than reliable . Those he identified as being more thoroughly researched are Peters ' 1990 history , The House of Barrymore , and his own study of the actor 's work in John Barrymore : A Bio @-@ Bibliography ( 1995 ) . Subsequent to Norden 's comments on the available literature , Morrison published the positively reviewed John Barrymore , Shakespearean Actor in 1997 , which focuses on Barrymore 's stage work . 
 There were several celebratory events in 1982 , on the centenary of Barrymore 's birth . The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Museum of Modern Art jointly hosted a commemorative program of his work , which included numerous <unk> from his films and interviews with some who knew him , including Barrie and his one @-@ time co @-@ star Myrna Loy . The same year , in celebration of the centenary of the Actors Fund of America , the US Postal Service issued a postage stamp featuring Barrymore and his siblings . In February 2010 , an intersection in Fort Lee , New Jersey , was renamed John Barrymore Way on what would have been the actor 's 128th birthday . The intersection marked the spot of the former <unk> 's Hotel , where Barrymore had his 1900 stage debut in " A Man of the World " . 
 = = Portrayals and characterizations = = 
 Barrymore has been used as the inspiration for characters on stage and film . He performed as himself in a number of works ( including The Great Profile , My Dear Children and Playmates ) , and in the Ziegfeld Follies of 1921 he was played by his friend W. C. Fields . In 1927 the Barrymore family was parodied in The Royal Family in which a character based on him was portrayed by Fredric March , whose performance Barrymore admired . The play was staged in London in 1934 as Theatre Royal , with Laurence Olivier in the Barrymore role , and adapted as a film in 1930 , with March reprising his performance . 
 In 1991 , Paul Rudnick 's comedy I Hate Hamlet , performed at the Walter Kerr Theatre , was set in Barrymore 's former apartment . He returns after a séance , dressed in his Hamlet costume . Nicol Williamson played the Barrymore role . Three years later , a London production , Jack : A Night on the Town with John Barrymore , ran for 60 performances at the Criterion Theatre , and Williamson again played the lead . Barrymore , a two @-@ person play by William Luce , premiered in 1996 and depicts Barrymore shortly before his death in 1942 as he is rehearsing a revival of his Richard III . Christopher Plummer played the title role . A film version was released in 2012 , with Plummer again taking the main role . 
 Barrymore had been a friend and drinking companion of Fields . In the 1976 film W.C. Fields and Me , Barrymore was played by Jack Cassidy . Barrymore 's friend , Errol Flynn , played him in a 1958 film Too Much , Too Soon , an adaptation of the autobiography of Diana Barrymore , with Dorothy Malone playing the female lead . Howard Thompson , the film critic of The New York Times , wrote that " Flynn , as the late John Barrymore , a moody , wild @-@ drinking ruin of a great actor , steals the picture , lock , stock and keg . It is only in the scenes of his savage disintegration , as the horrified girl hangs on , that the picture approaches real tragedy . " 
 = Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science = 
 The Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science ( RSMAS / <unk> / ) is a college and research institute for the study of oceanography and the atmospheric sciences within the University of Miami ( UM ) . It is located on a 16 acre ( 65 @,@ 000 m ² ) campus on Virginia Key in Miami , Florida , USA . It is the only subtropical applied and basic marine and atmospheric research institute in the continental United States . 
 Up until 2008 , RSMAS was solely a graduate school within the University of Miami , while it jointly administrated an undergraduate program with UM 's College of Arts and Sciences . In 2008 , the Rosenstiel School has taken over administrative responsibilities for the undergraduate program , granting Bachelor of Science in Marine and Atmospheric Science ( <unk> ) and Bachelor of Arts in Marine Affairs ( <unk> ) baccalaureate degree . Master 's , including a Master of Professional Science degree , and doctorates are also awarded to RSMAS students by the UM Graduate School . 
 The Rosenstiel School 's research includes the study of marine life , particularly Aplysia and coral ; climate change ; air @-@ sea interactions ; coastal ecology ; and admiralty law . The school operates a marine research laboratory ship , and has a research site at an inland sinkhole . Research also includes the use of data from weather satellites and the school operates its own satellite downlink facility . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1940 , University of Miami President Bowman Ashe recruited F.G. Walton Smith , a young British marine biologist who was working in the Bahamas . Smith joined the Department of Zoology , and began organizing the development of a marine laboratory . In 1943 , the Board of Trustees of the University of Miami established the Marine Laboratory for the University . They invited researchers and oceanographers to associate themselves with this laboratory . Its three original objectives were teaching , basic research , and applied marine research . The laboratory focused on subjects specific to the tropical environment . Initially , the Marine Lab was located in a private boathouse on an estate on Belle Isle in Miami Beach , Florida . In 1945 , when the boathouse became structurally unsafe , the lab moved to a converted apartment building in Coral Gables , Florida near the main campus . 
 In 1947 , a delegation from Dade County prompted the Florida State Legislature to support the development of a state Marine Laboratory in conjunction with the UM lab . It reported to the State Board of Conservation , which had no marine research facility and little budget of its own at the time . The relationship lasted for 12 years until the state of Florida built the board a lab in St. Petersburg . In 1953 , the School 's classrooms and laboratories were built at the current Virginia Key location . It was renamed the Institute of Marine Science in 1961 , it became part of the University of Miami 's School of Environmental and Planetary Sciences . 
 In 1969 , the institution was made into an independent school and named to honor Lewis and Dorothy Rosenstiel after a major contribution from the Rosenstiel 's foundation to support progress in atmospheric and marine sciences . In 1977 , the school began a joint undergraduate program with Miami 's College of Arts & Sciences . The school bought Research vessels and built more facilities to further research projects . From 2003 to 2008 , the school operated the Pew Institute for Ocean Science as a joint venture with the The Pew Charitable Trusts , and in 2008 , the program relocated to SUNY at Stony Brook . 
 In 2008 , RSMAS took over administrative functions of the University of Miami 's undergraduate Marine Science , Marine Affairs , and Meteorology programs . Also in 2008 , RSMAS 's library merged with the central University of Miami Library . Recently , RSMAS started unique a one @-@ year Master of Professional Science degree program aimed at students planning non @-@ research careers in business , government , or non @-@ profit organizations . 
 = = Academics = = 
 While the graduate programs are conducted by the RSMAS faculty who in turn report to the Dean of RSMAS , the University of Miami 's Graduate School awards the graduate degrees . RSMAS offers a joint program with the UM Law School which awards its students both a Juris Doctor degree and a Master of Arts in Marine Affairs and Policy . RSMAS also administrates the University of Miami 's undergraduate Marine Science , Marine Affairs , and Meteorology programs on the main campus in Coral Gables , Florida . 
 The Rosenstiel School is divided into six academic divisions , each focusing on a different aspect of oceanography : 
 Applied Marine Physics ( fluid dynamics , remote sensing , waves ) 
 Marine & Atmospheric Chemistry 
 Marine Affairs & Policy ( admiralty law , aquaculture , marine conservation , maritime archaeology , natural resource economics , political ecology ) 
 Marine Biology & Fisheries 
 Marine Geology & Geophysics 
 Meteorology & Physical Oceanography 
 In addition to the academic divisions , RSMAS also has several research units : the Oceans and Human Health Center , the National Resource for Aplysia , the National Center for Coral Reef Research , the Center for Southeastern Tropical Advanced Remote Sensing ( CSTARS ) , and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences . As of 2011 , 358 professors and scientists conduct research programs and teach at RSMAS and the Coral Gables campus . Of these , 81 are regular full @-@ time faculty members . 
 The school operates the F.G. Walton Smith research vessel . Designed to met the school 's specifications , the catamaran was put on water in 2000 . It is equipped with a special sea water flow system that can take samples . The on @-@ board lab can perform chemical analysis of those water samples . It also has transducers for measuring ocean currents , sub @-@ bottom profiling , and deep water bathymetry . In response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill , the vessel was reassigned to environmental monitoring of affected areas and to track underwater plumes of oil . 
 The Rosenstiel School 's research invertebrate museum houses one of the world 's most extensive collections of invertebrate tropical marine life with 400 @,@ 000 specimens . It includes Atlantic tropical marine invertebrates . The collection consists of 60 @,@ 000 specimen lots , out of which 38 @,@ 900 are cataloged and identified species . 
 Since 2005 , RSMAS has conducted an underwater photography contest that draws international submissions . RSMAS also makes underwater photographs available through its Digital Atlas of Marine Species and Locations , which is a database that includes photos of specific marine species . 
 Since 1951 , RSMAS has published the Bulletin of Marine Science a scientific journal which publishes research papers in the marine subject areas covered by the school . It is published four times a year . 
 The United States National Research Council ranked graduate research programs based on 2008 data , and RSMAS ranked 11th to 40th among Oceanography , Atmospheric Sciences , and Meteorology Rankings . The RSMAS entering graduate students ' Average Quantitative Graduate Record Examination score was 681 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Virginia Key 18 @-@ acre ( 73 @,@ 000 m2 ) campus includes classroom facilities , laboratories , a dock , and a student center . The center , called the F. G. Walton Smith Commons , holds a cafeteria and a bar that was rated as one of Miami 's best secrets by the Miami New Times in 2008 . The RSMAS campus features mangroves , sea grape trees , and other dune plants to protect its sand dunes and the campus from storm damage . In 2009 , UM received a $ 15 million federal grant to help construct a new $ 43 @.@ 8 million , 56 @,@ 500 square feet ( 5 @,@ 250 m2 ) Marine Technology and Life Sciences Seawater Research Building . The Virginia Key campus is located at a 65 @-@ acre ( 260 @,@ 000 m2 ) marine research and education park that is also home to two National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) research laboratories and the Maritime and Science Technology Academy magnet school . 
 RSMAS also operates a 76 @-@ acre ( 310 @,@ 000 m2 ) site on mainland Miami @-@ Dade County that was formerly the United States Naval Observatory Secondary National Time Standard Facility , which already had buildings and a 20M antenna used for Very Long Baseline Interferometry ( VLBI ) . The Rosenstiel School 's Center for Southeastern Tropical Advanced Remote Sensing ( CSTARS ) and Richmond Satellite Operations Center ( <unk> ) have research facilities located on what is now named the Richmond Campus . 
 = = Research = = 
 As of 2008 , RSMAS receives $ 50 million in annual external research funding . Laboratories at Virginia Key are equipped with specialized instruments including a salt @-@ water wave tank , the five @-@ tank Conditioning and Spawning Systems , multi @-@ tank Aplysia Culture Laboratory , Controlled Corals Climate Tanks , and DNA analysis equipment . The Richmond Campus ' CSTARS provides RSMAS with a near @-@ real @-@ time weather satellite downlink . The Rosenstiel School also operates the Bimini Biological Field Station , an array of oceanographic high @-@ frequency radar along the US east coast , and the Bermuda aerosol observatory . Since 1977 , the Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies ( <unk> ) , a scientific partnership between UM and the NOAA , has been studying climate change , air @-@ sea interactions and coastal ecology . 
 Research projects at RSMAS are in the domain of atmospheric and marine sciences and include : 
 Coral reef research , focusing on corals survival in a new climate conditions ; coral reef protection 
 Field programs evaluating trace gas chemistry and transport 
 The aquaculture program 
 Climate change modeling 
 Tropical weather , climate , and atmospheric / oceanic circulations 
 Air @-@ sea interactions research through buoys , remote sensing , analysis in situ , a wave tank laboratory , numerical modeling ; 
 Volcanoes in the Pacific , Everglades water level measurements and subsidence through satellite images 
 Studies of the coastal quality and the impact on human health . 
 RSMAS 's Marine Affairs & Policy Division also conducts archaeological and paleontological research at Little Salt Spring in Sarasota County . The site was donated to the University of Miami in 1982 . RSMAS also hosts the National Center for Coral Reef Research ( <unk> ) , which works to understand , conserve and manage coral reefs worldwide . 
 RSMAS has focused significant resources to studying the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and its long term environmental effect . The school is an active member of the State of Florida 's Oil Spill Academic Task Force that works with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection on spill issues . In the summer of 2010 , a <unk> team working with the research vessel Walton Smith was able to document a 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) long oil plume extending toward the Dry Tortugas . 
 The Development Bank of Latin America has awarded a grant to RSMAS to conduct a feasibility study for a new experimental water tunnel facility located in Panama . The facility would be similar to a wind tunnel , but would flow water at high velocity around the objects being studied . 
 The quality of the school is evaluated through peer @-@ reviewed competition for faculty research grants . In addition , each year , the National Science Foundation conduct a nationwide student competition for Graduate Research Award Fellowship , and in 2010 , five RSMAS students received such awards with two additional honorable mentions . 
 = = Notable faculty = = 
 Frederick Bayer ( Marine Biology ) 
 Cesare <unk> ( Geology and Geophysics ) - " founder of <unk> " 
 Samuel H. Gruber ( Marine Biology and Fisheries ) 
 José Carlos Millás ( Meteorology ) 
 Fred <unk> ( Applied Marine Physics ) 
 = Madison Bumgarner = 
 Madison Kyle Bumgarner ( born August 1 , 1989 ) , commonly known by his nickname , " <unk> " , is an American professional baseball pitcher for the San Francisco Giants of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . 
 Bumgarner was born in Hickory , North Carolina , and attended South Caldwell High School in Hudson , North Carolina , where he helped his baseball team win the 2007 4A State Championship . He was drafted by the San Francisco Giants in the first round ( tenth overall ) in the 2007 MLB draft out of high school . In his first year playing professionally , 2008 , he won the South Atlantic League pitching triple crown . He made his major league debut in 2009 with the Giants . In 2010 , he began the season in the minor leagues but was called up midway through the season and wound up becoming the youngest left @-@ handed pitcher to throw eight scoreless innings in a World Series as the Giants won the 2010 World Series , their first since 1954 . 
 In 2014 , Bumgarner set a career high number of wins with 18 and won his third World Series as a Giant . Following one of the most dominant postseason and World Series pitching performances in modern MLB history , he was named the Most Valuable Player of the 2014 World Series , the 2014 Babe Ruth Award winner , the 2014 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year , and the 2014 Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year . He made history by becoming one of only 4 pitchers to ever intentionally bat for himself in a game played in an American League park , rather than use the designated hitter . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bumgarner was born August 1 , 1989 , in Hickory , North Carolina , and grew up in an area ten miles away nicknamed " <unk> " because of the abundance of people with the surname Bumgarner who have lived there over the years after their ancestors had arrived from Germany . 
 He grew up in a log house that his father , Kevin , built , sleeping in a loft at nights . Bumgarner 's first word was " ball " , and by the age of four , he was already playing in a youth baseball league . His father had to sign a waiver because the league was for five- to eight @-@ year @-@ olds . His parents , Kevin and Debbie , divorced while Bumgarner was in high school . 
 Much like fellow Major League pitcher Brett Cecil , throwing a ball is the only thing Bumgarner does left @-@ handed 
 Bumgarner attended South Caldwell High School in Hudson , North Carolina , where he was known as " Maddie " to his friends and was a member of the Spartans baseball team . In his junior season , he had a 12 – 2 record , an 0 @.@ 99 earned run average ( ERA ) , and 120 strikeouts in 84 innings pitched as he led his team to a runner @-@ up in the 2006 4A State Championship . Next season , he went 11 – 2 with a 1 @.@ 05 ERA and 143 strikeouts in 86 innings while this time helping his team win the 2007 4A State Championship . He batted .424 with 11 home runs and 38 runs batted in . He was named Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of the playoffs and the Gatorade North Carolina Player of the Year , garnering the nickname " The Carolina Peach " . In 2013 , the North Carolina High School Athletic Association included him on its " 100 To Remember " male athletes list , which included Michael Jordan , Carl Eller , and Jim Beatty . Bumgarner attracted so much attention from scouts and agents in high school that his father built a wall around the bullpen at his high school field to keep them from distracting him as he warmed up for games . He committed to attend the University of North Carolina on a college baseball scholarship . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues = = = 
 The San Francisco Giants selected Bumgarner in the first round ( 10th overall ) of the 2007 MLB draft . Going into the draft , Baseball America had ranked him as the 14th best prospect overall . He was the first high school pitcher to be selected by the Giants on their first pick since Matt Cain in 2002 , and the first left @-@ handed pitcher selected in the first round by the organization since Noah Lowry in 2001 . 
 Bumgarner pitched for the Augusta <unk> , the Giants ' Low @-@ A South Atlantic League affiliate , in 2008 . The Giants sought for him to alter the angle of his head during his delivery , but after Bumgarner struggled over his first three starts in Augusta , he reverted to the way he had thrown in high school . With Augusta , he worked on the changeup , the slider , and " the ability to pitch inside . " When asked if it was tough to work on off @-@ speed pitches in a league in which most of the hitters can be fooled with the fastball , Bumgarner replied , " The minors are all about player development . I needed to work on other pitches and have the confidence to throw them . " He won the South Atlantic League pitchers ' Triple Crown , tying for the league lead in wins ( 15 , tied with Levi Maxwell ) , leading the league in earned run average ( 1 @.@ 46 ) , and leading the league in strikeouts ( 164 ) . He began the 2009 season with the Giants ' High @-@ A affiliate , the San Jose Giants of the California League . After five starts , in which he went 3 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 48 ERA and 23 strikeouts , he was called up to the Giants AA affiliate , the Connecticut Defenders of the Eastern League . On July 22 , he hit a grand slam against Eric Niesen and picked up the victory in a 9 – 3 triumph over the Binghamton Mets . In 20 games ( 19 starts ) with them , he went 9 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 93 ERA and 69 strikeouts . 
 In 2008 , Baseball America ranked him the third @-@ best prospect in the Giants organization . Before the start of the 2009 season , the magazine ranked Bumgarner as the ninth @-@ best prospect in baseball . Entering 2010 , he dropped to the 14th @-@ best prospect in baseball on the magazine 's list , as some writers were concerned about a drop in Bumgarner 's velocity . Jason Grey of ESPN wrote that the drop was " puzzling . " 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( 2009 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = 2009 – 2010 = = = = 
 Bumgarner was called up to the majors on September 8 , 2009 , to make his first major league start and debut in place of Tim Lincecum , who was scratched with back spasms . At the age of 20 , he became the second youngest pitcher ever to start a game for the Giants since the franchise moved west in 1958 . He was older only than Mike McCormick , who played as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old for San Francisco but had made his debut with the Giants two years earlier when the team was still in New York . Bumgarner made four appearances with the Giants in 2009 , posting an ERA of 1 @.@ 80 , striking out 10 batters , and pitching 10 innings without recording a decision . 
 Bumgarner attended the Giants ' spring training before the 2010 season , competing for the position of fifth starter . However , out of shape after attending his half @-@ sister 's funeral , he struggled and was sent down to the AAA Fresno Grizzlies , partly due to a drop in his velocity . In 14 starts with Fresno , he went 7 – 1 with a 3 @.@ 16 ERA and 59 strikeouts . On June 26 , 2010 , Bumgarner was called up again to join the club , facing the Boston Red Sox the next day . He replaced Joe Martinez , who had made one start in place of an injured Todd Wellemeyer , in the rotation . On July 6 , 2010 , against the Milwaukee Brewers in Milwaukee , Bumgarner earned his first major league victory , 6 – 1 , going eight innings without yielding a run . Bumgarner pitched well enough that when Wellemeyer returned from the disabled list in August , Giants ' manager Bruce Bochy chose to use him in the bullpen and leave Bumgarner in the rotation . 
 In five September starts during the Giants ' successful run to the National League West Division championship , Bumgarner posted an ERA of 1 @.@ 13 . At the end of September , Bumgarner earned his first win at home , making him 7 – 6 on the season . 
 Despite a ten @-@ day layoff , Bumgarner became the youngest pitcher in Giants ' franchise history to pitch in and win a postseason game , which he did against the Braves in the NLDS @-@ clinching game on October 11 . In addition to his clinching performance in the NLDS , he pitched two shutout innings in relief in the NLCS clinching game versus the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 On October 31 , Bumgarner pitched eight shutout innings in Game 4 of the 2010 World Series , becoming the fourth @-@ youngest pitcher to start and win a World Series game , as well as the youngest to make a scoreless start of six innings or more . This win gave the Giants a 3 – 1 lead in the series , en route to the Giants winning their first World Series championship in 56 years . After the season , he was named a starting pitcher on Baseball America 's 2010 All @-@ Rookie Team . 
 = = = = 2011 – 2013 = = = = 
 After his start May 13 , 2011 , Bumgarner was 0 – 5 with a 4 @.@ 58 ERA in his first seven starts of the season . He struggled in his first two games of the season , but soon after regained his post @-@ season form . However , he was the victim of poor run support and bad luck . Despite pitching at least six innings and giving up more than one earned run only once in his five starts from April 27 through May 19 , it wasn 't until the 19th that he got his first win , collecting an ERA of 3 @.@ 71 for the season at that point . By June 9 , Bumgarner had a 1 @.@ 93 ERA over his last nine starts , yet had two wins and five losses to show for it . In seven of his eight losses at that point , the Giants either only scored once or scored no times at all . On September 5 , Bumgarner struck out thirteen batters while yielding two earned runs , seven hits and one walk over 8 @.@ 1 innings while earning the win against the San Diego Padres at Petco Park . It was his second consecutive double digit strikeout game , having struck out 11 batters in his previous start against the Chicago Cubs . With his win September 16 , Bumgarner had won five consecutive starts ; he finished the season 13 – 13 with a 3 @.@ 21 ERA , 204 innings pitched , and 191 strikeouts . Worth noting , however , is that Bumgarner was 12 – 1 for the games in which his teammates scored three or more runs for him . 
 In April 2012 , Bumgarner agreed to a six @-@ year contract worth $ 35 @.@ 56 million through the 2017 season , with additional $ 12 million options for 2018 and 2019 . Bumgarner began the 2012 season by going 5 – 1 with a 2 @.@ 31 ERA . With his win over the Brewers on May 5 , he became the first Giant since Jason Schmidt to win 14 games in a 20 @-@ game span . His ERA then rose to 2 @.@ 85 after he lost three consecutive games , with his record moving to 5 – 4 . 
 After May 14 , the Giants went 16 home games without a home run until Bumgarner hit the first of his career into left field on June 12 , against Houston Astros pitcher Bud Norris . Bumgarner , with his home run and 12 strikeouts , became the most recent Giant to hit a home run and throw 10 + strikeouts since Mike <unk> , who was announcing the game . On June 28 , Bumgarner pitched nine shutout innings against the Cincinnati Reds to earn his first complete game and shutout . With this victory , the Giants franchise established a new San Francisco record for consecutive scoreless innings , a total of 36 . In 2012 , Bumgarner won 16 games ( with only seven losses ) while posting a 3 @.@ 37 ERA and striking out 191 in 208 1 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 After struggling earlier in the playoffs with an 11 @.@ 25 ERA , Bumgarner pitched seven scoreless innings and struck out eight in Game 2 of the 2012 World Series on October 25 . Bumgarner became the first pitcher to begin his World Series career with 15 scoreless innings since Bruce Hurst did so in 1986 . Hall of Famer Christy Mathewson in 1905 was the last Giant before Bumgarner to have scoreless outings in his first two career World Series starts . 
 The 2013 season saw Bumgarner set career bests for ERA ( 2 @.@ 77 ) , walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) ( 1 @.@ 03 ) and strikeouts ( 199 ) in 31 starts , finishing with a 13 – 9 record . Bumgarner 's WHIP was the lowest for a Giants ' left @-@ hander since Carl Hubbell 's in 1933 . Bumgarner was also selected by Giants manager Bruce Bochy and the manager of the National League team , to pitch in the All Star game for the first time . However , Bumgarner didn 't pitch in the game . He took pride in pitching 200 + innings for the third consecutive season ( 201 @.@ 1 ) and improving at holding runners on base , conceding 8 stolen bases in 2013 compared with 27 in 2012 . Bumgarner was rested for what would have been his final start of the season , following a great seven @-@ inning , one @-@ run , 10 @-@ strikeout win over the New York Mets . Bochy said he wanted to give Bumgarner a break and also allow Barry Zito a final home start . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Following his outstanding 2013 season , on February 25 , Bumgarner was named the Giants ' Opening Day starter for the first time in his career . On April 11 , Bumgarner hit his first career grand slam and registered a career @-@ high five RBIs against the Colorado Rockies ' Jorge de la Rosa , the third home run of Bumgarner 's major league career . Bumgarner was named NL Pitcher of the Month for May after going 5 – 0 in six starts , with 48 strikeouts and a 2 @.@ 08 ERA . 
 On July 13 , in an 8 – 4 win over the Arizona Diamondbacks at AT & T Park , Bumgarner and batterymate Buster Posey each hit grand slam home runs , marking the first ever occurrence in MLB history that <unk> each hit grand slams in the same game . Bumgarner also tied the all @-@ time MLB records for grand slams in a career and in a single season by a pitcher with two . Tony Cloninger had been the last pitcher to hit two grand slams in one season , doing so in one game on July 3 , 1966 . 
 On August 26 at AT & T Park , in a 3 – 0 win over the Colorado Rockies , Bumgarner pitched his second career complete game one @-@ hit shutout , which included pitching seven perfect innings to start the game until Justin Morneau reached out on a 1 – 2 pitch that went down deep right field for a double . In the process , he set a franchise @-@ record sixth career game with ten or more strikeouts and no walks . Bumgarner beat Jorge de la Rosa at AT & T Park for the second time that season . Bumgarner was named the NL Pitcher of the Month for August . He went 4 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 57 ERA , threw three complete games , and had 56 strikeouts against just three walks . 
 On September 12 at AT & T Park , in a 9 – 0 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers Bumgarner struck out former teammate Juan Uribe for his 207th strikeout of the season , breaking Ray <unk> 's mark and setting a new San Francisco Giants single season strikeout record by a left @-@ handed pitcher . 
 Bumgarner set a career @-@ high in wins with eighteen , posting an 18 – 10 record , a 2 @.@ 98 ERA , and 219 strikeouts for the 2014 MLB regular season . 
 On October 1 , Bumgarner pitched a 4 @-@ hit shutout in the NL Wild Card game against the Pittsburgh Pirates at PNC Park , allowing the Giants to advance to the NLDS against the Washington Nationals .. He joins Sandy Koufax from the 1965 World Series and Justin Verlander from the 2012 ALDS as the only postseason pitchers to pitch a shutout and strikeout ten or more batters in a winner @-@ take @-@ all game . On October 11 , in Game 1 of the NLCS , by tossing 7 2 ⁄ 3 shutout innings against the St. Louis Cardinals at Busch Stadium , Bumgarner set a new , all @-@ time MLB pitching record for postseason consecutive scoreless innings on the road , with 26 2 ⁄ 3 . In doing so he broke the 90 @-@ year @-@ old record held by fellow Giant , Art <unk> . For his performance , he was named NLCS MVP . 
 On October 21 , in Game 1 of the 2014 World Series , Bumgarner pitched seven innings of one @-@ run ball . Although his streak of scoreless innings ended at 21 2 ⁄ 3 when he gave up a home run to Salvador Pérez in the 7th inning , he earned his third career win in World Series competition as his team defeated the host Kansas City Royals 7 – 1 in Kauffman Stadium . Describing Bumgarner , Giants manager Bruce Bochy said , " This is a big stage , a loud crowd . But he just keeps that maniacal focus . He 's as good as anybody I 've seen at it . " 
 Bumgarner threw a four @-@ hit , complete @-@ game shutout in Game 5 on October 26 . He set all @-@ time MLB records for lowest World Series ERA ( 0 @.@ 29 ) among pitchers of at least 25 innings pitched , and was the first pitcher in Series history to pitch a shutout with no walks and at least eight strikeouts . 
 On October 29 , in Game 7 , on two days rest , Bumgarner pitched five scoreless innings in relief in the final game of the World Series . This effort drew media comparisons to Barry Bonds , in terms of unusual statistical performance . He was named the 2014 World Series MVP , finishing the Series with a 2 – 0 record , 1 save , and a 0 @.@ 43 ERA . In three pitching appearances , Bumgarner gave up one run in 21 innings . Some analysts have posited that Bumgarner 's entire 2014 postseason record — in which the 25 @-@ year @-@ old threw a record @-@ breaking 52 2 ⁄ 3 innings — was the most dominant postseason pitching performance ever . Following the postseason , he won the Babe Ruth Award as the postseason MVP and was named Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year and Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 In a 4 – 0 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers on May 21 , Bumgarner paired up and beat Clayton Kershaw for the third time that season , becoming the first pitcher to hit a home run off of Kershaw . The homer made Kershaw the second Cy Young Award winner to surrender a home run to Bumgarner after Zack Greinke . He became the first reigning World Series MVP to homer off the defending League MVP . 
 On June 23 at AT & T Park against the San Diego Padres , Bumgarner struck out a career @-@ high fourteen batters , tying Atlee <unk> 's franchise record for most strikeouts in a single game by a left @-@ handed pitcher . On June 28 , in a 6 – 3 win over the Colorado Rockies at AT & T Park , Bumgarner had two hits , one a solo home run , scored twice , and struck out Brandon Barnes for his 1,000th career strikeout . He is also the third left @-@ handed pitcher in the San Francisco Era and the third youngest in franchise history to reach the milestone . Only Amos Rusie ( 21 ) and Christy Mathewson ( 25 ) were younger . 
 On July 14 at the 2015 MLB All @-@ Star Game held at Great American Ball Park against the American League , Bumgarner pitched a scoreless fourth inning for the National League with batterymate Buster Posey . 
 On August 11 at AT & T Park , Bumgarner pitched a complete game 3 – 1 victory over the Houston Astros where he struck out twelve and walked none . During the outing , he struck out a career @-@ high seven straight batters to tie a San Francisco record with Juan Marichal and Jonathan Sánchez . On August 16 , he tied his career @-@ high by striking out fourteen batters , including striking out that year 's National League MVP Bryce Harper a career @-@ high three times , hit a home run , and pitched a complete game shutout against the Washington Nationals . He became the first Giants left @-@ handed pitcher to record multiple fourteen @-@ strikeout games in a single season and career , and joined Juan Marichal as the only Giants pitchers in the San Francisco Era to strike out ten or more batters , hit a home run , and record a shutout in the same game . Bumgarner was honored for the first time in his career with National League Player of the Week honors . 
 Bumgarner logged his first career pinch hit in the seventh inning on August 18 at Busch Stadium in a 2 – 0 win over the St. Louis Cardinals . He became the first Giants pitcher to record a hit in a pitch @-@ hitting appearance since Kirk <unk> did so on August 17 , 2004 against the Montreal Expos . On August 21 at PNC Park , in a 6 – 4 win over the Pittsburgh Pirates , Bumgarner hit his fifth homer and won his fifteenth game of the season , the first to do so since Carlos Zambrano in 2006 , and the sixth pitcher since 1970 according to SportsCenter . On August 28 at AT & T Park , in a 9 – 1 win over the Chicago Cubs , Bumgarner struck out twelve batters through six innings , logging his third straight game with twelve or more strikeouts . This marks the first occurrence a Giants pitcher has struck out twelve or more batters in at least three games in a single calendar month since John Montefusco in August 1975 . 
 On September 1 at Dodger Stadium , Bumgarner paired up against Zack Greinke , both of whom batted eighth in the starting lineup . It marked the first time in the same Giants @-@ Dodgers game that both pitchers batted eighth . He also became the first left @-@ handed pitcher in the live @-@ ball era to hit five home runs and strikeout two hundred batters in a single season . On September 12 at AT & T Park , in an 8 – 0 win over the San Diego Padres , Bumgarner pitched his third career complete game one @-@ hit shutout , including a career @-@ high 72 ⁄ 3 perfect innings to start the game . 
 On September 24 at Petco Park , Bumgarner struck out his 220th batter of the season , breaking his own San Francisco Giants single season strikeout record by a left @-@ handed pitcher . 
 Bumgarner tied a career @-@ high in wins with eighteen , posting an 18 – 9 record , a 2 @.@ 93 ERA , and also set career @-@ highs with a .667 win percentage , 218 @.@ 1 innings pitched and 234 strikeouts for the 2015 MLB regular season . According to CSN Bay Area , his 234 strikeouts are the most by a Giants left @-@ handed pitcher since Rube Marquard struck out 237 batters in the 1911 season . He was named the winner of the 2015 National League Silver Slugger Award at pitcher . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 On April 9 , 2016 at AT & T Park , Bumgarner matched up with Clayton Kershaw less than a year after hitting his first home run off of Kershaw , and Bumgarner hit another one into the left @-@ field seats in nearly exactly the same spot . Since the 2014 season , Bumgarner , Troy Tulowitzki , and Daniel Murphy are the only three players to have homered off of Kershaw multiple times . Over Kershaw 's last twenty @-@ seven starts , Kershaw has allowed two of his eleven home runs to Bumgarner .. 
 Bumgarner allowed two earned runs or fewer in twelve consecutive starts from April 20 to June 20 , which is tied with Fred Anderson for the third longest streak in Giants franchise history since 1913 , according to Comcast SportsNet Bay Area . 
 On June 30 , in a 12 @-@ 6 win over the Oakland Athletics at Oakland Alameda Coliseum , Bumgarner was started at pitcher hitting for himself in an American League ballpark , the first time this was intentionally done in the Majors since 1976 , according to SportsCenter , and only the fifth time since the creation of the designated hitter rule in 1973 . He went 1 for 4 , opening the third inning with a double and starting a six @-@ run rally . 
 On July 10 at AT & T Park , in a 4 @-@ 0 Win over the Arizona Diamondbacks , Bumgarner pitched his fourth career complete game one @-@ hit shutout and third career game by striking out fourteen batters , tying his career @-@ high and extending his record . Bumgarner 's four career one @-@ hitters are the most by a Giants pitcher in the last one @-@ hundred years , not since Christy Mathewson 's six career one @-@ hitters . Bumgarner started the game by throwing 4 2 ⁄ 3 perfect innings until an outfield error by Gregor Blanco as he was battling the sun . He also carried a no @-@ hitter through 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings until it was broken up by Jake Lamb , an All @-@ Star snub . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Bumgarner 's repertoire consists of four pitches including a curveball he throws at two different speeds with two different types of movement . He features a four @-@ seam fastball in the 90 to 93 miles per hour ( 145 to 150 km / h ) range that tops off at 95 mph , a cutter around 86 to 90 miles per hour ( 138 to 145 km / h ) , a curveball that usually ranges from 75 to 78 miles per hour ( 121 to 126 km / h ) with sharp , mostly downward break , but he occasionally throws a much slower curve with a more exaggerated and horizontal break in the mid @-@ to @-@ high 60 miles per hour range , and a change @-@ up that sits at 82 to 85 miles per hour ( 132 to 137 km / h ) . The fastball and cutter are his main pitches ; through 2013 , he has thrown the fastball 43 @.@ 68 % of the time and the cutter 33 @.@ 84 % of the time . Madison has a unique pitching style . As he throws , it appears he is throwing toward first base . 
 = = Career highlights = = 
 On December 8 , 2014 , Sports Illustrated named Madison Bumgarner Sportsman of the Year . 
 On December 31 , 2014 , the Associated Press named Madison Bumgarner the Male Athlete of the Year regarding his phenomenal 2014 postseason performance and overall success as an MLB left @-@ handed pitcher . 
 Bumgarner has hit 13 career home runs . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bumgarner 's parents are Kevin and Debbie , who divorced when Madison was in high school . 
 In high school , Bumgarner dated a girl also named Madison Bumgarner . 
 Bumgarner married Ali Saunders on February 14 , 2010 , in a private ceremony in which he wore jeans . During the offseason , they live on a farm in North Carolina that is about thirty minutes from where he grew up in the old furniture manufacturing area of the state , and during the season in a condo in San Francisco . Bumgarner has been a Baptist since his childhood . Andrew <unk> , a reporter who covers the Giants , wrote of Bumgarner , " While I wouldn 't describe him as outgoing , he struck me as being smart , well spoken and polite . He is deeply Christian and seems to be very grounded . " Bumgarner had a half @-@ sister , Dena , who died in 2010 reportedly from accidentally overdosing on pain medication following hospitalization from cancer . Bumgarner has a stepsister and two older half @-@ brothers . His father , Kevin , built the log house the younger Bumgarner grew up in , and works nights at a food distribution company . His mother is an accountant for PepsiCo . 
 Bumgarner has an endorsement deal with <unk> , and is featured in one of their television commercials . 
 In 2015 , Bumgarner admitted to being a smokeless tobacco user since he was in 5th grade . 
 = = Baseball records and accomplishments = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 MLB record for grand slams by a pitcher in one season – 2 ( tied with Tony Cloninger ) 
 MLB record for career grand slams by a pitcher – 2 ( tied with 6 others ) . 
 Along with Buster Posey , the only starting pitcher @-@ catcher duo in MLB history to both hit a grand slam in one game . 
 Second pitcher in SF Giants history to throw a complete @-@ game shutout , strikeout 10 + batters , and hit a home run in one game ( August 16 , 2015 ) . The first was Juan Marichal . 
 First left @-@ handed pitcher in the live @-@ ball era to hit five home runs and strikeout two hundred batters in a single season . 
 = = = Post @-@ season = = = 
 MLB record for most starts in a single post @-@ season – 6 in 2014 ( tied for the record with Chris Carpenter , 2011 and Curt Schilling , 2001 ) 
 MLB record for most innings pitched in a single post @-@ season – 52 2 / 3rds in 2014 
 MLB record for lowest career world series ERA ( minimum 20 innings of work ) – 0 @.@ 25 
 MLB record for fewest hits allowed in a single World Series by any pitcher with at least 20 innings of work – 9 in 21 innings in 2014 
 MLB record for most shutout innings in relief in a World Series game 7 – 5 ( tie with Joe Page ) 
 MLB record for longest save in a World Series – 5 innings in Game 7 in 2014 
 MLB record for longest save in a winner @-@ take @-@ all game – 5 innings in Game 7 in 2014 
 MLB record for most World Series games won through age 25 – 4 
 First MLB pitcher in a single World Series to earn at least two wins , throw a shutout and earn a save – in 2014 
 First MLB pitcher in a World Series to pitch a shutout with no walks and at least eight strikeouts – game 5 in 2014 
 His 0 @.@ 43 ERA in the 2014 World Series was the lowest in a single World Series ( minimum 15 innings ) since Sandy Koufax posted a 0 @.@ 38 ERA in the 1965 World Series 
 Second @-@ most strikeouts in a single World Series while walking no more than one batter – 17 in 2014 . Christy Mathewson of the New York Giants struck out 18 in 1905 
 First pitcher to throw at least four scoreless innings in a World Series Game 7 ( 2014 ) on two days ' rest since Sandy Koufax 's shutout for the Dodgers in 1965 
 In the 2014 post @-@ season , he threw more than double the innings of any other pitcher 
 = Sheng nu = 
 Sheng nu ( <unk> ; <unk> ; common translation : " leftover women " or " leftover ladies " ) is a derogatory term made popular by the All @-@ China Women 's Federation that classifies women who remain unmarried in their late twenties and beyond . The term is most prominently used in China , including a state sponsored directive and program , but has been used to describe women across Asia , India , and North America . The term has gone on to become widely used in the mainstream media and has been the subject of several televisions series , magazine and newspaper articles , and book publications focusing on both the good and bad aspects of the term and surrounding culture . Xu <unk> of The China Daily described the sheng <unk> as " a social force to be reckoned with " while others have argued the term should be taken as a positive to mean " successful women " . The slang term , 3S or 3S Women , meaning " single , seventies ( 1970s ) , and stuck " has also been used in place of sheng nu . The equivalent term for men , <unk> gun ( <unk> ) meaning bare branches , is used to refer to men who do not marry and thus do not add ' branches ' to the family tree . Similarly , <unk> ( <unk> ) or " leftover men " has also been used . 
 = = Background = = 
 The one @-@ child policy ( Family Planning Program ) and sex @-@ selective abortions in China have caused a growing disproportion in the country 's gender balance . Since 1979 , when the one @-@ child policy was introduced , approximately 20 million more men than women have been born , or 120 males to 100 females born , and by 2020 , China is expected to have 24 million more men than women . The global average is 103 males to 107 females . 
 According to The New York Times , the State Council of the People 's Republic of China ( Central People 's Government ) issued an " edict " in 2007 regarding the Population and Family Planning Program ( one @-@ child @-@ policy ) to address the urgent gender imbalance and cited it as a major " threat to social stability " . The council further cited " upgrading population quality ( <unk> ) " as one of its primary goals and appointed the All @-@ China Women 's Federation , a state agency established in 1949 to " protect women 's rights and interests " , to oversee and resolve the issue . 
 The exact etymology of the term is not conclusively known , but most reliable sources cite it as having entered the mainstream in 2006 . The China Daily reported in 2011 that Xu Wei , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Cosmopolitan Magazine China , coined the term . The term , sheng nu , literally translates to " leftover ladies " or " leftover women " . In 2007 , the Ministry of Education of the People 's Republic of China released an official statement defining sheng nu as any " unmarried women over the age of 27 " and added it to the national lexicon . The ministry expanded the meaning as a " failure to find a husband " due to " overly high expectations for marriage partners " in a subsequent statement . According to several sources , the government mandated the All @-@ China Women 's Federation to publish series of articles stigmatizing unwed women who were in their late twenties . 
 In March 2011 , the All @-@ China Women 's Federation posted a controversial article titled ' Leftover Women Do Not Deserve Our Sympathy ' shortly after International Women 's Day . An excerpt states , " Pretty girls do not need a lot of education to marry into a rich and powerful family . But girls with an average or ugly appearance will find it difficult " and " These girls hope to further their education in order to increase their competitiveness . The tragedy is , they don 't realise that as women age , they are worth less and less . So by the time they get their MA or PhD , they are already old — like yellowed pearls . " Originally at least 15 articles were available on its website relating to the subject of sheng nu , which have now been subsequently removed , that included matchmaking advice and tips . 
 = = China = = 
 = = = Culture and statistics = = = 
 The National Bureau of Statistics of the People 's Republic of China ( NBS ) and state census figures reported approximately 1 in 5 women between the age of 25 @-@ 29 remain unmarried . In contrast , the proportion of unwed men in that age range is much higher , sitting at around 1 in 3 . In a 2010 Chinese National Marriage Survey , it was reported that 9 out of 10 men believe that women should be married before they are 27 years old . 7 @.@ 4 % of Chinese women between 30 @-@ 34 were unmarried and the percentage falls to 4 @.@ 6 % between the ages 35 – 39 . In comparison with other neighbouring countries with similar traditional values , these figures put China as having some of the highest female marriage rates in the world . Despite being categorized as a " relatively rare " demographic , the social culture and traditions of China have put the issue in the social spotlight . 
 A study of married couples in China noted that men tended to marry down the socio @-@ economic ladder . " There is an opinion that A @-@ quality guys will find B @-@ quality women , B @-@ quality guys will find C @-@ quality women , and C @-@ quality men will find D @-@ quality women , " says Huang Yuanyuan . " The people left are A @-@ quality women and D @-@ quality men . So if you are a leftover woman , you are A @-@ quality . " A University of North Carolina demographer who studies China 's gender imbalance , Yong Cai , further notes that " men at the bottom of society get left out of the marriage market , and that same pattern is coming to emerge for women at the top of society " . 
 China , and many other Asian countries , share a long history of conservative and patriarchal view of marriage and the family structure including marrying at a young age and <unk> . The pressure from society and family has been the source criticism , shame , social embarrassment and social anxiety for many women who are unmarried . Chen , another women interviewed by the BBC , said the sheng nu are " afraid their friends and neighbours will regard me as abnormal . And my parents would also feel they were totally losing face , when their friends all have grandkids already " . Similar sentiment has been shared amongst other women in China , particularly amongst recent university graduates . A report by CNN cited a survey of 900 female university graduates across 17 Chinese universities where approximately 70 percent of those surveyed said " their greatest fear is becoming a 3S lady " . 
 The increasing popularity of unwed women in China has been largely accredited to the growing educated middle class . Women are more free and able to live independently in comparison to previous generations . Forbes reported that in 2013 , " 11 of the 20 richest self @-@ made women in the world are Chinese " . In addition , it cites that Chinese female CEOs make up 19 percent of women in management jobs making it the second highest worldwide after Thailand . Another noted outcome has been the reluctance amongst male partners to date women who are professionally more successful than they or unwilling to give up work or both . A rapidly growing trend in premarital sex has been commonly surveyed and noted amongst women in China . In 1989 , 15 % of Chinese women engaged in premarital sex against 2013 where between 60 @-@ 70 % had done so . Chinese Academy of Social Sciences professor Li states that this shows an increase in the types of relationships amongst new generations in China . 
 A movement in China to have the word banned from most government websites , including the All @-@ China Women 's Federation website , was marginally successful . The wording was changed to " old unmarried women " , but sheng nu remains a widespread and mainstream idea . The term has also been embraced by some feminists with the opening of ' sheng nu ' social clubs . In an interview with fashion editor Sandra Bao by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting , Bao stated that " many modern , single women in China enjoy their independence and feel comfortable holding out for the right man , even as they grow older . " She further explained , " We don 't want to make compromises because of age or social pressure " . 
 Between 2008 and 2012 , sociologist Sandy To , while at the University of Cambridge , conducted a ' grounded theory method ' study in China regarding the topic . To 's research focused on " marriage partner choice " by Chinese professional women in the form of a typology of four different " partner choice strategies " . The main finding of the study found that contrary to the popular belief that highly educated and single women remain unmarried , or do not want to take on traditional roles in marriage , because of personal preference , that in contrast , they commonly have an appetite for marriage and that their main obstacle is traditional patriarchal attitudes . The study also pointed out that in other Asian countries such as Japan , Singapore , South Korea , and Taiwan , where women have been receiving a higher education , that correspondingly , the average age of marriage amongst them is much higher . The Chinese People 's Daily cited a 2012 United Nations survey that found 74 percent of women in the United Kingdom and 70 percent of women in Japan were single between the ages of 25 and 29 . The China Daily published an article that cited figures from the 2012 United Nations ' World Marriage Data which reported 38 % of women in the United States , and more than 50 % of women in Britain remained unmarried in their 30s . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 The Chinese media has capitalized on the subject matter with television shows , viral videos , newspapers and magazine articles , and pundits that have sharply criticized women for " waiting it out for a man with a bigger house or fancier car " . The television series comedy Will You Marry Me and My Family , which premièred on CCTV @-@ 8 , that revolves around the principal concept of sheng nu as a family frantically searches for a prospective spouse of the main character who is in her 30s . The series Old Women Should Get Married and You Are the One ( MediaCorp Channel 8 ) have been accredited with minting terms like " the <unk> economy " and further bringing the subject into public fascination and obsession . If You Are the One ( Jiangsu Satellite Television ) is a popular Chinese game show , loosely based on Taken Out , whose rise has been credited with the " national obsession " surrounding sheng nu . The show between 2010 @-@ 2013 was China 's most viewed game show . 
 In response to a popular music video called " No Car , No House " about blue @-@ collar Chinese bachelors , another music video called " No House , No Car " was made by a group of women and uploaded on International Women 's Day . The video was viewed over 1 @.@ 5 million times over the first two days on the Chinese video site Youku . Other commercial interests have taken advantage of the situation such as the increased popularity of " boyfriends for hire " . The concept has also been turned into a popular television drama series called <unk> a Girlfriend for Home Reunion . 
 = = = Longevity and consequences = = = 
 Experts have further theorized about the term 's longevity as the National Population and Family Planning Commission has been moving towards phasing out the one @-@ child policy in favour of an " appropriate and scientific family planning policy ( one @-@ child policy ) " where the child limit may be increased . He Feng in The China Daily points out , " the sheng nu phenomenon is nothing like the feminist movement in the West , in which women consciously demanded equal rights in jobs and strived for independence . " Rather , the change has been " subtle " and that " perhaps decades later , will be viewed as symbolic of China 's social progress and a turning point for the role of women in its society . " 
 In an article by the South China Morning Post , it concludes , " with mounting pressure and dwindling hopes of fulfilling both career and personal ambitions at home , for women such as Xu the urge to pack up and leave only grows stronger with time . Without women such as her , though , the mainland will be left with not only a weaker economy , but an even greater pool of frustrated leftover men . " 
 Divorce rates in Shanghai and Beijing , China 's two most populated economic centres , have been steadily rising since 2005 with it reaching 30 % in 2012 . This among other contributing factors such as online dating and the upward mobility of people have been attributed to pushing the average age of marriage in China to 27 . Up from 20 in 1950 making it closer to global marriage trends . 
 = = In other cultures = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Comparisons have been made to a 1986 Newsweek cover and featured article that said " women who weren 't married by 40 had a better chance of being killed by a terrorist than of finding a husband " . Newsweek eventually apologized for the story and in 2010 launched a study that discovered 2 in 3 women who were 40 and single in 1986 had married since . The story caused a " wave of anxiety " and some " skepticism " amongst professional and highly educated women in the United States . The article was cited several times in the 1993 Hollywood film Sleepless in Seattle starring Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan . The Chinese People 's Daily noted a United Nations study , mentioned earlier , that in the United States in 2012 , nearly half of all women between 25 and 29 were single . 
 The term bachelorette is used to describe any unmarried women who is still single . The popular American reality television series The Bachelorette capitalizes on matchmaking often successful businesswomen in their mid to late twenties with other eligible bachelors . 
 Former Los Angeles deputy mayor Joy Chen , a Chinese @-@ American , wrote a book titled Do Not Marry Before Age 30 ( 2012 ) . Chen 's book , a pop culture bestseller , was commissioned and published by the Chinese government as a self @-@ help book for unmarried women . In an earlier interview with The China Daily , she was quoted with saying , " We should not just try to find a ' Mr Right Now ' , but a ' Mr Right Forever ' " . The same year , Chen was named " Woman of the Year " by the All @-@ China Women 's Federation . 
 = = = Other countries = = = 
 Singapore is noted to have gone through a similar period . In 1983 , then Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew sparked the ' Great Marriage Debate ' when he encouraged Singapore men to choose highly educated women as wives . He was concerned that a large number of graduate women were unmarried . Some sections of the population , including graduate women , were upset by his views . Nevertheless , a match @-@ making agency Social Development Unit ( SDU ) was set up to promote socialising among men and women graduates . In the Graduate Mothers Scheme , Lee also introduced incentives such as tax rebates , schooling , and housing priorities for graduate mothers who had three or four children , in a reversal of the over @-@ successful ' Stop @-@ at @-@ Two ' family planning campaign in the 1960s and 1970s . By the late 1990s , the birth rate had fallen so low that Lee 's successor Goh Chok Tong extended these incentives to all married women , and gave even more incentives , such as the ' baby bonus ' scheme . Lee reaffirmed his controversial position in his personal memoir , From Third World to First , " many well @-@ educated Singaporean women did not marry and have children . " 
 The 2012 UN study cited by the Chinese People 's Daily reported that in Britain 74 percent and in Japan 70 percent of all women between 25 and 29 were single . A similar feature in the People 's Daily focused on the reception of the concept of sheng nu from netizens outside of China , particularly in Asia , specifically Korea , Japan , and India . One Japanese netizen noted that during the 1980s , the term " Christmas cakes " was commonly used to refer to women who were unmarried and beyond the national age average of married women . The actual reference to Christmas cakes is the saying , " who wants Christmas cakes after December 25 " . Another contributor wrote , similarly " a class of highly educated , independent age 27 + women who choose to live a more liberated life and put their talent / skill to good use in society " is happening in India . " People must make their own choices and must simply refuse others ' labels and be blissfully happy , " she further explained . Alternatively , for men in Japan , the term <unk> men is used to describe men who have no interest in getting married or finding a girlfriend . 
 The China Daily posted the question , " Are ' leftover women ' a unique Chinese phenomenon ? " on their opinions column . Readers cited their own experiences universally stating they too felt societal and family pressures in their 30s and 40s for marriage . Yong Cai who studies China 's gender imbalance at the University of North Carolina stated , " The ' sheng nu ' phenomenon is similar to trends we 've already seen around the world , in countries ranging from the United States to Japan as higher education and increased employment give women more autonomy " . Cai cites studies that show that women are now breaking the tradition of " mandatory marriage " to have fewer children or marry later on in life . 
 Other similar terms that are still used in the modern lexicon of other countries and cultures show the concept has existed in some cases as far back as the 16th century . The term spinster was used to describe unmarried or single women of a marriageable age . It wasn 't until 2004 when the Civil Partnership Act replaced the word spinster with " single " in the relationship history section of marriage certificates in the UK . Subsequently , at the height of the Industrial Revolution , the term surplus women was used to describe the excess of unmarried women in Britain . 
 <unk> was a traditional French label for women 25 years old or older who were still unmarried by the Feast of Saint Catherine of Alexandria on 25 November . The French idiom , " to do St. Catherine 's hair , " meaning " to remain an old maid " is also associated with this tradition . 
 = Fishing Creek ( North Branch Susquehanna River ) = 
 Fishing Creek is a 29 @.@ 98 @-@ mile ( 48 @.@ 25 km ) long tributary of the Susquehanna River in Columbia County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It joins the Susquehanna River near the census @-@ designated place of Rupert and the town of Bloomsburg . The watershed has an area of 385 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) . 
 Nomadic Native Americans arrived in the lower reaches of Fishing Creek around 8000 BCE , and some were spending winters in the upper reaches of the valley by 3000 to 2000 BCE . In the past few centuries , the Fishing Creek area has been home to many industries , mills , and dams . It drains parts of five Pennsylvania counties : Columbia , Montour , Sullivan , Luzerne , and Lycoming . The creek 's main tributaries include Hemlock Creek , Little Fishing Creek , Green Creek , Huntington Creek , West Branch Fishing Creek , and East Branch Fishing Creek . 
 Public recreation activities include canoeing , birdwatching , and fishing . The creek is known for its trout population , which includes brook , brown and rainbow trout ; it also contains many other species of fish . Northern hardwood trees and ruffed grouse live in the surrounding area . 
 Some stretches of Fishing Creek contain significant amounts of algae because of leaking septic systems in the watershed . The area around the tributary West Creek is the least habitable part of the Fishing Creek area , according to a 2011 study . The water quality of Fishing Creek can vary . Its pH ranges from 4 @.@ 9 to 8 @.@ 5 , while the concentration of dissolved oxygen ranges from 5 to 17 @.@ 5 mg per liter . The creek 's average discharge is 615 cubic feet per second ( 17 @.@ 4 m3 / s ) ; its watershed contains gravel , shale and various loams — in particular the Albrights soil series and the Leck Kill soil . 
 = = Course = = 
 Fishing Creek 's source is 920 feet ( 280 m ) above sea level in Sugarloaf Township , south of State Game Lands Number 13 and Pennsylvania Route 118 , where East Branch and West Branch Fishing Creeks of southern Sullivan County meet in northern Columbia County . The creek heads approximately south with a few bends through Sugarloaf Township for about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . In the southern part of the township , it turns east for less than a mile and picks up Coles Creek — its first named tributary after the confluence of the East and West Branches . It empties into Fishing Creek from the northeast , 26 @.@ 34 miles ( 42 @.@ 39 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 Around this point , Fishing Creek turns sharply south into Benton Township and starts flowing parallel to Pennsylvania Route 487 . Here it flows four or five miles , including about a mile in Benton , where West Creek parallels Fishing Creek and empties into it from the west just south of Benton and 21 @.@ 72 miles ( 34 @.@ 95 km ) upstream of the mouth . Fishing Creek crosses under Pennsylvania Route 239 and continues approximately south , passing through the community of Maple Grove and flowing into Fishing Creek Township and Stillwater . In Stillwater , Raven Creek empties into the creek from the northeast , 18 @.@ 62 miles ( 29 @.@ 97 km ) above the mouth . About 1 @.@ 5 to 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) south , the creek turns and picks up Huntington Creek , and then flows past the communities of <unk> , Forks , and <unk> . The mouth of Huntington Creek is 15 @.@ 1 miles ( 24 @.@ 3 km ) above the mouth of Fishing Creek . 
 Upon leaving Fishing Creek Township , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) after picking up Huntington Creek , Fishing Creek flows southwest past Knob Mountain and into Orange Township . It passes near the northern edge of Knob Mountain 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) downstream , then by Orangeville , and makes a 90 ° turn to the northwest . Shortly after this turn it picks up Green Creek 10 @.@ 84 miles ( 17 @.@ 45 km ) above its mouth and turns west . After some distance , it turns south again , passing Bowman Bridge and a gauging station . From this point , the creek flows along the border between Orange and Mount Pleasant Townships for almost 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . While on the border between these two townships , it flows past Kocher Park . The creek stays considerably nearer to the western edge of the river valley than the eastern edge at this point . Near Lightstreet , it turns west into Mount Pleasant Township , passing several lakes and the Turkey Hill Oxbow . Upon entering Mount Pleasant Township , the creek stops paralleling Pennsylvania Route 487 and flows in the vicinity of Interstate 80 for 2 to 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 Along the border of Mount Pleasant Township and Bloomsburg , Fishing Creek picks up Little Fishing Creek at a distance of 3 @.@ 86 miles ( 6 @.@ 21 km ) upstream of its mouth before turning south and paralleling the western border of Bloomsburg . As it flows between Bloomsburg and <unk> , it turns sharply westward , paralleling U.S. Route 11 , and picks up Hemlock Creek , which is 1 @.@ 52 miles ( 2 @.@ 45 km ) above the mouth . Shortly after picking up Hemlock Creek , Fishing Creek turns southeast under U.S. Route 11 and flows parallel to Pennsylvania Route 42 for slightly over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , picking up Montour Run from the right , then empties 0 @.@ 72 miles ( 1 @.@ 16 km ) later into the Susquehanna between Bloomsburg and Rupert . The Rupert Covered Bridge No. 56 crosses the main stem of the creek . Its mouth is 456 feet ( 139 m ) above sea level — 464 feet ( 141 m ) lower than , and 29 @.@ 98 miles ( 48 @.@ 25 km ) downstream of , the source . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Fishing Creek has several major tributaries and numerous minor ones . The major tributaries are Hemlock Creek , Little Fishing Creek , Green Creek , Huntington Creek , and the East and West Branch Fishing Creeks . West Branch Fishing Creek rises on North Mountain and flows east into Fishing Creek . East Branch Fishing Creek is a tributary that starts on North Mountain in Sullivan County and is approximately 4 @.@ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) long . Huntington Creek starts in State Game Lands number 57 and heads southwest through Luzerne County until it reaches the north side of Knob Mountain , which it runs parallel to until it merges with Fishing Creek . Huntington Creek drains the eastern and northeastern parts of the Fishing Creek watershed . Four covered bridges cross Huntington Creek ; these are the Twin Bridges – East Paden Covered Bridge No. 120 , the Twin Bridges – West Paden Covered Bridge No. 121 , the Josiah Hess Covered Bridge No. 122 , and the Huntington Mills Bridge . 
 Green Creek rises near Waller and heads roughly south to <unk> and on to Orangeville , where it joins Fishing Creek . It drains the central part of the Fishing Creek watershed . Little Fishing Creek starts just in Lycoming County near the Columbia County Line . It winds through rural areas before reaching Pennsylvania Route 42 , which it runs parallel to for the remainder of its length . It drains the western part of the Fishing Creek watershed . Four covered bridges cross Little Fishing Creek ; these are the <unk> Covered Bridge No. 69 , the Sam Eckman Covered Bridge No. 92 , the Jud Christie Covered Bridge No. 95 , and the <unk> Covered Bridge . 
 Other tributaries of the main stem include Coles Creek and West Creek near Benton , Raven Creek in Fishing Creek Township , Hemlock Creek in Hemlock Township , Montour Run in Montour Township , and <unk> Run and Stony Brook , both near Orange Township . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Fishing Creek drains most of Columbia County north of the Susquehanna River except for an area in the eastern part of the county , which is drained by Briar Creek . It also drains southern Sullivan County and western Luzerne County . Minor tributaries drain small portions of Montour County and southeastern Lycoming County . The upper part of the watershed is 85 percent forest and 13 percent farmland . Near its source , the other two percent is residential ; closer to Benton , the remainder is urban . The creek 's drainage basin consists of a number of sub @-@ watersheds . The largest ones are the Huntington Creek watershed , with an area of 114 square miles ; the Little Fishing Creek watershed , with an area of 68 @.@ 1 square miles ; the Green Creek drainage basin , with an area of 36 @.@ 9 square miles ; and the West Branch Fishing Creek drainage basin , with an area of 32 @.@ 9 square miles . 
 = = = Oxbow lake = = = 
 Northern Bloomsburg and Scott Township include a small oxbow lake of Fishing Creek ; the area around this lake is known as the Turkey Hill Oxbow . The lake is located between Interstate 80 and the forests on the side of Turkey Hill . The oxbow is on a flood plain and includes grasses , forested wetlands , and areas of open water . In wet periods of the year , the Turkey Hill Oxbow lake receives overflow from the waters of Fishing Creek while during dry periods it contains water in only a few places . 
 Most land around the oxbow is steep . It is covered by hemlock and hardwood forests , as well as skunk cabbage seeps . The forests around the lake also contain black birch , yellow birch , white oak , red oak , sugar maple , tulip poplar , and Norway maple , while the understory contains slippery elm , European privet , Japanese barberry , American elderberry , wild hydrangea , witch hazel , mountain laurel , ironwood , and the rare American yew . The American yew population was in significant decline by 2004 due to heavy grazing by deer . 
 There are numerous wildflower species in the uplands and rock outcroppings of the Turkey Hill Oxbow . These include white <unk> , northern maidenhair fern , spikenard , blue <unk> , <unk> , false Solomon 's seal , purple trillium , and wild <unk> . Animals inhabiting the areas surrounding the pools include pickerel frogs , green frogs , wood ducks , and snapping turtles . Plants in this location include broadleaf arrowhead , northern <unk> , manna grasses , water starwort , and several varieties of sedges . Japanese knotweed has been seen near Interstate 80 on the northern edges of the Turkey Hill Oxbow . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native American settlement = = = 
 Having first inhabited Pennsylvania between 16 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 BCE , nomadic Native Americans reached the area near the mouth of Fishing Creek by 8000 BCE . By 3000 to 2000 BCE , some of them were going into the Fishing Creek valley during the winter to hunt deer and bears and returning to the Susquehanna River in the summer , creating trade routes . There was no permanent habitation until 1000 BCE when some Native American villages were built at the mouth of Fishing Creek . The Native Americans who settled in this area included the Shawnee and Susquehannock Indians . A Native American path ran along the creek from Bloomsburg to Orangeville before turning away in the direction of Tunkhannock Creek . Since at least 1769 , there has also been a path between the mouths of Huntington and Green Creeks . 
 = = = European settlement = = = 
 The first lots at the mouth of Fishing Creek were surveyed in 1769 when European settlers began moving into the area , and in the same year , the Penn family purchased 1060 acres ( 430 hectares ) of land 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) upstream of Benton . In 1778 , Moses Van Campen built a fort of logs covered with earth with a small swivel cannon on Fishing Creek to protect settlers on the frontier . There were settlers on the creek in Orange Township in 1780 , and the Fishing Creek valley north of Orangeville , in what is now Stillwater , was first settled in 1783 by Daniel McHenry . The headwaters of the creek were settled in the late 1780s and early 1790s . Leonard Rupert established a ferry on the creek in 1786 . The first sawmill on the upper portion of Fishing Creek was built in the late 1790s ; it was destroyed in a flood in 1848 . 
 The first mill in Sugarloaf Township was built alongside Fishing Creek in 1802 , and another mill in the same township was noted for its buckwheat flour . A schoolhouse had been built by 1806 . In 1818 , John Barton built a flour and grist mill on Fishing Creek . It was destroyed by fire in 1855 and again in 1905 . Although rebuilt , it burned down again in 1932 . Another gristmill stood on the creek until 1830 when it was converted into a paper mill . Iron ore was discovered in the area of Fishing Creek in 1822 , and in 1844 , an anthracite @-@ burning furnace was built on the creek near Bloomsburg . In the 19th century , an aqueduct was built across the creek . From around 1840 to 1900 , the wagon @-@ making industry was important to the upper Fishing Creek area . Another historic industry was the Susquehanna Slate Company , which operated in the late 19th century . The Fishing Creek Confederacy ( August – November 1864 ) during the American Civil War was a suspected uprising of a high number of deserters and draft evaders . A thousand soldiers occupied and searched the Fishing Creek valley and the mountains of its headwaters but were unable to find any deserters . Nevertheless , 100 residents of Columbia County were arrested and imprisoned for desertion and draft evasion although most were later released . Starting in 1877 , the Bloomsburg Water Company used Fishing Creek as its water supply . The Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad , which paralleled the creek , was built in 1888 . 
 There were limestone mines at the junction of Fishing Creek and Little Fishing Creek , but these have not been used since at least 1887 . During the Great Depression , a beach was constructed on the creek near <unk> by the Works Progress Administration . After the creek flooded in 1972 from Hurricane Agnes , a flash flood warning system was installed there . In 2002 , a tract of land from the Custer / Kocher homestead on Fishing Creek near Lightstreet was converted into a park called the Frank W. Kocher Memorial Park , which was later expanded to cover 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) . In the 21st century , the only significant industry in the watershed is the Benton Foundry . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) downstream of Orangeville a gauging station was established on the creek in 1938 . Other monitoring of the creek has included detailed studies at a stream @-@ gauging station near Bloomsburg , which operated from 2002 to 2012 . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 Just downstream of Orangeville , Fishing Creek 's discharge averages 615 cubic feet per second ( 17 @.@ 4 m3 / s ) , with a median of 361 cubic feet per second ( 10 @.@ 2 m3 / s ) . The lowest recorded discharge was 90 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 5 m3 / s ) while the highest was 2 @,@ 580 cubic feet per second ( 73 m3 / s ) . Further upstream in Benton , it is almost always less than 720 cubic feet per second ( 20 m3 / s ) , and usually approaches zero during the summer . The typical discharge is around 540 cubic feet per second ( 15 m3 / s ) . In years of drought , the streambeds of West Branch and East Branch Fishing Creeks typically run dry for 105 days over summer ; even in wet years they are dry for an average of 5 days . Near Bloomsburg , Fishing Creek 's discharge has ranged between 10 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 28 m3 / s ) and 5 @,@ 350 cubic feet per second ( 151 m3 / s ) . 
 = = = pH = = = 
 Near Benton , Fishing Creek 's pH ranges from around 5 @.@ 6 to 7 @.@ 25 , while near Bloomsburg , a wider range has been recorded , from 5 @.@ 8 to 8 @.@ 5 . Near Camp Lavigne , it ranges from 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 1 . East Branch Fishing Creek is the only stream in the watershed whose pH drops below 5 @.@ 5 ; it can fall as low as 4 @.@ 9 . West Creek and Coles Creek are the least acidic streams in the watershed , with pH levels usually above 6 @.@ 3 and often above 7 . Typically , the creek and its tributaries are not at risk of becoming too acidic for the optimal health of fish , but in early spring during <unk> , the levels approach the limit that brook trout can tolerate . Fishing Creek 's waters are acidic because of acid rain . 
 = = = Dissolved chemicals = = = 
 = = = = Nonmetals = = = = 
 The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Fishing Creek ranges from approximately 5 to 17 @.@ 5 mg / L at Benton . A site near Camp Lavigne had slightly less variability , ranging from 8 to 17 mg / L. The concentration near Bloomsburg ranged between 4 @.@ 1 and 17 @.@ 1 mg / L , with an average of 10 @.@ 9 mg / L. The amount of carbon dioxide near Bloomsburg ranged from 0 @.@ 3 to 34 mg / L , with an average of 2 @.@ 04 mg / L. 
 The total concentration of nitrogen near Bloomsburg between 2002 and 2012 ranged from 0 @.@ 52 to 2 @.@ 8 mg / L. The average concentration was 1 @.@ 212 mg / L. The ammonia levels in the creek ranged from less than 0 @.@ 02 mg / L to 0 @.@ 06 mg / L , while the concentration of nitrates was always less than 0 @.@ 04 mg / L. The total concentration of phosphates ranged from less than 0 @.@ 031 mg / L to 0 @.@ 11 mg / L , while for phosphorus the figures ranged from less than 0 @.@ 01 mg / L to 0 @.@ 575 mg / L. 
 The total concentration of dissolved solids near Bloomsburg ranges from less than 2 to 166 mg / L. 
 = = = = Metals = = = = 
 In most places on Fishing Creek , there is not enough dissolved aluminum to be toxic , although East Branch Fishing Creek has aluminum concentrations of over 100 μg per liter , approaching a lethal level for fish . Fishing Creek itself and all its other tributaries have concentrations of less than 70 μg per liter . The concentration is seasonal : aluminum trapped in frozen ground is released into the streams when the soil thaws . As a result , aluminum levels in the creek peak in March and April and drop to almost zero in the summer . 
 The concentration of calcium at the gauging station near Bloomsburg has ranged from 5 @.@ 5 mg / L to 26 mg / L , averaging 7 @.@ 532 mg / L. The concentration of magnesium has ranged from 1 @.@ 5 mg / L to 6 @.@ 7 mg / L , with an average of 1 @.@ 748 mg / L. 
 = = = Dams = = = 
 There are five dams on Fishing Creek . The <unk> dam called Boone 's Dam is the furthest downstream , in Montour Township . It is 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) high and 253 feet ( 77 m ) long . Further upstream is the Diverting Dam , a 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 6 @-@ meter ) high and 100 @-@ foot ( 31 @-@ meter ) long dam in Bloomsburg . It was built to power the nearby Irondale furnaces . A 380 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) wide and 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) high unnamed dam is on the creek further upstream , in Mount Pleasant Township . The uppermost dams are the 130 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) wide and 11 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) high Benton Dam and the 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) wide and 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) high Mill Dam , which are in Benton Township and Benton . Additionally , the Jonestown Dam is on the tributary Huntington Creek in Jonestown . This dam is 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high and 120 feet ( 37 m ) wide . 
 = = = Water temperature = = = 
 The highest water temperature is at West Creek , which can reach 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) in the summer . In Benton , Fishing Creek can reach 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) in the summer while Coles Creek only reaches 66 to 68 ° F ( 19 to 20 ° C ) . In the winter , the water in the main stem is around 32 ° F ( 0 ° C ) , while in West Branch Fishing Creek it can drop to 28 ° F ( − 2 ° C ) in the winter , making it the coldest stream in the watershed . At the gauging station near Bloomsburg , the temperature has ranged from 32 to 78 ° F ( 0 to 26 ° C ) ; it was at its lowest on January 10 , 2011 . The highest temperature occurred on August 3 , 2006 . The average temperature in August was 72 @.@ 81 ° F ( 22 @.@ 67 ° C ) and the average water temperature in January was 35 @.@ 46 ° F ( 1 @.@ 92 ° C ) . The temperature has averaged approximately 53 @.@ 65 ° F ( 12 @.@ 03 ° C ) . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Fishing Creek watershed has been affected by glaciation , which has left a glacial till near the source and glacial outwash in the lower parts of the watershed . The watershed lies in two major geological regions : the Deep Valley section of the Allegheny Plateau and the Susquehanna Lowlands Section . The Allegheny Plateau lies in the upper reaches of the watershed and is characterized by deep valleys and rounded mountains with elevations of around 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) . The Susquehanna Lowlands section is characterized by linear ridges of moderate elevation and valleys less steep than those of the Deep Valley region . There are also flood plains along the creek . Near its mouth , it cuts through Montour Ridge , and a basalt @-@ containing section of the Catskill Formation extends to the creek 's banks in Hemlock Township . Other rock formations along the banks include the Clinton Formation , the Selena Formation , the Lower <unk> Formation , and the Hamilton Formation . There is a terminal moraine , which crosses the creek near Benton . 
 The bed of Fishing Creek contains red and brown shale in some places . Other parts of the watershed lie over gray sandstone or conglomerates . There are numerous deposits of iron ore , limestone and marble in the watershed of Fishing Creek . Most of the rock in the watershed , including the Trimmers Rock Formation and Catskill Formation , is from the Devonian Period , but some of the northernmost tributaries have watersheds on rock from the Mississippian Period , such as the Huntley Mountain Formation and Burgoon sandstone . The creek is a freestone stream although its water is colder than that of most eastern freestone streams . 
 Areas along Fishing Creek contain pools followed by riffles , which are further followed by more pools . This configuration of pools and riffles creates an ideal situation for fly @-@ fishing . The lower part of the creek forms one side of a triangle of low @-@ lying land in western Bloomsburg , which floods severely during heavy rains . 
 = = = Soil = = = 
 The main soil in the area of Fishing Creek belongs to the Albrights series , which contains a 7 @-@ inch ( 18 cm ) layer of sticky , reddish @-@ brown , gravelly silt loam . Below this is a layer of yellowish @-@ red , gravelly , silty clay loam , which extends to approximately 30 inches ( 76 cm ) below ground and lies over a layer of equal portions of gravel and silty clay loam . Bedrock occurs several feet below the surface . The top 8 inches ( 20 cm ) of the Leck Kill @-@ Meckesville @-@ Calvin series in the watershed is dark brown silt loam with small pieces of sandstone and shale . A subsoil of reddish @-@ brown silt loam from 8 to 32 inches ( 20 to 81 cm ) below ground is followed by a 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) layer of sticky clay loam , below which is a bedrock of red shale . 
 The Barbour series occurs near the source of the creek . It is topped with a crumbly , 10 @-@ inch ( 25 cm ) layer of brownish @-@ red silt loam over a loose subsoil of reddish @-@ brown loam with some gravel . The top layer can easily be penetrated by roots and water . Further down is a layer of reddish @-@ brown gravel and sand , which extends to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) or more underground . The Basher series also occurs along upper Fishing Creek . The top layer is a loose , crumbly , reddish @-@ brown sandy loam extending to 9 inches ( 23 cm ) underground , and the subsoil is a loose , porous , reddish @-@ brown sandy loam with some gravel , extending to 20 inches ( 51 cm ) underground . Lower down , there is a layer of red sandy loam with some gravel that extends from 15 to 30 inches ( 38 to 76 cm ) underground . 
 The Pekin series is found along Fishing Creek and its tributary Huntington Creek . The uppermost layer , a dark brown silt loam that extends to 8 inches ( 20 cm ) underground , lies over a layer of brown silt loam with 10 percent gravel extending 16 inches ( 41 cm ) underground . The subsoil is mottled , brown , silty clay loam with cobbles and extends to 40 inches ( 100 cm ) underground . Bedrock occurs at a depth of 6 to 40 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 12 @.@ 2 m ) underground . The Pekin soils near the creek contain more cobbles than typical Pekin soils . Soils of the <unk> @-@ Pope @-@ Holly series have also been found along it . 
 In 1914 the soils of the Fishing Creek watershed were found to yield large quantities of farm crops . Potatoes yielded 100 to 200 bushels per acre , corn 70 to 90 bushels per acre , oats 40 bushels per acre , wheat 20 to 30 bushels per acre , and hay one to two tons per acre . J. H. Battle 's 1887 History of Columbia and Montour Counties , Pennsylvania stated that the Fishing Creek valley was fertile . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Benthic algae densely cover the bed of Fishing Creek , their preponderance attributed to leaking septic systems . At one location on the main stem downstream of Grassmere Park , coverage exceeds 60 percent . The dominant algal organism on West Branch Fishing Creek near the village of Elk Grove is Cladophora . The green algae <unk> dominates the stretch of Fishing Creek for 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) downstream of Grassmere Park , where it covers 80 percent of the riverbed . South of Pennsylvania Route 239 's crossing of the creek , the dominant algal organisms are <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . In the fall , decomposing algae covers 50 percent of the riverbed . 
 Thirty @-@ six species of macroinvertebrates live in Fishing Creek . The highest level of macroinvertebrate biodiversity on upper Fishing Creek is near Grassmere Park while the lowest is in Benton . The number of these organisms per square meter on Fishing Creek ranges from under 200 in Benton to nearly 400 halfway between Coles Creek and Benton . The highest density of them in the watershed occurs at West Creek where there are between 600 and almost 900 per m2 and the lowest density occurs at a site on East Branch Fishing Creek , where there are approximately 100 per m2 . 
 Some of Fishing Creek is stocked by the Fishing Creek Sportsman 's Association and contains populations of brook trout , rainbow trout , and brown trout . Many of them are sizable ; the largest one caught in Fishing Creek weighed 8 pounds ( 3 @.@ 6 kg ) and was 28 inches ( 71 cm ) long . All streams in the watershed are suitable for trout habitation according to the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . An 1887 book stated that Fishing Creek and its tributaries may have once been " alive with trout " . In the upper part of the watershed , wild brook trout are most common in West Branch Fishing Creek and fish in general are least common in East Branch Fishing Creek . West Creek has higher fish diversity than any other stream in the upper part of the watershed and is also the only place that is inhabited by wild brown trout . In addition , sculpin and cutlips minnow have been observed in large numbers in the creek and its tributaries . Less commonly observed fish in the upper part of the watershed include <unk> darters , white suckers , and black @-@ nosed dace . It is difficult for fish to spawn in the creek because of poor water quality near Benton , a lack of food , and dry headwaters for part of the year . The fish diversity in East Branch Fishing Creek and West Branch Fishing Creek is also significantly affected by episodic acidification , which is caused by acid rain falling in areas with no limestone in the bedrock . The main stem experiences similar problems but to a lesser extent , and the tributaries Coles Creek and West Creek experience the problems even less . 
 Northern hardwood trees are common in the Fishing Creek watershed . Ruffed grouse are common along Little Fishing Creek and its tributaries north of Iola . There are populations of Japanese knotweed , an invasive plant , along the creek and its tributaries south of Pennsylvania Route 118 . 
 = = = Habitat quality = = = 
 In 2011 , the habitat quality of upper Fishing Creek and its tributaries were rated on a scale of 1 to 200 ( with a higher rating indicating better habitability ) by Point Park University and the Fishing Creek Sportsmans ' Association . Most of this part of the creek and its tributaries were rated 166 or higher , which was considered optimal . The waters near the mouths of West Branch and East Branch Fishing Creeks , and Fishing Creek near Benton , were rated 113 to 160 , considered suboptimal . A portion of West Creek was rated 60 – 112 , considered marginal . 
 The highest Shannon Diversity Index of any stream in the Fishing Creek watershed is around 2 @.@ 75 , for West Branch Fishing Creek . This value is closely followed by that of West Creek , which has an index of 2 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 6 . The lowest value in the watershed is that of East Branch Fishing Creek , which is around 1 @.@ 2 . The main stem has a Shannon Diversity Index of 2 @.@ 1 to 2 @.@ 4 , depending on the site . 
 The Fishing Creek Sportsmans ' Association has proposed a number of methods to conserve Fishing Creek and its tributaries . These include planting riparian buffers , eliminating leaky septic systems , and protecting the area from hydraulic fracturing . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Fishing Creek Watershed Association plans to open a public section of the creek that stretches for 6500 feet ( 1980 meters ) , with a park of 92 acres ( 37 @.@ 2 ha ) . There are other tracts of public property along the creek , one of which , called the Power Dam , is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) upstream of Benton . It covers 19 acres ( 7 @.@ 7 ha ) and stretches for 2900 feet ( 880 meters ) of Fishing Creek , and contains the remains of a concrete dam . Another public area is the Benton Overlook 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) into Benton , which covers 42 acres ( 17 @.@ 0 ha ) and stretches for 2600 feet ( 790 meters ) near the creek . A public site at the <unk> Bridge in <unk> 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) downstream from Stillwater covers 31 acres ( 12 @.@ 5 ha ) along about 1000 feet ( 300 meters ) of the creek and contains an abandoned railroad grade . 
 The Grassmere Park Campground was established in the early 1900s on Fishing Creek . Further downstream , near Lightstreet , is Kocher Park , which occupies more than 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) . Typical activities there include canoeing , dog walking , birdwatching and fishing . 
 The western part of Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 13 is in a gorge cut by West Branch Fishing Creek . These state game lands have an area of 50 @,@ 000 acres and feature many forest roads and old grades . The hiking trail Waterfall Wonderland , which affords views of Big , Twin , Lewis , and Sullivan Falls , is described as " a place of almost mystical beauty " by Jeff Mitchell in his book Hiking the Endless Mountains : Exploring the Wilderness of Northeastern Pennsylvania . The state game lands are less crowded than the nearby Ricketts Glen State Park . 
 The <unk> Hollow Natural Area is on a small tributary of Little Fishing Creek . It is near <unk> and features old @-@ growth forests . The natural area is one of the smallest in Pennsylvania . 
 = Interstate 370 = 
 Interstate 370 ( abbreviated I @-@ 370 ) is a 2 @.@ 54 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 09 km ) Interstate Highway spur route off I @-@ 270 in Gaithersburg , Maryland to the western end of toll road Maryland Route 200 ( MD 200 , Intercounty Connector ) at an interchange that provides access to the park and ride lot at the Shady Grove station on the Red Line of the Washington Metro . Despite the number , I @-@ 370 does not connect to I @-@ 70 itself . The road continues to the west of I @-@ 270 as Sam Eig Highway , a surface road . Along the way , I @-@ 370 has interchanges with MD 355 and Shady Grove Road . The freeway was completed in the late 1980s to connect I @-@ 270 to the Shady Grove Metro station . I @-@ 370 was always part of the planned Intercounty Connector , but was the only segment to be built at the time . The opening of MD 200 east of I @-@ 370 resulted in the truncation of I @-@ 370 to the interchange with MD 200 and the re @-@ designation of the road leading into the Shady Grove Metro station as MD 200A . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 370 begins a short distance to the west of the I @-@ 270 interchange in Gaithersburg , Montgomery County , heading northeast as a six @-@ lane freeway . Southwest of this interchange , the road continues as Sam Eig Highway ( named after Washington real estate developer Sam Eig ) which interchanges with Washingtonian Boulevard before becoming a surface road . The highway passes woods to the northwest and a shopping center to the southeast as it reaches an interchange with I @-@ 270 . From this point , I @-@ 370 turns east and runs between residential neighborhoods to the north and business parks to the south , with trees separating the road from these areas . The freeway curves northeast again and comes to the MD 355 interchange . Past this , the highway passes more commercial development before reaching a bridge over CSX 's Metropolitan Subdivision . A short distance later , I @-@ 370 comes to a trumpet interchange with MD 200A , a road that provides access to Shady Grove Road and the Shady Grove station of Washington Metro 's Red Line . At this point , I @-@ 370 ends and the freeway continues east as MD 200 ( Intercounty Connector ) . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now I @-@ 370 was originally proposed as part of the Intercounty Connector in the late 1970s . The I @-@ 370 freeway opened on December 17 , 1988 , connecting I @-@ 270 to the Shady Grove Metro station . After three and a half years of construction , the freeway was four lanes wide and 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) long . Its construction cost $ 169 million , with federal funds paying for ninety percent of the cost . The state of Maryland 's portion of the cost was funded with a portion of the proceeds of a nickel @-@ per @-@ gallon gas tax increase in 1987 . Prior to its opening , driving from I @-@ 270 to the Shady Grove Metro station involved exiting at Shady Grove Road and passing six traffic lights to arrive at the station . Upon its opening , the remainder of the Intercounty Connector was planned but not yet built . At the time , it was the third shortest interstate , after I @-@ 878 in New York and I @-@ 395 in Baltimore . 
 In 2007 , construction began on MD 200 , which was to head east from I @-@ 370 . At this time , the ramp from Shady Grove Road to westbound I @-@ 370 was shifted to a new alignment . In 2009 , the lanes along I @-@ 370 were shifted to allow for construction of the MD 200 interchange . Construction on this segment of MD 200 was completed in February 2011 , with the road opening to traffic on February 23 . As a result of the completion of MD 200 , the eastern terminus of I @-@ 370 was truncated to the west end of MD 200 , with the freeway connection to the Shady Grove Metro station becoming MD 200A . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Montgomery County . 
 = Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden is a 2011 concert special which documents the February 21 and 22 , 2011 shows of American pop singer Lady Gaga 's worldwide concert , The Monster Ball Tour . Filmed at Madison Square Garden in Gaga 's hometown of New York City , the two @-@ hour special was directed by the singer 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson and produced by HBO . It was first broadcast on the channel on May 7 , 2011 , a day after Gaga 's last date of The Monster Ball Tour . The special was released on November 21 , 2011 , on DVD and Blu @-@ ray by Media Blasters . 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden features concert footage as well as pre @-@ concert and backstage content . The special received critical acclaim ; critics praised Gaga 's performance and the onstage theatrics while expressing doubt in Gaga 's sincerity during her monologues and in pre @-@ concert scenes . When aired , the special was watched by 1 @.@ 2 million viewers and was nominated for five awards at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , winning one for Outstanding Picture Editing for a Special ( Single or Multi @-@ Camera ) . 
 The video album released for the special includes extra footage like a capella performances and photo gallery . The 5 @.@ 1 surround sound of the release utilized DTS @-@ HD Master Audio and new technology to provide the viewer an optimum experience of watching the live concert . Emphasis was given on the main music and the vocals sung during the concert , while adjusting them against the screaming and the cheering of the crowd . The release was a commercial success , reaching the top of the DVD charts in the United States , France and Italy and the top @-@ ten in other nations . It received double platinum certifications in Australia and France , while in the United Kingdom , it was certified gold . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Monster Ball Tour was the second worldwide concert tour by Lady Gaga . Staged in support of her EP The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) and comprising a set list of songs from the EP and her debut album The Fame ( 2008 ) , the tour visited arenas and stadiums from 2009 through 2011 . Described as " the first @-@ ever pop electro opera " by Gaga , the tour was announced in October 2009 after an intended joint concert tour with hip @-@ hop artist Kanye West was suddenly canceled . The tour commenced four days after the release of The Fame Monster in November 2009 . A revision of the tour occurred after only a few months of performances , due to Gaga 's concern that the original version was constructed within a very short span of time . The stage of the original show looked like a frame , comparable to that of a hollowed @-@ out television set . Since The Fame Monster dealt with the paranoias Gaga had faced , the main theme of the original shows became human evolution , while elements of the canceled tour with West were still included in some parts . From 2010 onward , the revamped shows had a New York theme and portrayed a story set in the city , where Gaga and her friends got lost and had to find their way to " the Monster Ball " . Both versions of the show were divided into five segments , with the last being the encore . Each of them featured Gaga in new outfits , singing songs related to the concept of the segment , as they were followed by a video interlude . 
 The tour received general critical acclaim , with critics praising Gaga 's singing abilities , the theatricality of the show , and her sense of style and fashion . The Monster Ball was a commercial success , with sold @-@ out shows and demand for tickets prompting organizers to add more dates to the itinerary . It ultimately grossed an estimated $ 227 @.@ 4 million ( $ 239 million in 2016 dollars ) from 200 reported shows and an audience of 2 @.@ 5 million , becoming one of the highest @-@ grossing tours of all time . At the 2010 Billboard Touring Awards , Gaga won the Breakthrough Performer Award , as well as the Concert Marketing and Promotion Award , the latter being an acknowledgment of her partnership with sponsor Virgin Mobile . 
 = = Content = = 
 The special opens with a black @-@ and @-@ white introduction that sees Gaga ordering a cup of coffee from a New York convenience store before being escorted by security into a black SUV , where she reminisces about the many times she had been at the arena to watch other acts perform , and realizes that she will now be performing there herself . After being escorted backstage , she removes her makeup and cries as she discusses feeling like a " loser " . She then sings the opening lines of " Marry the Night " while preparing to take the stage . Full @-@ color footage of the concert ( shot on February 21 and 22 , 2011 ) is then seen , interspersed with black @-@ and @-@ white backstage footage . The special ends with another black @-@ and @-@ white backstage scene where Gaga and her backup singers perform " Born This Way " a capella . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was filmed at Madison Square Garden in Gaga 's hometown of New York City , the two @-@ hour special was directed by the singer 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson and produced by HBO , with the first broadcast on the channel on May 7 , 2011 , a day after Gaga 's last date of The Monster Ball Tour . The channel had released a trailer for the special in YouTube and a poster in their website , which showed Gaga with her characteristic pyrotechnic bra emitting sparks . According to Billboard , the special was watched by 1 @.@ 2 million viewers . The special received critical acclaim . On review aggregate website Metacritic , the special holds a rating of 81 out of 100 based on four critic reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald wrote , " [ B ] etween the orgy of visuals — stripper strobes , androgynous dancers and a very loose , X @-@ rated ' Wizard of Oz ' theme — we get some great song and dance numbers : ' Poker Face ' , ' Paparazzi ' and ' Bad Romance ' . These are amazing hits , club @-@ thumping tracks that define joy and sadness for a generation of suburban teens and the urban disenfranchised . " However , he felt that the show 's non @-@ concert content was not genuine , and found the special to be similar to Madonna 's 1991 documentary Madonna : Truth or Dare . The A.V. Club 's Genevieve Koski gave the special a B + rating , claiming that Gaga " proves that she is a performer " and that " she puts on a show " , though she felt that the concert was overly emotional and artistically ambitious , and that Gaga 's on @-@ stage banter was slightly annoying . Koski also compared the special to the Madonna documentary . Linda <unk> from New York Post was also positive in her assessment of the concert special . She complimented the behind the scenes footage , the costumes and the dancing and the pyrotechnics of the show , describing it as " a concert that would make Madonna ’ s shows look like run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill dinner theater . " A review in website Idolator described Gaga as " ringleader of her own circus — in complete control of her little monsters " . It went on to appreciate Gaga 's vocals and the fact that she did not lip @-@ synch , as well as the hurried costume changes , while commending the " raw " nature of the show . 
 Paul Schrodt of Slant Magazine was more critical in his review , though he gave it a 2 @.@ 5 star ( out of 4 ) rating . While he positively called Gaga 's performances outrageous and " occasionally fierce " , he questioned Gaga 's authenticity , both on stage and in the pre @-@ concert scenes . Ultimately , he wrote , " Unsurprisingly , HBO 's Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden raises more questions about Stefani Germanotta ( Gaga 's birth name ) than it answers , which is probably as it should be . " Radio host Howard Stern also compared the black @-@ and @-@ white scenes of the special to Madonna : Truth or Dare , adding that when he darts a glance at Lady Gaga , she is occasionally registered in his brain as Madonna . On his show , Stern was also critical of inappropriateness and <unk> of the numerous speeches Gaga gave between the songs in the special , calling them " prattle " , " drivel " , and " condescending " . Dedicating over half an hour of his show on May 9 and 10 , 2011 , to express his criticism of the concert , Stern compared the manner of Gaga 's speaking to professional wrestling due to echoing , Gaga 's gasping between the words , and the audience 's arguable inability to hear the words enough to understand them . In particular , Gaga claimed in the concert that her incentive to work is to " set [ her audience ] free " , not money . Stern attempted to debunk that claim by arguing that Gaga takes potentially psychiatric problems of her audience lightly by urging her fans to " forget all of [ their ] insecurities " overnight . 
 The special received five nominations at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . It was nominated for Outstanding Variety , Music or Comedy Special ; Outstanding Directing for a Variety , Music or Comedy Special ; Outstanding Technical Direction , Camerawork , Video Control for a Miniseries , Movie or a Special ; Outstanding Picture Editing for a Special ( Single or Multi @-@ Camera ) ; and Outstanding Lighting Design / Lighting Direction for a Variety , Music or Comedy Special . It won the picture editing award and lost all of its other bids . The five nominations were among the 104 HBO received for 2011 ; it made up over one @-@ fifth of the total nominations . The special also received a nomination at the 2012 Dorian Awards in the category of " TV Musical Program of the Year " . 
 = = Video album = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on November 21 , 2011 , and was also released as a digital download to iTunes Store . In addition to the content of the original HBO broadcast , it includes new , previously @-@ unseen footage . The video is also a part of a bundled package — along with the 17 @-@ track special edition of Born This Way and a remix album , Born This Way : The Remix — titled Born This Way , The Collection , which was released the same day . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was captured with a 14 @-@ camera High Definition shoot . The Blu @-@ ray edition of the video album is presented in an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 78 : 1 , encoded with MPEG @-@ 4 AVC and grants a 1080i transfer . It contains two audio tracks DTS @-@ HD Master Audio 5 @.@ 1 and LPCM 2 @.@ 0 . According to Jim Belcher , Vice President for Advanced Technology and Production of Universal Music Group , the advanced technologies associated with Dolby DTS @-@ HD would allow the audience the best experience while viewing the DVD . 
 Brian Riordan , one of the engineers who worked on mastering the audio for the DVD described in a video interview with Rolling Stone how the mix was achieved . He recalled getting a call from one of the show 's producers who were looking for specialized sound arrangements to acquire an authentic live concert feeling for the release . Riordan remembered that the main difficulty was trying to preserve the " craziness " of the audience and Gaga 's fans , and their screaming during the concert , nevertheless make the music of the show primary . His team used <unk> which did not use compression , instead one @-@ to @-@ one audio mixing giving the whole sound system " much more of an impactful experience " . Riordan decided to engineer the concert sound as " center @-@ channeled " since Gaga did not use backing audio , resulting in the listener getting the whole impact of her vocals , when listened with a headphone . Other difficulty faced by team included converting the heavy production of Gaga 's songs to a live format and utilizing the singer 's bands . " You also have the crowd , the house going nuts and all the reverberations at Madison Square Garden , so it was really difficult for me to figure out globally how real , how dry , how punchy can we get this thing to sound " , he added . Initially Riordan had featured more of the live instrumentation and mixed the songs a number of times , however felt that they needed a dry reverb hence he pondered on the mix along with co @-@ producer coming to a consensus regarding the sound . According to Riordan , the mixing process was approved by Gaga who watched the cuts while travelling on the tour however , she did not ask Riordan to change anything , unlike previous projects the engineer had undertaken . The 5 @.@ 1 mix was further orchestrated by using the sound recordings from the microphones placed around the audience members in Madison Square Garden , giving a new dimension to the surround sound in the Blu @-@ ray . 
 It has a length of over 114 minutes and contains five subtitles : English , French , Spanish , Portuguese and German . Extra features added to the release included another a cappella version of " Born This Way " which was performed on stage unlike the one in the closing credits . A photo gallery was also included as well as backstage footage showing Gaga meeting with actress Liza Minnelli . According to Jeffrey Kauffman of Blu @-@ ray.com , the audio tracks were commendable for their crisp sound . He stated that " One of the best things about this concert is despite its artifice , even its artificiality , there 's absolutely no question that Lady Gaga is actually singing . What a novel idea for a live concert , and one that seemed especially refreshing after having just sat through the Britney Spears Live : The Femme Fatale Tour concert Blu @-@ ray , where Brit 's live voice was all but buried in the pre @-@ records . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , it entered Billboard 's Top Music Video chart at the top , selling 26 @,@ 000 copies of the DVD — the greatest total for a music video since Beyoncé Knowles ' I Am ... World Tour live CD / DVD sold 37 @,@ 000 and 31 @,@ 000 copies in its first two weeks in November and December 2010 , and held this title until the release of Adele 's Live at the Royal Albert Hall . Its final appearance on the chart was for the issue dated November 30 , 2013 , where upon it tallied a total of 64 weeks in side the chart . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden became the fourth best @-@ selling music video of 2011 in the United States . 
 In Australia , the DVD debuted at number two on the ARIA DVD Chart . The next week , it remained in the same position , while being certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the DVD . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was certified double platinum in January 2012 , denoting shipments of 30 @,@ 000 copies . It was the fifth and eleventh best selling DVD of 2011 and 2012 in Australia , respectively . The DVD charted on the UK Music Video chart at number four , for the issue dated December 3 , 2011 . It was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for selling more than 25 @,@ 000 copies . Across Europe , the DVD reached the top of the charts in France and Italy , the former region it was also certified double platinum by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 30 @,@ 000 copies of the release . It reached the top @-@ ten of the charts in other nations . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 Bonus content 
 " Born This Way " ( a cappella ) – 3 : 16 
 " Backstage at the Monster Ball " – 12 : 50 
 Photo gallery 
 Track listing adapted from Amazon.com. 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden DVD booklet . 
 Main personnel 
 Production crew 
 Costumes and makeup 
 Sound Department 
 Special Effects 
 Lighting crew 
 Principal photography 
 = Ulysses S. Grant = 
 Ulysses S. Grant ( born Hiram Ulysses Grant ; April 27 , 1822 – July 23 , 1885 ) was the 18th President of the United States ( 1869 – 77 ) . As Commanding General of the United States Army ( 1864 – 69 ) , Grant worked closely with President Abraham Lincoln to lead the Union Army to victory over the Confederacy in the American Civil War . He implemented Congressional Reconstruction , often at odds with Lincoln 's successor , Andrew Johnson . Twice elected president , Grant led the Republicans in their effort to remove the vestiges of Confederate nationalism and slavery , protect African @-@ American citizenship , and support economic prosperity nationwide . His presidency has often come under criticism for protecting corrupt associates and in his second term leading the nation into a severe economic depression . 
 Grant graduated in 1843 from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point , served in the Mexican – American War and initially retired in 1854 . He struggled financially in civilian life . When the Civil War began in 1861 , he rejoined the U.S. Army . In 1862 , Grant took control of Kentucky and most of Tennessee , and led Union forces to victory in the Battle of Shiloh , earning a reputation as an aggressive commander . He incorporated displaced African American slaves into the Union war effort . In July 1863 , after a series of coordinated battles , Grant defeated Confederate armies and seized Vicksburg , giving the Union control of the Mississippi River and dividing the Confederacy in two . After his victories in the Chattanooga Campaign , Lincoln promoted him to lieutenant @-@ general and Commanding General of the United States Army in March 1864 . Grant confronted Robert E. Lee in a series of bloody battles , trapping Lee 's army in their defense of Richmond . Grant coordinated a series of devastating campaigns in other theaters . In April 1865 , Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox , effectively ending the war . Historians have hailed Grant 's military genius , and his strategies are featured in military history textbooks , but a minority contend that he won by brute force rather than superior strategy . 
 After the Civil War , Grant led the army 's supervision of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states . Elected president in 1868 and reelected in 1872 , Grant stabilized the nation during the turbulent Reconstruction period , prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan , and enforced civil and voting rights laws using the army and the Department of Justice . He used the army to build the Republican Party in the South , based on black voters , Northern newcomers ( " carpetbaggers " ) , and native Southern white supporters ( " scalawags " ) . After the disenfranchisement of some former Confederates , Republicans gained majorities and African Americans were elected to Congress and high state offices . In his second term , the Republican coalitions in the South splintered and were defeated one by one as <unk> ( conservative whites ) regained control using coercion and violence . Grant 's Indian peace policy initially reduced frontier violence , but is best known for the Great Sioux War of 1876 , where George Custer and his regiment were killed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn . Grant responded to charges of corruption in executive offices more than any other 19th Century president . He appointed the first Civil Service Commission and signed legislation ending the corrupt moiety system . 
 In foreign policy , Grant sought to increase American trade and influence , while remaining at peace with the world . His administration successfully resolved the Alabama Claims by the Treaty of Washington with Great Britain , ending wartime tensions . Grant avoided war with Spain over the Virginius Affair , but Congress rejected his attempted annexation of the Dominican Republic . In trade policy , Grant 's administration implemented a gold standard and sought to strengthen the dollar . Corruption charges escalated during his second term , while his response to the Panic of 1873 proved ineffective nationally in halting the five @-@ year industrial depression that produced high unemployment , low prices , low profits , and bankruptcies . Grant left office in 1877 and embarked on a widely praised world tour lasting over two years . 
 In 1880 , Grant was unsuccessful in obtaining a Republican presidential nomination for a third term . Facing severe investment reversals and dying of throat cancer , he completed his memoirs , which proved a major critical and financial success . His death in 1885 prompted an outpouring of national unity . 20th century historical evaluations were negative about his presidency before recovering somewhat beginning in the 1980s . Scholars rank his presidency below the average of other presidents . Grant 's critics take a negative view of his economic mismanagement and his failed Dominican Republic annexation treaty , while admirers emphasize his concern for Native Americans and enforcement of civil and voting rights for African Americans . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hiram Ulysses Grant was born in Point Pleasant , Ohio , on April 27 , 1822 , to Jesse Root Grant , a tanner , and Hannah ( née Simpson ) Grant . His ancestors Matthew and Priscilla Grant arrived aboard the Mary and John at Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630 . Grant 's great @-@ grandfather fought in the French and Indian War , and his grandfather served in the American Revolution at Bunker Hill . Grant 's father was a Whig Party supporter with abolitionist sentiments . In 1823 , the family moved to the village of Georgetown in Brown County , Ohio , where five more siblings were born : Simpson , Clara , Orvil , Jennie , and Mary . Young Grant regularly attended public schools and later was enrolled in private schools . While hating the tannery , he chose work on his father 's farm . Unlike his siblings , Grant was not forced to attend church by his Methodist parents ; for the rest of his life , he prayed privately and never officially joined any denomination . Observers , including his own son , thought he was an agnostic . In his youth , Grant developed an unusual ability to work with and control horses . As a general he rode the strongest and most challenging horse available , and was sometimes injured in riding . 
 When Grant was 17 , Congressman Thomas L. Hamer nominated him to the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . Hamer mistakenly wrote down the name as " Ulysses S. Grant of Ohio " , and this became his adopted name . His nickname became " Sam " among army colleagues at the academy since the initials " U.S. " also stood for " Uncle Sam " . As he later recalled it , " a military life had no charms for me " ; he was lax in his studies , but he achieved above @-@ average grades in mathematics and geology . Quiet by nature , he established a few intimate friends , including Frederick Tracy Dent and Rufus Ingalls . Grant developed a reputation as a fearless and expert horseman known as a horse <unk> , setting an equestrian high @-@ jump record that stood for almost 25 years . He also studied under Romantic artist Robert Walter Weir and produced nine surviving artworks . He graduated in 1843 , ranking 21st in a class of 39 . Glad to leave the academy , his plan was to resign his commission after his four @-@ year term of duty . Despite his excellent horsemanship , he was not assigned to the cavalry ( assignments were determined by class rank , not aptitude ) , but to the 4th Infantry Regiment . He was made regimental quartermaster , managing supplies and equipment , with the rank of brevet second lieutenant . 
 = = Early military career and personal life = = 
 Grant 's first assignment after graduation took him to the Jefferson Barracks near St. Louis , Missouri . It was the nation 's largest military base in the west , commanded by Colonel Stephen W. Kearny . Grant was happy with his new commander , but looked forward to the end of his military service and a possible teaching career . He spent some of his time in Missouri visiting the family of his West Point classmate , Frederick Tracy Dent ; he became engaged to Dent 's sister , Julia , in 1844 . 
 Amid rising tensions with Mexico , Grant 's unit shifted to Louisiana as part of the Army of Observation under Major General Zachary Taylor . When the Mexican – American War broke out in 1846 , the Army entered Mexico . Although a quartermaster , Grant led a cavalry charge at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma . At Monterrey he demonstrated his equestrian ability , by volunteering to carry a dispatch through sniper @-@ lined streets while hanging off the side of his horse , keeping the animal between him and the enemy . President James K. Polk , wary of Taylor 's growing popularity , divided his forces , sending some troops ( including Grant 's unit ) to form a new army under Major General Winfield Scott . Scott 's army landed at Veracruz and advanced toward Mexico City . The army met the Mexican forces at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec outside Mexico City . Grant was a quartermaster in charge of supplies and did not have a combat role , but he yearned for one and finally was allowed to take part in dangerous missions . At Chapultepec , men under Grant 's direction dragged a disassembled howitzer into a church steeple , reassembled it , and bombarded nearby Mexican troops . His bravery and initiative earned him brevet promotions ; he became a temporary captain while his permanent rank was lieutenant . Scott 's army entered the city , and the Mexicans agreed to peace soon afterward . 
 During this war Grant studied the tactics and strategies of Scott and others , often second guessing their moves beforehand . In his Memoirs , he wrote that this is how he learned about military leadership , and in retrospect identified his leadership style with Taylor 's . Even so , he believed that the Mexican war was wrongful and that the territorial gains from the war were designed to expand slavery . Grant reflected in 1883 , " I was bitterly opposed to the measure , and to this day , regard the war , which resulted , as one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation . " He opined that the Civil War was punishment inflicted on the nation for its aggression in Mexico . 
 Grant 's mandatory service expired during the war , but he chose to remain a soldier . Four years after becoming engaged , he married Julia on August 22 , 1848 . They had four children : Frederick , Ulysses Jr . ( " Buck " ) , Ellen ( " Nellie " ) , and Jesse . Grant 's first post @-@ war assignments took him and Julia to Detroit and then to Sackets Harbor , New York . In 1852 , Grant 's next assignment sent him west to Fort Vancouver in the Oregon Territory . Julia , who was eight months pregnant with Ulysses Jr . , did not accompany him . While traveling overland through Panama , an outbreak of cholera among his fellow travelers caused 150 fatalities ; Grant arranged makeshift transportation and hospital facilities to care for the sick . He debarked in San Francisco during the height of the California Gold Rush . 
 Grant 's time in the Pacific Northwest followed the Cayuse War ; the army was stationed there to keep peace between settlers and Indians . To supplement a military salary which was inadequate to support his family , Grant tried and failed at several business ventures , confirming Jesse Grant 's belief that his son had no head for business . He was unhappy being separated from his family , and rumors circulated that he was drinking to excess . Historians overwhelmingly agree that his drunkenness , although off duty , at the time was a fact , though there are no eyewitness reports extant . 
 Promoted to captain in the summer of 1853 , Grant was assigned to command Company F , 4th Infantry , at Fort Humboldt in California . The commanding officer at Fort Humboldt , Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Buchanan , received reports that Grant became intoxicated off @-@ duty while seated at the pay officer 's table . In lieu of a court @-@ martial , Buchanan gave Grant an ultimatum to resign ; he did so , effective July 31 , 1854 , without explanation and returned to St. Louis . The War Department stated on his record , " Nothing stands against his good name . " After Grant 's retirement , rumors persisted in the regular army of his drinking . Years later , he said , " the vice of intemperance ( drunkenness ) had not a little to do with my decision to resign . " 
 = = Civilian struggles and politics = = 
 At age 32 , with no civilian vocation , Grant struggled through seven financially lean years . His father initially offered him a place in the Galena , Illinois , branch of the family 's tannery and leather goods business , on condition that Julia and the children stay with her parents in Missouri or with the Grants in Kentucky . Ulysses and Julia opposed another separation and declined the offer . In 1855 , Grant farmed on his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's property near St. Louis , using slaves owned by Julia 's father . The farm was not successful and to earn money he sold firewood on St. Louis street corners . The next year , the Grants moved to land on Julia 's father 's farm , and built a home Grant called " Hardscrabble " . Julia hated the rustic house , which she described as an " unattractive cabin " . In 1857 , Grant acquired a slave , a thirty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old man named William Jones , from his father @-@ in @-@ law . The Panic of 1857 devastated farmers , including Grant , who was forced to rent out Hardscrabble the following year . 
 Having met with no success farming , the Grants left the farm when their fourth and final child was born in 1858 . The following year in 1859 Grant freed his only slave Jones , who was 35 years old and worth about $ 1 @,@ 500 , instead of selling him at a time when Grant desperately needed money . For the next year , the family took a small house in St. Louis where he worked with Julia 's cousin Harry Boggs as a bill collector , again without success . In 1860 , Jesse offered him the job in Galena without conditions , and Grant accepted . The leather shop , " Grant & Perkins " , sold harnesses , saddles , and other leather goods , and purchased hides from farmers in the prosperous Galena area . Grant and family moved to a rental house that year . 
 After Grant had retired from the military , many considered him allied politically to Julia 's father , Frederick Dent , a prominent Missouri Democrat . In the 1856 election , Grant cast his first presidential vote for the Democrat , James Buchanan , later saying he was really voting against John C. Frémont , the first Republican candidate , over concern that Frémont 's anti @-@ slavery position would motivate southern states to secede . In 1859 , Grant 's vote for Buchanan and his political affiliation to his father @-@ in @-@ law cost him an appointment to become county engineer . Grant 's own father in Illinois , Jesse , was an outspoken Republican in Galena . In 1860 , Grant was an open Democrat , favoring Democrat Stephen A. Douglas over Abraham Lincoln , and Lincoln over the Southern Democrat , John C. Breckinridge . Lacking the residency requirements in Illinois at the time , he could not vote . Grant opposed the southern states ' secession at the outbreak of the Civil War and remained loyal to the Union . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 On April 12 , 1861 , the American Civil War began as Confederate troops attacked Fort Sumter in Charleston , South Carolina . Two days later , President Lincoln called for 75 @,@ 000 volunteers and a mass meeting was held in Galena to encourage recruitment . Recognized as a military professional , Grant was asked to lead the ensuing effort . Before the attack on Fort Sumter , Grant had not reacted strongly to Southern secession . The news of the attack came as a shock in Galena , and Grant shared his neighbors ' mounting concern about the onset of war . After hearing a speech by his father 's attorney , John Aaron Rawlins , Grant found renewed energy in the Union cause . Rawlins later became Grant 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp and close friend during the war . Grant recalled with satisfaction that after that first recruitment meeting in Galena , " I never went into our leather store again . " 
 Without any formal rank in the army , Grant helped recruit a company of volunteers and accompanied them to Springfield , the state capital . During this time , Grant quickly perceived that the war would be fought for the most part by volunteers and not career soldiers . Illinois ' Governor Richard Yates offered Grant a militia commission to recruit and train volunteer units , which he accepted , but he still wanted a field command in the army . He made several efforts through his professional contacts , including Major General George B. McClellan . McClellan refused to meet him , remembering Grant 's earlier reputation for drinking while stationed in California . Meanwhile , Grant continued serving at the training camps and made a positive impression on the volunteer Union recruits . 
 With the aid of his advocate in Washington , Illinois congressman Elihu B. Washburne , Grant was formally promoted to Colonel on June 14 , 1861 , and put in charge of disciplining the unruly 21st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment . To restore discipline , Grant had one troublemaker bound and gagged to a post for being drunk and disorderly . Transferred to northern Missouri , Grant was promoted by Lincoln to Brigadier General , backdated to May 17 , 1861 , again with Washburne 's support . Believing Grant was a general of " dogged persistence " and " iron will " , Major General John C. Frémont assigned Grant command of troops near Cairo , Illinois by the end of August 1861 . Under Frémont 's authority Grant advanced into Paducah and took the town without a fight . 
 = = = Belmont , Forts Henry and Donelson = = = 
 On November 7 , 1861 Grant and his troops crossed the Mississippi to attack Confederate soldiers encamped in Belmont , Missouri . They took the camp , but the reinforced Confederates under Brigadier General Gideon J. Pillow forced a retreat to Cairo . A tactical defeat , the battle nonetheless gave Grant and his volunteers confidence and experience . After Belmont , Grant asked his new commander Henry Halleck ( Lincoln had relieved Frémont of command ) for permission to move against Fort Henry in Tennessee , which would open the Tennessee River to Union gunboats ; Halleck agreed on condition that the attack be conducted in coordination with navy Flag Officer Andrew H. Foote . Grant 's troops , in close cooperation with Foote 's naval forces captured Fort Henry on February 6 , 1862 . 
 Emboldened by Lincoln 's call for a general advance of all Union forces , Grant ordered an immediate assault on nearby Fort Donelson , which dominated the Cumberland River ( this time without Halleck 's permission ) . On February 15 , Grant and Foote met stiff resistance from Confederate forces under Pillow . Reinforced by 10 @,@ 000 troops , Grant 's army totaled 25 @,@ 000 troops against 12 @,@ 000 Confederates . Foote 's first approach was repulsed , and the Confederates attempted a breakout , pushing Grant 's right flank into disorganized retreat . Grant rallied his troops , resumed the offensive , retook the Union right , and attacked Pillow 's left . Pillow ordered Confederate troops back into the fort and relinquished command to Brigadier General Simon Bolivar Buckner , who the next day acceded to Grant 's demand for his " unconditional and immediate surrender . " Lincoln promoted Grant to major @-@ general of volunteers while the Northern press treated Grant as a hero . Playing off his initials , they took to calling him " Unconditional Surrender Grant " . 
 = = = Shiloh and aftermath = = = 
 <unk> on the western bank of the Tennessee River , Grant 's Army of the Tennessee , now numbering about 45 @,@ 000 troops , prepared to attack a Confederate army of roughly equal strength at Corinth , Mississippi , a vital railroad junction . The Confederates , led by Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard , struck first on April 6 , 1862 , attacking five divisions of Grant 's army bivouacked at Pittsburg Landing , not far from the Shiloh meetinghouse . Grant 's troops were not entrenched and were taken by surprise , falling back before the Confederate onslaught . At day 's end , the Confederates captured one Union division , but Grant 's army was able to hold the Landing . The remaining Union army might have been destroyed , but the Confederates halted due to exhaustion , confusion , and a lack of reinforcements . Grant , bolstered by 18 @,@ 000 fresh troops from the divisions of Major Generals Don Carlos Buell and Lew Wallace , counterattacked at dawn the next day The Northerners regained the field and forced the rebels to retreat back to Corinth . 
 In Shiloh 's aftermath , the Northern press criticized Grant for high casualties and for his alleged drunkenness during the battle . Shiloh was the costliest battle in American history to that point , with total casualties of about 23 @,@ 800 . Halleck arrived at Pittsburg Landing on April 9 , and removed Grant from field command , proceeding to capture Corinth . Discouraged and disappointed , Grant considered resigning his commission , but Brigadier General William Tecumseh Sherman , one of his division commanders , convinced him to stay . Lincoln overruled Grant 's critics , saying " I can 't spare this man ; he fights . " Ordered to Washington , Halleck on July 11 reinstated Grant as field commander of the Army of the Tennessee . On September 19 , Grant 's army defeated Confederates at the Battle of Iuka , then successfully defended Corinth , inflicting heavy casualties on the enemy . On October 25 , Grant assumed command of the District of the Tennessee . In November , after Lincoln 's preliminary Emancipation Proclamation , Grant ordered units under his command , headed by Chaplain John Eaton , to incorporate contraband slaves into the Union war effort , giving them clothes , shelter , and wages for their services . 
 = = = Vicksburg campaign = = = 
 Located on the high bluffs of the Mississippi River , Vicksburg , Mississippi was the last major obstacle to Union control of that river ; both Lincoln and Grant saw it as the key to victory in the West and were determined to take the rebel stronghold . Grant 's Army held western Tennessee having almost 40 @,@ 000 troops available to fight . Grant was aggravated to learn that Lincoln authorized Major General John A. McClernand to raise a separate army for the purpose . Halleck ordered McClernand to Memphis , and placed him under Grant 's authority . Grant planned to attack Vicksburg on land from the east while Sherman attacked the fortress from the Mississippi River , but two Confederate cavalry raids , on December 11 and 20 , prevented the armies from connecting . On December 29 , a Confederate army led by Lieutenant General John C. Pemberton repulsed Sherman 's direct approach to Vicksburg at Chickasaw Bayou . McClernand reached Sherman 's army , assumed command , and independently of Grant led a campaign that captured Confederate Fort Hindman . 
 Along with his military responsibilities in the months following Grant 's return to command , he was concerned over an expanding illicit cotton trade in his district . He believed the trade undermined the Union war effort , funded the Confederacy , and prolonged the war , while Union soldiers died in the fields . On December 17 , he issued General Order No. 11 , expelling " Jews , as a class , " from the district , saying that Jewish merchants were violating trade regulations . Writing in 2012 , historian Jonathan D. Sarna said Grant " issued the most notorious anti @-@ Jewish official order in American history . " Historians ' opinions vary on Grant 's motives for issuing the order . Jewish leaders complained to Lincoln while the Northern press criticized Grant . Lincoln demanded the order be revoked and Grant rescinded it within three weeks . Grant made amends with the Jewish community during his presidency . 
 On January 29 , 1863 , Grant assumed personal overall command and during the months of February and March made a series of attempts to advance his army through water @-@ logged terrain to bypass Vicksburg 's guns ; these also proved ineffective , however , Union soldiers became better trained . On April 16 , 1863 , Grant ordered Admiral David Porter 's Union gunboats south under fire from the Vicksburg batteries to meet up with his Union troops who had marched south down the west side of the Mississippi River . Grant ordered diversionary battles , confusing Pemberton and allowing Grant 's army to cross east over the Mississippi , landing troops at Bruinsburg . Continuing eastward , Grant 's army captured Port Gibson , Raymond , and Jackson , the state capital and Confederate railroad supply center . Advancing his army to Vicksburg , Grant defeated Pemberton 's army at the Battle of Champion Hill on May 16 , forcing Pemberton to retreat into Vicksburg . After Grant 's men assaulted the Vicksburg entrenchments twice , suffering severe losses , they settled in for a siege lasting seven weeks . Pemberton surrendered Vicksburg to Grant on July 4 , 1863 . 
 The fall of Vicksburg gave Union forces control over the Mississippi River and split the Confederacy in two . By that time , Grant 's political sympathies fully coincided with the Radical Republicans ' aggressive prosecution of the war and emancipation of the slaves . Although the success at Vicksburg was a great morale boost for the Union war effort , Grant received criticism for his decisions and his alleged drunkenness . The personal rivalry between McClernand and Grant continued after Vicksburg , until Grant removed McClernand from command when he contravened Grant by publishing an order without permission . When Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton suggested Grant be brought back east to run the Army of the Potomac , Grant demurred , writing that he knew the geography and resources of the West better and he did not want to upset the chain of command in the East . 
 = = = Chattanooga and promotion = = = 
 Lincoln commissioned Grant a major general in the regular army and assigned him command of the newly formed Division of the Mississippi in October 1863 , including the Armies of the Ohio , Tennessee , and Cumberland . After the Battle of Chickamauga , the Army of the Cumberland retreated into Chattanooga , where they were trapped . When informed of the situation , Grant put Major General George H. Thomas in charge of the besieged army . Taking command , Grant arrived in Chattanooga by horseback , devising plans to resupply the city and break the siege . Lincoln also sent Major General Joseph Hooker and two divisions of the Army of the Potomac to assist . Union forces captured Brown 's Ferry and opened a supply line to Bridgeport . On November 23 , 1863 , Grant organized three armies to attack at Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain . Two days later in the early morning , Hooker 's forces successfully took Lookout Mountain . Grant ordered Thomas and the Army of the Cumberland to advance when Sherman 's army failed to take Missionary Ridge from the northeast . The Army of the Cumberland , led by Major General Philip Sheridan and Brigadier General Thomas J. Wood , charged uphill and captured the Confederate entrenchments on top of the ridge , forcing the rebels into disorganized retreat . The decisive battle gave the Union control of Tennessee and opened Georgia , the heartland of the Confederacy , to Union invasion . 
 On March 3 , 1864 Lincoln promoted Grant to lieutenant general , giving him command of all Union Armies , answering only to the President . Grant assigned Sherman the Division of the Mississippi and traveled east to Washington D.C. , meeting with Lincoln to devise a strategy of total war against the Confederacy . After settling Julia into a house in Georgetown , Grant established his headquarters with General George Meade 's Army of the Potomac in Culpeper , Virginia . He devised a strategy of coordinated Union offensives , attacking the rebel armies at the same time to keep the Confederates from shifting reinforcements within their interior lines . Sherman was to pursue Joseph E. Johnston 's Army of the Tennessee , while Meade would lead the Army of the Potomac , with Grant in camp , to attack Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia . Major General Benjamin Butler was to advance towards Richmond from the south , up the James River . If Lee was forced south as expected , Grant would join forces with Butler 's armies and be fed supplies from the James . Major General Franz Sigel was to capture the railroad line at Lynchburg , move east , and attack from the Blue Ridge Mountains . Grant knew that Lee had limited manpower and that a war of attrition fought on a battlefield without entrenchments would lead to Lee 's defeat . 
 Grant was now riding a rising tide of popularity , and there was talk that a Union victory early in the year could lead to his candidacy for the presidency . Grant was aware of the rumors , but had ruled out a political candidacy ; the possibility would soon vanish with delays on the battlefield . 
 = = = Overland Campaign and Union victory = = = 
 Sigel 's and Butler 's efforts sputtered , and Grant was left alone to fight Lee in a series of bloody battles known as the Overland Campaign . Grant crossed the Rapidan River on May 4 , 1864 , and attacked Lee in the Battle of the Wilderness , a hard @-@ fought three @-@ day battle with many casualties . Rather than retreat as his predecessors had done , Grant flanked Lee 's army to the southeast and attempted to wedge his forces between Lee and Richmond at Spotsylvania Court House . Lee 's army got to Spotsylvania first , and a costly battle ensued , lasting thirteen days . During the battle , Grant attempted to break through Lee 's line of defense , resulting in one of the bloodiest assaults of the Civil War , known as the Battle of the Bloody Angle . Unable to break Lee 's defenses , Grant again flanked the Confederate army to the southeast , meeting at North Anna , where a battle lasted three days . The Confederates had the defensive advantage , and Grant maneuvered his army to Cold Harbor , a vital railroad hub that linked to Richmond , but Lee 's men were again able to entrench against the Union assault . During the third day of the thirteen @-@ day battle , Grant led a costly assault on Lee 's trenches . As casualty reports became known in the North , heavy criticism fell on Grant , who was castigated as " the Butcher " by the Northern press after taking 52 @,@ 788 casualties in the thirty days since crossing the Rapidan . Lee 's army suffered 32 @,@ 907 casualties , but he was less able to replace them . The costly Union assault at Cold Harbor was the second of two battles in the war that Grant later said he regretted ( the other being his initial assault on the fortifications around Vicksburg ) . Without being detected by Lee , Grant pulled out of Cold Harbor and moved his army south of the James River , freed Butler from the Bermuda Hundred ( where the Rebels had surrounded his army ) , and advanced toward Petersburg , Richmond 's central railroad hub . 
 After crossing the James River undetected , Grant and the Army of the Potomac arrived at Petersburg . Confederate General P.G.T. Beauregard defended the city , and Lee 's veteran reinforcements soon arrived . The result was a nine @-@ month @-@ long siege of Petersburg , stalling the advance . Northern resentment grew as the war dragged on , but an indirect benefit of the Petersburg siege was that Lee was forced to entrench and defend Richmond , and was unable to reinforce the Army of the Tennessee . Sheridan was assigned command of the Union Army of the Shenandoah and Grant directed him to " follow the enemy to their death " . Lee had sent General Jubal Early up the Shenandoah Valley to attack the federal capital and draw troops away from the Army of the Potomac , but Sheridan defeated Early , ensuring that Washington would not be endangered . Grant then ordered Sheridan 's cavalry to destroy vital Confederate supplies in the Shenandoah Valley . When Sheridan reported suffering attacks by irregular Confederate cavalry under John S. Mosby , Grant recommended rounding up their families for imprisonment as hostages at Fort McHenry . 
 Grant approved of a plan to blow up part of the enemy trenches from an underground tunnel . The explosion created a crater , into which poorly @-@ led Union troops poured . Recovering from the surprise , Confederates surrounded the crater and easily picked off Union troops within it . The Union 's 3500 casualties outnumbered the Confederates ' by three @-@ to @-@ one ; although the plan could have been successful if implemented correctly , Grant admitted the tactic had been a " stupendous failure " . On August 9 , 1864 , Grant , who had just arrived at his headquarters in City Point , narrowly escaped death when Confederate spies blew up an ammunition barge in the James River . Rather than fight Lee in a full frontal attack as he had done at Cold Harbor , Grant continued to extend Lee 's defenses south and west of Petersburg , to capture vital railroad links . As Grant continued to push the Union advance westward , Lee 's lines became overstretched and undermanned . After the Federal army rebuilt the City Point Railroad , Grant was able to use mortars to attack Lee 's entrenchments . On September 2 , Sherman captured Atlanta while Confederate forces retreated , ensuring Lincoln 's reelection in November . Sherman convinced Grant and Lincoln to send a Union Army to march to Savannah devastating the Confederate heartland . 
 Once Sherman reached the East Coast and Thomas dispatched John Bell Hood 's forces in Tennessee , Union victory appeared certain , and Lincoln attempted negotiations . He enlisted Francis Preston Blair to carry a message to Confederate President Jefferson Davis . Davis and Lincoln each appointed commissioners , but the conference soon stalled . Grant contacted Lincoln , who agreed to personally meet with the commissioners at Fort Monroe . The peace conference that took place near Union @-@ controlled Fort Monroe was ultimately fruitless , but represented Grant 's first foray into diplomacy . 
 In late March 1865 , Grant 's forces finally took Petersburg , then captured Richmond that April . Grant , Sherman , Admiral Porter and Lincoln held a conference on the River Queen to discuss Reconstruction of the South . Lee 's troops began deserting in large numbers ; disease and lack of supplies also diminished the remaining Confederates . Lee attempted to link up with the remnants of Joseph E. Johnston 's defeated army , but Union cavalry forces led by Sheridan were able to stop the two armies from converging , cutting the line of advance to the Confederate supply trains . Lee and his army surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9 , 1865 . Grant gave generous terms ; Confederate troops surrendered their weapons and were allowed to return to their homes with their mounts , on the condition that they would not take up arms against the United States . On April 26 , Johnson 's Confederate army surrendered to Sherman under the same terms Grant offered to Lee . On May 26 , Kirby Smith 's western Confederate army surrendered and the Civil War was over , ending in Union victory . 
 = = = Lincoln 's assassination = = = 
 On April 14 , five days after Grant 's victory at Appomattox , he attended a cabinet meeting in Washington . Lincoln invited him and his wife to Ford 's Theater , but they declined as they had plans to travel to Philadelphia . In a conspiracy that targeted several government leaders , Lincoln was fatally shot by John Wilkes Booth at the theater , and died the next morning . Many , including Grant himself , thought that he had been a target in the plot . Secretary of War Stanton notified him of the President 's death and summoned him back to Washington . Attending Lincoln 's funeral on April 19 , Grant stood alone and wept openly ; he later said Lincoln was " the greatest man I have ever known . " Regarding the new President , Andrew Johnson , Grant told Julia that he dreaded the change in administrations ; he judged Johnson 's attitude toward white southerners as one that would " make them unwilling citizens " , and initially thought that with President Johnson , " Reconstruction has been set back no telling how far . " 
 = = Commanding General = = 
 = = = Transition to peacetime = = = 
 At the war 's end , Grant remained commander of the army , with duties that included enforcement of Reconstruction Acts in the former Confederate states and supervision of Indian wars on the western Plains . Grant secured a house for his family in Georgetown Heights in 1865 , but instructed Elihu Washburne that for political purposes his legal residence remained in Galena , Illinois . That same year , Grant spoke at Cooper Union in New York , where the New York Times reported that " ... the entranced and bewildered multitude trembled with extraordinary delight . " Further travels that summer took the Grants to Albany , New York , back to Galena , and throughout Illinois and Ohio , with enthusiastic receptions . 
 In November 1865 , President Andrew Johnson sent Grant on a fact @-@ finding mission to the South . Afterwards , Grant recommended continuation of a reformed Freedmen 's Bureau , which Johnson opposed , but advised against the use of black troops in garrisons , which he believed encouraged an alternative to farm labor . Grant did not believe the people of the devastated South were ready for civilian self @-@ rule , and that both whites and blacks in the South required protection by the federal government . He also warned of threats by disaffected poor people , black and white , and recommended that local decision @-@ making be entrusted only to " thinking men of the South " ( i.e. , white men of property ) . In this respect , Grant 's opinion on Reconstruction aligned with Johnson 's policy of pardoning established southern leaders and restoring them to their positions of power . He joined Johnson in arguing that Congress should allow representatives from the South to take their seats . On July 25 , 1866 , Congress promoted Grant to the newly created rank of General of the Army of the United States . 
 = = = Breach with Johnson = = = 
 Johnson favored a lenient approach to Reconstruction , calling for an immediate return of the former Confederate states into the Union without any guarantee of African American civil rights . The Radical Republican @-@ controlled Congress opposed the idea and refused to admit Congressmen from the former Confederate states . Over Johnson 's vetoes , Congress renewed the Freedmen 's Bureau and passed the Civil Rights Act of 1866 . During the congressional election campaign later that year , Johnson took his case to the people in his " Swing Around the Circle " speaking tour . Johnson pressured Grant , by then the most popular man in the country , to go on the tour ; Grant , wishing to appear loyal , agreed . Grant believed that Johnson was purposefully agitating conservative opinion to defy Congressional Reconstruction . Finding himself increasingly at odds with Johnson , Grant confided to his wife that he thought the President 's speeches were a " national disgrace " . Publicly , Grant attempted to appear loyal to Johnson while not alienating Republican legislators essential to his future political career . Concerned that Johnson 's differences with Congress would cause renewed insurrection in the South , he ordered Southern arsenals to ship arms north to prevent their capture by Southern state governments . 
 Conflict between radicals and conservatives continued after the 1866 congressional elections . Rejecting Johnson 's vision for quick reconciliation with former Confederates , Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts , which divided the southern states into five military districts to protect the freedman 's constitutional and congressional rights . Military district governors were to lead transitional state governments in each district . Grant , who was to select the general to govern each district from a group designated by Johnson , preferred Congress 's plan for enforcement of Reconstruction . Grant was optimistic that Reconstruction Acts would help pacify the South . By complying with the Acts and instructing his subordinates to do likewise , Grant further alienated Johnson . When Sheridan removed public officials in Louisiana who impeded Reconstruction , Johnson was displeased and sought Sheridan 's removal . Grant recommended a rebuke , but not a dismissal . Throughout the Reconstruction period , Grant and the military protected the rights of more than 1 @,@ 500 African Americans elected to political office . In 1866 , Congress renewed the Freedmen 's Bureau over Johnson 's vetoes and with Grant 's support , and passed the first Civil Rights Act protecting African American civil rights by nullifying black codes . On July 19 , 1867 , Congress , again over Johnson 's veto , passed a measure that authorized Grant to have oversight in enforcing congressional Reconstruction , making Southern state governments subordinate to military control . 
 = = = Johnson 's impeachment = = = 
 Johnson wished to replace Stanton , a Lincoln appointee who sympathized with Congressional Reconstruction . To keep Grant under control as a potential political rival , Johnson asked him to take the post . Grant recommended against the move , in light of the Tenure of Office Act , which required Senate approval for cabinet removals . Johnson believed the Act did not apply to officers appointed by the previous president , and forced the issue by making Grant an interim appointee during a Senate recess . Grant agreed to accept the post temporarily , and Stanton vacated the office until the Senate reconvened . 
 When the Senate reinstated Stanton , Johnson told Grant to refuse to surrender the office and let the courts resolve the matter . Grant told Johnson in private that violating the Tenure of Office Act was a federal offense , which could result in a fine or imprisonment . Believing he had no other legal alternatives , Grant returned the office to Stanton . This incurred Johnson 's wrath ; at a cabinet meeting immediately afterwards , Johnson accused Grant of breaking his promise to remain Secretary of War . Grant disputed that he had ever made such a promise although cabinet members later testified he had done so . Newspapers friendly to Johnson published a series of articles to discredit Grant over returning the War Department to Stanton , stating that Grant had been deceptive in the matter . This public insult infuriated Grant , and he defended himself in an angry letter to Johnson , after which the two men were confirmed foes . When Grant 's statement became public , it increased his popularity among Radical Republicans and he emerged from the controversy unscathed . Although Grant favored Johnson 's impeachment , he took no active role in the impeachment proceedings against Johnson , which were fueled in part by Johnson 's removal of Stanton . Johnson barely survived , and none of the other Republican leaders directly involved benefited politically in their unsuccessful attempt to remove the president . 
 = = = Election of 1868 = = = 
 While remaining Commanding General , Grant entered the 1868 campaign season with increased popularity among the Radical Republicans following his abandonment of Johnson over the Secretary of War dispute . The Republicans chose Grant as their presidential candidate on the first ballot at the 1868 Republican National Convention in Chicago . In his letter of acceptance to the party , Grant concluded with " Let us have peace " , which became his campaign slogan . For vice president , the delegates nominated House Speaker Schuyler Colfax . Grant 's 1862 General Order No. 11 became an issue during the presidential campaign ; he sought to distance himself from the order , saying " I have no prejudice against sect or race , but want each individual to be judged by his own merit . " As President , Grant would atone for 1862 's expulsion of the Jews . Historian Jonathan Sarna argues that Grant became one of the greatest friends of Jews in American history , meeting with them often and appointing them to high office . He was the first president to condemn atrocities against Jews in Europe , thus putting human rights on the American diplomatic agenda . As was expected at the time , Grant returned to his home state and left the active campaigning and speaking on his behalf to his campaign manager William E. Chandler and others . The Republican campaign focused on continuing Reconstruction and restoring the public credit . 
 The Democrats nominated former New York Governor Horatio Seymour . Their campaign focused mainly on ending Reconstruction and returning control of the South to the white planter class , which alienated many War Democrats in the North . The Democrats attacked Reconstruction and the Republican Party 's support of African American rights , while deriding Grant , calling him captain of the " Black Marines " . Grant won the election by 300 @,@ 000 votes out of 5 @,@ 716 @,@ 082 votes cast , receiving an electoral college landslide , of 214 votes to Seymour 's 80 . Grant , at the age of 46 was ( at the time ) the youngest president ever elected . His election was a triumph of conservative principles that included sound money , efficient government , and the restoration of Southern reconstructed states . Grant was the first president elected after the nation had outlawed slavery and granted citizenship to former slaves . Implementation of these new rights was slow to come ; in the 1868 election , the black vote counted in only 16 of the 37 states , nearly all in the South . Grant lost Louisiana and Georgia primarily due to Ku Klux Klan violence against African American voters . During the election there was a noticeably large number of black citizens in Washington . 
 = = Presidency ( 1869 – 77 ) = = 
 On March 4 , 1869 , Grant was sworn in as the eighteenth President of the United States by Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase . His presidency began with a break from tradition , as Johnson did not attend Grant 's inauguration at the Capitol or ride with him as he departed the White House for the last time . In his inaugural address , Grant urged the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment and said he would approach Reconstruction " calmly , without prejudice , hate or sectional pride . " Grant recommended the " proper treatment " of Native Americans be studied ; advocating their civilization and eventual citizenship . Grant took an unconventional approach to choosing his cabinet , declining to consult with the Senate and keeping his choices secret until he submitted them for confirmation . In his effort to create national harmony , Grant purposely avoided choosing Republican Party leaders . Grant appointed his wartime comrade John A. Rawlins as Secretary of War and Hamilton Fish , a conservative New York statesman , as Secretary of State . Sherman earned promotion to Commanding General , but his relationship with Grant became strained when the President took Rawlins 's side when the Secretary of War sought to limit Sherman 's authority . Grant initially granted Sherman command over War Department bureau chiefs , but rescinded it when Rawlins and Congress complained . Rawlins died in office a few months later , and Grant appointed William W. Belknap as his replacement . 
 Grant selected several non @-@ politicians to his cabinet , including Adolph E. Borie and Alexander Turney Stewart , with limited success . Borie served briefly as Secretary of the Navy , later replaced by George M. Robeson , while Stewart was prevented from becoming Secretary of the Treasury by a 1789 statute that barred businessmen from the position ( Senators Charles Sumner and Roscoe Conkling opposed amending the law . ) In place of Stewart , Grant appointed Massachusetts Representative George S. Boutwell , a radical , as Treasury Secretary . Grant 's other cabinet appointments — Jacob D. Cox ( Interior ) , John Creswell ( Postmaster General ) , and Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar ( Attorney General ) — were well @-@ received and uncontroversial . Grant also appointed four Justices to the Supreme Court : William Strong , Joseph P. Bradley , Ward Hunt and Chief Justice Morrison Waite . Hunt voted to uphold Reconstruction laws while Waite and Bradley did much to undermine them . 
 = = = Later Reconstruction and civil rights = = = 
 Grant took office in 1869 during the middle of the Reconstruction of the South or former Confederate states . Unlike his predecessor , Grant advocated systematic federal enforcement of fundamental civil rights regardless of race . He lobbied Congress to pass the Fifteenth Amendment , guaranteeing that no state could prevent someone from voting based on race , and believed that its passage would secure freedmen 's rights . Grant asked Congress to admit representatives from the remaining unrepresented Southern states in conformity with Congressional Reconstruction ; they did so , passing legislation providing that Mississippi , Virginia , and Texas would be represented in Congress after they ratified the Fifteenth Amendment . Grant pressured Congress to draw up legislation that would seat African American state legislators in Georgia , who had been ousted by white conservatives . Congress responded through special legislation ; the members were re @-@ seated in the Georgia legislature , and Georgia was required to adopt the Fifteenth Amendment to gain representation in Congress . By July 1870 , the four remaining states were readmitted . 
 To bolster the new amendment , Grant relied on the army and in 1870 he signed <unk> creating the Justice Department , primarily to enforce federal laws in the South . Where the attorney general had once been only a legal adviser to the president , he now led a cabinet department dedicated to enforcing federal law , including a solicitor general to argue on the government 's behalf in court . Under Grant 's first attorney general , Ebenezer R. Hoar , the administration was not especially aggressive in prosecuting white Southerners who terrorized their black neighbors , but Hoar 's successor , Amos T. Akerman , was more zealous . Alarmed by a rise in terror by the Ku Klux Klan and other groups against African Americans , Congress ( with Grant 's encouragement ) passed a series of three laws , the Enforcement Acts from 1870 to 1871 , which made depriving African Americans their civil rights a federal offense and authorized the president to use the military to enforce the laws . In May 1871 , Grant ordered federal troops to help marshals in arresting Klansmen . That October , on Akerman 's recommendation , Grant suspended habeas corpus in part of South Carolina and sent federal troops to enforce the law there . After prosecutions by Akerman and his replacement , George Henry Williams , the Klan 's power collapsed ; by 1872 , elections in the South saw African Americans voting in record numbers . That same year , Grant signed the Amnesty Act , which restored political rights to former Confederates . Lacking sufficient funding , the Justice Department stopped prosecutions of the Klan in June 1873 , and Grant offered the Klan clemency in exchange for peace . The Justice Department 's civil rights prosecutions continued throughout Grant 's second term but with fewer yearly cases and minimal convictions . 
 After the Klan 's decline , other conservative whites formed armed groups , such as the Red Shirts and the White League who openly used violence and intimidation to take control of state governments . The Panic of 1873 and the ensuing depression contributed to public fatigue , and the North grew less concerned with Reconstruction . Supreme Court rulings in the Slaughter @-@ House Cases ( 1873 ) and United States v. Cruikshank ( 1875 ) restricted federal enforcement of civil rights . Grant began to favor limiting the use of troops , to avoid the impression that he was acting as a military dictator ; he was also concerned that increased military pressure in the South might cause conservative whites in the North to bolt the Republican Party . In 1874 , Grant by proclamation ended the Brooks – Baxter War bringing Reconstruction in Arkansas to a peaceful conclusion , but that same year , he sent troops and warships under Major General William H. Emory to New Orleans in the wake of the Colfax Massacre and disputes over the election of Governor William Pitt Kellogg . Emory peacefully restored Kellogg to office and the following year the parties reached a compromise allowing Democrats to retain control of the Louisiana House . Under public pressure Grant recalled General Sheridan and most of the federal troops from Louisiana . 
 By 1875 , Democratic " Redeemer " politicians took control of all but three Southern states . As violence against black Southerners escalated once more , Edwards Pierrepont ( Grant 's fourth attorney general ) told Governor Adelbert Ames of Mississippi that the people were " tired of the autumnal outbreaks in the South " , and declined to intervene directly , instead , sending an emissary to negotiate a peaceful election . Grant signed an ambitious Civil Rights Act of 1875 , which expanded federal law enforcement by prohibiting discrimination on account of race in public lodging , public transportation , and jury service . However , it did not stop the rise of white supremacist forces in the South . In October 1876 , Grant sent troops to South Carolina to aid Republican Governor Daniel Chamberlain . Even so , the remaining three Republican governments in the South fell to Redeemers after the 1876 presidential election , and the ensuing Compromise of 1877 marked the end of Reconstruction . 
 = = = Indian peace policy = = = 
 Grant 's attempts to live peacefully with Native Americans marked a radical reversal of what had since the 1830s been the government 's policy of Indian removal . He appointed Ely S. Parker , a Seneca Indian and member of his wartime staff , as Commissioner of Indian Affairs . " My efforts in the future will be directed , " Grant said in his second inaugural address , " by a humane course , to bring the aborigines of the country under the benign influences of education and civilization ... Wars of extermination ... are demoralizing and wicked . " Grant 's " Peace Policy " aimed to replace entrepreneurs serving as Indian agents with missionaries . In 1869 , Grant signed a law establishing a Board of Indian Commissioners to oversee spending and reduce corruption in the Bureau of Indian Affairs . Two years later , he signed a bill ending the Indian treaty system ; the law now treated individual Native Americans as wards of the federal government , and no longer dealt with the tribes as sovereign entities . Grant wished for Indian tribes to be protected on reservations and educated in European @-@ style farming and culture , abandoning their hunter @-@ gatherer way of life . Although , as biographer Jean Edward Smith wrote , Grant 's peace policy was " remarkably progressive and humanitarian " for its time , it ultimately disregarded native cultures , something modern Americans see " as a grave error . " 
 The peace policy showed some success in reducing battles between Indians and whites on the western frontier , but the increased slaughter of the buffalo , encouraged by Grant 's subordinates , led to conflict with the Plains Indians . The Sioux and other Plains tribes accepted the reservation system , but encroachments by whites in search of gold in the Black Hills led to renewed war by the end of Grant 's second term , ending the understanding that had developed between Grant and Sioux Chief Red Cloud . Under Major Generals Oliver Otis Howard and George Crook , Grant 's policy had greater success in the Southwest . Howard , the former head of the Freedmen 's Bureau , negotiated peace with the Apache in 1872 , convincing their leader , Cochise , to move the tribe to a new reservation , and ending a war started the year before . In Oregon , relations were less peaceful , as war with the Modocs erupted in April 1873 . The Modocs refused to move to a reservation and killed the local army commander , Major General Edward Canby . Although Grant was upset over Canby 's death , he ordered restraint , disregarding Sherman 's advice to seek revenge or exterminate the tribe . The army captured , tried , and executed the four Modoc warriors responsible for Canby 's murder in October 1873 . Grant ordered the rest of the Modoc tribe relocated to the Indian Territory . 
 During the Great Sioux War , fueled by the discovery of gold in the Black Hills , Grant came into conflict with Colonel George Armstrong Custer after Custer testified in 1876 about corruption in the War Department . Grant ordered Custer arrested for breach of military protocol and barred him from leading an upcoming campaign against the Sioux . Grant later relented and let Custer fight under Brigadier General Alfred Terry . Sioux warriors led by Crazy Horse killed Custer at the Battle of the Little Big Horn , the army 's most famous defeat in the Indian wars . Two months later , Grant castigated Custer in the press , saying " I regard Custer 's massacre as a sacrifice of troops , brought on by Custer himself , that was wholly unnecessary – wholly unnecessary . " Custer 's death shocked the nation , leading Congress to appropriate funds for more troops , two more Western forts and barred Indians from purchasing weapons . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 Even before Grant became president , expansionists in American politics desired control over the Caribbean islands . Andrew Johnson had recommended annexation but the early anti @-@ imperialist Republicans in Congress rejected the plan . Grant renewed negotiations to annex the Dominican Republic , led by Orville E. Babcock , a wartime confidant . Grant was initially skeptical , but at the urging of Admiral Porter , who wanted a naval base at Samaná Bay , and Joseph W. <unk> , a New England businessman employed by the Dominican government , Grant became convinced of the plan 's merit . Grant sent Babcock to the Dominican Republic and consult with Buenaventura Báez , the Dominican president who supported annexation . Although he had no official government standing , Babcock secretly negotiated an annexation treaty with Baez and returned to Washington in December 1869 . 
 Grant believed in peaceful expansion of the nation 's borders , and thought acquisition of the majority @-@ black nation would allow new economic opportunities for African Americans in the United States while increasing American naval power in the Caribbean . Grant believed the island would offer a refuge for black Americans suffering from violent attacks in the South by white Americans during Reconstruction . Secretary of State Hamilton Fish dismissed annexation , seeing the island as politically unstable and troublesome . Grant personally lobbied Senators to pass the treaty , going so far as to visit Sumner at his home . Fish added to the effort out of loyalty to the administration , but to no avail ; the Senate refused to pass the treaty . Sumner 's role in leading opposition toward annexation led to political enmity between him and Grant . A congressional investigation in 1870 by Senator Carl Schurz revealed land speculators financially motivated passage of the treaty . After the Dominican initiative failed , Grant convinced Fish to stay in the cabinet and gave him greater authority to run the State Department . Unwilling to admit defeat , Grant successfully lobbied Congress to send a commission to the West Indies to investigate , including Frederick Douglass . Although Douglass and the commission approved of Grant 's claims for annexation in its findings released on April 5 , 1871 , the Senate remained opposed while Grant was forced to abandon further annexation attempts . 
 Grant and Fish were more successful in their resolution of the Alabama claims . This dispute with the United Kingdom stemmed from the damage done to American shipping during the Civil War by the five ships built for the Confederacy in British shipyards including , most famously , the CSS Alabama . The Americans claimed that Britain had violated neutrality by building ships for the Confederate Navy . When the war ended , the United States demanded restitution , which the British refused to pay . Negotiations continued fitfully , a sticking point being the claims of " indirect damages " on top of the harm directly caused by the five ships . Sumner opposed the Johnson administration 's proposed settlement , which had been rejected by the Senate , believing that Britain should directly pay $ 2 billion in gold or , alternatively , cede Canada to the United States . Fish convinced Grant that peaceful relations with Britain were more important than acquisition of more territory , and the two nations agreed to negotiate along those lines . A commission in Washington produced a treaty whereby an international tribunal would settle the damage amounts ; the British admitted regret , but not fault . The Senate approved the Treaty of Washington , which also settled disputes over fishing rights and maritime boundaries , by a 50 – 12 vote in 1871 . 
 In 1873 , a Spanish cruiser took captive a merchant ship , Virginius , flying the U.S. flag , carrying war materials and men to aid the Cuban insurrection . The passengers and crew , including eight American citizens , were illegally traveling to Cuba to help overthrow the government . Spanish authorities executed the prisoners , and many Americans called for war with Spain . Fish , with Grant 's support , worked to reach a peaceful resolution . Spain 's President , Emilio Castelar y Ripoll , expressed regret for the tragedy and agreed to decide reparations through arbitration ; Spain surrendered the Virginius and paid a cash indemnity of $ 80 @,@ 000 to the families of the executed Americans . In June 1874 , Grant 's Secretary of the Navy , George M. Robeson , commissioned the reconstruction of five redesigned double @-@ turreted monitor warships to compete with the superior Spanish Navy . The administration 's diplomacy was also at work in the Pacific as , in December 1874 , Grant held a state dinner at the White House for the King of Hawaii , David Kalakaua , who was seeking duty @-@ free sugar importation to the United States . Grant and Fish were able to produce a successful free trade treaty in 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii , incorporating the Pacific islands ' sugar industry into the United States ' economic sphere . 
 = = = Gold standard and the Gold Ring = = = 
 Soon after taking office , Grant took steps to return the nation 's currency to a more secure footing . During the Civil War , Congress had authorized the Treasury to issue banknotes that , unlike the rest of the currency , were not backed by gold or silver . The " greenback " notes , as they were known , were necessary to pay the unprecedented war debts , but they also caused inflation and forced gold @-@ backed money out of circulation ; Grant determined to return the national economy to pre @-@ war monetary standards . Many in Congress agreed , and they passed the Public Credit Act of 1869 , which guaranteed that bondholders would be repaid in gold , not greenbacks . To strengthen the dollar , Treasury Secretary George S. Boutwell , backed by Grant , sold gold from the Treasury each month and bought back high @-@ interest Treasury bonds issued during the war ; this had the effect of reducing the deficit , but deflating the currency . 
 These actions had a large impact on the gold market and the national economy . Jay Gould , a Wall Street trader and railroad magnate , and financier Jim Fisk , seeking to drive up the gold price , enlisted the help of another speculator Abel Corbin , Grant 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , who used his connection with the president to get inside information ( the collaborators were later known as the " Gold Ring . " ) Corbin convinced Grant to appoint a Gould associate , Daniel Butterfield , as assistant Treasurer , where he could gather information for the Ring . Meanwhile , Gould and Fisk quietly stockpiled gold . Gould convinced Corbin that a high gold price would be good for the nation 's prosperity , and Corbin passed this theory on to Grant , who allowed the Treasury to act accordingly . After consulting in early September with Alexander Stewart ( his erstwhile nominee for Treasury Secretary ) , Grant stopped the sale of gold , believing a higher gold price would help Western farmers . By mid @-@ September , Grant warned Boutwell to be on his guard as the gold price continued to rise , while the conspirators bought ever more and the rising price affected the wider economy . Grant , seeing that the increase was unnatural , told Boutwell to sell gold , which reduced its price . Boutwell did so the next day , on September 24 , 1869 , later known as Black Friday . The sale of gold from the Treasury defeated Gould 's scheme as the gold price plummeted , relieving the growing economic tension . Gould and Fisk managed to escape without much harm to themselves . Many brokerage firms collapsed while trade volume and agriculture prices plummeted , causing a mild recession , but by January 1870 , the economy resumed its post @-@ war recovery . 
 = = = Election of 1872 = = = 
 Despite his administration 's many scandals , Grant continued to be personally popular . A growing number of reformers , however , were disappointed by Grant 's support of Reconstruction , the Gold Ring , and corruption in the New York Customs House . To placate reformers , Grant created a Civil Service Commission authorized by Congress in 1871 . The Commission , chaired by reformer George William Curtis , proposed certain reform rules and regulations , which Grant implemented by executive order in April 1872 , Congress appropriating funds in May . Congress stopped funding the Commission in December 1875 having refused to pass legislation to implement its recommendations . There was further division within the party between the faction most concerned with the plight of the freedmen and that concerned with the growth of industry . During the war , both factions ' interests had aligned , and in 1868 both had supported Grant . As the wartime coalition began to fray , Grant 's alignment with the party 's pro @-@ Reconstruction elements alienated party leaders who favored an end to federal intervention in Southern racial issues . 
 Many of that faction split from the party in 1872 , calling themselves the Liberal Republican Party . Led by Charles Francis Adams of Massachusetts and Senator Carl Schurz of Missouri , they publicly denounced the federal patronage system that Sumner , a Liberal Republican sympathizer , called " Grantism " and demanded amnesty for Confederate soldiers . The Liberal Republicans distrusted black suffrage and demanded literacy tests for voting while opposing federal enforcement of equal voting rights in the South . The Liberal Republicans nominated Horace Greeley , another Republican who had come to dislike Grant and his policies , and Governor Benjamin Gratz Brown of Missouri for Vice President . The Democrats , seeking to benefit from anti @-@ Grant sentiment , nominated Greeley as well . The rest of the Republican Party nominated Grant for reelection , with Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts replacing Colfax as vice @-@ presidential nominee . Wilson , viewed as a practical reformer and civil rights advocate , was meant to strengthen the Republican ticket . The Crédit Mobilier scandal revealed in September 1872 , in which a railroad company bribed many members of Congress in 1868 , did not involve Grant , but did ensnare Vice President Colfax and Senator Wilson , adding to the general sense of dishonesty in Washington . To the Liberals ' chagrin , Greeley made Grant 's Southern policy , rather than reform , the main campaign issue . The fusion effort failed and Grant was easily reelected . The Liberal Republicans were unable to deliver many votes , and Greeley was only successful in areas the Democrats would have carried without him . A strong economy , debt reduction , lowered tariffs , repeal of the income tax , and civil service reforms helped Grant defeat the Liberal Republicans . Grant won 56 percent of the popular vote and an Electoral College landslide of 286 to 66 . A majority of African Americans in the South voted for Grant , while Democratic opposition remained mostly peaceful . 
 = = = Panic of 1873 , the Long Depression , and currency debates = = = 
 As his first term was ending , Grant continued to work for a strong dollar , signing into law the Coinage Act of 1873 , which effectively ended the legal basis for bimetallism ( the use of both silver and gold as money ) , and established the gold standard in practice . The Coinage Act discontinued the standard silver dollar and established the gold dollar as the sole monetary standard . Critics who wanted more money in circulation to facilitate easier credit later denounced the move as the " Crime of 1873 " , claiming the law caused deflation and helped bankers while hurting farmers . 
 Grant 's second term saw renewed economic turmoil . In September 1873 , Jay Cooke & Company , a New York brokerage house , collapsed after it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Cooke 's Northern Pacific Railway . The collapse sent ripples through Wall Street , and other banks and brokerages that owned railroad stocks and bonds were also ruined . On September 20 , the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for ten days . Grant , who knew little about finance , traveled to New York to consult leading businessmen and bankers for advice on how to resolve the crisis , which became known as the Panic of 1873 . Grant believed that , as with the collapse of the Gold Ring in 1869 , the panic was merely an economic fluctuation that affected bankers and brokers . He responded cautiously , instructing the treasury to buy $ 10 million in government bonds , thus injecting cash into the system . These purchases curbed the panic on Wall Street , but a five @-@ year industrial depression , later called the Long Depression , nonetheless swept the nation . Many of the nation 's railroads — 89 out of 364 — went bankrupt . 
 Congress hoped inflation would stimulate the economy and passed what became known as the Inflation Bill in 1874 . Many farmers and workingmen favored the bill , which would have added $ 64 million in greenbacks to circulation , but some Eastern bankers opposed it because it would have weakened the dollar . Belknap , Williams , and Delano told Grant a veto would hurt Republicans in the November elections . Grant believed the bill would destroy the credit of the nation , and he vetoed it despite their objections . Grant 's veto , supported by Fish , placed him in the conservative faction of the Republican party , and was the beginning of the party 's commitment to a strong gold @-@ backed dollar . Grant later pressured Congress for a bill to further strengthen the dollar by gradually reducing the number of greenbacks in circulation . After losing the House to the Democrats in the 1874 elections , the lame @-@ duck Republican Congress did so before the Democrats took office . On January 14 , 1875 , Grant signed the Specie Payment Resumption Act into law . The Resumption Act required gradual reduction of the amount of greenbacks allowed to circulate and declared that specie payment ( i.e. , in gold or silver ) would resume in 1879 . 
 = = = Gilded Age corruption and reform = = = 
 Grant served as president during the Gilded Age , a time when the economy was open to speculation and western expansion that fueled corruption in government offices . Against the harsh public revelation of the Credit Mobilier of America scandal , Grant responded to charges of misconduct in nearly all federal departments , engaging his administration in constant conflict between corrupt associates and reformers . Although personally honest with his own money matters , Grant was trusting and had difficulty in spotting corruption in others . <unk> protective of corrupt associates , Grant often saw their prosecutions as unjust and shielded them from attack even at the cost of his own reputation , unless evidence of personal misconduct was overwhelming . No person linked any of the scandals together , except possibly Grant 's personal secretary , Orville E. Babcock , who indirectly controlled many cabinet departments and delayed federal investigations . 
 There was additional scandal in New York . In 1871 , Thomas Murphy , the Collector of the Port of New York and a member of New York Senator Roscoe Conkling 's political machine , was forced to resign . Murphy , a Grant appointee to the patronage @-@ rich position , had become embroiled in a dispute with another faction of the Republican party over the jobs at his disposal and was accused of corruption in office ( a charge confirmed in an 1872 congressional investigation ) . In December , Grant appointed Chester A. Arthur , another Conkling man , to replace Murphy , and administration of the Customs House steadily improved . 
 In Grant 's second term , a congressional investigation exposed corruption in the Treasury Department , in a case that would become known as the Sanborn incident : Treasury Secretary William Richardson had hired John Sanborn ( a friend of Congressman Benjamin Butler ) as an independent tax collector on a 50 percent commission basis , also known as a moiety . Treasury officials were then privately instructed not to press for payment , so that accounts would eventually become delinquent in taxes and Sanborn would get paid more when he " discovered " the accounts ' delinquency . The congressional committee report condemned Richardson for permitting the aggressive tax collection system Sanborn used , but did not attempt impeachment . To quell the public outcry and prevent future fraud , Congress passed the Anti @-@ Moiety Act . Signed into law by Grant in 1874 , it abolished the moiety system . Grant removed Richardson from the Treasury appointing him judge of the Court of Claims . 
 In 1874 , Grant replaced Richardson as Treasury Secretary with Benjamin H. Bristow , a man known for his honesty , who began a series of reforms in the department , including tightening up the detective force and firing the second @-@ comptroller for inefficiency . Discovering that millions of gallons of whiskey escaped taxation , and having Grant 's endorsement to act ( " Let no guilty man escape " ) , Bristow in May 1875 struck down the Whiskey Ring , seizing 32 installations , impounding documents , and arresting some 350 men while obtaining 176 indictments . These led to 110 convictions and $ 3 @,@ 150 @,@ 000 in tax dollars was restored to the Treasury . When Bristow 's investigation implicated Babcock as part of the Whiskey Ring , Grant became defensive , believing Babcock was the innocent victim of a witch hunt . While denying immunity to minor Whiskey Ring conspirators , Grant worked to protect Babcock . In 1876 , a jury acquitted Babcock at a trial influenced by Grant 's deposition in Babcock 's favor . After the trial , under public pressure , Grant dismissed Babcock from the White House . Grant pardoned some Ring members after a few months in prison , and pardoned Ring founder John McDonald after 17 months in jail . 
 As the scandals increased , Congress , with the House now under Democratic control , began several investigations into corruption in the administration , the most notable of which dealt with profiteering at western trading <unk> involving Secretary of War William W. Belknap which led to his resignation . Congress also investigated and reprimanded Navy Secretary George M. Robeson in 1876 for receiving bribes . 
 Grant 's Civil Service Commission reforms had limited success , as his cabinet implemented a merit system that increased the number of qualified candidates and relied less on Congressional patronage . Interior Secretary Columbus Delano , however , exempted his department from competitive examinations , and Congress refused to enact permanent Civil Service reform . Zachariah Chandler , who succeeded Delano , made sweeping reforms in the entire Interior Department ; Grant ordered Chandler to fire all corrupt clerks in the Bureau of Indian Affairs . Grant appointed reformers Edwards Pierrepont and Marshall Jewell as Attorney General and Postmaster General , respectively , who supported Bristow 's investigations . In 1875 , Pierrepont cleaned up corruption among the United States Attorneys and Marshals in the South . Grant suggested other reforms as well , including a proposal that states should offer free public schooling to all children ; he also endorsed the Blaine Amendment , which would have forbidden government aid to schools with religious affiliations . 
 = = = Election of 1876 = = = 
 Even as Grant drew cheers at the opening of the Centennial Exposition in May 1876 , the collected scandals of his presidency , the country 's weak economy , and the Democratic gains in the House led many in the Republican party to repudiate him in June . Bristow was among the leading candidates to replace him , suggesting that a large faction desired an end to " Grantism " and feared that Grant would run for a third term . Ultimately , Grant declined to run , but Bristow also failed to capture the nomination , as the convention settled on Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio , a reformer . The Democrats nominated Governor Samuel J. Tilden of New York . Voting irregularities in three Southern states caused the election that year to remain undecided for several months . Grant told Congress to settle the matter through legislation and assured both sides that he would not use the army to force a result , except to curb violence . On January 29 , 1877 , Grant signed legislation passed by Congress to form an Electoral Commission to decide the matter . The result was the Compromise of 1877 : the Electoral Commission ruled that the disputed votes belonged to Hayes , but the last troops were withdrawn from Southern capitals . The Republicans had won , but Reconstruction was over . According to biographer Jean Edward Smith , " Grant 's calm visage in the White House reassured the nation . " 
 = = = Cabinet = = = 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 = = = World tour = = = 
 After leaving the White House , Grant and his family stayed with friends for two months , before setting out on a world tour . The trip , which would last two years , began in Liverpool in May 1877 , where enormous crowds greeted the ex @-@ president and his entourage . The Grants dined with Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle , and Grant gave several speeches in London . After a tour on the continent , the Grants spent a few months with their daughter Nellie , who had married an Englishman and moved to that country several years before . Grant and his wife journeyed to France and Italy , spending Christmas 1877 aboard USS Vandalia , a warship docked in Palermo . A winter sojourn in the Holy Land followed , and they visited Greece before returning to Italy and a meeting with Pope Leo XIII . They toured Spain before moving on to Germany , where Grant discussed military matters with Chancellor Otto von Bismarck , telling him that in the final stages of the Civil War , the Union Army fought to preserve the nation and to " destroy slavery " . 
 The Grants left from England by ship , sailing through the Suez Canal to India . They visited cities throughout the Raj , welcomed by colonial officials . After India , they toured Burma , Siam ( where Grant met with King Chulalongkorn ) , Singapore , and Cochinchina ( Vietnam ) . Traveling on to Hong Kong , Grant began to change his mind on the nature of colonization , believing that British rule was not " purely selfish " but also good for the colonial subjects . Leaving Hong Kong , the Grants visited the cities of Canton , Shanghai , and Peking , China . He declined to ask for an interview with the Guangxu Emperor , a child of seven , but did speak with the head of government , Prince Gong , and Li Hongzhang , a leading general . They discussed China 's dispute with Japan over the Ryukyu Islands , and Grant agreed to help bring the two sides to agreement . After crossing over to Japan and meeting the Emperor Meiji , Grant convinced China to accept the Japanese annexation of the islands , and the two nations avoided war . 
 By then , the Grants had been gone two years , and were homesick . They crossed the Pacific and landed in San Francisco in September 1879 , greeted by cheering crowds . After a visit to Yosemite Valley , they returned at last to Philadelphia on December 16 , 1879 . The voyage around the world had captured popular imagination , and Republicans — especially those of the Stalwart faction excluded from the Hayes administration — saw Grant in a new light . The Republican nomination for 1880 was wide open after Hayes <unk> a second term and many Republicans thought that Grant was the man for the job . 
 = = = Third term attempt = = = 
 Stalwarts , led by Grant 's old political ally , Roscoe Conkling , saw the ex @-@ president 's renewed popularity as a way for their faction to regain power . Opponents denounced the idea as a violation of the two @-@ term rule that had been the norm since George Washington . Grant said nothing publicly , but he wanted the job and encouraged his men . Elihu B. Washburne urged him to run ; Grant demurred , saying he would be happy for the Republicans to win with another candidate , though he preferred James G. Blaine to John Sherman . Even so , Conkling and John A. Logan began to organize delegates in Grant 's favor . When the convention convened in Chicago in June , there were more delegates pledged to Grant than to any other candidate , but he was still short of a majority vote to capture the nomination . 
 At the convention , Conkling nominated Grant with an elegant speech , the most famous line being : " When asked which state he hails from , our sole reply shall be , he hails from Appomattox and its famous apple tree . " With 370 votes needed for nomination , the first ballot had Grant at 304 , Blaine at 284 , Sherman at 93 , and the rest scattered to minor candidates . Subsequent ballots followed , with roughly the same result ; neither Grant nor Blaine could win . After thirty @-@ six ballots , Blaine 's delegates deserted him and combined with those of other candidates to nominate a compromise candidate : Representative James A. Garfield of Ohio . The 306 votes Grant received on the last ballot was not enough to secure the nomination . A procedural motion made the vote unanimous for Garfield , who accepted the nomination . 
 Grant gave speeches for Garfield , but declined to criticize the Democratic nominee , Winfield Scott Hancock , a general who had served under him in the Army of the Potomac . Garfield won the popular vote by a narrow margin , but solidly won the Electoral College — 214 to 155 . After the election , Grant gave Garfield his public support , and pushed him to include Stalwarts in his administration . 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 Grant 's world tour had been costly . When he returned to America , Grant had depleted most of his savings and needed to earn money and find a new home . Wealthy friends bought him a home on Manhattan 's Upper East Side , and to make an income , Grant , Jay Gould , and former Mexican Finance Secretary Matías Romero chartered the Mexican Southern Railroad , with plans to build a railroad from Oaxaca to Mexico City . Grant urged Chester A. Arthur , who had succeeded Garfield as president in 1881 , to negotiate a free trade treaty with Mexico . Arthur and the Mexican government agreed , but the United States Senate rejected the treaty in 1883 . The railroad was similarly unsuccessful , falling into bankruptcy the following year . 
 At the same time , Grant 's son Ulysses Jr. had opened a Wall Street brokerage house with Ferdinand Ward . Regarded as a rising star , Ward , and the firm , Grant & Ward , were initially successful . In 1883 , Grant joined the firm and invested $ 100 @,@ 000 of his own money . Investors bought securities through the firm , and Ward used the securities as collateral to borrow money to buy more securities . Grant & Ward pledged that collateral to borrow more money to trade in securities on the firm 's own account . The practice — called <unk> — was legal and accepted ; what was illegal was <unk> , the practice of pledging the same securities as collateral for multiple loans . Ward , having colluded with the bank involved , did this for many of the firm 's assets . When the trades went bad , multiple loans came due , all backed up by the same collateral . Historians agree that Grant was likely unaware of Ward 's tactics , but it is unclear how much Buck Grant knew . In May 1884 , enough investments went bad to convince Ward that the firm would soon be bankrupt . Ward told Grant of the impending failure , but suggested that this was a temporary shortfall . Grant approached businessman William Henry Vanderbilt , who gave him a personal loan of $ 150 @,@ 000 . Grant invested the money in the firm , but it was not enough to save the firm from failure . Essentially penniless , but compelled by a sense of personal honor , he repaid what he could with his Civil War mementos and the sale or transfer of all other assets . Although the proceeds did not cover the loan , Vanderbilt insisted the debt had been paid in full . Grant was left destitute . 
 = = = Memoirs and death = = = 
