 To restore his family 's income , Grant wrote several articles on his Civil War campaigns for The Century Magazine at $ 500 each . The articles were well received by critics , and the editor , Robert Underwood Johnson , suggested that Grant write a book of memoirs , as Sherman and others had done . Grant 's articles would serve as the basis for several chapters . 
 In the summer of 1884 , Grant complained of a soreness in his throat , but put off seeing a doctor until late October where he finally learned it was throat cancer . Before being diagnosed , Grant was invited to a Methodist service for Civil War veterans in Ocean Grove , New Jersey , on August 4 , 1884 , receiving a standing ovation from more than ten thousand veterans and others ; it would be his last public appearance . In March of the following year , the New York Times finally announced that Grant was dying of cancer and a nationwide public concern for the former president began . Later , Grant , who had forfeited his military pension when he assumed the presidency , was honored by his friends and the Congress when he was restored to the rank of General of the Army with full retirement pay . 
 Despite his debilitating illness , Grant worked diligently on his memoirs at his home in New York City , and then from a cottage on the slopes of Mount McGregor , finishing only days before he died . Grant asked his former staff officer , Adam Badeau , to help edit his work . Grant 's son Fred assisted with references and proofreading . Century magazine offered Grant a book contract with a 10 percent royalty , but Grant accepted a better offer from his friend , Mark Twain , who proposed a 75 percent royalty . His memoir ends with the Civil War , and does not cover the post @-@ war years , including his presidency . 
 The book , Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant , was a critical and commercial success . In the end , Julia Grant received about $ 450 @,@ 000 in royalties . The memoir has been highly regarded by the public , military historians , and literary critics . Grant portrayed himself in the persona of the honorable Western hero , whose strength lies in his honesty and straightforwardness . He candidly depicted his battles against both the Confederates and internal army foes . Twain called the Memoirs a " literary masterpiece . " Given over a century of favorable literary analysis , reviewer Mark Perry states that the Memoirs are " the most significant work " of American non @-@ fiction . 
 In the days preceding his death , Grant 's wife , Julia , all of his children , and three grandchildren were present . After a year @-@ long struggle with the cancer , Grant died at 8 o 'clock in the morning in the Mount McGregor cottage on July 23 , 1885 , at the age of 63 . Sheridan , then Commanding General of the Army , ordered a day @-@ long tribute to Grant on all military posts , and President Grover Cleveland ordered a thirty @-@ day nationwide period of mourning . After private services , the honor guard placed Grant 's body on a special funeral train , which traveled to West Point and New York City . A quarter of a million people viewed it in the two days before the funeral . Tens of thousands of men , many of them veterans from the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) or other veterans ' organizations , marched with Grant 's casket drawn by two dozen horses to Riverside Park in the Morningside Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan , New York City . His pallbearers included Union generals Sherman and Sheridan , Confederate generals Simon Bolivar Buckner and Joseph E. Johnston , Admiral David Dixon Porter , and Senator John A. Logan , the head of the GAR . 
 Grant 's body was laid to rest in Riverside Park , first in a temporary tomb , and then — twelve years later , on April 17 , 1897 — in the General Grant National Memorial , also known as " Grant 's Tomb " . The tomb is the largest mausoleum in North America . Attendance at the New York funeral topped 1 @.@ 5 million . Ceremonies were held in other major cities around the country , and those who eulogized Grant in the press likened him to George Washington and Abraham Lincoln . 
 = = Historical reputation = = 
 No presidential reputations have changed as dramatically as Grant 's . Hailed across the North as the winning general in a great war , his nomination as president seemed inevitable . Grant 's popularity declined with congressional investigations into corruption in his administration and Custer 's defeat at the Battle of the Little Big Horn . In 1877 , there was bipartisan approval of Grant 's peaceful handling of the electoral crisis . Grant 's reputation soared during his well @-@ publicized world tour . 
 At his death , Grant was seen as " a symbol of the American national identity and memory " , when millions turned out for his funeral procession in 1885 and attended the 1897 dedication of his tomb . Grant 's popularity increased in the years immediately after his death . At the same time , commentators and scholars portrayed his administration as the most corrupt in American history . As the popularity of the pro @-@ Confederate Lost Cause movement increased early in the 20th century , a more negative view became increasingly common . As they had early in the Civil War , Grant 's new critics charged that he was a reckless drunk , and in light of his presidency , that he was also corrupt . In the 1930s , biographer William B. <unk> noted that Grant 's reputation deteriorated because his enemies were better writers than his friends . In 1931 , Frederic Paxson and Christian Bach in the Dictionary of American Biography praised Grant 's military vision and his execution of that vision in defeating the Confederacy , but of his political career , the authors were less complimentary . Speaking specifically of the scandals , they wrote that " personal scandal has not touched Grant in any plausible form , but it struck so close to him and so frequently as to necessitate the vindication of his honor by admitting his bad taste in the choice of associates . " 
 Views of Grant reached new lows as he was seen as an unsuccessful president and an unskilled , if lucky , general . Bruce Catton and T. Harry Williams began the reassessment of Grant 's military career in the 1960s , shifting the analysis of Grant as victor by brute force to that of successful and skillful strategist and commander . Even for scholars with a particular concern for the plight of former slaves and Indians , Grant left a problematic legacy and , with changing attitudes toward warfare after the end of the Vietnam War , Grant 's military reputation suffered again . William S. McFeely won the Pulitzer Prize for his critical 1981 biography that emphasized the failure of Grant 's presidency to carry out lasting progress and concluded that " he did not rise above limited talents or inspire others to do so in ways that make his administration a credit to American politics . " John Y. Simon in 1982 responded to McFeely : " Grant 's failure as President ... lies in the failure of the Indian peace policy and the collapse of Reconstruction ... But if Grant tried and failed , who could have succeeded ? " Simon praised Grant 's first term in office , arguing that it should be " remembered for his staunch enforcement of the rights of freedmen combined with conciliation of former Confederates , for reform in Indian policy and civil service , for successful negotiation of the Alabama Claims , and for delivery of peace and prosperity . " According to Simon , the Liberal Republican revolt , the Panic of 1873 , and the North 's conservative retreat from Reconstruction weakened Grant 's second term in office , although his foreign policy remained steady . 
 Historians ' views have grown more favorable since the 1990s , appreciating Grant 's protection of African Americans and his peace policy towards Indians , even where those policies failed . Grant 's reputation rose further with Jean Edward Smith 's 2001 biography . Smith argued that the same qualities that made Grant a success as a general carried over to his political life to make him , if not a successful president , then certainly an admirable one . Smith wrote that " the common thread is strength of character — an indomitable will that never flagged in the face of adversity ... Sometimes he blundered badly ; often he oversimplified ; yet he saw his goals clearly and moved toward them relentlessly . " Brooks Simpson continued the trend in the first of two volumes on Grant in 2000 , although the work was far from a hagiography . H. W. Brands , in his more uniformly positive 2012 book , wrote favorably of Grant 's military and political careers alike , saying : 
 As commanding general in the Civil War , he had defeated secession and destroyed slavery , secession 's cause . As President during Reconstruction he had guided the South back into the Union . By the end of his public life the Union was more secure than at any previous time in the history of the nation . And no one had done more to produce the result than he . 
 As Reconstruction scholar Eric Foner wrote , Brands gave " a sympathetic account of Grant 's forceful and temporarily successful effort as president to crush the Ku Klux Klan , which had inaugurated a reign of terror against the former slaves . " Foner criticized Grant for not sending military aid to Mississippi during the 1875 election to protect African Americans from threats of violence . According to Foner , " Grant 's unwillingness to act reflected the broader Northern retreat from Reconstruction and its ideal of racial equality . " 
 According to historian Brooks Simpson , Grant was on " the right side of history " . Simpson said , “ [ w ] e now view Reconstruction ... as something that should have succeeded in securing equality for African @-@ Americans , and we see Grant as supportive of that effort and doing as much as any person could do to try to secure that within realm of political reality . " John F. <unk> said , " You have to go almost to Lyndon Johnson to find a president who tried to do as much to ensure black people found freedom . " 
 Besides civil rights , issues of environmental protection have also attracted historiographical attention . Historian Joan Waugh , in her generally favorable book , says Grant appreciated the beauty of the West , and in 1872 signed the law establishing the country 's first national park at Yellowstone . However , she argues : 
 ... he approved of projects that took great swaths of land and opened them to timber , cattle , land speculators , and millions of settlers ... the idea of preserving the region 's environment and concerns about industrial pollution were of much less importance to Grant ... 
 Throughout the 20th century , historians ranked his presidency near the bottom . In the 21st century , his military reputation is strong , while most scholars rank his presidency well below average . His accomplishments as President have been overlooked due to corruption charges of his Cabinet members and appointees during his administration . 
 = = Memorials and presidential library = = 
 Several memorials honor Grant . In addition to his mausoleum , the General Grant National Memorial in New York , there is the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial at the foot of Capitol Hill in Washington , D.C. Dedicated in 1922 , it overlooks the Capitol Reflecting Pool and is made of bronze and marble created by sculptor Henry Merwin <unk> and architect Edward Pearce Casey . On April 23 , 2015 , the 193rd anniversary of Grant 's birth , restoration work began ; the restoration is expected to be completed before the bicentennial of Grant 's birth in 2022 . 
 The Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site near St. Louis , and several other sites in Ohio and Illinois memorialize Grant 's life . There are smaller memorials in Chicago 's Lincoln Park and Philadelphia 's Fairmount Park . Named in his honor are Grant Park , as well as several counties in western and midwestern states . On June 3 , 1891 , a bronze statue of Grant , created by Danish sculptor Johannes Gelert and commissioned by publisher H. H. Kohlsaat , was dedicated at Grant Park in Galena , Illinois . From 1890 to 1940 , part of what is now Kings Canyon National Park was called General Grant National Park , named for the General Grant sequoia . Grant has appeared on the front of the United States fifty @-@ dollar bill since 1913 , and appears on several stamps . 
 In May 2012 , the Ulysses S. Grant Foundation , on the institute 's fiftieth anniversary , selected Mississippi State University as the permanent location for Ulysses S. Grant 's presidential library . Historian John Y. Simon edited Grant 's letters into a 32 @-@ volume scholarly edition published by Southern Illinois University Press . 
 = Joseph Staten = 
 Joseph Michael Staten is an American writer . 
 At Bungie , Staten served as director of cinematics for the studio 's games , including the Halo series ; he would write mission scripts and movie dialogue for the titles . He has also been involved in managing the expansion of the Halo franchise to other game studios and producers , including Peter Jackson 's Wingnut Interactive . Though not a published author previously , Tor Books approached Staten to write the fifth Halo novelization , Halo : Contact Harvest . Released in 2007 , the novel reached # 3 on The New York Times bestseller list in the first week of its release and received positive reviews . Staten 's latest project was a brand new game series entitled Destiny , a first @-@ person shooter . Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior creative director on January 9 , 2014 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Joseph Staten is the son of a minister who is a professor of theology and philosophy of religion . He was born in San Francisco , California . Staten entered Northwestern University in 1990 with the aspiration of becoming a professional actor . Realizing he was not material to be a leading man , he switched focus to other subjects and graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in communication and international studies in 1994 . Staten also has studied at the University of Chicago where is he received a Master of Arts degree in international relations in 1997 . After being rejected for employment with the Central Intelligence Agency , Staten dropped the idea of entering the foreign service and helped his family at their winery in Sonoma Valley . He instead pursued a number of jobs before becoming a staff member at game developer Bungie in 1998 after meeting some of the developers in online Myth matches . 
 = = = Bungie = = = 
 Staten 's former role at Bungie was director of cinematics and was responsible for the in @-@ game movies for Bungie 's Halo : Combat Evolved , Halo 2 , and Halo 3 . Work on the games at " crunch time " involved 80 @-@ hour weeks and stretches without sleep maxing out at 72 hours . Staten worked alongside three other staff writers at Bungie , each with their own separate role : Frank O 'Connor developed Halo 3 's combat dialogue , Rob McLees focused on Halo canon and working with licensing partners , Luke Smith interacted with the fans online , and Staten developed the cinematics and missions scripts . Staten said in an interview that he considered it challenging to write for the games , as " first person shooters [ are ] all about writing ' between the bullets ' " — relating plot information to the players in between action sequences . " You need to be efficient and clever to give players the story — the context — they need . But you don 't want to push too hard or they 'll reject it . " During his work on the games he read science fiction works by Iain Banks , Robert A. Heinlein , and Vernor Vinge . In addition to his writing contributions , Staten lends his voice to small aliens known as Grunts in all three video games . 
 Though previous Halo novels had been written by professional writers like Eric Nylund and William C. Dietz , publisher Tor Books chose Staten to write the fifth Halo novelization , entitled Halo : Contact Harvest . Editor Eric Raab noted in the book 's press release that " who better to tell the tale " of humanity 's encounter with the antagonistic alien Covenant than Staten , who had " intimate knowledge " of the series ' story . The novel is an ensemble piece , with the action being narrated from both human and alien viewpoints ; the work of Staten 's favorite science @-@ fiction authors helped teach him the importance of honing a " strong , consistent voice " . Staten found that writing compelling action involved slowing things down , paradoxically the opposite of the fast @-@ paced gameplay of a Halo title . He considered the book the perfect way to elaborate on the Halo story without stripping it down for a video game , . and flesh out the character of Avery Johnson more than the games had allowed . 
 On release , Contact Harvest reached a top spot of # 3 on the New York Times bestseller list , where it remained for four weeks . The novel also appeared on the USA Today bestseller 's list at the same time . Reviewers noted that despite being an unproven writer , Staten had succeeded in crafting an excellent novel . The novel 's success was considered to be evidence that games were breaking into the mainstream , and that the genre was becoming increasingly about the story . 
 After Contact Harvest 's release Staten played an important role in the development of offshoots to the Halo franchise . He traveled to New Zealand several times to work with Peter Jackson and Weta Workshop . Staten assisted with the fiction of Ensemble Studios title Halo Wars , and the now @-@ postponed Halo film . In interviews , Staten has explained that the game 's protagonist , the Master Chief , would serve as a supporting character rather than who the film would focus on . He worked on story development for the Halo 3 expansion , Halo 3 : ODST ; Staten provided the voices for a number of characters as placeholder audio during the representational play testing of the game in December 2008 . Staten was last working for Bungie as the writer and design director for Destiny . On September 24 , 2013 , Bungie announced that Staten had left the company to pursue new creative challenges . 
 = = = Microsoft = = = 
 Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior creative director on January 9 , 2014 . On March 12 , 2015 , 343 Industries official website posted a blog post detailing a list of upcoming Halo novels . One of the novels listed is Halo : Shadow of Intent authored by Joseph Staten and was released on December 7 , 2015 . He is the lead writer for Microsoft 's <unk> , which is set to be released in 2016 . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Staten is married and has two children . On June 18 , 2011 , Staten gave the convocation address to the class of 2011 of the Northwestern University School of Communication . 
 = Lionel Gilbert = 
 Lionel Arthur Gilbert OAM ( 8 December 1924 – 28 January 2015 ) was an Australian historian , author , curator , lecturer , and biographer , specializing in applied , natural , and local history . Born in Burwood , New South Wales , he studied at Sydney Teachers College and , beginning in 1946 , worked as a teacher and later a headmaster in state schools in various locations around New South Wales until 1961 . In 1963 Gilbert graduated from the University of New England with a Bachelor of Arts in History . That same year , he was appointed a lecturer and curator at the Armidale Teachers ' College Museum of Education , in which capacity he served until his retirement in 1984 , overseeing several expansions of the museum and establishment of a historical research centre . 
 During his time with the college , Gilbert published a number of articles , papers , and books , many of them focusing on local history of New South Wales , including the state 's New England area . He attained a Doctor of Philosophy ( Ph.D ) in Botanical History from the University of New England in 1972 . After retirement , Gilbert authored several books on Australian natural history , including biographies of three Australian botanists and a history of Sydney 's Royal Botanic Gardens . In recognition of his work in education and history , he was selected as a fellow by several historical organizations . In 1995 he was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia , a Centenary Medal in 2001 , and in 2007 with an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of New England . 
 = = Early life and career with state schools = = 
 Gilbert was born in Burwood , a suburb of Sydney , on 8 December 1924 . His primary and secondary education took place at Burwood Primary School , Homebush Boys High School , and Fort Street High School , receiving a leaving certificate from the latter . After graduation , Gilbert took temporary employment at <unk> Men 's Store in Sydney . In 1942 , he received a Teacher 's Scholarship to Sydney Teachers College , where he trained for one year to be a school teacher . 
 In 1943 , Gilbert enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force , joining 570 other Teachers College students who served in the armed forces during World War II , 68 of whom were killed during the conflict . Assigned as a radar operator in Arnhem Land , Gilbert served until 1946 . 
 After his discharge from the military , Gilbert was employed as secondary school teacher at <unk> Central School from 1946 until 1954 . In 1955 , he was appointed Deputy Headmaster of Wauchope Primary School , and served in that capacity until 1960 . That year , he accepted an appointment as headmaster of Rocky River Primary School near <unk> , New South Wales , a position he held until 1961 . 
 While at <unk> , Gilbert met Margaret Roberts and the two married in 1949 . Their daughter Anne was born in 1960 . 
 = = Academia and curator career = = 
 In 1955 , Gilbert enrolled as an external student at the University of New England in the first class of the university 's external studies program . In 1961 , he was appointed by the university as a Research and Information Officer in the Department of External Studies . In this capacity , Gilbert taught weekend classes on the methodology of local history for the university 's adult education department throughout the northwest area of New South Wales . In 1963 , he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in History with First Class Honors , submitting his thesis on the history of botanical knowledge of the eastern seaboard of Australia for the years 1788 @-@ 1815 . 
 In July 1963 , Gilbert accepted an appointment as lecturer in applied history and curator with the Armidale Teachers ' College ( later College of Advanced Education ) Museum of Education . Holding the position for 21 years , he guided expansion of the facility to better present the history of education in Australia . Between 1976 and 1980 he supervised the relocation to the museum of three historic school buildings from Armidale High School and Dumaresq Public School . In addition , Gilbert designed courses in applied and local history for internal and external students of the college , which became the Armidale College of Advanced Education in 1971 . 
 In 1974 , Gilbert successfully requested an Innovations Grant from the Schools Commission to establish a Historical Resources Centre at the college . Opened in 1976 with Gilbert as its first director , the centre 's goal was to provide education on the history of New England to primary , secondary , tertiary , and postgraduate students , and community groups . 
 Gilbert recalled in 2008 that between 1975 and 1978 , 5 @,@ 758 primary or secondary pupils toured the museum on field trips . A further 1 @,@ 653 adults visited during that time to conduct historical or genealogical research at the museum or the Historical Resources Centre . In 1981 the Museums Association of Australia recognised the museum with a certificate of merit for its , " authenticity and detail in building , display and education . " 
 In 1972 , Gilbert was named chair of the school 's newly formed Department of History . He attained the position of Acting Deputy Principal for the college before retiring in June 1984 . 
 In 1967 , Gilbert assisted the National Trust of Australia and the Australian National University 's Department of Adult Education with a series of lectures and exhibits on local history of the New England area . Held in Armidale , the series helped establish a local chapter of the National Trust and the subsequent preservation of several historical colonial buildings in the area . 
 While at the college , Gilbert pursued post @-@ graduate studies at New England and received a Doctor of Philosophy ( Ph.D ) in Botanical History in 1972 , with his thesis titled Botanical investigation of New South Wales , 1811 @-@ 1880 . Also in 1972 , he was awarded a Churchill Fellowship to the U.K. for four weeks to study how museums in the U.K. contributed to general education . 
 = = Other work = = 
 In 1962 , Gilbert succeeded Eric Dunlop as Honorary Curator of the Armidale City Council 's Folk Museum , serving in the position until 1982 . When the museum reached capacity in its original facility , he joined the Armidale town clerk in a successful petition to the Department of Education for New South Wales to relocate the museum into the nearby Hillgrove School . Opened in 1977 , the new facility is known as the Museum of Rural Life and Industry . Beginning in 1975 , he served on the New South Wales State Archives Authority . 
 During his career at the college , Gilbert authored or co @-@ authored a number of papers and books , particularly on Australian biographical , genealogical , and local history . In 1974 , Gilbert joined William Patrick Driscoll , Alan Sutherland , and David Rose in publishing History Around Us : An Enquiry Approach to Local History , a book on historical research targeted at younger readers . The book was re @-@ issued in 1984 . In 1978 , Gilbert and co @-@ author Elwyn Sydney Elphick wrote a book titled of Forty @-@ three and Seven : A Short Illustrated History of the First Fifty Years of Teacher Education in Armidale : Armidale Teachers ' College , 1928 @-@ 1971 and Armidale College of Advanced Education 1971 @-@ 1978 to commemorate the school 's 50 @-@ year jubilee celebration . In 1980 , two books by Gilbert were published : A Grave Look at History : Glimpses of a Vanishing Form of Folk Art and New England from Old Photographs . The former studied graveyard monuments and was representative of Gilbert 's lifelong interest in studying and documenting epitaphs . The latter book focused on local history of New South Wales . From 1966 , he contributed a series of articles to the Australian Dictionary of Biography . 
 = = Post retirement work , professional associations , and honors = = 
 Gilbert continued to write in retirement , often focusing on natural history . In 1985 , 1992 , and 2001 , he respectively authored books on botanists William Woolls , Herman Rupp , and Joseph Maiden . In 1986 , his book on the history of Sydney 's Royal Botanic Gardens was published . Two years after its publication , Gilbert was appointed an Honorary Research Associate of the gardens . He was also a patron of the Australian National Museum of Education and a member of Australia 's National Trust . 
 Gilbert was named a Fellow of the Society of Australian Genealogists in 1955 , an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Australian Historical Society in 1997 , and a Fellow of the Federation of Australian Historical Societies in 2007 . On 12 June 1995 he was recognised with the Medal of the Order of Australia ( OAM ) , " In recognition of service to the community as a researcher and curator of local history in the New England region . " On 1 January 2001 he was awarded the Centenary Medal , " For service to the community through education and local history . " The University of New England presented Gilbert with an honorary Doctor of Letters ( Hon. D. Litt . ) in 2008 . Also in 2008 , he contributed a historical essay on the Auchinleck @-@ Ross family of New England to the biographical compendium , New England Lives III . Gilbert served as president of the Armidale and District Historical Society and has been honored with Freedom of the City of Armidale . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 Gilbert and his wife , Margaret , resided in Armidale , New South Wales from 1961 . He died in Armidale on 28 January 2015 and was survived by his wife , daughter Anne , son @-@ in @-@ law Tony Bennett , and grandson Alexei . 
 = = Awards and professional elections = = 
 1955 Fellow , Society of Australian Genealogists 
 1972 Churchill Fellowship 
 1988 Honorary Research Associate , Royal Botanic Gardens , Sydney 
 1995 Medal of the Order of Australia 
 1997 Honorary Fellow , Royal Australian Historical Society 
 2001 Centenary Medal 
 2007 Fellow , Federation of Australian Historical Societies 
 2008 Doctor of Letters , University of New England 
 Freedom of the City of Armidale , New South Wales 
 President of the Armidale and District Historical Society 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Elphick , Elwyn Sydney ; Lionel Arthur Gilbert ( 1978 ) . Forty @-@ three and Seven : A Short Illustrated History of the First Fifty Years of Teacher Education in Armidale : Armidale Teachers ' College , 1928 @-@ 1971 and Armidale College of Advanced Education 1971 @-@ 1978 . Armidale , New South Wales : Armidale College of Advanced <unk> p . 85 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1980 ) . A Grave Look at History : Glimpses of a Vanishing Form of Folk Art . Sydney : John <unk> p . 143 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1980 ) . New England from Old Photographs . Sydney : John <unk> p . 144 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ; William Patrick Driscoll ; Alan Sutherland ; David Rose ( 1984 ) . History Around Us : An Enquiry Approach to Local History ( 2nd ed . ) . North Ryde , New South Wales : Methuen <unk> p . 140 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1985 ) . William Woolls , 1814 @-@ 1893 : " A Most Useful Colonist " . Canberra : <unk> Press. p . 138 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 23 June 1986 ) . The Royal Botanic Gardens , Sydney : A History , 1816 @-@ 1985 . Melbourne ; New York : Oxford University Press. p . 210 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1987 ) . Mr Smith , Mr Jones and a Time of Bliss . Armidale , New South Wales : Armidale College of Advanced Education . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 30 November 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1992 ) . The Orchid Man : The Life , Work and Memoirs of the Rev. <unk> Rupp , 1872 @-@ 1956 . <unk> , New South Wales : Kangaroo Press. p . 248 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 1 March 2001 ) . The Little Giant : The Life & Work of Joseph Henry Maiden , 1859 @-@ 1925 . Sydney : <unk> Press in association with Royal Botanic <unk> p . 429 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 Gilbert , Lionel Arthur ( 2005 ) . The Last Word : Two Centuries of Australian Epitaphs . Armidale , New South Wales : <unk> Press. p . 451 . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . 
 = Grunge = 
 Grunge ( sometimes referred to as the Seattle sound ) is a subgenre of alternative rock that emerged during the mid @-@ 1980s in the American state of Washington , particularly in Seattle . The early grunge movement revolved around Seattle 's independent record label Sub Pop , but by the early 1990s its popularity had spread , with grunge acts in California and other parts of the U.S. building strong followings and signing major record deals . 
 Grunge became commercially successful in the first half of the 1990s , due mainly to the release of Nirvana 's Nevermind , Pearl Jam 's Ten , Soundgarden 's Badmotorfinger , Alice in Chains ' Facelift , and Stone Temple Pilots ' Core . The success of these bands boosted the popularity of alternative rock and made grunge the most popular form of rock music at the time . Although most grunge bands had disbanded or faded from view by the late 1990s , their influence continues to affect modern rock music . More recent bands have also embraced grunge sounds and themes , with bands such as Violent Soho described as " grunge revival " artists . 
 Grunge typically fuses elements of punk rock and heavy metal , such as the distorted electric guitar used in both genres , although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other . The music shares with punk a raw sound and similar lyrical concerns . However , it also involves much slower tempos , dissonant harmonies , and more complex instrumentation — which is reminiscent of heavy metal . Lyrics are typically angst @-@ filled , often addressing themes such as social alienation , apathy , confinement , and a desire for freedom . 
 A number of factors contributed to grunge 's decline in prominence . During the mid @-@ late 1990s , many grunge bands broke up or became less visible . Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain , labeled by Time as " the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest " , appeared unusually tortured by success and " struggled with an addiction to heroin before he committed suicide at the age of 27 in 1994 " . 
 = = Origin of the term = = 
 Although writer Paul <unk> used " grunge " in a 1978 NME article to describe mainstream guitar rock , Mark Arm , the vocalist for the Seattle band Green River — and later Mudhoney — is generally credited as being the first to use the term grunge to describe this genre of music . Arm first used the term in 1981 , when he wrote a letter under his given name Mark McLaughlin to the Seattle zine Desperate Times , criticizing his own band Mr. Epp and the Calculations as " Pure grunge ! Pure noise ! Pure shit ! " . Clark Humphrey , contributor to Desperate Times , cites this as the earliest use of the term to refer to a Seattle band , and mentions that Bruce Pavitt of Sub Pop popularized the term as a musical label in 1987 – 88 , using it on several occasions to describe Green River . 
 Arm said years later , " Obviously , I didn 't make grunge up . I got it from someone else . The term was already being thrown around in Australia in the mid- ' 80s to describe bands like King Snake Roost , The Scientists , Salamander Jim , and Beasts of Bourbon . " Arm used grunge as a descriptive term rather than a genre term , but it eventually came to describe the punk / metal hybrid sound of the Seattle music scene . 
 Some bands associated with the genre , such as Soundgarden , Pearl Jam and Alice in Chains , have not been receptive to the label , preferring instead to be referred to as " rock and roll " bands . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Grunge is generally characterized by a sludgy guitar sound with a " thick midrange " and rolled @-@ off treble tone and a high level of distortion and fuzz , typically created with small <unk> pedals , with some guitarists chaining several fuzz pedals together and plugging them into a tube amplifier . The use of pedals by grunge guitarists was a move away from the expensive , studio @-@ grade <unk> effects units used in other rock genres . Grunge guitarists played loud , with Kurt Cobain 's early guitar sound coming from an unusual set @-@ up of four 800 watt PA system power amplifiers . Guitar feedback effects were used . Grunge guitarists were influenced by the raw , primitive sound of punk , and they favored " ... energy and lack of finesse over technique and precision " ; key guitar influences included the Sex Pistols , The Dead Boys , Neil Young ( Rust Never Sleeps , side two ) , The Replacements , Husker Du , Black Flag and The Melvins . Grunge guitarists often downtuned their instruments for a lower , heavier sound . Grunge guitarists " flatly rejected " the <unk> " shredding " guitar solos that had become the centerpiece of heavy metal songs , instead opting for melodic , blues @-@ inspired solos - focusing " ... on the song , not the guitar solo " - with Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains stating that solos should be to serve the song , rather than to show off a guitarist 's technical skill . In place of the strutting guitar heroes of metal , grunge had " guitar anti @-@ heroes " like Cobain , who showed little interest in mastering the instrument . 
 Grunge fuses elements of hardcore punk and heavy metal , although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other . The music shares with punk a raw sound and similar lyrical concerns . However , it also involves much slower tempos , dissonant harmonies , and more complex instrumentation — which is reminiscent of heavy metal . Some individuals associated with the development of grunge , including Sub Pop producer Jack Endino and the Melvins , explained grunge 's incorporation of heavy rock influences such as Kiss as " musical provocation " . Grunge artists considered these bands " cheesy " but nonetheless enjoyed them ; Buzz Osborne of the Melvins described it as an attempt to see what ridiculous things bands could do and get away with . In the early 1990s , Nirvana 's signature " stop @-@ start " song format became a genre convention . Allmusic calls grunge a " hybrid of heavy metal and punk " . Although keyboards are generally not used in grunge , Seattle band Gorilla created controversy by breaking the " guitars only " approach and using a 1960s @-@ style Vox organ in their group . 
 According to The Atlantic , the four most influential singing styles of grunge were exemplified by Alice in Chains ' Layne Staley , who was called the " most memorable voice " of the genre for his " ... ability to project power and vulnerability " ; Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain , who could both scream and sing melodically in the same song like John Lennon ; Soundgarden 's Chris Cornell , who " wailed and hit high notes " like Robert Plant ; and Pearl Jam 's Eddie Vedder , who " ... combined a Jim Morrison @-@ style natural baritone range with other punk and rock influences . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Grunge lyrics are typically angst @-@ filled , and anguished , often addressing themes such as social alienation , apathy , confinement , and a desire for freedom . A number of factors influenced the focus on such subject matter . Many grunge musicians displayed a general disenchantment with the state of society , as well as a discomfort with social prejudices . Such themes bear similarities to those addressed by punk rock musicians . In 1992 , music critic Simon Reynolds said that " there 's a feeling of burnout in the culture at large . Kids are depressed about the future " . The topics of grunge lyrics – " broken homes , drug addiction and self @-@ loathing " contrasted sharply to the glam metal lyrics of Poison , which described " life in the fast lane " . 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 Grunge concerts were known for being straightforward , high @-@ energy performances . Grunge bands rejected the complex and high budget presentations of many musical genres , including the use of complex light arrays , pyrotechnics , and other visual effects unrelated to playing the music . Stage acting and " onstage theatrics " were generally avoided . Instead the bands presented themselves as no different from minor local bands . Jack Endino said in the 1996 documentary Hype ! that Seattle bands were inconsistent live performers , since their primary objective was not to be entertainers , but simply to " rock out " . One of the philosophies of the grunge scene was authenticity . Dave Rimmer writes that with the revival of punk ideals of stripped @-@ down music in the early 1990s , " for Cobain , and lots of kids like him , rock & roll ... threw down a dare : Can you be pure enough , day after day , year after year , to prove your authenticity , to live up to the music ... And if you can 't , can you live with being a poseur , a phony , a sellout ? " 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 Clothing commonly worn by grunge musicians in Washington consisted of thrift store items and the typical outdoor clothing ( most notably flannel shirts ) of the region , as well as a generally unkempt appearance and long hair . Seattle and Aberdeen , Washington were logging towns and hence , the lumberjack attire was a common sight in the thrift stores for the low prices that musicians could afford . Grunge fashion consisted of ripped jeans , mom jeans , Doc Martens , combat boots , band T @-@ shirts , oversized knit sweaters , long and droopy skirts , ripped tights , <unk> , hiking boots , and eco @-@ friendly clothing made from recycled textiles or fair trade organic cotton . 
 “ Grunge also became an anti @-@ consumerist movement where the less you spent on clothes , the more ‘ coolness ’ you had . ” The style did not evolve out of a conscious attempt to create an appealing fashion ; music journalist Charles R. Cross said , " [ Nirvana frontman ] Kurt Cobain was just too lazy to shampoo " , and Sub Pop 's Jonathan Poneman said , " This [ clothing ] is cheap , it 's durable , and it 's kind of timeless . It also runs against the grain of the whole flashy aesthetic that existed in the 80s . " Grunge fashion was very much an anti @-@ fashion response and a non @-@ conformist move against the “ manufactured image ” , often pushing musicians to dress in authentic ways and not <unk> themselves . 
 At the same time , Sub @-@ Pop utilised the ‘ grunge look ’ in their marketing of their bands . In an interview with VH1 , photographer Charles Peterson commented that members from grunge band Tad “ were given blue collar identities that weren ’ t entirely earned . Bruce ( Pavitt ) really got him to dress up in flannel and a real chain saw and really play up this image of a mountain man and it worked . ” 
 Grunge music hit mainstream in early ‘ 90s with Soundgarden and Nirvana being signed to major record labels . Grunge fashion began to break into mainstream fashion and in mid @-@ 1992 for both sexes and peaked in late 1993 and early 1994 . As it picked up momentum , the grunge tag was being used by shops selling expensive <unk> shirts in an effort to cash in on the trend . Ironically , the non @-@ conformist look suddenly became a mainstream trend . In the fashion world , Marc Jacobs presented a show for Perry Ellis in 1992 , featuring grunge @-@ inspired clothing mixed up with high @-@ end fabrics . For Jacobs , he found inspiration in the ‘ realism ’ of streetwear and mixed it up with the luxury of fashion by sending models down in <unk> , floral dresses and silk flannel shirts . Unfortunately , this did not sit well with the brand owners and Jacobs was dismissed . Other designers like Anna Sui , also drew inspiration from grunge during that Spring Summer 1993 season . 
 In the same year , Vogue did a spread called “ Grunge & Glory ” with fashion photographer Steven <unk> who shot supermodels Naomi Campbell and Kristen <unk> in a savannah landscape wearing grunge @-@ styled clothing . This shoot made <unk> the perfect face for grunge , having had her eyebrows shaved and her hair cropped short in the shoot . In later years , designers like Christian Lacroix , Donna Karen and Karl Lagerfeld interpreted the influence into their looks . 
 In 1993 , James Truman , editor of Details , said : “ to me the thing about grunge is it ’ s not anti @-@ fashion , it ’ s <unk> . Punk was anti @-@ fashion . It made a statement . Grunge is about not making a statement , which is why it ’ s crazy for it to become a fashion statement . ” It can be said that this generation X was reacting against the excessive glamour of the yuppies in the early ‘ 80s who were perhaps more driven , materialistic and successful in some way . The power suits of the eighties with the exaggerated silhouettes and well @-@ kept appearances of office workers contrasted with the slouchy casual silhouettes and unwashed long hair of the grunge bands . His unkempt fashion sense defined the look of the “ slacker generation ” , who “ skipped school , smoked pot , smoked cigarettes and listened to music ” hoping to be a rockstar one day . 
 Vogue stated in 2014 that " Cobain pulled liberally from both ends of a woman ’ s and a man ’ s wardrobe , and his Seattle thrift @-@ store look ran the gamut of masculine lumberjack <unk> and 40s @-@ by @-@ way @-@ of @-@ 70s feminine dresses . It was completely counter to the <unk> , flashy aesthetic of the 1980s in every way . In disheveled jeans and floral frocks , he softened the tough exterior of the archetypal rebel from the inside out , and set the ball in motion for a radical , millennial idea of androgyny . " Cobain 's way of dressing " was the antithesis of the macho American man " , because he " ... made it cooler to look slouchy and loose , no matter if you were a boy or a girl . " Music and culture writer Julianne Escobedo Shepherd wrote that with Cobain 's style of dress “ [ n ] ot only did he make it okay to be a freak , he made it desirable . " 
 Even though the grunge movement died down in 1994 after the death of Kurt Cobain , designers have continued to draw inspiration from the movement from time to time . Grunge appeared as a trend again in 2008 and for Fall / Winter 2013 , Hedi Slimane at Saint Laurent brought back grunge to the runway . With Courtney Love as his muse for the collection , she reportedly loved the collection . " No offense to MJ [ Marc Jacobs ] but he never got it right , " Courtney said . " This is what it really was . Hedi knows his shit . He got it accurate , and MJ and Anna [ Sui ] did not . ” Both Cobain and Love apparently burnt the Perry Ellis collection they received from Marc Jacobs back in 1993 . 
 In 2016 , grunge makes an appearance with A $ AP Rocky , Rihanna and Kanye West reinventing grunge style by upscaling it . However , “ dressing grunge is no longer a badge of authenticity , though : the signifiers of rebellion ( Dr Martens boots , plaid shirts ) are omnipotent on the high street ” , says Lynette Nylander , deputy editor of i @-@ D magazine . 
 = = = Graphic design = = = 
 Regarding graphic design and image , a common feature of grunge bands was the use of lo @-@ fi and deliberately unconventional album covers , for example presenting intentionally murky or mis @-@ colored photography , collage or distressed lettering . This was already a common feature of punk rock design , but could be extended in the grunge period due to the increasing use of computers for desktop publishing and digital image processing . The style was sometimes called ' grunge typography ' when used outside music . A famous example of ' grunge ' -style experimental design was Ray Gun magazine , art directed by David Carson . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Roots , predecessors and influences = = = 
 Grunge 's sound partly resulted from Seattle 's isolation from other music scenes . As Sub Pop 's Jonathan Poneman noted , " Seattle was a perfect example of a secondary city with an active music scene that was completely ignored by an American media fixated on Los Angeles and New York . " Mark Arm claimed that the isolation meant , " this one corner of the map was being really inbred and ripping off each other 's ideas " . Grunge evolved from the local punk rock scene , and was inspired by bands such as The <unk> , The U @-@ Men , 10 Minute Warning , The <unk> , and the Fastbacks . Additionally , the slow , heavy , and sludgy style of the Melvins was a significant influence on the grunge sound . 
 Outside the Pacific Northwest , a number of artists and music scenes influenced grunge . Noise rock bands such as Scratch Acid and the Butthole Surfers influenced Nirvana . Alternative rock bands from the Northeastern United States , including Sonic Youth , Pixies , and Dinosaur Jr . , are important influences on the genre . Through their patronage of Seattle bands , Sonic Youth " inadvertently nurtured " the grunge scene , and reinforced the fiercely independent attitudes of its musicians . The influence of Pixies on Nirvana was noted by Kurt Cobain , who commented in a Rolling Stone interview , " I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band — or at least a Pixies cover band . We used their sense of dynamics , being soft and quiet and then loud and hard . " In August 1997 , in an interview with Guitar World , Dave Grohl said : " From Kurt , Krist and I liking the Knack , Bay City Rollers , Beatles and Abba just as much as we liked Flipper and Black Flag ... You listen to any Pixies record and it 's all over there . Or even Black Sabbath 's " War Pigs " <unk> 's there : the power of the dynamic . We just sort of abused it with pop songs and got sick with it . " 
 Aside from the genre 's punk and alternative rock roots , many grunge bands were equally influenced by heavy metal of the early 1970s . Clinton Heylin , author of Babylon 's Burning : From Punk to Grunge , cited Black Sabbath as " perhaps the most ubiquitous pre @-@ punk influence on the northwest scene " . Black Sabbath played a role in shaping the grunge sound , through their own records and the records they inspired . Musicologist Bob <unk> asserted that Black Sabbath 's sound " shows up in virtually all of grunge 's most popular bands , including Nirvana , Soundgarden , and Alice in Chains " . The influence of Led Zeppelin is also evident , particularly in the work of Soundgarden , whom Q magazine noted were " in thrall to ' 70s rock , but contemptuous of the genre 's overt sexism and machismo " . Jon Wiederhorn of Guitar World wrote : " So what exactly is grunge ? ... Picture a supergroup made up of Creedence Clearwater Revival , Black Sabbath and the Stooges , and you 're pretty close . " 
 The Los Angeles hardcore punk band Black Flag 's 1984 record My War , on which the band combined heavy metal with their traditional sound , made a strong impact in Seattle . Mudhoney 's Steve Turner commented , " A lot of other people around the country hated the fact that Black Flag slowed down ... but up here it was really great ... we were like ' Yay ! ' They were weird and fucked @-@ up sounding . " Turner explained grunge 's integration of metal influences , noting , " Hard rock and metal was never that much of an enemy of punk like it was for other scenes . Here , it was like , ' There 's only twenty people here , you can 't really find a group to hate . ' " Bands began to mix metal and punk in the Seattle music scene around 1984 , with much of the credit for this fusion going to The U @-@ Men . 
 The raw , distorted and feedback @-@ intensive sound of some noise rock bands had an influence on grunge . Among them are Wisconsin 's <unk> , and most notably San Francisco 's Flipper , a band known for its slowed @-@ down and murky " noise punk " . The Butthole Surfers ' mix of punk , heavy metal and noise rock was a major influence , particularly on the early work of Soundgarden . Several Australian bands , including The Scientists , Cosmic Psychos and <unk> , are cited as precursors to grunge , their music influencing the Seattle scene through the college radio broadcasts of Sub Pop founder Jonathan Poneman and members of Mudhoney . 
 After Neil Young played a few concerts with Pearl Jam and recorded the album Mirror Ball with them , some members of the media gave him the title " Godfather of Grunge " . This was grounded not only in his work with his band Crazy Horse and his regular use of distorted guitar — most notably on the album Rust Never Sleeps — but also his dress and persona . A similarly influential yet often overlooked album is Neurotica by Redd Kross , about which Jonathan Poneman said , " Neurotica was a life changer for me and for a lot of people in the Seattle music community . " 
 = = = Early development ( 1980s ) = = = 
 A seminal release in the development of grunge was the Deep Six compilation , released by C / Z Records in 1986 . The record featured multiple tracks by six bands : Green River , Soundgarden , Melvins , Malfunkshun , Skin Yard , and The U @-@ Men . For many of them it was their first appearance on record . The artists had " a mostly heavy , aggressive sound that melded the slower tempos of heavy metal with the intensity of hardcore " . As Jack Endino recalled , " People just said , ' Well , what kind of music is this ? This isn 't metal , it 's not punk , What is it ? ' [ ... ] People went ' Eureka ! These bands all have something in common . ' " 
 Later that year Bruce Pavitt released the Sub Pop 100 compilation and Green River 's Dry As a Bone EP as part of his new label , Sub Pop . An early Sub Pop catalog described the Green River EP as " ultra @-@ loose <unk> that destroyed the morals of a generation " . Sub Pop 's Bruce Pavitt and Jonathan Poneman , inspired by other regional music scenes in music history , worked to ensure that their label projected a " Seattle sound " , reinforced by a similar style of production and album packaging . While music writer Michael Azerrad acknowledged that early grunge bands like Mudhoney , Soundgarden , and Tad had disparate sounds , he noted " to the objective observer , there were some distinct similarities . " 
 Early grunge concerts were sparsely attended ( many by fewer than a dozen people ) but Sub Pop photographer Charles Peterson 's pictures helped create the impression that such concerts were major events . Mudhoney , which was formed by former members of Green River , served as the flagship band of Sub Pop during their entire time with the label and spearheaded the Seattle grunge movement . Other record labels in the Pacific Northwest that helped promote grunge included C / Z Records , Estrus Records , <unk> Records and <unk> Records . 
 Grunge attracted media attention in the United Kingdom after Pavitt and Poneman asked journalist Everett True from the British magazine Melody Maker to write an article on the local music scene . This exposure helped to make grunge known outside of the local area during the late 1980s and drew more people to local shows . The appeal of grunge to the music press was that it " promised the return to a notion of a regional , authorial vision for American rock " . Grunge 's popularity in the underground music scene was such that bands began to move to Seattle and approximate the look and sound of the original grunge bands . Mudhoney 's Steve Turner said , " It was really bad . Pretend bands were popping up here , things weren 't coming from where we were coming from . " As a reaction , many grunge bands diversified their sound , with Nirvana and Tad in particular creating more melodic songs . Dawn Anderson of the Seattle fanzine Backlash recalled that by 1990 many locals had tired of the hype surrounding the Seattle scene and hoped that media exposure had dissipated . 
 = = = Mainstream success ( early – mid 1990s ) = = = 
 Grunge bands had made inroads to the musical mainstream in the late 1980s . Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label when they joined the roster of A & M Records in 1989 . Soundgarden , along with other major label signings Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees , performed " okay " with their initial major label releases , according to Jack Endino . Nirvana , originally from Aberdeen , Washington , was also courted by major labels , while releasing its first album Bleach in 1989 . Nirvana got signed by Geffen Records in 1990 . In September 1991 , Nirvana released its major label debut , Nevermind . The album was at best hoped to be a minor success on par with Sonic Youth 's Goo , which Geffen had released a year earlier . It was the release of the album 's first single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " that " marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon " . Due to constant airplay of the song 's music video on MTV , Nevermind was selling 400 @,@ 000 copies a week by Christmas 1991 . In January 1992 , Nevermind replaced pop superstar Michael Jackson 's Dangerous at number one on the Billboard 200 . Nevermind was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 1999 . 
 The success of Nevermind surprised the music industry . Nevermind not only popularized grunge , but also established " the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general . " Michael Azerrad asserted that Nevermind symbolized " a sea @-@ change in rock music " in which the glam metal that had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music that was perceived as authentic and culturally relevant . Grunge made it possible for genres thought to be of a niche audience , no matter how radical , to prove their marketability and be co @-@ opted by the mainstream , cementing the formation of an individualist , fragmented culture . Other grunge bands subsequently replicated Nirvana 's success . Pearl Jam , which featured former Mother Love Bone members Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard , had released its debut album Ten in August 1991 , a month before Nevermind , but album sales only picked up a year later . By the second half of 1992 Ten had become a breakthrough success , being certified gold and reaching number two on the Billboard charts . Ten by Pearl Jam was certified 13x platinum by the RIAA . 
 Soundgarden 's album Badmotorfinger and Alice in Chains ' Dirt , along with the Temple of the Dog album collaboration featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden , were also among the 100 top selling albums of 1992 . The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted Rolling Stone to nickname Seattle " the new Liverpool " . Major record labels signed most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle , while a second influx of bands moved to the city in hopes of success . The grunge scene was the backdrop in the 1992 Cameron Crowe film Singles . There were several small roles , performances , and cameos in the film by popular Seattle grunge bands including Pearl Jam , Soundgarden , and Alice in Chains . Filmed in and around Seattle in 1991 , the film was not released until 1992 during the height of grunge popularity . 
 The popularity of grunge resulted in a large interest in the Seattle music scene 's perceived cultural traits . While the Seattle music scene in the late 1980s and early 1990s in actuality consisted of various styles and genres of music , its representation in the media " served to depict Seattle as a music ' community ' in which the focus was upon the ongoing exploration of one musical idiom , namely grunge " . The fashion industry marketed " grunge fashion " to consumers , charging premium prices for items such as knit ski hats and plaid shirts . Critics asserted that advertising was co @-@ opting elements of grunge and turning it into a fad . Entertainment Weekly commented in a 1993 article , " There hasn 't been this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies in the ' 60s " . The New York Times compared the " <unk> of America " to the mass @-@ marketing of punk rock , disco , and hip hop in previous years . Ironically the New York Times was tricked into printing a fake list of slang terms that were supposedly used in the grunge scene ; often referred to as the grunge speak hoax . This media hype surrounding grunge was documented in the 1996 documentary Hype ! . 
 A backlash against grunge began to develop in Seattle ; in late 1992 Jonathan Poneman said that in the city , " All things grunge are treated with the utmost cynicism and amusement [ . . . ] Because the whole thing is a fabricated movement and always has been . " Many grunge artists were uncomfortable with their success and the resulting attention it brought . Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain told Michael Azerrad , " Famous is the last thing I wanted to be . " Pearl Jam also felt the burden of success , with much of the attention falling on frontman Eddie Vedder . 
 Nirvana 's follow @-@ up album In Utero ( 1993 ) was an intentionally abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a " wild aggressive sound , a true alternative record " Nevertheless , upon its release in September 1993 In Utero topped the Billboard charts . In 1996 , In Utero was certified 5x platinum by the RIAA . Pearl Jam also continued to perform well commercially with its second album , Vs . ( 1993 ) . The album sold a record 950 @,@ 378 copies in its first week of release , topped the Billboard charts , and outperformed all other entries in the top ten that week combined . In 1993 , the grunge band Candlebox released their self @-@ titled album , which was certified 4x platinum by the RIAA . The album 's songs " You " and " Far Behind " reached the Billboard Hot 100 chart ; " You " peaked at number 78 on the chart and " Far Behind " peaked at number 18 on the chart . Soundgarden 's album Superunknown , which was released in 1994 , was certified 5x platinum by the RIAA . In 1995 , Alice in Chains ' self @-@ titled album peaked at number 1 on the Billboard 200 and was certified 2x platinum . 
 At the height of grunge 's commercial success in the early 1990s , the commercial success of grunge put record labels on a nationwide search for undiscovered talent to promote . This included San Diego , California @-@ based Stone Temple Pilots , Texas @-@ based Tripping Daisy and Toadies , Chicago @-@ based Veruca Salt , and Australian band Silverchair , bands whose early work continues to be identified broadly ( if not in Seattle itself ) as " grunge " . In 2014 , Paste Magazine ranked Veruca Salt 's " All Hail Me " # 39 and Silverchair 's " Tomorrow " # 45 on their list of the 50 best grunge songs of all time . Loudwire named Stone Temple Pilots one of the ten best grunge bands of all time . 
 During this period , acts promoted as " grunge " that were not from Seattle were often panned by critics , who accused them of being bandwagon @-@ jumpers . Stone Temple Pilots in particular fell victim to this . In a January 1994 Rolling Stone poll , Stone Temple Pilots was simultaneously voted " Best New Band " by Rolling Stone 's readers and " Worst New Band " by the magazine 's music critics , highlighting the disparity between critics and fans . Stone Temple Pilots became very popular ; their album Core was certified 8x platinum by RIAA and their album Purple was certified 6x platinum by the RIAA . The British band Bush released their debut album Sixteen Stone in 1994 . Described as grunge , the album was certified 6x platinum by the RIAA . The band 's second album <unk> Suitcase , which was released in 1996 and peaked at number 1 on the Billboard 200 , was certified 3x platinum by the RIAA . In a review of <unk> Suitcase , Rolling Stone criticized the album and called Bush " the most successful and shameless mimics of Nirvana 's music " . In the book Fargo Rock City : A Heavy Metal Odyssey in Rural North Dakota , Chuck Klosterman wrote , " Bush was a good band who just happened to signal the beginning of the end ; ultimately , they would became the grunge Warrant " . In the book Accidental Revolution : The Story of Grunge , Kyle Anderson wrote : 
 " The twelve songs on Sixteen Stone sound exactly like what grunge is supposed to sound like , while the whole point of grunge was that it didn 't really sound like anything , including itself . Just consider how many different bands and styles of music have been shoved under the " grunge " header in this discography alone , and you realize that grunge is probably the most ill @-@ defined genre of music in history . " 
 = = = Decline of mainstream popularity ( mid – late 1990s ) = = = 
 A number of factors contributed to grunge 's decline in prominence . During the latter half of the 1990s , grunge was supplanted by post @-@ grunge , which remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century . These artists were seen as lacking the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what grunge had become , namely " a wildly popular form of inward @-@ looking , serious @-@ minded hard rock " . Post @-@ grunge was a more commercially viable genre that tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with polished , radio @-@ ready production . Although the bands Bush and Candlebox have been categorized as grunge , both bands have been categorized as post @-@ grunge , too . Bush and Candlebox became popular after 1992 . Tim Grierson of About.com wrote about bands such as Bush and Candlebox , writing : 
 " Perhaps not surprisingly , because these bands seemed to be merely ripping off a trendy sound , critics dismissed them as bandwagon @-@ jumpers . Tellingly , these bands were labeled almost pejoratively as “ post @-@ grunge , ” suggesting that rather than being a musical movement in their own right , they were just a calculated , cynical response to a legitimate stylistic shift in rock music . " 
 Other bands categorized as post @-@ grunge that emerged when Bush and Candlebox emerged include Collective Soul and Live . Post @-@ grunge still was popular in the late 1990s and early 2000s with bands such as Creed , Nickelback , 3 Doors Down and Puddle of Mudd . These post @-@ grunge artists were criticized for their commercialized sound as well as their " worldview built around the comforts of community and romantic relationships " , as opposed to grunge 's lyrical exploration of " troubling issues such as suicide , societal hypocrisy and drug addiction . " 
 Conversely , another rock genre , Britpop , emerged in part as a reaction against the dominance of grunge in the United Kingdom . In contrast to the dourness of grunge , Britpop was defined by " youthful exuberance and desire for recognition " . Britpop artists were vocal about their disdain for grunge . In a 1993 NME interview , Damon Albarn of Britpop band Blur agreed with interviewer John Harris ' assertion that Blur was an " anti @-@ grunge band " , and said , " Well , that 's good . If punk was about getting rid of hippies , then I 'm getting rid of grunge " . Noel Gallagher of Oasis , while a fan of Nirvana , wrote music that refuted the pessimistic nature of grunge . Gallagher noted in 2006 that the 1994 Oasis single " Live Forever " " was written in the middle of grunge and all that , and I remember Nirvana had a tune called ' I Hate Myself and I Want to Die , ' and I was like ... ' Well , I 'm not fucking having that . ' As much as I fucking like him [ Cobain ] and all that shit , I 'm not having that . I can 't have people like that coming over here , on smack , fucking saying that they hate themselves and they wanna die . That 's fucking rubbish . " 
 During the mid @-@ 1990s many grunge bands broke up or became less visible . Kurt Cobain , labeled by Time as " the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest " , appeared " unusually tortured by success " and struggled with an addiction to heroin . Rumors surfaced in early 1994 that Cobain suffered a drug overdose and that Nirvana was breaking up . On April 8 , 1994 , Cobain was found dead in his Seattle home from an apparently self @-@ inflicted gunshot wound ; Nirvana summarily disbanded . That same year Pearl Jam canceled its summer tour in protest of what it regarded as ticket vendor Ticketmaster 's unfair business practices . Pearl Jam then began a boycott of the company ; however , Pearl Jam 's initiative to play only at non @-@ Ticketmaster venues effectively , with a few exceptions , prevented the band from playing shows in the United States for the next three years . In 1996 , Alice in Chains gave their final performances with their ailing and estranged lead singer , Layne Staley , who subsequently died from an overdose of cocaine and heroin in 2002 . In 1996 , Soundgarden and Screaming Trees released their final studio albums of the 1990s , Down on the Upside and Dust , respectively . 
 = = = Revival ( 21st century ) = = = 
 Many grunge bands have continued recording and touring with success . Perhaps the most notable grunge act of the 21st century has been Pearl Jam . In 2006 Rolling Stone writer Brian Hiatt described Pearl Jam as having " spent much of the past decade deliberately tearing apart their own fame " , he noted the band developed a loyal concert following akin to that of the Grateful Dead . They saw a return to wide commercial success with 2006 's Pearl Jam ( the band Pearl Jam 's self @-@ titled album ) , 2009 's Backspacer and 2013 's Lightning Bolt . 
 Despite Kurt Cobain 's demise , Nirvana has continued to be successful posthumously . Due to the high sales for Kurt Cobain 's Journals and the band 's best @-@ of compilation Nirvana upon their releases in 2002 , The New York Times argued Nirvana " are having more success now than at any point since Mr. Cobain 's suicide in 1994 . " This trend has continued through the century 's second decade , with the reissuing of the band 's discography and release of the authorized documentary " Kurt Cobain : Montage of Heck " . 
 Alice In Chains reformed for a handful of reunion dates in 2005 with several different vocalists replacing Layne Staley . Eventually settling on William Duvall as Staley 's replacement , in 2009 they released Black Gives Way to Blue , their first record in 15 years . The band 's 2013 release , The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here , reached number 2 on the Billboard 200 . Soundgarden reformed in 2010 and released their album King Animal two years later which reached the top five of the national albums charts in Denmark , New Zealand , and the United States . Matt Cameron and Ben Shepherd joined Alain Johannes ( Queens of the Stone Age , Eleven ) , Mark Lanegan ( Screaming Trees , Queens of the Stone Age ) and Dimitri Coats ( Off ! ) to form side project Ten Commandos in 2016 . 
 One of the most successful rock groups of the 21st Century , Queens of the Stone Age , has featured major contributions from various grunge musicians . Josh Homme had briefly played in Screaming Trees with off @-@ and @-@ on QOTSA member Mark Lanegan , before forming the group . Nirvana 's Dave Grohl and Eleven 's Alain Johannes have also provided notable contributions . Homme and Grohl joined with Led Zeppelin 's John Paul Jones to form the supergroup Them Crooked Vultures in 2009 . Johannes also performed with the group as a touring member . 
 In 2005 , The Seattle Times made note of grunge @-@ influenced groups returning in the Seattle scene . Similarly , The Guardian reported of grunge @-@ influenced groups from Yorkshire , including Dinosaur Pile @-@ Up , Pulled Apart by Horses , and Wonderswan . Also , in 2003 , the New York Times noted a resurgence in grunge fashion . 
 The 2010s have featured bands influenced by grunge . Unlike their forebears , some of these acts ascribe the label to themselves willingly . Many acts have been noted for affiliating and / or collaborating with prominent figures from the original alternative rock era . Steve Albini has produced for or worked with members of bands such as Bully , <unk> , and Shannon Wright , while Emma Ruth Rundle of Marriages has toured with Buzz Osbourne of the Melvins . Other acts that have been labelled as grunge or are heavily influenced by the music of the grunge era , include Courtney Barnett , Wolf Alice , <unk> , Speedy Ortiz , 2 : 54 , Dilly Dally , <unk> , and Torres . Ireland 's <unk> are also associated with the genre . 
 = = Prominent grunge artists = = 
 Bands prominently labelled as grunge include : 
 Seattle area 
 = Edward Teller = 
 Edward Teller ( Hungarian : Teller Ede ; January 15 , 1908 – September 9 , 2003 ) was a Hungarian @-@ American theoretical physicist who was born in Hungary , and is known colloquially as " the father of the hydrogen bomb " , although he claimed he did not care for the title . He made numerous contributions to nuclear and molecular physics , spectroscopy ( in particular , the Jahn – Teller and Renner – Teller effects ) and surface physics . His extension of Enrico Fermi 's theory of beta decay , in the form of Gamow – Teller transitions , provided an important stepping stone in its application , while the Jahn – Teller effect and the Brunauer – Emmett – Teller ( BET ) theory have retained their original formulation and are still mainstays in physics and chemistry . Teller also made contributions to Thomas – Fermi theory , the precursor of density functional theory , a standard modern tool in the quantum mechanical treatment of complex molecules . In 1953 , along with Nicholas Metropolis and Marshall Rosenbluth , Teller co @-@ authored a paper which is a standard starting point for the applications of the Monte Carlo method to statistical mechanics . 
 Teller emigrated to the United States in the 1930s , and was an early member of the Manhattan Project , charged with developing the first atomic bomb . During this time he made a serious push to develop the first fusion @-@ based weapons as well , but these were deferred until after World War II . After his controversial testimony in the security clearance hearing of his former Los Alamos Laboratory superior J. Robert Oppenheimer , Teller was ostracized by much of the scientific community . He continued to find support from the U.S. government and military research establishment , particularly for his advocacy for nuclear energy development , a strong nuclear arsenal , and a vigorous nuclear testing program . He was a co @-@ founder of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory ( LLNL ) , and was both its director and associate director for many years . 
 In his later years , Teller became especially known for his advocacy of controversial technological solutions to both military and civilian problems , including a plan to excavate an artificial harbor in Alaska using thermonuclear explosive in what was called Project Chariot . He was a vigorous advocate of Ronald Reagan 's Strategic Defense Initiative . Throughout his life , Teller was known both for his scientific ability and his difficult interpersonal relations and volatile personality , and is considered one of the inspirations for the character Dr. Strangelove in the 1964 movie of the same name . 
 = = Early life and work = = 
 Ede Teller was born on January 15 , 1908 , in Budapest , Hungary ( then part of Austria @-@ Hungary ) , into a Jewish family . His parents were Ilona ( born Deutsch ) , a pianist , and Max Teller , an attorney . Despite being raised in a Jewish family , he later on became an agnostic . " Religion was not an issue in my family " , he later wrote , " indeed , it was never discussed . My only religious training came because the <unk> required that all students take classes in their respective religions . My family celebrated one holiday , the Day of Atonement , when we all fasted . Yet my father said prayers for his parents on Saturdays and on all the Jewish holidays . The idea of God that I absorbed was that it would be wonderful if He existed : We needed Him desperately but had not seen Him in many thousands of years . " Like Einstein and Feynman , Teller was a late talker . He developed the ability to speak later than most children but became very interested in numbers , and would calculate large numbers in his head for fun . 
 Teller left Hungary in 1926 , partly due to the discriminatory <unk> <unk> rule under Miklós Horthy 's regime . The political climate and revolutions in Hungary during his youth instilled a lingering animosity for both Communism and Fascism in Teller . When he was a young student , his right foot was severed in a streetcar accident in Munich , requiring him to wear a prosthetic foot , and leaving him with a lifelong limp . Werner Heisenberg said that it was the hardiness of Teller 's spirit , rather than stoicism , that allowed him to cope so well with the accident . 
 Teller graduated in chemical engineering at the University of Karlsruhe , and received his Ph.D. in physics under Werner Heisenberg at the University of Leipzig . Teller 's dissertation dealt with one of the first accurate quantum mechanical treatments of the hydrogen molecular ion . In 1930 he befriended Russian physicists George Gamow and Lev Landau . Teller 's lifelong friendship with a Czech physicist , George Placzek , was also very important for his scientific and philosophical development . It was Placzek who arranged a summer stay in Rome with Enrico Fermi in 1932 , thus orienting Teller 's scientific career in nuclear physics . 
 In 1930 , Teller moved to the University of Göttingen , then one of the world 's great centers of physics due to the presence of Max Born and James Franck , but after Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in January 1933 , Germany became unsafe for Jewish people , and he left through the aid of the International Rescue Committee . He went briefly to England , and moved for a year to Copenhagen , where he worked under Niels Bohr . In February 1934 , he married his long @-@ time girlfriend Augusta Maria " Mici " ( pronounced " Mitzi " ) <unk> , the sister of a friend . He returned to England in September 1934 . 
 Mici had been a student in Pittsburgh , and wanted to return to the United States . Her chance came in 1935 , when , thanks to George Gamow , Teller was invited to the United States to become a Professor of Physics at George Washington University , where he worked with Gamow until 1941 . At George Washington University in 1937 , Teller predicted the Jahn – Teller effect , which distorts molecules in certain situations ; this affects the chemical reactions of metals , and in particular the coloration of certain metallic dyes . Teller and Hermann Arthur Jahn analyzed it as a piece of purely mathematical physics . In collaboration with Brunauer and Emmet , Teller also made an important contribution to surface physics and chemistry : the so @-@ called Brunauer – Emmett – Teller ( BET ) isotherm . Teller and Mici became naturalized citizens of the United States on March 6 , 1941 . 
 When World War II began , Teller wanted to contribute to the war effort . On the advice of the well @-@ known Caltech aerodynamicist and fellow Hungarian émigré Theodore von Kármán , Teller collaborated with his friend Hans Bethe in developing a theory of shock @-@ wave propagation . In later years , their explanation of the behavior of the gas behind such a wave proved valuable to scientists who were studying missile re @-@ entry . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 = = = Los Alamos Laboratory = = = 
 In 1942 , Teller was invited to be part of Robert Oppenheimer 's summer planning seminar , at the University of California , Berkeley for the origins of the Manhattan Project , the Allied effort to develop the first nuclear weapons . A few weeks earlier , Teller had been meeting with his friend and colleague Enrico Fermi about the prospects of atomic warfare , and Fermi had nonchalantly suggested that perhaps a weapon based on nuclear fission could be used to set off an even larger nuclear fusion reaction . Even though he initially explained to Fermi why he thought the idea would not work , Teller was fascinated by the possibility and was quickly bored with the idea of " just " an atomic bomb even though this was not yet anywhere near completion . At the Berkeley session , Teller diverted discussion from the fission weapon to the possibility of a fusion weapon — what he called the " Super " , an early concept of what was later to be known as a hydrogen bomb . 
 Arthur Compton , the chairman of the University of Chicago physics department , coordinated the uranium research of Columbia University , Princeton University , the University of Chicago , and the University of California , Berkeley . To remove disagreement and duplication , Compton transferred the scientists to the Metallurgical Laboratory at Chicago . Teller was left behind at first , because while he and Mici were now American citizens , they still had relatives in enemy countries . In early 1943 , the Los Alamos laboratory was established in Los Alamos , New Mexico to design an atomic bomb , with Oppenheimer as its director . Teller moved there in March 1943 . Apparently , Teller managed to annoy his neighbors there by playing the piano late in the night . 
 Teller became part of the Theoretical ( T ) Division . He was given a secret identity of Ed Tilden . He was irked at being passed over as its head ; the job was instead given to Hans Bethe . Oppenheimer had him investigate unusual approaches to building fission weapons , such as autocatalysis , in which the efficiency of the bomb would increase as the nuclear chain reaction progressed , but proved to be impractical . He also investigated using uranium hydride instead of uranium metal , but its efficiency turned out to be " negligible or less " . He continued to push his ideas for a fusion weapon even though it had been put on a low priority during the war ( as the creation of a fission weapon proved to be difficult enough ) . On a visit to New York , he asked Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer to carry out calculations on the Super for him . She confirmed Teller 's own results : the Super was not going to work . 
 A special group was established under Teller in March 1944 to investigate the mathematics of an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . It too ran into difficulties . Because of his interest in the Super , Teller did not work as hard on the implosion calculations as Bethe wanted . These too were originally low @-@ priority tasks , but the discovery of spontaneous fission in plutonium by Emilio Segrè 's gave it increased importance . In June 1944 , at Bethe 's request , Oppenheimer moved Teller out of T Division , and placed him in charge of a special group responsible for the Super , reporting directly to Oppenheimer . He was replaced by Rudolf Peierls from the British Mission , who in turn brought in Klaus Fuchs , who was later revealed to be a Soviet spy . Teller 's Super group became part of Fermi 's F Division when he joined the Los Alamos Laboratory in September 1944 . It included Stanislaw Ulam , Jane Roberg , Geoffrey Chew , Harold and Mary Argo , and Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer . 
 Teller made valuable contributions to bomb research , especially in the elucidation of the implosion mechanism . He was the first to propose the solid pit design that was eventually successful . This design became known as a " Christy pit " , after the physicist Robert F. Christy who made the pit a reality . Teller was one of the few scientists to actually watch ( with eye protection ) the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 , rather than follow orders to lie on the ground with backs turned . He later said that the atomic flash " was as if I had pulled open the curtain in a dark room and broad daylight streamed in . " 
 = = = Decision to drop the bombs = = = 
 In the days , before and after the first demonstration of a nuclear weapon , the Trinity test in July 1945 , his fellow Hungarian Leo Szilard circulated the Szilard petition , which argued that a demonstration to the Japanese of the new weapon should occur prior to actual use on Japan , and with that hopefully the weapons would never be used on people . In response to Szilard 's petition , Teller consulted his friend Robert J. Oppenheimer . Teller believed that Oppenheimer was a natural leader and could help him with such a formidable political problem . Oppenheimer reassured Teller that the nation 's fate should be left to the sensible politicians in Washington . Bolstered by Oppenheimer 's influence , he decided to not sign the petition . 
 Teller therefore penned a letter in response to Szilard that read : 
 ... I am not really convinced of your objections . I do not feel that there is any chance to outlaw any one weapon . If we have a slim chance of survival , it lies in the possibility to get rid of wars . The more decisive a weapon is the more surely it will be used in any real conflict and no agreements will help . 
 Our only hope is in getting the facts of our results before the people . This might help to convince everybody that the next war would be fatal . For this purpose actual combat @-@ use might even be the best thing . 
 On reflection on this letter years later when he was writing his memoirs , Teller wrote : 
 First , Szilard was right . As scientists who worked on producing the bomb , we bore a special responsibility . Second , Oppenheimer was right . We did not know enough about the political situation to have a valid opinion . Third , what we should have done but failed to do was to work out the technical changes required for demonstrating the bomb [ very high ] over Tokyo and submit that information to President Truman . 
 Unknown to Teller at the time , four of his colleagues were solicited by the then secret May to June 1945 Interim Committee . It is this organization which ultimately decided on how the new weapons should initially be used . The committee 's four @-@ member Scientific Panel was led by Oppenheimer , and concluded immediate military use on Japan was the best option : 
 The opinions of our scientific colleagues on the initial use of these weapons are not unanimous : they range from the proposal of a purely technical demonstration to that of the military application best designed to induce surrender ... Others emphasize the opportunity of saving American lives by immediate military use ... We find ourselves closer to these latter views ; we can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an end to the war ; we see no acceptable alternative to direct military use . 
 Teller later learned of Oppenheimer 's solicitation and his role in the Interim Committee 's decision to drop the bombs , having secretly endorsed an immediate military use of the new weapons . This was contrary to the impression that Teller had received when he had personally asked Oppenheimer about the Szilard petition : that the nation 's fate should be left to the sensible politicians in Washington . Following Teller 's discovery of this , his relationship with his advisor began to deteriorate . 
 In 1990 , the historian Barton Bernstein argued that it is an " unconvincing claim " by Teller that he was a " covert dissenter " to the use of the weapon . In his 2001 Memoirs , Teller claims that he did lobby Oppenheimer , but that Oppenheimer had convinced him that he should take no action and that the scientists should leave military questions in the hands of the military ; Teller claims he was not aware that Oppenheimer and other scientists were being consulted as to the actual use of the weapon and implies that Oppenheimer was being hypocritical . 
 = = Hydrogen bomb = = 
 Despite an offer from Norris Bradbury , who had replaced Oppenheimer as the director of Los Alamos in November 1945 , to become the head of the Theoretical ( T ) Division , Teller left Los Alamos on February 1 , 1946 , to return to the University of Chicago as a professor and close associate of Fermi and Goeppert @-@ Mayer . Mayer 's work on the internal structure of the elements would earn her the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 . 
 On April 18 – 20 , 1946 , Teller participated in a conference at Los Alamos to review the wartime work on the Super . The properties of thermonuclear fuels such as deuterium and the possible design of a hydrogen bomb were discussed . It was concluded that Teller 's assessment of a hydrogen bomb had been too favourable , and that both the quantity of deuterium needed , as well as the radiation losses during deuterium burning , would shed doubt on its workability . Addition of expensive tritium to the thermonuclear mixture would likely lower its ignition temperature , but even so , nobody knew at that time how much tritium would be needed , and whether even tritium addition would encourage heat propagation . 
 At the end of the conference , in spite of opposition by some members such as Robert Serber , Teller submitted an optimistic report in which he said that a hydrogen bomb was feasible , and that further work should be encouraged on its development . Fuchs also participated in this conference , and transmitted this information to Moscow . With John von Neumann , he contributed an idea of using implosion to ignite the Super . The model of Teller 's " classical Super " was so uncertain that Oppenheimer would later say that he wished the Russians were building their own hydrogen bomb based on that design , so that it would almost certainly retard their progress on it . 
 By 1949 , Soviet @-@ backed governments had already begun seizing control throughout Eastern Europe , forming such puppet states as the Hungarian People 's Republic in Teller 's homeland of Hungary , where much of his family still lived , on August 20 , 1949 . Following the Soviet Union 's first test detonation of an atomic bomb on August 29 , 1949 , President Harry Truman announced a crash development program for a hydrogen bomb . 
 Teller returned to Los Alamos in 1950 to work on the project . He insisted on involving more <unk> but many of Teller 's prominent colleagues , like Fermi and Oppenheimer , were sure that the project of the H @-@ bomb was technically infeasible and politically undesirable . None of the available designs were yet workable . However Soviet scientists who had worked on their own hydrogen bomb have claimed that they developed it independently . 
 In 1950 , calculations by the Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam and his collaborator Cornelius Everett , along with confirmations by Fermi , had shown that not only was Teller 's earlier estimate of the quantity of tritium needed for the H @-@ bomb a low one , but that even with higher amounts of tritium , the energy loss in the fusion process would be too great to enable the fusion reaction to propagate . However , in 1951 Teller and Ulam made a breakthrough , and invented a new design , proposed in a classified March 1951 paper , On <unk> Detonations I : <unk> Lenses and Radiation Mirrors , for a practical megaton @-@ range H @-@ bomb . The exact contribution provided respectively from Ulam and Teller to what became known as the Teller – Ulam design is not definitively known in the public domain , and the exact contributions of each and how the final idea was arrived upon has been a point of dispute in both public and classified discussions since the early 1950s . 
 In an interview with Scientific American from 1999 , Teller told the reporter : 
 I contributed ; Ulam did not . I 'm sorry I had to answer it in this abrupt way . Ulam was rightly dissatisfied with an old approach . He came to me with a part of an idea which I already had worked out and had difficulty getting people to listen to . He was willing to sign a paper . When it then came to defending that paper and really putting work into it , he refused . He said , " I don 't believe in it . " 
 The issue is controversial . Bethe considered Teller 's contribution to the invention of the H @-@ bomb a true innovation as early as 1952 , and referred to his work as a " stroke of genius " in 1954 . In both cases , however , Bethe emphasized Teller 's role as a way of stressing that the development of the H @-@ bomb could not have been hastened by additional support or funding , and Teller greatly disagreed with Bethe 's assessment . Other scientists ( antagonistic to Teller , such as J. Carson Mark ) have claimed that Teller would have never gotten any closer without the assistance of Ulam and others . Ulam himself claimed that Teller only produced a " more generalized " version of Ulam 's original design . 
 The breakthrough — the details of which are still classified — was apparently the separation of the fission and fusion components of the weapons , and to use the X @-@ rays produced by the fission bomb to first compress the fusion fuel ( by process known as " radiation implosion " ) before igniting it . Ulam 's idea seems to have been to use mechanical shock from the primary to encourage fusion in the secondary , while Teller quickly realized that X @-@ rays from the primary would do the job much more symmetrically . Some members of the laboratory ( J. Carson Mark in particular ) later expressed the opinion that the idea to use the x @-@ rays would have eventually occurred to anyone working on the physical processes involved , and that the obvious reason why Teller thought of it right away was because he was already working on the " Greenhouse " tests for the spring of 1951 , in which the effect of x @-@ rays from a fission bomb on a mixture of deuterium and tritium was going to be investigated . 
 Whatever the actual components of the so @-@ called Teller – Ulam design and the respective contributions of those who worked on it , after it was proposed it was immediately seen by the scientists working on the project as the answer which had been so long sought . Those who previously had doubted whether a fission @-@ fusion bomb would be feasible at all were converted into believing that it was only a matter of time before both the USA and the USSR had developed multi @-@ megaton weapons . Even Oppenheimer , who was originally opposed to the project , called the idea " technically sweet . " 
 Though he had helped to come up with the design and had been a long @-@ time proponent of the concept , Teller was not chosen to head the development project ( his reputation of a thorny personality likely played a role in this ) . In 1952 he left Los Alamos and joined the newly established Livermore branch of the University of California Radiation Laboratory , which had been created largely through his urging . After the detonation of Ivy Mike , the first thermonuclear weapon to utilize the Teller – Ulam configuration , on November 1 , 1952 , Teller became known in the press as the " father of the hydrogen bomb . " Teller himself refrained from attending the test — he claimed not to feel welcome at the Pacific Proving Grounds — and instead saw its results on a seismograph in the basement of a hall in Berkeley . 
 There was an opinion that by analyzing the fallout from this test , the Soviets ( led in their H @-@ bomb work by Andrei Sakharov ) could have deciphered the new American design . However , this was later denied by the Soviet bomb researchers . Because of official secrecy , little information about the bomb 's development was released by the government , and press reports often attributed the entire weapon 's design and development to Teller and his new Livermore Laboratory ( when it was actually developed by Los Alamos ) . 
 Many of Teller 's colleagues were irritated that he seemed to enjoy taking full credit for something he had only a part in , and in response , with encouragement from Enrico Fermi , Teller authored an article titled " The Work of Many People , " which appeared in Science magazine in February 1955 , emphasizing that he was not alone in the weapon 's development . He would later write in his memoirs that he had told a " white lie " in the 1955 article in order to " soothe ruffled feelings " , and claimed full credit for the invention . 
 Teller was known for getting engrossed in projects which were theoretically interesting but practically unfeasible ( the classic " Super " was one such project . ) About his work on the hydrogen bomb , Bethe said : 
 Nobody will blame Teller because the calculations of 1946 were wrong , especially because adequate computing machines were not available at Los Alamos . But he was blamed at Los Alamos for leading the laboratory , and indeed the whole country , into an adventurous programme on the basis of calculations , which he himself must have known to have been very incomplete . 
 During the Manhattan Project , Teller advocated the development of a bomb using uranium hydride , which many of his fellow theorists said would be unlikely to work . At Livermore , Teller continued work on the hydride bomb , and the result was a dud . Ulam once wrote to a colleague about an idea he had shared with Teller : " Edward is full of enthusiasm about these possibilities ; this is perhaps an indication they will not work . " Fermi once said that Teller was the only <unk> he knew who had several manias . 
 Carey Sublette of Nuclear Weapon Archive argues that Ulam came up with the radiation implosion compression design of thermonuclear weapons , but that on the other hand Teller has gotten little credit for being the first to propose fusion boosting in 1945 , which is essential for miniaturization and reliability and is used in all of today 's nuclear weapons . 
 = = Oppenheimer controversy = = 
 Teller became controversial in 1954 when he testified against Oppenheimer at Oppenheimer 's security clearance hearing . Teller had clashed with Oppenheimer many times at Los Alamos over issues relating both to fission and fusion research , and during Oppenheimer 's trial he was the only member of the scientific community to state that Oppenheimer should not be granted security clearance . Asked at the hearing by Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) attorney Roger Robb whether he was planning " to suggest that Dr. Oppenheimer is disloyal to the United States " , Teller replied that : 
 " I do not want to suggest anything of the kind . I know Oppenheimer as an intellectually most alert and a very complicated person , and I think it would be presumptuous and wrong on my part if I would try in any way to analyze his motives . But I have always assumed , and I now assume that he is loyal to the United States . I believe this , and I shall believe it until I see very conclusive proof to the opposite . " 
 He was immediately asked whether he believed that Oppenheimer was a " security risk " , to which he testified : 
 In a great number of cases I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act — I understood that Dr. Oppenheimer acted — in a way which for me was exceedingly hard to understand . I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated . To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better , and therefore trust more . In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling that I would feel personally more secure if public matters would rest in other hands . 
 Teller also testified that Oppenheimer 's opinion about the thermonuclear program seemed to be based more on the scientific feasibility of the weapon than anything else . He additionally testified that Oppenheimer 's direction of Los Alamos was " a very outstanding achievement " both as a scientist and an administrator , lauding his " very quick mind " and that he made " just a most wonderful and excellent director . " 
 After this , however , he detailed ways in which he felt that Oppenheimer had hindered his efforts towards an active thermonuclear development program , and at length criticized Oppenheimer 's decisions not to invest more work onto the question at different points in his career , saying : 
 If it is a question of wisdom and judgment , as demonstrated by actions since 1945 , then I would say one would be wiser not to grant clearance . 
 By recasting a difference of judgment over the merits of the early work on the hydrogen bomb project into a matter of a security risk , Teller effectively damned Oppenheimer in a field where security was necessarily of paramount concern . Teller 's testimony thereby rendered Oppenheimer vulnerable to charges by a Congressional aide that he was a Soviet spy , which resulted in the destruction of Oppenheimer 's career . 
 Oppenheimer 's security clearance was revoked after the hearings . Most of Teller 's former colleagues disapproved of his testimony and he was ostracized by much of the scientific community . After the fact , Teller consistently denied that he was intending to damn Oppenheimer , and even claimed that he was attempting to exonerate him . Documentary evidence has suggested that this was likely not the case , however . Six days before the testimony , Teller met with an AEC liaison officer and suggested " deepening the charges " in his testimony . 
 Teller always insisted that his testimony had not significantly harmed Oppenheimer . In 2002 , Teller contended that Oppenheimer was " not destroyed " by the security hearing but " no longer asked to assist in policy matters . " He claimed his words were an overreaction , because he had only just learned of Oppenheimer 's failure to immediately report an approach by Haakon Chevalier , who had approached Oppenheimer to help the Russians . Teller said that , in hindsight , he would have responded differently . 
 Historian Richard Rhodes said that in his opinion it was already a foregone conclusion that Oppenheimer would have his security clearance revoked by then AEC chairman Lewis Strauss , regardless of Teller 's testimony . However , as Teller 's testimony was the most damning , he was singled out and blamed for the hearing 's ruling , losing friends due to it , such as Robert Christy , who refused to shake his hand in one infamous incident . This was emblematic of his later treatment which resulted in his being forced into the role of an outcast of the physics community , thus leaving him little choice but to align himself with industrialists . 
 = = US Government work and political advocacy = = 
 After the Oppenheimer controversy , Teller became ostracized by much of the scientific community , but was still quite welcome in the government and military science circles . Along with his traditional advocacy for nuclear energy development , a strong nuclear arsenal , and a vigorous nuclear testing program , he had helped to develop nuclear reactor safety standards as the chair of the Reactor Safeguard Committee of the AEC in the late 1940s , and in the late 1950s headed an effort at General Atomics which designed research reactors in which a nuclear meltdown would be impossible . The TRIGA ( Training , Research , Isotopes , General Atomic ) has been built and used in hundreds of hospitals and universities worldwide for medical isotope production and research . 
 Teller promoted increased defense spending to counter the perceived Soviet missile threat . He was a signatory to the 1958 report by the military sub @-@ panel of the Rockefeller Brothers funded Special Studies Project , which called for a $ 3 billion annual increase in America 's military budget . 
 In 1956 he attended the Project Nobska anti @-@ submarine warfare conference , where discussion ranged from oceanography to nuclear weapons . In the course of discussing a small nuclear warhead for the Mark 45 torpedo , he started a discussion on the possibility of developing a physically small one @-@ megaton nuclear warhead for the Polaris missile . His counterpart in the discussion , J. Carson Mark from the Los Alamos National Laboratory , at first insisted it could not be done . However , Dr. Mark eventually stated that a half @-@ megaton warhead of small enough size could be developed . This yield , roughly thirty times that of the Hiroshima bomb , was enough for Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Arleigh Burke , who was present in person , and Navy strategic missile development shifted from Jupiter to Polaris by the end of the year . 
 He was Director of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , which he helped to found with Ernest O. Lawrence , from 1958 to 1960 , and after that he continued as an Associate Director . He chaired the committee that founded the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley . He also served concurrently as a Professor of Physics at the University of California , Berkeley . He was a tireless advocate of a strong nuclear program and argued for continued testing and development — in fact , he stepped down from the directorship of Livermore so that he could better lobby against the proposed test ban . He testified against the test ban both before Congress as well as on television . 
 Teller established the Department of Applied Science at the University of California , Davis and LLNL in 1963 , which holds the Edward Teller endowed professorship in his honor . In 1975 he retired from both the lab and Berkeley , and was named Director Emeritus of the Livermore Laboratory and appointed Senior Research Fellow at the Hoover Institution . After the fall of communism in Hungary in 1989 , he made several visits to his country of origin , and paid careful attention to the political changes there . 
 = = Global Climate Change = = 
 Teller was one of the first prominent people to raise the danger of climate change , driven by the burning of fossil fuels . At an address to the membership of the American Chemical Society in December 1957 , Teller warned that the large amount of carbon @-@ based fuel that had been burnt since the mid @-@ 19th century was increasing the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere , which would " act in the same way as a greenhouse and will raise the temperature at the surface " , and that he had calculated that if the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increased by 10 % " an appreciable part of the polar ice might melt . " 
 Teller changed his mind , however , becoming the most prestigious signer of the Oregon Petition . The petition , drafted in 1998 , states , in part : “ There is no convincing scientific evidence that human release of carbon dioxide , methane , or other greenhouse gases is causing or will , in the foreseeable future , cause catastrophic heating of the Earth 's atmosphere and disruption of the Earth 's climate . ” 
 = = Operation <unk> and Project Chariot = = 
 Teller was one of the strongest and best @-@ known advocates for investigating non @-@ military uses of nuclear explosives , which the United States explored under Operation <unk> . One of the most controversial projects he proposed was a plan to use a multi @-@ megaton hydrogen bomb to dig a deep @-@ water harbor more than a mile long and half a mile wide to use for shipment of resources from coal and oil fields through Point Hope , Alaska . The Atomic Energy Commission accepted Teller 's proposal in 1958 and it was designated Project Chariot . While the AEC was scouting out the Alaskan site , and having withdrawn the land from the public domain , Teller publicly advocated the economic benefits of the plan , but was unable to convince local government leaders that the plan was financially viable . 
 Other scientists criticized the project as being potentially unsafe for the local wildlife and the Inupiat people living near the designated area , who were not officially told of the plan until March 1960 . Additionally , it turned out that the harbor would be ice @-@ bound for nine months out of the year . In the end , due to the financial infeasibility of the project and the concerns over radiation @-@ related health issues , the project was abandoned in 1962 . 
 A related experiment which also had Teller 's endorsement was a plan to extract oil from the tar sands in northern Alberta with nuclear explosions , titled Project <unk> . The plan actually received the endorsement of the Alberta government , but was rejected by the Government of Canada under Prime Minister John Diefenbaker , who was opposed to having any nuclear weapons in Canada , although Canada had nuclear weapons , from a US nuclear sharing agreement , from 1963 to 1984 . 
 = = Nuclear technology and Israel = = 
 For some twenty years , Teller advised Israel on nuclear matters in general , and on the building of a hydrogen bomb in particular . In 1952 , Teller and Oppenheimer had a long meeting with David Ben @-@ Gurion in Tel Aviv , telling him that the best way to accumulate plutonium was to burn natural uranium in a nuclear reactor . Starting in 1964 , a connection between Teller and Israel was made by the physicist Yuval Ne <unk> , who had similar political views . Between 1964 and 1967 , Teller visited Israel six times , lecturing at Tel Aviv University , and advising the chiefs of Israel 's scientific @-@ security circle as well as prime ministers and cabinet members . 
 At each of his talks with members of the Israeli security establishment 's highest levels , he would make them swear that they would never be tempted into signing the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty . In 1967 when the Israeli nuclear program was nearing completion , Teller informed Neeman that he was going to tell the CIA that Israel had built nuclear weapons , and explain that it was justified by the background of the Six @-@ Day War . After Neeman cleared it with Prime Minister Levi Eshkol , Teller briefed the head of the CIA 's Office of Science and Technology , Carl Duckett . It took a year for Teller to convince the CIA that Israel had obtained nuclear capability ; the information then went through CIA Director Richard Helms to the president at that time , Lyndon B. Johnson . Teller also persuaded them to end the American attempts to inspect the Negev Nuclear Research Center in Dimona . In 1976 Duckett testified in Congress before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission , that after receiving information from " American scientist " , he drafted a National Intelligence Estimate ( NIE ) on Israel 's nuclear capability . 
 In the 1980s , Teller again visited Israel to advise the Israeli government on building a nuclear reactor . Three decades later , Teller confirmed that it was during his visits that he concluded that Israel was in possession of nuclear weapons . After conveying the matter to the U.S. government , Teller reportedly said : " They [ Israeli ] have it , and they were clever enough to trust their research and not to test , they know that to test would get them into trouble . " 
 = = Three Mile Island = = 
 Teller suffered a heart attack in 1979 , and blamed it on Jane Fonda , who had starred in The China Syndrome , which depicted a fictional reactor accident and was released less than two weeks before the Three Mile Island accident . She spoke out against nuclear power while promoting the film . After the accident , Teller acted quickly to lobby in favor of nuclear energy , testifying to its safety and reliability , and soon after one flurry of activity suffered the attack . He signed a two @-@ page @-@ spread ad in the July 31 , 1979 , Wall Street Journal with the headline " I was the only victim of Three @-@ Mile Island " . It opened with : 
 On May 7 , a few weeks after the accident at Three @-@ Mile Island , I was in Washington . I was there to refute some of that propaganda that Ralph Nader , Jane Fonda and their kind are spewing to the news media in their attempt to frighten people away from nuclear power . I am 71 years old , and I was working 20 hours a day . The strain was too much . The next day , I suffered a heart attack . You might say that I was the only one whose health was affected by that reactor near Harrisburg . No , that would be wrong . It was not the reactor . It was Jane Fonda . Reactors are not dangerous . 
 = = Strategic Defense Initiative = = 
 In the 1980s , Teller began a strong campaign for what was later called the Strategic Defense Initiative ( SDI ) , derided by critics as " Star Wars , " the concept of using ground and satellite @-@ based lasers , particle beams and missiles to destroy incoming Soviet ICBMs . Teller lobbied with government agencies — and got the approval of President Ronald Reagan — for a plan to develop a system using elaborate satellites which used atomic weapons to fire X @-@ ray lasers at incoming missiles — as part of a broader scientific research program into defenses against nuclear weapons . 
 Scandal erupted when Teller ( and his associate Lowell Wood ) were accused of deliberately overselling the program and perhaps had encouraged the dismissal of a laboratory director ( Roy Woodruff ) who had attempted to correct the error . His claims led to a joke which circulated in the scientific community , that a new unit of unfounded optimism was designated as the teller ; one teller was so large that most events had to be measured in <unk> or <unk> . 
 Many prominent scientists argued that the system was futile . Hans Bethe , along with IBM physicist Richard Garwin and Cornell University colleague Kurt Gottfried , wrote an article in Scientific American which analyzed the system and concluded that any putative enemy could disable such a system by the use of suitable decoys that would cost a very small fraction of the SDI program . 
 In 1987 Teller published a book supporting civil defense and active protection systems such as SDI which was titled Better a Shield than a Sword and his views on the role of lasers in SDI were published , and are available , in two 1986 @-@ 7 laser conference proceedings . 
 = = Asteroid impact avoidance = = 
 At a 1995 meeting at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory ( LLNL ) in Calif . , Edward Teller proposed to a collective of U.S. and Russian ex @-@ Cold War weapons designers and space engineers the use of nuclear fusion warheads in diverting the paths of extinction event class asteroids . Edward Teller suggested the creation of an orbital platform for faster missile delivery . He further suggested the need for nuclear weapons more powerful than the Tsar Bomba for this purpose . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Teller died in Stanford , California on September 9 , 2003 , at the age of 95 . He had suffered a stroke two days previous , and had long been suffering from a number of conditions related to his advanced age . 
 A wish for his 100th birthday , made around the time of his 90th , was for Lawrence Livermore 's scientists to give him " excellent predictions @-@ calculations and experiments @-@ about the interiors of the planets " . 
 In his early career , Teller made contributions to nuclear and molecular physics , spectroscopy ( the Jahn – Teller and Renner – Teller effects ) , and surface physics . His extension of Fermi 's theory of beta decay ( in the form of the so @-@ called Gamow – Teller transitions ) provided an important stepping stone in the applications of this theory . The Jahn – Teller effect and the BET theory have retained their original formulation and are still mainstays in physics and chemistry . Teller also made contributions to Thomas – Fermi theory , the precursor of density functional theory , a standard modern tool in the quantum mechanical treatment of complex molecules . In 1953 , along with Nicholas Metropolis and Marshall Rosenbluth , Teller co @-@ authored a paper which is a standard starting point for the applications of the Monte Carlo method to statistical mechanics . 
 Teller 's vigorous advocacy for strength through nuclear weapons , especially when so many of his wartime colleagues later expressed regret about the arms race , made him an easy target for the " mad scientist " stereotype . In 1991 he was awarded one of the first Ig Nobel Prizes for Peace in recognition of his " lifelong efforts to change the meaning of peace as we know it " . He was also rumored to be one of the inspirations for the character of Dr. Strangelove in Stanley Kubrick 's 1964 satirical film of the same name ( others speculated to be RAND theorist Herman Kahn , mathematician John von Neumann , rocket scientist Wernher von Braun , and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara ) . In the aforementioned Scientific American interview from 1999 , he was reported as having bristled at the question : " My name is not Strangelove . I don 't know about Strangelove . I 'm not interested in Strangelove . What else can I say ? ... Look . Say it three times more , and I throw you out of this office . " 
 Nobel Prize winning physicist Isidor I. Rabi once suggested that " It would have been a better world without Teller . " In addition , Teller 's false claims that Stanislaw Ulam made no significant contribution to the development of the hydrogen bomb ( despite Ulam 's key insights of using compression and staging elements to generate the thermonuclear reaction ) and his personal attacks on Oppenheimer caused great animosity towards Teller within the general physics community . 
 In 1986 , he was awarded the United States Military Academy 's Sylvanus Thayer Award . He was elected a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences in 1948 . He was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , the American Association for the Advancement of Science , and the American Nuclear Society . Among the honors he received were the Albert Einstein Award in 1958 , the Enrico Fermi Award in 1962 , the <unk> Medal in 1980 , the Harvey Prize in 1975 , the National Medal of Science in 1983 , the Presidential Citizens Medal in 1989 , and the Corvin Chain in 2001 . He was also named as part of the group of " U.S. Scientists " who were Time magazine 's People of the Year in 1960 , and an asteroid , <unk> Teller , is named after him . He was awarded with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush in 2003 , less than two months before his death . His final paper , published posthumously , advocated the construction of a prototype liquid fluoride thorium reactor . 
 = Halo 2 Original Soundtrack = 
 The Halo 2 Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack for Bungie 's 2004 video game Halo 2 . The soundtrack was released as two separate volumes , released almost two years apart . Volume 1 , released at the same time as Halo 2 on November 9 , 2004 , contains arranged instrumental pieces written by Martin O 'Donnell and his partner Michael Salvatori , as well as " inspired by " tracks from bands Incubus , Hoobastank and Breaking Benjamin . Volume 2 was released on April 25 , 2006 and contains all the game music arranged in a suite form . 
 O 'Donnell , who had previously composed the music for Bungie games such as Myth and Halo : Combat Evolved , sought to develop the " Halo sound " of the previous game as well as introduce new sounds and influences to the music . The music was based on what was happening in the game , rather than using leitmotifs or theme repetitively . The music was recorded in pieces with a fifty @-@ piece orchestra at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . To mark its release both Microsoft and Sumthing Else Music Works planned an aggressive marketing campaign . 
 Upon release , the music of Halo 2 was well received . Critics were split on the merits of Volume 1 , with some publications enjoying the bonus offerings while others felt the first volume lacked cohesion . Volume 2 was declared the " real " soundtrack to Halo 2 . Upon release both soundtracks became commercial successes , with more than 100 @,@ 000 copies sold . The soundtracks ' success was pointed to as a sign of increasing legitimacy of video game music in the entertainment industry . Halo 's music has since been played in concert settings , including Play ! A Video Game Symphony and Video Games Live . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the summer of 2004 , Halo 2 composer Martin O 'Donnell and album producer Nile Rodgers decided it would be a good idea to present Halo 2 's music in two distinct volumes . The first volume would contain the game 's themes that were finished and mixed as well as " inspired @-@ by " offerings from other artists . The first volume was released alongside the video game as Volume 1 on November 9 of the same year . As the soundtrack was finished before all the in @-@ game music was completed , none of the tracks written by O 'Donnell appear in Halo 2 in the same arrangement . The bands featured in Volume 1 , including Breaking Benjamin and Incubus , were enthusiastic about adding music to the soundtrack . Incubus was tapped to produce a suite of music which appears scattered throughout the soundtrack as four movements . Incubus guitarist Mike Einziger said that " Halo is the only video game that ever inspired us to write a whole suite [ of music ] . " 
 The first pieces of music O 'Donnell wrote for Halo 2 were promotional in nature ; O 'Donnell scored the cinematic announcement trailer for Halo 2 on August 2 , 2002 , and followed up with interactive music for the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2003 Halo 2 demo . O 'Donnell confirmed that the chanting monks of Halo : Combat Evolved 's choral theme , along with additional guitars by Steve Vai , would return in Halo 2 . O 'Donnell noted that the new setting of Africa prompted him to look at " Afro @-@ Cuban " influences , but most of this type of music did not make it to the final product . Rather than write for locations or use leitmotifs for all the different characters in what O 'Donnell called a " Peter and the Wolf approach to music " , O 'Donnell wrote " sad music for sad moments , scary music to score the scary bits and so forth . " Recurring themes developed more by accident than planning . Recording of orchestrated music was completed over several sessions with the Northwest <unk> orchestra at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . 
 Nile Rodgers produced both volumes of the soundtrack , in addition to writing and performing the track " Never Surrender " in collaboration with songwriter / remixer Nataraj . Rodgers himself is a video game player , noting in an interview that " 30 % to 40 % of the [ recording ] budget was spent in downtime playing video games . Since all that money was going to that part of the recording session , I decided to figure out what was so compelling about it , and I got hooked [ by the game ] . " 
 Due to legal issues , the second Halo 2 soundtrack containing the entire finished score , Volume 2 , was not released until more than a year after the soundtrack had been mixed and mastered . The volume 's music is formatted in a ' suite ' structure that corresponds with the chapters within the game , or order to create a " music representation " of the video game . O 'Donnell stated that this presentation of the music as a concept album was natural because the overall story and atmosphere of Halo 2 directly influenced the sound to begin with . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The first volume of the Halo 2 Original Soundtrack was specifically timed to coincide with the launch of the video game , to cash in on the " Halo effect " ; players would go to buy the game and get the soundtrack and other merchandise by association . The first several million copies of the game sold all contained promotional inserts for the soundtrack . The soundtrack was seen as an integral part of the marketing and merchandise push Microsoft planned for Halo 2 . The soundtrack 's publisher , Sumthing Distribution , also planned and executed an aggressive marketing campaign , including special music listening stations and side @-@ by @-@ side soundtrack and game placement at participating retailers . The " Halo Theme MJOLNIR Mix " , the first track on Volume 1 , was released on November 22 , 2007 as a free track for Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock on the Xbox 360 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , the reaction to Halo 2 's score was generally positive . Reception for the two soundtrack releases , however , varied . Volume 1 's inclusion of other artists in addition to original music received both praise and criticism . Mike Brennan Soundtrack.net 's review claimed that the inclusion of Hoobastank and Breaking Benjamin as well as Incubus made the soundtrack " more harsh " sounding but overall lacked cohesion . On the other hand , G4 TV found the four @-@ part Odyssey by Incubus comprised " a progressive rock / fusion jam the likes of which haven 't been recorded since the 1970s . " 
 <unk> declared that Volume 2 was the soundtrack that fans had been waiting for ; other publications agreed , saying that it " feels like the real soundtrack to Halo 2 " . IGN found the soundtrack ultimately enjoyable , but felt that the more traditional orchestration that appeared in Halo 2 clashed with the ambient and electronic sounds that had appeared before , making the album " divided " . 
 Overall , the Halo 2 soundtracks sold well . Volume 1 sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies , and peaked at the number 162 position of the Billboard 200 , the first video game soundtrack to ever enter the chart . This compares favorably to typical movie soundtracks , which generally sell no more than 10 @,@ 000 copies . The Halo 2 Original Soundtrack 's success was pointed to as a sign of increasing legitimacy of video game music in the entertainment industry , which had graduated from " simple beeps " to complex melodies with big budgets . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = Volume 1 = = = 
 = = = Volume 2 = = = 
 All music composed by Martin O 'Donnell , Michael Salvatori . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the CD credits . 
 Martin O 'Donnell ( ASCAP ) – composer 
 Michael Salvatori ( ASCAP ) – composer 
 Simon James – concert master / contractor 
 Christian Knapp – Northwest Sinfonia conductor 
 Marcie O 'Donnell – choir conductor 
 Nile Rodgers – producer 
 Nile Rodgers , Michael Ostin - music co @-@ supervisors 
 Lorraine McLees - album art director 
 = Wicked Priest = 
 Wicked Priest ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; Romanized Hebrew : ha @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> 'ā ) is a sobriquet used in the Dead Sea scrolls pesharim , four [ 1 ] times in the Habakkuk Commentary ( 1QpHab ) and once in the Commentary on Psalm 37 ( 4QpPsa ) , to refer to an opponent of the " Teacher of Righteousness . " It has been suggested [ 2 ] that the phrase is a pun on " ha @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> " , as meaning " the High Priest " , but this is not the proper term for the High Priest . He is generally identified with a Hasmonean ( Maccabean ) High Priest or Priests . However , his exact identification remains controversial , and has been called " one of the <unk> problems connected with the Dead Sea Scrolls . " 
 The most commonly argued @-@ for single candidate is Jonathan Maccabaeus , followed by Simon Maccabaeus ; the widespread acceptance of this view , despite its acknowledged weaknesses , has been dubbed the " Jonathan consensus . " More recently , some scholars have argued that the sobriquet does not refer to only one individual . Most notably the " Groningen Hypothesis " advanced by García Martinez and van der Woude , argues for a series of six Wicked Priests . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Habakkuk Commentary ( 1QpHab ) was one of the original seven Dead Sea Scrolls discovered in 1947 and published in 1951 . The thirteen @-@ column scroll is a <unk> , or " interpretation " , of the Book of Habakkuk . The Commentary on Psalm 37 is one of the three pesharim on the Book of Psalms and the only other Dead Sea scroll to use the sobriquet . Psalm 37 has been said to have " the strongest literary and thematic links " with the Book of Habakkuk , compared to the other Psalms , and the language of Psalm 37 is borrowed by the Habakkuk <unk> in the commentary on Hab . 2 : 17 . The similar language and themes of the Commentaries on Habakkuk and Psalm 37 have been suggested as evidence of common authorship , or at least similar interpretive methods . 
 Radiocarbon dating tests conducted on 1QpHab and 4QpPsa at the Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Facility gave a one standard deviation confidence interval of 104 @-@ 43 BCE and a two sigma confidence interval of 120 @-@ 5 BCE ( 97 % ) ; for 4QpPsa ( <unk> ) the one standard deviation confidence interval was 22 @-@ 78 CE and the two sigma confidence interval was 5 @-@ 111 CE . Earlier paleographic dating of 1QpHab indicated a date range of 30 @-@ 1 BCE . 
 The prediction of column 7 of 1QpHab that " the final age shall be prolonged " is sometimes interpreted to mean that the Habakkuk Commentary was written approximately 40 years after the death of the Teacher of Righteousness — the time when the final age should have ended , according to the Damascus Document . 
 = = Text = = 
 = = Description = = 
 The references to the Wicked Priest have been divided into three overlapping themes : violence against the Teacher of Righteousness and his followers , cultic transgressions and non @-@ observance , and divine punishment against the Wicked Priest for these acts . 
 = = = Role in the history of the Qumran community = = = 
 Many scholars have gleaned from this passage that the Wicked Priest and the Teacher of Righteousness followed different liturgical calendars , thus enabling the Wicked Priest to travel on Yom Kippur ; some have even suggested that the Teacher of Righteousness was a schismatic High Priest during the pre @-@ Jonathan <unk> . 
 = = = " Illegitimate Priest " = = = 
 Several scholars have interpreted the <unk> of " Wicked Priest " as meaning " Illegitimate Priest , " i.e. not of <unk> lineage . Some interpret 1QpHab 8 @.@ 9 @-@ 10 — that the Wicked Priest was " called by the name of truth when he first arose " — as the initial acceptance of the Wicked Priest by the Qumran community , before Jonathan combined the diarchy of the Kingship and the Priesthood . The " Groningen Hypothesis " also follows this interpretation , based not on evidence from the pesharim but rather from external sources , namely 1 and 2 Maccabees and Josephus 
 Other scholars , however , argue that hereditary illegitimacy is not listed among the indiscretions of the Wicked Priest , and that this interpretation has been foisted upon the text by decades of questionable interpretation . Collins argues further that there is no evidence in the Community Rule or the Damascus Document to support the view that the Qumran community was concerned with the legitimacy of a non @-@ <unk> High Priest . 
 = = Other possible references = = 
 Suggested equivalents of the Wicked Priest are scattered throughout the pesharim . <unk> ( <unk> ) mentions " an accursed man , one of Belial " who — with his sons as accomplices — spilt blood " on the breastwork of Lady Zion . " Some scholars consider <unk> a reference to the Wicked Priest , arguing that it fits Simon , who was murdered with his two sons : Judas and Mattathias . 
 The Nahum Commentary ( <unk> ) contains numerous explicit references to historical figures , including Alexander Jannaeus , the " furious young lion " who takes revenge on the " seekers of smooth things " for inviting " Demetrius " to conquer Jerusalem . Vermes regards the Nahum Commentary as describing " an age following that of the Teacher of Righteousness and the Wicked Priest , " but interprets the " furious young lion " of <unk> 2 : 2 @-@ 3 as " the last Priest . " The liturgical calendar of <unk> , <unk> @-@ b also drops some names associated with various proposed Wicked Priests . The " <unk> " in Jerusalem from <unk> have also been suggested as followers of the Wicked Priest . 
 = = = The Liar = = = 
 Some scholars do not differentiate between the Wicked Priest and the Liar ( " Man of the Lie " , <unk> <unk> ) , another sobriquet used in 1QpHab . For example , the description of the liar building " his city of vanity with blood " ( 1QpHab 10 @.@ 10 ) has been marshaled another clue to the identity of the Wicked Priest . 
 The best evidence for distinguishing between the two figures is that the Liar is always associated with " false doctrine and the act of misleading " whereas the Wicked Priest is associated with " cultic transgressions and non @-@ observance . " Indeed , such a separation has been suggested even without recourse to sources outside the Commentary on Habakkuk . 
 = = Proposed identifications = = 
 Since the time of de Vaux , the default assumption has been that the Wicked Priest is a single individual , if only because of the appealing parallelism to the Teacher of Righteousness . The consensus time period for the founding of Qumran ( 150 @-@ 140 BCE ) includes five High Priests : three Hellenized and two Maccabean : Jason , Menelaus , Alcimus , Jonathan , and Simon , and also the various figures potentially associated with the <unk> . 
 Various early theories situated the Wicked Priest within time periods running the full gamut from the pre @-@ <unk> period , to that of early Christianity , to that of the Crusades . However , that the Wicked Priest " ruled over Israel " ( 1QpHab 8 @.@ 10 ) and was able to partake in " plundering " ( 9 @.@ 7 ) has persuaded most scholars to exclude from consideration the predecessors of the Hasmonean High Priests , who did not share their ability to attack other nations militarily , having been militarily subjugated to Egypt or Syria , and their successors , who were dominated by the Romans . To a lesser extent , that the Wicked Priest was once called " by the name of the truth " ( 8 @.@ 8 @-@ 9 ) is used to disqualify the pre @-@ Maccabean , Hellenized High Priests , who were not held in high regard by their coreligionists . 
 Similarly , post @-@ Hasmonean High Priests have not received much serious attention because the " <unk> " ( identifiable as the Romans due to the distinct practice of " sacrifice to their standards " attested to in 1QpHab 6 @.@ 6 ) are referred to in the imperfect and none of the characters associated with the beginning of the Qumran community would have come into contact with the Romans 
 The " Maccabean theory " — as advanced by Cross , <unk> , and Vermes — traditionally identifies the Wicked Priest as either Jonathan or Simon . 
 = = = Jonathan = = = 
 Jonathan is the most commonly identified single candidate for the identity of the Wicked Priest . The most popularly accepted piece of evidence for the identification of Jonathan is his " death at the hands of the Gentiles , " a characteristic shared only by Menelaus ( 172 @-@ 162 BCE ) , who is generally chronologically excluded . 1 Maccabees 13 recounts the capture and execution of Jonathan at <unk> ( in modern Jordan ) by Diodotus Tryphon , the general of Seleucid King Alexander <unk> , which some have attempted to fit with this incident . However , there is no compelling textual basis that the " enemies " who " took vengeance on this body of flesh " ( 1QpHab 9 @.@ 2 ) need be Gentiles . Nor can Jonathan be accurately said to have died of " disease . " 
 The so @-@ called " King Jonathan Fragment " ( <unk> ) has been used both to argue against his identification or for it by connecting it to the Wicked Priest to having been originally " called by the name of truth . " 
 = = = Alexander Jannaeus = = = 
 Alexander Jannaeus died , according to Josephus , of quartan fever and alcoholism , which has been compared to the references to " disease " and " drunkenness " of the Wicked Priest . Jannaeus also may lay claim to the " delivered into the hands of his enemies " passage because , according to Jewish Antiquities ( 13 : 13 @.@ 5 ) , he succumbed to an ambush by " <unk> , the King of the Arabs " before escaping to Jerusalem . The same passage has also been suggested as a pun on Jannaeus ’ s verbose moniker ( as attested to by contemporary coins , pictured ) — <unk> ( " Yahweh gave " ) , often shorted as <unk> — a pun which allegedly also occurs in 1QpHab 10 @.@ 3 @-@ 5 . 
 Jannaeus ’ s " fortification , or beautification " of Jerusalem has been compared to the Wicked Priest 's illicit building activities . The Wicked Priests pursuit of the Teacher of Righteousness to the " house of his exile " ( 1QpHab 11 @.@ 6 ) on the " Day of Atonement " ( 11 @.@ 7 @-@ 8 ) has also been compared to Jannaeus ’ s known attack on the Pharisees on the Feast of <unk> . 
 = = = Antigonus Mattathias = = = 
 Antigonus Mattathias was proposed as the figure of the Wicked Priest in 2013 by Gregory Doudna . Antigonus was the last Hasmonean king of Israel , executed by the Romans in 37 BCE . 
 Doudna also proposes that Hyrcanus II was seen as the Teacher of Righteousness . According to Doudna , Hyrcanus II ’ s sectarian orientation is now generally understood to have been <unk> ; whereas Antigonus was more sympathetic towards the Pharisees . 
 = = = Multiple Wicked Priests = = = 
 Several scholars argue that there is no one High Priest who is the strongest candidate for identification with each of the Wicked Priest passages . The different demises of the Wicked Priest and the tenses associated with them are often cited as evidence of the impossibility of a single Wicked Priest . 
 Biblical examples of a title applied to a series of successors include Daniel 11 , [ 3 ] where " King of the North " and " King of the South " can apply to multiple Seleucid and Ptolemaic kings , respectively ; other potential sobriquets and titles in the pesharim that can refer to a multiplicity of people include : the " Teacher of Righteousness " ( both the founder and future eschatological teacher of the Qumran community ) , the " Searcher of the Law " ( both the Teacher of Righteousness and another eschatological figure ) , and " Anointed " ( both past prophets and future priests or kings ) . 
 = = = = Groningen hypothesis = = = = 
 The " Groningen hypothesis " advanced by Florentino García Martinez , later together with A.S. van der Woude , interprets columns 8 to 12 of 1QpHab as describing six Wicked Priests in chronological ( but not absolute , sequential order as Aristobulus I is excluded ) . The six " Groningen " High Priests are : Judas Maccabeus ( 8 @.@ 8 @-@ 13 ) , Alcimus ( 8 @.@ 16 @-@ 9 @.@ 2 ) , Jonathan ( 9 @.@ 9 @-@ 12 ) , Simon ( 9 @.@ 16 @-@ 10 @.@ 5 ) , John Hyrcanus I ( 11 @.@ 4 @-@ 8 ) , and Alexander Jannaeus ( 11 @.@ 12 @-@ 12 @.@ 10 ) . The pontificate of Alexander Jannaeus was to overlap with the writing of the Habakkuk Commentary but not the life of the Teacher of Righteousness . 
 The " Groningen hypothesis " argues that relative clauses and the perfect are used to describe ( and disambiguate ) the first five Wicked Priests , while an absolute clause and the imperfect are used to describe the sixth Wicked Priest . However , Lim contends that this requires the granting of " a number of debatable changes to the text , " and argues that the relative pronoun is used in the final columns in relation to the " sixth " Wicked Priest . Furthermore , the " second " and " fourth " Wicked Priests are not explicitly referred to as such in the Habakkuk Commentary but rather " the priest who rebelled " ( 8 @.@ 16 ) and " the [ Priest ] who … " ( 9 @.@ 16 ) , respectively . 
 The positing of Judas as the " first " Wicked Priest is attested to in Josephus ( JA 12 : 4 @.@ 14 , 19 , 34 ) , but later contradicted ( 20 : 10 @.@ 3 ) , and precluded by 1 Maccabees 9 , which states that Judas died before Alcimus . Van der Woude reverts to 1 Maccabees 9 for the order of the High Priests . John Hyrcanus I is assigned the role of the " fifth " Wicked Priest — the one who pursues the Teacher of Righteousness to his house of exile — merely because it fits the preconceived sequence and in the absence of any documentary evidence . John Hyrcanus I is chosen over Aristobulus I only because of the shortness of the latter ’ s reign . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Alternative identifications of the Wicked Priest include <unk> ben <unk> ( cf . Robert <unk> ) . and Jesus ( cf . Barbara <unk> ) 
 = Saitō Hajime ( Rurouni Kenshin ) = 
 Saitō Hajime ( <unk> 一 ) , known as Hajime Saito in the English @-@ language anime dubs , is a fictional character from the Rurouni Kenshin manga and anime series created by Nobuhiro Watsuki . Being a fan of the Shinsengumi , Watsuki created Saitō as an anti @-@ heroic foil to Himura Kenshin , the main character of the story , while basing him on the real life Shinsengumi member of the same name . 
 Set during a fictional version of Japan in the Meiji period , Saitō , known as the " Mibu no Okami " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Wolf of Mibu " ) , is the former third squad captain of the Shinsengumi , a pro @-@ shogunate force . During the Bakumatsu , he had a long time rivalry with Himura Kenshin , an assassin of the Imperialist cause . In the series , he is initially introduced as an antagonist who encounters and once again duels with Kenshin . It is later revealed that Saitō , who had only been testing Kenshin 's strength , is now a spy agent working for the Meiji Government . After the reveal , Saitō becomes one of the main protagonists of the series , forming an uneasy alliance with Kenshin . 
 Saitō appears in the featured movies of the series , as well as the original video animation ( OVA ) series and other media relating to the franchise , including a wide range of electronic games . He has also been one of the most popular characters of the Rurouni Kenshin series , ranking near the top of the series ' popularity polls . His character is featured in various types of merchandising developed for the series , such as figurines and key @-@ chains . Several anime and manga publications have commented on Saitō 's character . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Nobuhiro Watsuki based Saitō Hajime on the actual historic figure of the same name who was the captain of the third squad of the Shinsengumi in the Meiji era . Watsuki altered the character to a higher degree than the other historic figures who appear in Rurouni Kenshin since the character Saitō has a greater role in the story than the other characters . In the development of Rurouni Kenshin Watsuki planned for Saitō to be a " dirty " hero who maintains his " Swift Death to Evil " policy and does not become friendly with Kenshin 's group , being rather aloof to them . Hajime has no specific model for his design . Since Watsuki intended for the character Saitō to be a villain , he made the character 's face " villain @-@ ish . " 
 Watsuki considers Saitō as the " curse " of the villains in the series since he defeats the enemies who consider themselves the strongest . Watsuki came up with the idea of the Gatotsu sword technique that Saitō uses in the series from the fact that the historical figure 's favorite move was the " left single @-@ handed thrust , " or <unk> , a technique mainly for slashing downward , stabbing , and thrusts . Watsuki gave Saitō 's left @-@ handed technique the name " Gatotsu " to fit with the action comic theme . 
 In July 2006 , the Japanese publishers of Rurouni Kenshin released the kanzenban edition . In the sixth kanzenban volume , Watsuki included a draft page featuring a redesigned appearance of Saitō 's character . 
 In the anime adaptation of Rurouni Kenshin , Watsuki 's designs of Saitō were combined with the talents of voice actor Hirotaka Suzuoki , who also voiced Saitō in the original video animations and Rurouni Kenshin : The Motion Picture . However , due to Suzuoki 's death in 2006 , he was replaced by Ken Narita as the new voice actor for Saitō in the two @-@ part Rurouni Kenshin : New Kyoto Arc movies . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Rurouni Kenshin = = = 
 Saitō Hajime , known as the " Mibu no Okami " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Wolf of Mibu " ) , is the former captain of the third squad of the Shinsengumi , a loyalist force of the Tokugawa shogunate . A powerful and ruthless swordsman , Saitō lives by the code " Aku <unk> Zan " ( <unk> ? , Swift Death to Evil ) , and frequently fights using the Gatotsu , a special left @-@ handed stab variant of the <unk> technique of the Shinsengumi , and its different stances . During his time in the Shinsengumi , he was a close associate of fellow Shinsengumi member and first squad captain Okita Sōji , and also developed a rivalry with the pro @-@ Imperialist Himura Kenshin . At the end of the Bakumatsu , the pro @-@ shogunate forces were ultimately defeated and Saitō was forced to go into hiding . He later changed his name to Fujita Gorō ( <unk> <unk> ) and started working for the Meiji Government as a spy agent . Saitō is also married to a woman named Tokio ( <unk> ) , who does not appear in the story . 
 In his introduction in the series , Saitō attacks and seriously injures Sagara Sanosuke . Saitō has been hired by Shibumi , a corrupt politician , to kill Kenshin ; thus , his attack on Sanosuke serving as a warning to Kenshin . While Kenshin is dueling Shibumi 's assassin Akamatsu Arundo , Saitō appears at the Kamiya dojo , using his alias " Fujita Gorō " , and poses as a police officer who urgently needs to speak with Kenshin . When Kenshin returns , upon recognizing Saitō , he reveals Saitō 's true identity as the former Shinsengumi third squad captain . They fight , and just as they are about to kill each other , Ōkubo Toshimichi appears and stops the duel , revealing that Saitō was only testing Kenshin 's abilities to see if he was skilled enough to face Shishio Makoto . Having revealed his true allegiance with Ōkubo , Saitō postpones the duel , and leaves to kill Shibumi and Arundo . 
 Saitō then travels to Kyoto to fight Shishio under government orders . Along with Kenshin and Sanosuke , he assaults Shishio 's battleship , the Purgatory . Accepting Shishio 's challenge to fight on Mount Hiei , Saitō kills <unk> Usui , one of the Ten Swords , and later ambushes Shishio , almost , but failing to kill him as Shishio had been wearing a <unk> ( iron headband ) . Months later , Saitō is sent to arrest Yukishiro Enishi and he helps Kenshin fight against The Six Comrades , defeating <unk> <unk> . He also fights against the first of the four <unk> @-@ shin guards of Woo <unk> , Enishi 's second @-@ in @-@ command , and defeats him . Afterwards , Saitō is transferred to work in another location after rejecting the continuation of his duel with Kenshin . Five years after the end of series , it is revealed that Saitō continues to work for the government . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 In the movie Rurouni Kenshin : The Motion Picture , Saitō is assigned by the government to stop the samurai Takimi Shigure from overthrowing the Meiji Government as an act of revenge . He also receives assistance from Himura Kenshin to protect a foreign minister from the rebels . Saitō makes an appearance in the two @-@ part New Kyoto Arc movies , where some of his scenes and fights from the manga series are altered and removed . 
 Saitō also appears in both of the original video animation ( OVA ) series . In Rurouni Kenshin : Trust & Betrayal , his role and activities as a Shinsengumi captain during the Bakumatsu are depicted . As a result of his involvement in the <unk> Affair , he and his Shinsengumi comrades successfully prevent the burning of Kyoto by an extremist faction of the Ishin Shishi . His interactions with Okita Sōji as well as his first encounter with Himura Kenshin are also shown . Saitō has very brief cameo appearance in a flashback scene of Rurouni Kenshin : Reflection . 
 Saitō is also a playable character in the Rurouni Kenshin video games . He also appears in Jump Super Stars and Jump Ultimate Stars , but not as a playable character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Saitō has been well received by manga readers and as the series continued he went on to become one of the most popular characters among the Rurouni Kenshin reader base , having consistently placed near the top of the Weekly Shōnen Jump character popularity polls of the series , ranking third in the last two . He has also ranked second in the " Who is the best enemy of Kenshin ? " poll featuring all Kenshin 's opponents . Two polls by the official Rurouni Kenshin anime featured Saitō as one of the series ' most popular characters . In the " Favorite Character Then " poll , Saitō was ranked third , while in the " Favorite Character Now " he was also placed third . Saitō 's design initially received negative feedback from Shinsengumi fans who believed that Saitō had a more handsome face than the face Watsuki used . Watsuki also recalled that one of the complaints criticized Saitō 's selling of " Ishida powdered medicine " from the Hijikata family . Later , Watsuki was pleased with the fact that Saitō 's popularity with fans increased as the story progressed . A plethora of merchandise have been released in Saitō 's likeness including figurines , keychains and wall scroll posters . 
 Several anime and manga publications have provided praise for Saitō . His fight scenes in the series , in particular , have also been acclaimed . While reviewing the volume 7 from the manga , Mania Entertainment writer Megan Lavey applauded the fight between Himura Kenshin and Saito Hajime at the Kamiya Dojo as the " high spot of the [ Kyoto Arc ] high spot " . In the volume 14 review for the manga , Lavey described the end of the fight between Saitō and Usui as " very gruesome and not for the faint of heart " . In the DVD volume 7 review for the anime , Mania Entertainment 's Chris Beveridge described the fight scene between Saitō and Kenshin as " definitely choreographed well " . He praised " the viciousness in the attacks , masked under their cold calculating facade " as being " wonderfully done , providing a real feel for these ultimate killers " . His appearance in the OVAs has also received praise . Mike Crandol of Anime News Network states that during the character 's brief appearances in the Rurouni Kenshin : Reflection OVA series , he appears to be " truly menacing . " Mark A. Grey of Anime News Network said that the song " <unk> <unk> ( Howling Wolf of Mibu ) " in the anime series " perfectly " represents the character . 
 = Boricua Popular Army = 
 The Boricua Popular / People 's Army - or Ejército Popular Boricua in Spanish - is a clandestine organization based in Puerto Rico , with cells in the U.S. mainland . It campaigns for , and supports , the independence of Puerto Rico from the United States . In 2001 , FBI Director Louis J. Freeh linked the group to acts of terrorism , but some authors , including Ronald Fernandez , view such labeling as political convenience by the United States Government , intended to " shift the blame for any attacks on U.S. policy or personnel from us to them " . 
 Also known as Los Macheteros ( " The Machete <unk> " ) and the Puerto Rican Popular Army , their active membership was calculated in 2006 by professor Michael González Cruz , in his book Nacionalismo Revolucionario Puertorriqueño , to consist of approximately 5 @,@ 700 members with an additional unknown number of supporters , sympathizers , collaborators and informants throughout the U.S. and other countries . A report by The Economist placed the number of active members at 1 @,@ 100 , excluding supporters . The group claimed responsibility for the 1978 bombing of a small power station in the San Juan area , the 1979 retaliation attacks against the United States armed forces personnel , the 1981 attacks on Puerto Rico Air National Guard aircraft , and a 1983 Wells Fargo bank robbery . 
 Boricua Popular Army was led primarily by former FBI fugitive Filiberto Ojeda Ríos until his killing by the FBI in 2005 . Ojeda Rios 's killing was termed " an illegal killing " by the Government of Puerto Rico 's Comision de Derechos <unk> ( Civil Rights Commission ) after a 7 @-@ year investigation and a 227 @-@ page report issued on 22 September 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The name <unk> evokes images of an impromptu band of Puerto Ricans who assembled to defend the island of Puerto Rico from the invading forces of the United States Army during the Spanish – American War , between July 26 and August 12 , 1898 . Macheteros de Puerto Rico were dispatched throughout the island , working in cooperation with other voluntary groups including the <unk> de la Paz in Yauco and <unk> de <unk> in San Juan . These voluntary units were involved in most of the battles in the Puerto Rican Campaign . Their last involvement was in the Battle of Asomante , where along units led by Captain Hernaíz , defended Aibonito Pass from invading units . The allied offensive was effective , prompting a retreat order from the American side . However , the following morning the signing of the Treaty of Paris was made public . Subsequently , both Spanish and Puerto Rican soldiers and volunteers disengaged and Puerto Rico was annexed by the United States . 
 The Boricua Popular Army was organized in the 1970s by Filiberto Ojeda Ríos , Juan Enrique Segarra @-@ Palmer and Orlando González Claudio . The group began its operations in 1976 , however it can trace its origins back to the Armed Forces of National Liberation ( FALN ) . 
 Upon its beginnings , the group attracted a wide variety of Puerto Rican independence supporters , including some of the members of the University Pro @-@ Independence Federation of Puerto Rico ( <unk> ) and the Pro @-@ Independence Movement . 
 = = = Under Ojeda Ríos ' command = = = 
 In August 1978 , the group accepted responsibility for the murder of San Juan police officer Julio Rodríguez Rivera while attempting to steal his police car . 
 In 1979 , two attacks were made on unarmed US Navy technicians . In the first , on December 3 , Macheteros opened fire on a bus carrying sailors to Naval Security Group Activity Sabana Seca , killing <unk> John R. Ball and <unk> Emil E. White , as well as wounding nine others . A second attack , on off @-@ duty sailors returning from liberty , killed one and wounded three . The attack was in retaliation for the murder in a prison of a member of the Macheteros by the prison guards who were retired Marines . 
 On January 12 , 1981 , in the 1981 Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport attack , <unk> commandos infiltrated the Puerto Rico Air National Guard 's Muñiz Air National Guard Base , located on the northeastern corner of the Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport in San Juan . The infiltrators destroyed or damaged ten A @-@ 7 Corsair II light attack aircraft and a single F @-@ 104 Starfighter supersonic fighter @-@ interceptor aircraft . Total damages were estimated to be in excess of $ 45 million in 1981 US dollars . The subsequent investigation concluded security at the base was so lax that the attackers managed to enter and depart the base without ever being detected . The attack later served as the basis for upgrading base security , especially flight line security , at all Air National Guard installations on civilian airports in the United States to the same level as active duty U.S. Air Force installations . 
 On September 12 , 1983 , in an operation entitled Águila Blanca ( White Eagle ) the group assaulted the Wells Fargo depot located in West Hartford , Connecticut stealing a total of seven million dollars . After the robbery , the Macheteros threw some of the stolen money into the air from high floor buildings and used most of the remaining sum to fund their continued operations . According to a written statement from the Macheteros , the action was a symbolic protest against the " greed @-@ infested men and mechanisms which strain our elected officials , government agencies , and social aspirations in this country , as well as in Puerto Rico . " 
 In 1998 , Los Macheteros claimed responsibility for an explosion at a small power station in the San Juan metropolitan area . The explosion caused limited power outages . 
 On September 23 , 2005 , the anniversary of " el Grito de Lares " ( " The Cry of Lares " ) members of the FBI San Juan field office surrounded a modest home in the outskirts of the town of Hormigueros , Puerto Rico , where Ojeda Ríos was believed to be living in . The FBI claims that it was performing surveillance of the area because of reports that Ojeda Ríos had been seen in the home . In their press release , the FBI stated their surveillance team was detected , and proceeded to serving an arrest warrant against Ojeda Ríos . The FBI claims that as the agents approached the home , shots were fired from inside and outside the house wounding an FBI agent . The FBI alleges it then returned fire fatally wounding Ojeda Ríos . A subsequent autopsy of Ojeda 's body determined that he bled to death over the course of 15 to 30 minutes . The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico Civil Rights Commission started an investigation of the incident shortly after Ojeda Rios ' death that lasted 7 years . The 227 @-@ page report issued on 22 September 2011 stated that Ojeda Rios 's killing was " an illegal killing " by the FBI . 
 = = = Change in guard , Comandante Guasábara = = = 
 Following the incident that concluded in the death of its former leader , the command of the Boricua Popular Army was inherited by an anonymous figure known as " Comandante Guasábara " , named after the Taíno word for " war " . Under his leadership , the group appears to have shifted its focus towards intelligence . For example , the group has not recorded a single military action . Instead , Guasábara has generally used the media to publish classified information . The Boricua Popular Army took credit for denouncing what was called " paramilitary training " that private corporation Triangle Experience Group was carrying on in the mountains of the municipality of Utuado . The media later revealed that these exercises were being done illegally , in covert fashion and lacking the required permits . 
 = = Terrorism vs. national liberation = = 
 Supporters of independence for Puerto Rico argue that the U.S. favored the establishment of the present Commonwealth status to create a perpetual consumer base for U.S. and foreign products and services . Foreign products and services are redirected to Puerto Rico and other " unincorporated " lands of the United States to satisfy a portion of foreign trade agreements , while allowing domestic products and services a greater " home " market share . Another argument by the independence movement is that the Macheteros are continuing the historical rebellion that Puerto Ricans such as Pedro Albizu Campos and the Nationalist Party have waged , against U.S. domination of the island . It is known , for example , that Los Macheteros deliberately chose September 12 for their White Eagle assault on the Wells Fargo depot , because September 12 was the birthday of Puerto Rican Nationalist leader Pedro Albizu Campos . Beginning in the 1960s , the FBI infiltrated Puerto Rico 's free press and political circles in order to monitor and disrupt efforts related to independence movements like Los Macheteros . This operation was part of COINTELPRO . In 2001 , FBI Director Louis J. Freeh claimed the group committed acts of terrorism , but some authors , including Ronald Fernandez , view such labeling as political convenience by the United States Government , intended to " shift the blame for any attacks on U.S. policy or personnel from us to them " . 
 = = Focus on public education = = 
 Recently , the Macheteros have focused on public education regarding the use of Culebra and Vieques as bombing targets for the U.S. Navy ; the disproportionate number of military bases on the island ( compared to states in the Union ) ; the proportion of deaths within the ranks of the Independence and Nationalist leadership , including the alleged experimentation with radiation on Nationalist leader Pedro Albizu Campos while he was incarcerated ; the secret testing of Agent Orange on Puerto Rican soil ; and cancer " experiments " administered by Cornelius P. Rhoads , in which he claimed to have killed Puerto Rican patients and injected cancer cells to others , while working as part of a medical investigation conducted in San Juan 's Presbyterian Hospital for the Rockefeller Institute . 
 = = Documentary = = 
 An 80 @-@ minute documentary film about the Macheteros , titled <unk> , was released in 2008 . Starring <unk> ( <unk> ) , as Pedro Taíno , and <unk> De Bankolé ( Casino Royale ) , as French journalist Jean Dumont , the film takes place in both New York City and Puerto Rico . Other actors Kelvin Fernández ( first starring role ) and <unk> Pagán . The film was the winner of the 2008 South Africa International Film Festival , 2009 Swansea Film Festival , 2009 Heart of England Film Festival , 2009 International Film Festival Thailand , and the 2009 International Film Festival Ireland . 
 = = Notable group members = = 
 = French ironclad Friedland = 
 The French ironclad Friedland was originally intended to be an iron @-@ hulled version of Océan class armoured frigate built for the French Navy during the 1870s , but she was much altered during her prolonged construction . Named after the French victory at the Battle of Friedland in 1807 , the ship spent the bulk of her career assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron and supported the French occupation of Tunisia in 1881 . She was condemned in 1902 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Friedland was a central battery ironclad with the armament concentrated amidships . Like most ironclads of her era she was fitted with a plough @-@ shaped ram . 
 The ship measured 101 @.@ 1 meters ( 331 ft 8 in ) overall , with a beam of 17 @.@ 7 meters ( 58 ft 1 in ) . Friedland had a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 6 meters ( 28 ft 3 in ) and displaced 8 @,@ 540 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 410 long tons ) , some 750 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) larger than the Ocean @-@ class ironclads . Her crew numbered around 750 officers and men . 
 Five 100 @-@ millimetre ( 4 in ) watertight bulkheads divided the hull into compartments , although they only reached up to the main deck . Friedland did not have a double bottom . The metacentric height of the ship was low , a little above 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Friedland had one Indret 3 @-@ cylinder horizontal return connecting rod compound steam engine driving a single propeller . Its engine was powered by eight oval boilers . On sea trials the engine produced 4 @,@ 428 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 302 kW ) and Friedland reached 13 @.@ 3 knots ( 24 @.@ 6 km / h ; 15 @.@ 3 mph ) . She carried 630 metric tons ( 620 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for approximately 2 @,@ 666 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 937 km ; 3 @,@ 068 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Friedland was initially ship rigged with three masts , then barque @-@ rigged and finally fore @-@ and @-@ aft rigged after her mainmast was removed . 
 = = = Armament and Armour = = = 
 Two 274 @-@ millimetre Modèle 1870 guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , one gun at the forward corner of the battery , with the remaining six 274 @-@ millimetre Modèle 1870 guns on the battery deck below the barbettes . Eight 138 @-@ millimetre Modèle 1870 guns were on the upper deck , fore and aft of the barbettes , and on the battery deck . 
 The 18 @-@ calibre 274 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) gun fired an armour @-@ piercing , 476 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 216 @.@ 0 kg ) shell while the gun itself weighed 22 @.@ 84 long tons ( 23 @.@ 21 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 424 ft / s ( 434 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 14 @.@ 3 inches ( 360 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 138 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) gun was 21 calibres long and weighed 2 @.@ 63 long tons ( 2 @.@ 67 t ) . It fired a 61 @.@ 7 @-@ pound ( 28 @.@ 0 kg ) explosive shell that had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 529 ft / s ( 466 m / s ) . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 At some point the ship received 22 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss 5 @-@ barrel revolving guns . They fired a shell weighing about 500 g ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) at a muzzle velocity of about 610 m / s ( 2 @,@ 000 ft / s ) to a range of about 3 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 500 yd ) . They had a rate of fire of about 30 rounds per minute . The hull was not recessed to enable any of the guns on the battery deck to fire forward or aft . However , the guns mounted in the barbettes sponsoned out over the sides of the hull did have some ability to fire fore and aft . In 1884 two above @-@ water 356 @-@ millimeter ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes were added . Two more were added in 1891 . 
 Friedland had a complete 220 @-@ millimeter ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) wrought iron waterline belt . The sides and the transverse bulkheads of the battery itself were armoured with 160 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) of wrought iron . The barbettes were unarmoured . 
 = = Service = = 
 Friedland was laid down at Lorient in January 1865 and launched on 15 October 1873 . While the exact reason for such prolonged construction time is not known , the budget for the French Navy was cut after the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 and the French dockyards had not been reformed with working practices more suitable for the industrial age . The ship began her sea trials on 1 May 1875 , but was not completed until 20 June 1877 . Friedland joined the Mediterranean Squadron in 1878 and the ship bombarded the Tunisian port of Sfax from 6 – 16 July 1881 as part of the French occupation of Tunisia . She was reduced to reserve in 1887 and decommissioned in 1893 . Friedland returned to active duty in 1893 , but was paid off in 1898 and condemned in 1902 . 
 = Samuel Aba = 
 Samuel Aba ( Hungarian : Aba Sámuel ; before 990 or c . 1009 – 5 July 1044 ) was the third King of Hungary between 1041 and 1044 . He was born to a prominent family with extensive domains in the region of the <unk> Hills . Based on reports in the Gesta Hungarorum and other Hungarian chronicles about the non @-@ Hungarian origin of the Aba family , modern historians write that the Abas headed the Kabar tribes that seceded from the Khazar Khaganate and joined the Hungarians in the 9th century . 
 Around 1009 , Samuel or his father married a sister of Stephen I , the first King of Hungary . Thereafter the originally pagan or Jewish Aba family converted to Christianity . King Stephen appointed Samuel to head the royal court as his palatine . However , the king died in 1038 , and the new monarch , Peter the Venetian , removed Samuel from his post . 
 The Hungarian lords dethroned Peter in 1041 and elected Samuel king . According to the unanimous narration of the Hungarian chronicles , Samuel preferred commoners to noblemen , causing discontent among his former partisans . His execution of many opponents brought him into conflict with Bishop Gerard of Csanád . In 1044 , Peter the Venetian returned with the assistance of the German monarch , Henry III , who defeated Samuel 's larger army at the battle of Ménfő near Győr . Samuel fled from the battlefield but was captured and killed . 
 = = Origins and early life = = 
 According to the anonymous author of the Gesta Hungarorum , Samuel 's family descended from two " Cuman " chieftains , Ed and Edemen , who received " a great land in the forest of <unk> " from Árpád , Grand Prince of the Hungarians around 900 . In contrast , the Illuminated Chronicle and other 14th @-@ century Hungarian chronicles describe Ed and Edemen as the sons of Csaba – himself a son of Attila the Hun – by a lady from Khwarezm . Since all Hungarian chronicles emphasize the Oriental – either " Cuman " or " Khwarezmian " – origin of Ed and Edemen , Gyula Kristó , László <unk> and other historians propose that the Aba clan descending from them ruled the Kabars , a people of Khazar origin who joined the Hungarians in the middle of the 9th century , before the Hungarians ' arrival in the Carpathian Basin around 895 . Kristó argues that both Samuel 's Khazar origin and his first name suggest that he was born to a family that adhered to Judaism . 
 Despite the uncertainty over the clan 's origins , Samuel undoubtedly descended from a distinguished family , since an unnamed sister of Stephen I , who had in 1000 or 1001 been crowned the first King of Hungary , was given in marriage to a member of the Aba clan around 1009 . However , historians still debate whether Samuel himself or Samuel 's father married the royal princess . If Samuel was her husband , he must have been born before 990 and converted – either from Judaism or paganism – to Christianity when he married Stephen I 's sister . His Christian credentials are further evidenced by Samuel 's establishment of an abbey at <unk> which was recorded by Hungarian chronicles . According to Gyula Kristó and other historians , Samuel 's conversion coincided with the creation of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Eger encompassing his domains . 
 Samuel held important offices during the reign of King Stephen . Pál Engel proposes that Abaújvár ( " Aba 's new castle " ) was named after him , implying that he was also the first ispán , or head , of that fortress and the county surrounding it . Samuel was a member of the royal council and became the first palatine of Hungary . The death of King Stephen on 15 August 1038 led to his nephew , Peter Orseolo of Venice , ascending to the throne . The new monarch preferred his German and Italian courtiers and set aside the native lords , including Samuel . In 1041 , discontented Hungarian noblemen expelled King Peter in a coup d 'état and elected Samuel king . 
 = = King of Hungary = = 
 ... King Aba became insolent and began to rage cruelly against the Hungarians . For he held that all things should be in common between lords and servants ; but to have violated his oath he considered a mere trifle . <unk> the nobles of the kingdom , he consorted with peasants and commoners . The Hungarian nobles were unwilling to endure this from him , and chafing under this insulting behaviour they conspired and plotted that they would kill him . But one of them informed the King of the conspiracy against his life , whereupon the King imprisoned as many of them as he could and had them put to death without examination or trial , which did great damage to his cause . 
 Samuel abolished all laws introduced by Peter the Venetian and had many of his predecessor 's supporters killed or tortured . The contemporaneous Hermann of Reichenau even called him " the tyrant of Hungary " in his Chronicon . Hungarian chronicles sharply criticized Samuel for socializing with the peasants instead of the nobles . Samuel even abolished some levies payable by the commoners . 
 Following his ousting , Peter the Venetian took refuge in Germany . In response , Samuel stormed Austria in 1042 , provoking a retaliatory invasion by the German monarch , Henry III in 1043 . It forced Samuel to renounce all Hungarian territories to the west of the rivers Leitha and Morava as well as agree to the payment of a tribute . The funding of the tribute payment was through new taxes on the Christian prelates and seizure of Church estates . This policy caused discontent even among the members of Samuel 's own council . He had a number of his councillors executed during Lent . In order to punish the king , Bishop Gerard of Csanád ( modern @-@ day Cenad , Romania ) refused to perform the annual ceremony of putting the royal crown Gerard upon the monarch 's head at Easter . 
 King Henry III again invaded Hungary in 1044 to restore Peter the Venetian . The decisive battle was fought at Ménfő near Győr , where Samuel 's army was routed . Samuel 's fate following the battle is still uncertain . According to nearly contemporaneous German sources , he was captured in short order and executed on Peter the Venetian 's command . However , 14th @-@ century Hungarian chronicles narrate that he fled up the river Tisza where he was seized and murdered by the locals . The latter sources further state that Samuel was first buried in a nearby church , but was later transferred to his family 's monastery at <unk> . 
 When King Aba had broken his oath and his treaty , King Henry invaded Hungary with a very small force . Aba , who had equipped a very large army , held him in such contempt that he allowed him to enter the province , as though it would be easy to kill or to capture him . Henry , however , trusting in divine help , rapidly crossed the River Raab with part of his force and began the battle , while all the knights rushed hither and thither . In the first attack he defeated and put to flight the innumerable army of the Hungarians , losing very few of his own men . He himself fought very bravely and he won a most glorious victory on 5 July . King Aba narrowly escaped by fleeing , while all the Hungarians rushed in crowds to surrender to King Henry and promised subjection and service . ... Not long afterwards Aba was taken prisoner by King Peter and paid the penalty of his crimes with his head . 
 = = Family = = 
 No report on the fate of Samuel 's widow and children has been preserved . Even so , historians – including Gyula Kristó and László <unk> – suppose that the powerful Aba family descended from him . 
 = HMS Duchess ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Duchess was a D @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . The ship was initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before she was transferred to the China Station in early 1935 . She was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea during late 1935 during the Abyssinia Crisis , before returning to her duty station where she remained until mid @-@ 1939 . Duchess was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet just before the Second World War began in September 1939 . Whilst escorting the battleship HMS Barham back to the British Isles , she was accidentally rammed by the battleship in thick fog and sank with heavy loss of life on 12 December 1939 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Duchess displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Duchess carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Duchess had a single 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ) gun and two quadruple Mk I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mk III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Duchess was ordered on 2 February 1931 under the 1930 Naval Estimates and was laid down at the yards of the Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , Jarrow on 12 June 1931 . She was launched on 19 July 1932 and commissioned on 24 January 1933 , at a total cost of £ 229 @,@ 367 , excluding equipment supplied by the Admiralty , such as weapons , ammunition and wireless equipment . The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in September – November 1933 . Upon her return , her superheaters were repaired at Malta between 18 December and 6 January 1934 . She was given a refit at Chatham Dockyard from 3 September to 23 October to prepare the ship for service on the China Station . 
 Duchess arrived in Hong Kong in January 1935 where she joined the 8th Destroyer Flotilla . The ship was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in the Red Sea from September to November during the Abyssinian Crisis . She made a number of good @-@ will visits during her time on the station as well as conducted anti @-@ piracy patrols . During a typhoon at Hong Kong on 2 September 1937 , a merchant ship crushed Duchess 's stern when it dragged its anchors . Her repairs were not completed until 14 October . 
 The ship remained on the station until late August 1939 , when the imminent start of the Second World War caused the Admiralty to order her to take up her war station with the Mediterranean Fleet at Malta . Duchess arrived there on 12 October and remained in the Mediterranean for the next two months . In December the ship , along with her sisters HMS Delight , HMS Duncan and HMS Dainty , was assigned to escort the battleship HMS Barham back to the UK , and they departed Gibraltar on 6 December . During the morning of 12 December , Barham collided with Duchess off the Mull of Kintyre in heavy fog . The destroyer capsized and her depth charges exploded , killing 124 of her crew including her commanding officer , Lieutenant Commander Robin White , who was stuck in his sea cabin when the sliding door jammed . 
 = Analysis of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 satellite communications = 
 The analysis of communications between Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 and Inmarsat 's satellite telecommunication network provide the only source of information about Flight 370 's location and possible in @-@ flight events after it disappeared from radar coverage at 2 : 22 Malaysia Standard Time ( MYT ) on 8 March 2014 ( 17 : 22 UTC , 7 March ) , one hour after communication with air traffic control ended and the aircraft departed from its planned flight path while over the South China Sea . Flight 370 was a scheduled commercial flight with 227 passengers and 12 crew which departed Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia at 0 : 41 and was scheduled to land in Beijing , China at 6 : 30 China Standard Time ( 6 : 30 MYT ; 22 : 30 UTC , 7 March ) . Malaysia has worked in conjunction with the Australian Transport Safety Bureau to co @-@ ordinate the analysis , which has also involved the UK 's Air Accidents Investigation Branch , Inmarsat , and US National Transportation Safety Board , among others . Others have also made efforts to analyse the satellite communications , albeit challenged by a lack of publicly available information for several months after the disappearance . On 29 July 2015 , debris was discovered on Réunion Island which was later confirmed to come from Flight 370 ; it is the first physical evidence that Flight 370 ended in the Indian Ocean . 
 During flight , the aircraft maintains a datalink with a satellite communication network for data and telephone calls . The datalink connects the aircraft and a ground station via satellite , which translates ( changes ) the signal 's frequency and amplifies the signal ; the ground station is connected to telecommunication networks which allows messages to be sent to and received from other locations , such as the airline 's operations centre . Normal communications from Flight 370 were last made at 1 : 07 MYT and the datalink between the aircraft and satellite telecommunication network was lost at some point between 1 : 07 and 2 : 03 , when the aircraft did not acknowledge a message sent from the ground station . Three minutes after the aircraft left the range of radar coverage — at 2 : 25 — the aircraft 's satellite data unit ( SDU ) transmitted a log @-@ on message , which investigators believe occurred as the SDU started after a power interruption . Between the 2 : 25 message and 8 : 19 , the SDU acknowledged two ground @-@ to @-@ aircraft telephone calls , which were not answered , and responded to automated , hourly requests from the ground station that were made to determine whether the SDU was still active . None of the communications from 2 : 25 – 8 : 19 contain explicit information about the aircraft 's location . The aircraft 's final transmission at 8 : 19 was a log @-@ on message ; the aircraft did not respond to a message from the ground station at 9 : 15 . Investigators believe the 8 : 19 log @-@ on message was made when the SDU was restarting after the aircraft ran out of fuel and the aircraft 's auxiliary power unit was started . 
 The search for Flight 370 was launched in Southeast Asia near the location of the last verbal and radar contact with air traffic control . The day after the accident , staff at Inmarsat reviewed the log of communications between their network and Flight 370 and discovered that Flight 370 continued for several hours after contact with air traffic control was lost . On 11 March , they provided a preliminary analysis to investigators based on recorded burst timing offset ( BTO ) values . Relatively simple calculations can be made from BTO values to determine the distance between the aircraft and satellite at each transmission . When these distances are plotted on Earth , they result in rings which are further reduced to arcs , due to the limited range of the aircraft . Another value — burst frequency offset ( BFO ) — was analysed to determine the movement of the aircraft relative to the satellite , based on the Doppler shift of the signals , which provides the location of the aircraft along the BTO @-@ derived arcs . Initial analysis of the BFO values showed a strong correlation with a track south into the southern Indian Ocean , west of Australia . On 24 March , Malaysia 's Prime Minister cited this analysis to conclude that Flight 370 ended in the southern Indian Ocean with no survivors . After the initial analysis , the BFO calculations were later adjusted to account for a wobble in the satellite 's orbit and thermal changes in the satellite which affected the recorded BFO values . Further analysis considered the BTO and BFO calculations with flight dynamics , such as possible and probable aircraft speeds , altitudes , and autopilot modes . Two statistical analyses were made and combined with calculations of Flight 370 's maximum range to determine the most probable location of Flight 370 at the time of the 8 : 19 transmission , which is along the 8 : 19 BTO arc from approximately 38 @.@ 3 ° S 88 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 88 ﻿ ( Southwest corner of the area of interest along the 8 : 19 BTO arc , ATSB Flight Path Analysis Update ( October 2014 ) ) to 33 @.@ 5 ° S 95 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 95 ﻿ ( Southwest corner of the area of interest along the 8 : 19 BTO arc , ATSB Flight Path Analysis Update ( October 2014 ) ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 = = = 
 Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 departed Kuala Lumpur International Airport at 00 : 41 Malaysia Standard Time ( MYT ) on 8 March 2014 ( 16 : 41 UTC , 7 March ) , bound for Beijing Capital International Airport . At 1 : 19 , Malaysian air traffic control ( ATC ) initiated a hand @-@ off to Ho Chi Minh area ATC . The captain responded " Good night Malaysian Three Seven Zero " , after which no further communications were made with the pilots . At 1 : 21 , the aircraft disappeared from the radar of air traffic control after passing navigational waypoint IGARI ( 6 ° 56 ′ 12 ″ N 103 ° 35 ′ 6 ″ E ) in the South China Sea between Malaysia and Vietnam . The aircraft continued to be tracked by Malaysian military radar , which recorded that Flight 370 deviated from its planned flight path , turning around and crossing the Malay Peninsula . Flight 370 left the range of Malaysian military radar at 2 : 22 and was last located 200 nmi ( 370 km ; 230 mi ) northwest of Penang . Flight 370 was expected to arrive in Beijing at 6 : 30 China Standard Time ( CST ) on 8 March ( 06 : 30 MYT ; 22 : 30 UTC , 7 March ) . At 7 : 24 MYT / CST , Malaysia Airlines issued a media statement that Flight 370 was missing . 
 = = = Satellite datalink = = = 
 The datalink for Malaysia Airline 's avionics communications at the time of the incident was supplied by SITA , which contracted with Inmarsat to provide a satellite communication link using Inmarsat 's Classic Aero service . Aeronautical satellite communication ( SATCOM ) systems are used to transmit messages from the aircraft cockpit as well as automated messages from on @-@ board systems using the ACARS communications protocol , but may also be used to transmit <unk> and ATN messages and provide voice , fax , and data links using other protocols . An appropriate comparison of ACARS ' relationship to the SATCOM system is that of a messaging application to a smartphone ; the smartphone functions and will remain registered on a mobile phone network even if the messaging application is closed . 
 The data / messages from the aircraft are transmitted by the aircraft 's Satellite Data Unit ( SDU ) and relayed via satellite to a ground station , where they are routed to other communication networks to reach their destination . Messages may also be sent to the aircraft , in reverse order . When passing through the satellite , the signals are amplified and translated in frequency — mixed with the signal from an oscillator in the satellite , leaving the satellite at the combined frequency . Transmissions from the aircraft are made on one of several channels ( frequencies ) near 1 @.@ 6 GHz , combined with frequency of the satellite 's oscillator , and transmitted to the <unk> at the combined frequency ( one of several channels near 3 @.@ 6 GHz ) . The ground station then translates the received signal before it reaches equipment to be processed . The ground station keeps a log of transmissions and some data about them . 
 When the SDU tries to connect with the Inmarsat network , it will transmit a log @-@ on request , which the ground station acknowledges . This is , in part , to determine that the SDU belongs to an active service subscriber and also used to determine how to route messages to the SDU . After connecting , if a ground station hasn 't received any contact from a terminal for one hour , the ground station will transmit a " Log @-@ on Interrogation " ( LOI ) message — informally referred to as a " ping " ; an active terminal automatically responds . The entire process of interrogating the terminal is referred to as a ' handshake ' . 
 Equipment at Inmarsat 's Perth ground station had been upgraded in 2013 with additional storage capacity and new software to record an expanded data set for transmissions , including the addition of Burst Frequency Offset ( BFO ) and Burst Timing Offset ( BTO ) values . Without the addition of the BFO and BTO values , it would not have been possible to determine the aircraft 's distance from the satellite at each handshake and hence significantly narrow the search region . The expanded data values were prompted by Inmarsat 's involvement in the search for Air France Flight 447 , which disappeared over the Atlantic Ocean in 2009 . The company felt the additional data values could be useful in future incidents . According to Inmarsat 's vice @-@ president of satellite operations , Mark Dickinson , the company " did not know precisely how [ these additional data values ] might be useful but [ they ] had a hunch and decided to [ invest in upgrades to ground station equipment to record these values ] . " 
 = = = Emergency locator transmitters = = = 
 The aircraft was equipped with four emergency locator transmitters ( ELTs ) : 
 a fixed ELT on the aft fuselage which is activated by sudden deceleration , 
 a portable ELT in a cabinet located in the front of the aircraft which must be activated by moving a switch , and 
 two ELTs attached to slide rafts which are armed when the rafts are inflated and activated by water immersion 
 Once activated , the ELTs emit a radio signal which can be detected by the satellites of the International Cospas @-@ Sarsat Programme . The ELTs are designed to work at or near the water 's surface . Damage during a crash , shielding by aircraft wreckage or terrain , and submersion in deep water are all factors which may prevent the signal 's detection . In a review of accident records maintained by the ICAO over the past 30 years , there were 173 accidents involving aircraft over 5 @,@ 701 kilograms ( 12 @,@ 569 lb ) equipped with ELTs ; of these , an effective ELT detection was made in only 39 accidents . No signals from ELTs aboard Flight 370 were detected . 
 = = Communications from Flight 370 = = 
 The SDU on 9M @-@ MRO ( the aircraft used for Flight 370 ) logged onto the Inmarsat network at midnight MYT . In the 30 minutes prior to take @-@ off , seventeen messages were exchanged between the SDU and the Inmarsat network . An additional three messages were exchanged between take @-@ off and the time Flight 370 disappeared from secondary radar . The final message to use the ACARS protocol was sent at 01 : 07 ; ACARS reports expected at 01 : 37 and 02 : 07 were not received . At 02 : 03 and 2 : 05 , messages from the ground station went unanswered , indicating that the link was lost at some point between 1 : 07 and 2 : 03 . 
 After last contact by primary radar west of Malaysia , the following records were recorded in the log of Inmarsat 's ground station at Perth , Western Australia ( HH : MM : SS ; UTC times 7 – 8 March ) : 
 = = Analysis by the Joint Investigation Team = = 
 The analysis of the satellite communication relies on a limited number of data points that were analysed using innovative techniques that were only developed after the incident . The analysis has worked to determine useful information about in @-@ flight events and the location of Flight 370 at the 08 : 19 MYT signal — believed to have occurred near the time of fuel exhaustion and thus is close to the final location of Flight 370 . 
 = = = Joint Investigation Team = = = 
 Malaysian investigators set up an international working group — the Joint Investigation Team ( JIT ) — consisting of various agencies with experience in aircraft performance and satellite communications , to further analyse the signals between Flight 370 and the ground station , especially the signal at 08 : 19 . These included representatives from the UK 's Inmarsat , Air Accidents Investigation Branch , and Rolls @-@ Royce ; China 's Civil Aviation Administration and Aircraft Accident Investigation Department ; the US National Transportation Safety Board and Federal Aviation Administration ; and Malaysian authorities . 
 After initial analysis determined that Flight 370 's last location was within Australia 's Search and Rescue region in the southern Indian Ocean , Australia has played a major role in co @-@ ordinating the analysis in conjunction with Malaysia . The Australian Transport Safety Bureau ( ATSB ) is responsible for the search for Flight 370 and has brought together a team of experts to determine the location of Flight 370 at the 08 : 19 communication . The team brought together by the ATSB includes the UK 's Air Accidents Investigation Branch , Boeing , the Defence Science and Technology Organisation ( Australia ) , Malaysia 's Department of Civil Aviation , Inmarsat , the National Transportation Safety Board ( US ) , and Thales . 
 = = = Concepts = = = 
 The analysis of communications from Flight 370 focuses on two key parameters associated with the messages : 
 Burst timing offset ( BTO ) — The time difference between when a signal is sent from the ground station and when the response is received . This measure is twice the distance from the ground station to satellite to the aircraft and includes the time that the SDU takes between receiving and responding to the message and time between reception and processing at the ground station ( the latter two times are constant and can be calculated and removed ) . This measure can be analysed to determine the distance between the satellite and the aircraft and results in a ring on the Earth 's surface that is equidistant from the satellite at the calculated distance . 
 Burst frequency offset ( BFO ) – The difference between the expected and received frequency of transmissions . The difference is caused by doppler shift as the signals travelled from the aircraft to the satellite to the ground station ; the frequency translations made in the satellite and at the ground station ; a small , constant error ( bias ) in the SDU that results from drift and ageing ; and compensation applied by the SDU to counter the Doppler shift on the uplink . This measure can be analysed to determine where along the BTO rings the aircraft was located . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A few deductions can also be made from the satellite communications . The first deduction that can be made from the satellite communications is that the aircraft remained operational until at least 08 : 19 — seven hours after final contact was made with air traffic control over the South China Sea . The varying BFO values indicate the aircraft was moving at speed . The aircraft 's SDU needs location and track information to keep its antenna pointed towards the satellite , so it can also be deduced that the aircraft 's navigation system was operational . 
 Since the aircraft did not respond to a ping at 09 : 15 , it can be concluded that at some point between 08 : 19 and 09 : 15 , the aircraft lost the ability to communicate with the ground station . Malaysia 's Department of Civil Aviation noted this time was " consistent with the maximum endurance of the aircraft " and this time is believed to have been the result of the aircraft entering the ocean after fuel starvation . The ATSB is " confident the seventh handshake represents the area where the aircraft ran out of fuel before entering the ocean . " 
 The log @-@ on message sent from the aircraft at 08 : 19 : 29 was not immediately well understood . The 02 : 25 handshake was also initiated by the aircraft . Only a few reasons that the SDU would transmit a log @-@ on message exist , such as a power interruption , software failure , loss of critical systems providing input to the SDU , or a loss of the link due to aircraft attitude . Investigators consider the most likely reason to be that they were sent during power @-@ up after an electrical outage . At 08 : 19 , the aircraft had been airborne for 7 h 38 min ; the typical Kuala Lumpur @-@ Beijing flight is 51 ⁄ 2 hours and fuel exhaustion was likely . In the event of fuel exhaustion and engine flame @-@ out , the aircraft 's ram air turbine would deploy , providing power to various instruments and flight controls , including the SDU . Approximately 90 seconds after the 02 : 25 handshake , communications from the aircraft 's inflight entertainment system were recorded in the ground station log . Similar messages would be expected following the 08 : 19 handshake but none were received , supporting the fuel starvation scenario . 
 = = = Burst timing offset = = = 
 For system efficacy and reliability , aircraft transmissions made in response to a signal from a satellite are sent in timed slots referenced to the time the signal from the satellite arrived , using the slotted <unk> protocol . The time that the signal is sent from the ground station begins the time slot . The burst timing offset ( BTO ) is the time difference between the start of the time slot and the start of the transmission received from the aircraft ; it equals twice the distance ( for the ground station 's signal then aircraft 's response ) from the ground station to the satellite to the aircraft plus the time the aircraft 's SDU takes between receiving the signal and responding ( the SDU bias ) and the delay between the time the signal arrives at the ground station and the time it is processed ( when the BTO value is logged ; the ground station bias ) . The satellite 's location is known , thus the distance from the satellite to the ground station can be calculated , while the combined bias of the SDU and ground station is relatively constant and can be calculated from signals exchanged earlier in the flight while it was on the ground at KLIA , thus leaving the distance between the aircraft and satellite as the only variable . 
 The combined SDU and ground station bias was calculated from 17 signals exchanged between the ground station and the aircraft during a 30 @-@ minute period before take @-@ off , when the aircraft 's location was known ( at Kuala Lumpur International Airport ) . To establish the accuracy of their calculations , the bias value was used to calculate the distance from the aircraft to the satellite during the time it was on the ground at KLIA , with errors of < 1 km @-@ 8 @.@ 85 km ( < 1 mi @-@ 5 @.@ 5 mi ) . The distance from the satellite to the aircraft was also calculated while the aircraft was in @-@ flight and at a known location shortly after take @-@ off , showing similar accuracy . The distance between the satellite and aircraft could thus calculated for signals exchanged between 02 : 25 – 08 : 19 , after Flight 370 disappeared from radar . However , this could only produce a ring on Earth 's surface that is equidistant from the satellite at the calculated value , adjusted to account for the aircraft flying at 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) . The ring could also be reduced to an arc by taking into consideration the maximum range of the aircraft if it flew at its maximum speed . 
 The BTO value was added to the ground station 's data set to assist in geo @-@ locating an aircraft following the Air France Flight 447 accident in 2009 and the initial BFO analysis — relating the BFO value to the elevation angle between the aircraft and satellite — was based on methods developed during the Flight 447 investigation . The first and seventh handshakes gave anomalous results and were excluded from the initial analysis , but the issue was later resolved . The initial analysis , accurate to approximately 1 ° , determined that elevation angle between the aircraft and satellite at the 08 : 11 handshake was 40 ° . When this was publicly disclosed by Malaysian officials , the arc was broken into two arcs — dubbed the " northern corridor " and " southern corridor . " The first and seventh handshakes were later determined to be part of a log @-@ on sequence , as opposed to the other handshakes that were log @-@ on interrogation messages . The bias value during the <unk> sequence is different and was calculated using historical data for the aircraft 's SDU . This allowed the distance between the satellite and aircraft to be determined at these times . 
 = = = Burst frequency offset = = = 
 While the BTO is able to determine the distance between the satellite and the aircraft at the time of each handshake , it was still necessary to determine where along the BTO arcs the aircraft was . To accomplish this , an analysis was performed on another attribute of received signals that was recorded by the ground station : the burst frequency offset ( BFO ) — the difference between the expected and actual frequencies of the signal received from the aircraft . The BFO is primarily caused by the Doppler shift — a shift in frequency caused by the relative movement of the aircraft , satellite , and ground station — along with several other factors which can be calculated and removed , allowing the Doppler shift between the aircraft and satellite to be isolated . The Doppler shift between the aircraft and satellite indicates the relative motion of the aircraft relative to the satellite , although multiple combinations of aircraft speed and heading exist that match a given Doppler shift value . 
 When the aircraft 's SDU responds to messages sent from the ground station , it uses the aircraft 's navigation system to determine the aircraft 's position , track , and ground speed and adjusts the transmit frequency to compensate for the Doppler shift on the uplink signal , based on the satellite being located in its nominal position in geostationary orbit ( <unk> km above the equator ) at 64 @.@ 5 ° E. The initial analysis was calculated with the satellite at its nominal location in geostationary orbit , 35 @,@ 786 km ( 22 @,@ 236 mi ) above the equator at 64 @.@ 5 ° E longitude . However , the Inmarsat @-@ <unk> satellite was launched in 1996 with an expected life span of 13 years and to extend its lifespan by conserving remaining fuel , it was allowed to drift from its nominal location into a slightly inclined orbit . A map of the sub @-@ satellite points — the location on Earth 's surface directly beneath the satellite — shows that the satellite moves counterclockwise in an oval shape between 1 @.@ 6 ° S – 1 @.@ 6 ° N and 64 @.@ 45 – 64 @.@ 58 ° E. As a result , the adjustments made by the SDU only partially compensate for the Doppler shift on the uplink . This error is " immaterial " to the performance of the satellite network , but was crucial to eliminate the northern corridor during the initial analysis . 
 As the signal passes through the satellite , it is translated by — added to — a signal generated by an oscillator in the satellite . Although the oscillator is housed in a temperature @-@ controlled enclosure , it is subjected to thermal variation throughout the day that results in minor changes in the frequency of the translation signal . The thermal variation results from the rotation of the satellite relative to the sun over a given 24 @-@ hour period , including the time the satellite passes through the Earth 's shadow ( which affected the 3 : 40 and 4 : 26 handshakes ) , and is complicated by the use of heaters that run when the oscillator temperature exits pre @-@ determined limits . The variation in the translation frequency was calculated over several days , including the day of Flight 370 's disappearance , and could be factored into the BFO measurement . 
 Additional factors that affect the BFO are a translation made at the ground station between the reception and processing of the signal ( which is monitored and can be factored in ) and a fixed bias in the aircraft and satellite oscillators due to drift and ageing ( which can be calibrated by measures recorded when the aircraft 's location and speed were known ) . At 2 : 40 and 6 : 14 , ground @-@ to @-@ aircraft phone calls were made that were unanswered by the cockpit but acknowledged by the SDU . The signals associated with these calls could not be analysed to generate a BTO value , but BFO values of these signals can be considered in the analysis with the other BTO and BFO data . 
 The technique used to analyse the BFO values was validated against 87 aircraft with the same SATCOM equipment operating in the region around the time of Flight 370 's disappearance and against 9 previous flights operated by the same aircraft ( 9M @-@ MRO ) . The sensitivity to error was calculated during the early phase of Flight 370 when the aircraft 's location , track , and ground speed were known . This resulted in an uncertainty of ± 28 ° heading and ± 9 ° of latitude . 
 = = = Combined analysis with flight dynamics = = = 
 The BTO analysis was able to determine the distance between the satellite and aircraft with a relatively high degree of accuracy , while the BFO analysis was able to estimate the heading and speed of the aircraft , but is sensitive to small changes in input data . To determine the final location of Flight 370 , the BTO and BFO analyses were considered in combination with aircraft performance limitations , such as altitude , airspeed , and wind . The BFO analysis was able to isolate the Doppler shift between the aircraft and determine the relative motion of the aircraft to the satellite , which is reduced by the limited range of speeds at which the aircraft can fly and thus a limited set of speed / direction combinations exist that correlate with the calculated Doppler shifts . 
 The aircraft has three autopilot modes . The standard mode for en @-@ route navigation is <unk> , which navigates along a great circle route between waypoints , adjusting the aircraft 's heading to allow for wind . Other modes will maintain the aircraft 's heading — direction the nose is pointed ( flight path with be affected by winds ) — or the aircraft 's track — direction the aircraft travels ( flight path in a straight direction ) . The latter two modes are further affected by whether the aircraft used magnetic ( normal reference ) or true north ( typically only used at high latitudes ) as the reference for the autopilot . Since Flight 370 flew near waypoints <unk> , MEKAR , <unk> , and possibly <unk> — all along air route <unk> — while traversing the Malacca Strait , investigators considered whether Flight 370 followed any air routes or intersected any waypoints in the Southern Indian Ocean . <unk> <unk> and <unk> were considered possible points that Flight 370 may have traversed , but tracks through these waypoints did not correlate well with paths generated from the BTO and BFO analysis . 
 Two analysis techniques were used to combine the BTO and BFO results with flight parameters : 
 Data error optimisation – Candidate paths varied speed and heading at each handshake to minimise the error between the calculated BFO of that path versus the actual BFO recorded from Flight 370 . These paths were not constrained by the behaviour of the aircraft 's autopilot . 
 Constrained autopilot dynamics – The aircraft is assumed to be flying under the control of one of the autopilot modes . Candidate paths were generated using each mode . BTO and BFO values of each path were calculated and compared against the recorded values from Flight 370 . 
 The top 100 constrained autopilot dynamics candidate paths were selected on the basis of their match with the satellite data from Flight 370 and their consistency with autopilot behaviour . The distribution of these paths at the intersection with the 6th handshake was then generated , with some paths outside ( south ) of the maximum range of the aircraft and which can therefore be eliminated . The candidate paths generated by the data error optimisation method were weighed according to the root mean square of the BFO values at each handshake . The distribution of results from these two methods were charted together , indicating that the total probability areas overlap on the 08 : 11 arc between approximately 35 – 39 ° S. These paths have then been extrapolated to the seventh handshake at 08 : 19 and constrained by the maximum range , intersecting the seventh arc between approximately 33 @.@ 5 – 38 @.@ 3 ° S. This is the most likely location of Flight 370 at the time of the seventh handshake . 
 = = = Determining the final location of Flight 370 and search area = = = 
 Knowing the location at the seventh handshake , investigators then needed to determine an appropriate width of the search area from the seventh arc . The seventh handshake was a ' log @-@ on request ' initiated by the aircraft and is believed to be the result of the SDU starting after power failure , resulting from fuel exhaustion and following the deployment of the ram air turbine and restart of the auxiliary power unit . The log @-@ on request would have occurred 3 minutes and 40 seconds after fuel exhaustion — commonly known as flameout in aviation — of the second engine ( flameout of both engines would not have occurred simultaneously ) , at which point the autopilot would have disengaged . The BFO value of this handshake indicates the aircraft may have been descending and the aircraft was travelling northeast to southwest . The ATSB has determined that an unresponsive crew / hypoxia event " appeared to best fit the available evidence " for the period of flight that Flight 370 tracked south over the Indian Ocean . 
 An analysis of aircraft systems , particularly the electrical system and autopilot , are ongoing . Boeing and Malaysia Airlines have conducted numerous end @-@ of @-@ flight scenarios in their Boeing 777 simulators . The scenarios involve flameout in one engine before the other without any input from the cockpit . This scenario results in the aircraft entering a spiraling low @-@ bank turn with the aircraft entering the water a relatively short distance from the last engine flameout . If control inputs were made ( i.e. the plane was under the control of a pilot ) and depending on the initial altitude , it is possible that the aircraft could glide over 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) . However , investigators believe Flight 370 was most likely uncontrolled at this point . The ATSB cites a previous study conducted for the BEA , which determined that in cases of an upset followed by loss of control all impact points were within 20 nmi ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) of the start of the emergency , and in most cases within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) . Based on this , the ATSB chose a 50 nmi ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) width — 20 nmi ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) to the west and 30 nmi ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) to the east of the arc — for the underwater search in June 2014 . While keeping the 50 nmi width for the priority search area , the ATSB determined that the aircraft most likely entered the ocean close to the seventh arc and the underwater search would be conducted from the seventh arc and progress outwards . 
 = = Other analyses = = 
 In the weeks after Flight 370 's disappearance , discussions concerning the analysis of satellite data began on the website of space scientist Duncan Steel . The informal group of people , most with scientific backgrounds , soon became known as the Independent Group ( IG ) and has worked to analyse possible flight paths to determine the most likely final location of Flight 370 . For the first few months , their efforts were hindered by a lack of data publicly released and they were critical of the official analysis by Inmarsat ; the IG also pressured officials to release data related to Flight 370 's satellite communications . The IG did not believe there was sufficient evidence , using publicly available information , to exclude the possibility of Flight 370 following a northern track prior to the release of the communication logs on 27 May . Some of the IG members have worked on analysing specific elements of Flight 370 's flight path , such as the mid @-@ flight speed of Flight 370 and precise location of the Inmarsat @-@ <unk> satellite . 
 On 17 June , before 26 June release of a report by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau ( ATSB ) detailing the analysis of the satellite communications , the IG released a statement that they believed the final location of Flight 370 is 36 @.@ 02 ° S 88 @.@ 57 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 88 @.@ 57 ﻿ ( Final location determined by Independent Group , June 2014 ) at the time of the 6th handshake , which was used because the seventh handshake was not well understood at the time . Their most recent evaluation , published in July 2015 , of the final location of Flight 370 is 37 @.@ 105 ° S 89 @.@ 871 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 89 @.@ 871 ﻿ ( Final location determined by Independent Group , Flight Path model <unk> ( July 2015 ) ) . 
 Another analysis was made by Simon Hardy , a Boeing 777 captain , and published in March 2015 . Hardy 's analysis is a mathematical model to determine the track of Flight 370 from the 4th to 6th handshakes , assuming that the aircraft 's track and speed would be constant during this period of the flight . He calculated that the aircraft was likely flying on a 188 ° magnetic track , which the aircraft would compensate for winds to continue in a straight line , and that the final location of Flight 370 is near 38 @.@ 082 ° S 87 @.@ 400 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 87 @.@ 400 ﻿ ( Final location determined by Simon Hardy , June 2014 ) . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 On 8 March , Inmarsat provided basic flight data relating to Flight 370 to SITA , which relayed information to Malaysia Airlines and investigators . On 9 – 10 March , Inmarsat engineers noted that the ground station log recorded pings from the aircraft for several hours after contact was lost with air traffic control . Malaysian investigators set up an international working group , consisting of various agencies with experience in aircraft performance and satellite communications , to further analyse the signals between Flight 370 and the ground station , especially the signal at 08 : 19 . These included representatives from the UK 's Inmarsat , AAIB , and Rolls @-@ Royce ; China 's Civil Aviation Administration and Aircraft Accident Investigation Department ; the US NTSB and FAA ; and Malaysian authorities . 
 An analysis of the time difference between the transmission of the ping and the aircraft 's response allowed Inmarsat to determine the aircraft 's distance from the satellite . This resulted in two arcs — referred to as the " northern corridor " and " southern corridor " — where the aircraft may have been located at the time of its last complete handshake at 08 : 11 . Using an " innovative technique " that has " never before [ been ] used in an investigation of this sort " , the team determined it could also use the burst frequency offset to determine the aircraft 's speed and position along the identified arcs . Inmarsat cross @-@ checked its methodology to known flight data from six Boeing 777 aircraft flying in various directions on the same day , and found a good match . Applying the technique to the handshake signals from Flight 370 gave results that correlated strongly with the expected and actual measurements of a southern trajectory over the Indian Ocean , but poorly with a northern trajectory . Further revised calculations to account for movements of the satellite relative to the earth allowed the northern corridor to be ruled out completely . This analysis was passed on to Malaysian authorities on 23 March . 
 At 22 : 00 local time the next day , 24 March , Prime Minister Najib cited this development concluding at a press conference that Flight 370 ended in the southern Indian Ocean . 
 Using a type of analysis never before used in an investigation of this sort ... Inmarsat and the AAIB have concluded that [ Flight 370 ] flew along the southern corridor , and that its last position was in the middle of the Indian Ocean , west of Perth . This is a remote location , far from any possible landing sites . It is therefore with deep sadness and regret that I must inform you that , according to this new data , [ Flight 370 ] ended in the southern Indian Ocean . 
 In an article published on 8 May several satellite experts questioned the analysis of satellite pings made by Inmarsat staff because the Doppler frequency shifts measured were apparently not properly corrected against the satellite 's own drift ( a periodic North @-@ South oscillation of 3 ° every 24 hours ) . Without any additional data being released , the implication of this new analysis was that the northern portion of the Inmarsat satellite pings arc could not be ruled out . The Malaysian government released the satellite data three weeks later . 
 Details of the methodology used to analyse the satellite communications were provided in the Australian Transport Safety Bureau 's report MH370 – Definition of Underwater Search Areas , published in June , and a supplement released in October . 
 A peer @-@ reviewed paper by Inmarsat scientists published in the Journal of Navigation in October 2014 provides an account of the analysis applied to the satellite communications from Flight 370 . Their analysis concluded that Flight 370 was near 34 @.@ 7 ° S 93 @.@ 0 ° E ﻿ / <unk> ; 93 @.@ 0 ﻿ ( Location at last contact provided by Inmarsat scientists in the Journal of Navigation paper , October 2014 ) when the final transmission from the aircraft was made , but in their conclusion they " [ stress ] that the sensitivity of the reconstructed flight path to frequency errors is such that there remains significant uncertainty in the final location . " Their analysis used a simplified model of the aircraft 's flight dynamics " to illustrate how the measurements may be transformed into a reasonable flight path " and note that other investigators used more sophisticated models to determine the underwater search area . Although access to the journal requires a subscription , its publishers " [ felt ] this paper and subject are too important , and that it should be shared with the world " and the paper was released as an Open Access article with a Creative Commons Attribution license . 
 Since the October reports , analysis of the satellite data has continued to be refined . In March 2015 , ATSB Chief Commissioner Mark Dolan remarked that he is " slightly more optimistic than six months ago , because we have more confidence in the data " . 
 On 29 July 2015 , a flaperon from Flight 370 was discovered on Reunion Island . The ATSB reviewed their drift calculations for debris from the aircraft and , according to the JACC , they are " satisfied that the discovery of the flaperon at La Réunion ... is consistent with the current underwater search area in the southern Indian Ocean . " Reverse drift modelling of the debris , to determine its origin after 16 months , also supports the current underwater search area , although reverse drift modelling is very imprecise over long periods of time . 
 = New York State Route 45 = 
 New York State Route 45 ( NY 45 ) is a north – south state highway in central Rockland County , New York , in the United States . It spans 8 @.@ 60 miles ( 13 @.@ 84 km ) from the village of Chestnut Ridge at the New Jersey – New York border , where it becomes County Route 73 ( CR 73 ) in Bergen County , New Jersey , to U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) in the town of Haverstraw . Though an interchange does exist between NY 45 and the Palisades Interstate Parkway , the route has no access to the New York State Thruway . 
 NY 45 was originally designated as New York State Route 305 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It was renumbered to New York State Route 94 in the early 1940s before becoming NY 45 on January 1 , 1949 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 45 begins at the New Jersey – New York border in Chestnut Ridge . Although the first NY 45 reassurance shield is a quarter @-@ mile north of the state line , the reference marker below the " Welcome to New York " sign at the crossing indicates the beginning of NY 45 . 
 NY 45 runs parallel to the small portion of the Garden State Parkway ( GSP ) that enters New York . Officially this portion is considered an extension of the New York State Thruway . While NY 45 never intersects the GSP , it provides a link to the parkway . South of the New Jersey border in Bergen County , CR 73 intersects the GSP , and in New York , NY 45 intersects CR 41 , which intersects the parkway . Through Chestnut Ridge ( where it is known as Chestnut Ridge Road , just as CR 73 , its southern extension , is in New Jersey ) , it crosses the New York State Thruway . 
 Once it enters Spring Valley ( where it is known locally first as South Main Street , then as North Main Street after it crosses its very busy intersection with NY 59 ) , NY 45 continues northward through the downtown business district . Traffic here tends to pile up many times a day . After NY 45 's intersection at Hillcrest with CR 74 ( the location of several small shopping centers ) , traffic tends to ease up . North of there , NY 45 provides a link to the Hassidic Jewish community of New Square , although it never enters the village limits . At CR 80 , NY 45 enters New Hempstead . Again the road becomes relatively quiet , but it begins to parallel the Palisades Interstate Parkway , until its intersection at exit 12 in Pomona . NY 45 quickly leaves Pomona and enters Mount Ivy . This is where NY 45 comes to its northern terminus at US 202 . This area of US 202 is in downtown Mount Ivy , and exit 13 of the Palisades is just 0 @.@ 1 miles ( 0 @.@ 2 km ) west of NY 45 's northern terminus . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now NY 45 was originally designated NY 305 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . At the same time , the portion of modern NY 305 north of Portville in Cattaraugus and Allegany counties was assigned NY 94 , while the current NY 94 in Orange County was designated NY 45 . The NY 305 and NY 94 designations were swapped in the early 1940s , placing NY 305 on its current alignment and NY 94 on what is now NY 45 . NY 94 was then swapped again , this time for NY 45 , on January 1 , 1949 , placing both routes on their modern routings . 
 In 1958 , Ramapo town engineer Edwin Wallace noticed an increase in the amount of traffic passing through the village of Spring Valley . This led Wallace to propose a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) bypass of the village , starting at NY 59 in Monsey and ending at NY 45 in Hillcrest . Rockland County approved the proposed bypass two years later , and the plans were forwarded to the New York State Department of Transportation . In 1966 , the Tri @-@ State Transportation Commission released its long @-@ term highway report for the area . The new study replaced the Spring Valley Bypass with the NY 45 expressway , a north – south bypass of Spring Valley connecting the Garden State Parkway to the Palisades Interstate Parkway . The road would serve a steadily growing area of commercial businesses along the NY 45 corridor . No action was taken on this proposal . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Rockland County . 
 = One Hot Minute = 
 One Hot Minute is the sixth studio album by the American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers , released on September 12 , 1995 , on Warner Bros. Records . The worldwide success of the band 's previous album , Blood Sugar Sex Magik ( 1991 ) , caused guitarist John Frusciante to become uncomfortable with their status , eventually quitting mid @-@ tour in 1992 . 
 One Hot Minute was the only album that guitarist Dave Navarro recorded with the band . His presence altered the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' sound considerably . It contains fewer sexual themes than previous records and explores darker subject matters , such as drug use , depression , anguish , and grief . It also re @-@ integrated use of heavy metal guitar riffs . Vocalist Anthony Kiedis , who had resumed addictions to cocaine and heroin in 1994 after being sober for more than five years , approached his lyricism with a reflective outlook on drugs and their harsh effects . 
 One Hot Minute was a commercial disappointment despite producing three hit singles and reaching number four on the Billboard 200 chart . It sold fewer than half as many copies as Blood Sugar Sex Magik and received much less critical acclaim . Navarro was ultimately fired from the band in 1998 due to creative differences . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Red Hot Chili Peppers had released Blood Sugar Sex Magik in 1991 . The album was an instant hit , selling over seven million copies in the United States , and turned the band into an international sensation . Guitarist John Frusciante was having difficulty coping with the band 's newfound fame and started to dislike it . Frusciante often argued with his bandmates , and sabotaged performances . He began taking heroin and steadily increased his usage of the drug over time . Frusciante quit the band in 1992 , during its Japanese leg of the tour . He returned to his home in California and became a recluse . 
 Stunned , the remaining Chili Peppers , who had no suitable replacement for Frusciante , hired Arik Marshall to play the remaining dates after being forced to reschedule . Upon returning to Hollywood , the band placed an ad in the L.A. Weekly for open guitar auditions , which Kiedis considered to be a waste of time . After several months of unsuccessfully looking for a suitable guitarist , drummer Chad Smith suggested Dave Navarro . He had always been the band 's first choice , but had been too busy following the 1991 breakup of Jane 's Addiction . Navarro eventually accepted the position after productive jam sessions . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Kiedis knew that the band 's sound would inevitably change when Navarro joined . In July 1994 , the band entered The Sound Factory , a recording studio in Los Angeles , to record the album . The band completed a few basic tracks , when Kiedis began having difficulty singing . He had been through a dental procedure in which an addictive sedative , Valium , was used ; this caused him to relapse , and he once again became dependent on drugs . Kiedis had slipped from five years of sobriety and began reusing narcotics he 'd sworn never to use again . The band took a short break from recording to perform at Woodstock ' 94 , which was the first show Navarro played with the Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 After resuming production , Navarro questioned the methods of the Chili Peppers ' recording procedures . He wondered why such a considerable amount of jamming was involved with the album 's conception . Various qualms followed , and the process soon became uncomfortable for the band . Months went by , and only small amounts of material were written . Kiedis made a trip to Grand Rapids , Michigan in December , where his family realized he 'd resumed an active addiction once again . He returned to Hollywood in late January 1995 , when he finally finished recording his vocals . The rest of the recording was completed within the next month . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 Considering Kiedis had resumed heavy drug use and Frusciante was no longer present for collaboration , songs were written at a far slower rate . Working with Frusciante had been something Kiedis took for granted : " John Frusciante had been a true anomaly when it came to song writing . He made it even easier than Hillel Slovak to create music , even though I 'd known Hillel for years . I just figured that was how all guitar players were , that you showed them your lyrics and sang a little bit and the next thing you knew you had a song . That didn 't happen right off the bat with Dave . " Drummer Chad Smith suggested it was writer 's block that was holding Kiedis back from coming up with lyrics , however Kiedis strongly denied this . With the writing process taking too much time and Kiedis returning to his drug habit , Flea for the first time on any of the band 's albums , besides contributing music as usual , took over and wrote some of the song 's lyrics , including " Transcending " , his tribute to River Phoenix along with the intro and outro to " Deep Kick " , a song that told the story of his and Kiedis 's youth . Also for the first time on any album , Flea contributed lead vocals which he performed on his solo track titled " Pea " . 
 Stylistically , One Hot Minute diverged from the Chili Peppers ' previous records — especially Blood Sugar Sex Magik . The album was characterized by prominent use of heavy metal guitar riffs and hints of psychedelic rock . Navarro , unlike Flea and Kiedis , was not influenced by funk music . He told Guitar World in 1996 , " It doesn 't really speak to me . But then again , when I 'm playing with three other guys who I love and feel camaraderie with , it 's enjoyable to play funk . " Navarro 's own style was influenced mainly by classic rock guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix and Jimmy Page , as well as gothic rock guitarists Robert Smith and Daniel Ash . Continuing a trend that started on Blood Sugar Sex Magik , Kiedis diverged even further away from his signature rapping , only doing so on a few tracks . One Hot Minute took almost two years to write , and its recording and production was not a smooth process . Navarro felt as though he was an outsider to the other members . His writing in Jane 's Addiction was independent from other contributors , whereas the Red Hot Chili Peppers was a far more collaborative group . Navarro himself noted that the band 's dynamic was more balanced than that of Jane 's Addiction , which was often dominated by frontman Perry Farrell . 
 Overall , One Hot Minute lyrically confronted the dark , melancholy and remorseful feelings Kiedis kept to himself . Many of the songs were written at a time when he was hiding his resumed addiction . 
 " Warped " directly faced Kiedis 's distraught moods as a hysterical cry for help : " My tendency for dependency is offending me / It 's upending me / I 'm pretending to be strong and free from my dependency / It 's warping me . " He also felt disappointed that " no one had suspected that I 'd slipped from my more than five years of sobriety . " The track itself was composed of heavy guitar riffs and echoing vocals which attempted to convey a distressed state . 
 " Aeroplane " , the album 's third single , was more upbeat than many of the album 's songs ; but it still contained various references to Kiedis 's personal issues : " Looking into my own eyes / I can 't find the love I want / Someone better slap me before I start to rust / before I start to decompose . " The song also featured Flea 's daughter Clara and her kindergarten class singing backing vocals on the last verse . 
 " Tearjerker " was a tribute to Nirvana lead singer Kurt Cobain . Kiedis felt Cobain 's death " was an emotional blow , and we all felt it . I don 't know why everyone on earth felt so close to that guy ; he was beloved and endearing and inoffensive in some weird way . For all of his screaming and all of his darkness , he was just lovable . " 
 " My Friends " addressed more of Kiedis ' own somber thoughts rather than those of " his friends " : " My friends are so distressed / And standing on the brink of emptiness / No words I know of to express / This emptiness . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 While piecing together the final components of the album , the band recorded a video for " Warped " . They asked Flea 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Gavin Bowden , to direct it . The video involved Kiedis and Navarro kissing towards the end as a way of breaking the monotony of cumbersome video recording . Thinking nothing of it , they continued to shoot and finished several days later . Warner Bros. , however , saw the video and instantly wanted it thrown away , considering it to be unmarketable and that the kiss would alienate a large portion of the band 's fan base . The band came to a consensus to let the kiss remain on the final cut , prompting a backlash from the college segment of their audience , who took offense at the action . Kiedis said of the situation : " If they couldn 't accept what we were doing , we didn 't need them anymore . " 
 One Hot Minute was released September 12 , 1995 . It was certified Gold just more than two months later on November 11 ; since then it has gone Double Platinum in the United States . The album peaked at number four on the Billboard Top 200 . " My Friends " peaked at number one on the Modern Rock and Mainstream Rock charts . The song also peaked at number 29 on the UK Singles Chart , and " Aeroplane " at number 11 . Several days following the album 's release , Kiedis continued to use drugs despite the numerous interviews he was scheduled to attend . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 One Hot Minute was not as universally well received as Blood Sugar Sex Magik , and was ultimately considered to be a poor follow @-@ up . It did however receive mixed to positive reviews from critics . <unk> <unk> of Rolling Stone said " One Hot Minute dives into the emotionally deep end of drug addiction and loss " , and that the album " is a ferociously eclectic and imaginative disc that also presents the band members as more thoughtful , spiritual — even grown @-@ up . After a 10 plus @-@ year career , they 're realizing their potential at last . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said that " One Hot Minute wails and flails like a mosh @-@ pit workout tape , but it also has moments of outright subtlety and maturity . " He goes on to praise Kiedis for " keeping his boorish tendencies under control . " Browne , however , criticizes the band for " attempts at cosmic philosophy which often trip up on hippie @-@ <unk> sentiments " , and some songs " fall back on tired frat @-@ funk flop sweat . " " The Peppers work their own little patch with considerable expertise , " wrote Peter Kane in Q. " The incoming Navarro rarely fails to deliver the goods and upfront the taut ball of energy going by the name of Anthony <unk> still makes for a suitably rubbery @-@ lipped frontman , if not exactly a lovable one . " Q also included One Hot Minute in its ' best of the year ' roundup : " A bulging , blistering blend of a skewed ballads and physically intimidating workouts that charge around like a bull on a promise . " 
 Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that " following up Blood Sugar Sex Magik proved to be a difficult task for the Red Hot Chili Peppers " , and " Navarro 's metallic guitar shredding should have added some weight to the Chili Peppers ' punk @-@ inflected heavy @-@ guitar funk , but tends to make it plodding . " Erlewine went on to add that " by emphasizing the metal , the funk is gradually phased out of the blend , as is melody . " Robert Christgau gave the album a rating of " dud " . 
 " My Friends " was considered by Erlewine to be a blatant attempt to hold on to the mainstream audience gained by " Under the Bridge " , and that in contrast , " the melodies are weak and the lyrics are even more feeble . " The song also " tries to be a collective hug for all [ of Kiedis 's ] troubled pals . " Rolling Stone , on the other hand , said the song was " lovely " , and incorporated a " vaguely folky chorus , and sports the same sad <unk> of ' Under the Bridge ' and ' Breaking the Girl ' . " The article went on to praise " Warped " claiming it " mixes harrowing lyrics with a multi @-@ toned , layered intro and a whirling dervish of noises and big @-@ rock rhythms surfing through and over big , funky hooks . It 's like , well , a drug rush . " Rolling Stone went on to say that the title track was " funky and fun . It 's about love and sex . What the hell . Some things don 't have to change . " Entertainment Weekly said " some of these songs last a little too long and could have benefited from a trimming " , though they credited Kiedis for sounding " nearly spiritual " on " Falling into Grace " . 
 = = Unreleased Deep Kick documentary = = 
 In 1994 and 1995 the band , along with director Gavin Bowden , began work on a documentary titled " Deep Kick " , named after the third track on the album . The documentary was expected to be similar to Funky Monks , which documented the making of band 's 1991 album , Blood Sugar Sex Magik although it would also feature mini @-@ films intercut featuring each member of the band . Some footage from the documentary has been released on the internet including Anthony 's segment along with a segment of the band with The Velvet Underground 's " I 'm Waiting for the Man " playing over the footage . Footage from the in @-@ studio version of the " My Friends " music video also came from this shoot . It is unknown if the project was ever completed and if it was , why Warner never released it . 
 = = One Hot Minute tour = = 
 The One Hot Minute tour began several days after the release of the album . The band opened the tour with a European leg . Kiedis felt that as a musician , he was becoming somewhat lackluster . The short European leg ended in early November , and the U.S. portion was scheduled to begin 10 days later ; however , it was postponed until early February . A few shows into the commencement of the U.S. leg , Kiedis badly injured his leg while engaging in what he calls " eyes @-@ closed robotic dancing " . He tripped over a monitor and fell off the stage , ending up hanging by his calf from his microphone cable , resulting in a cast which he wore for the next two months . Kiedis reflected that it " was nice to see that people were still interested in coming out to see what we do " , as there had been a four @-@ year gap since the release of Blood Sugar Sex Magik . Following the conclusion of the U.S. tour , the Chili Peppers took two weeks off before several Australia and New Zealand performances . The band then played at the Tibetan Freedom Concert in San Francisco , before finishing the tour in Europe . 
 Kiedis had remained sober the entire tour and maintained positive disposition during shows . Navarro , however , was growing tired of touring , and that was beginning to grate on his fellow band @-@ mates . Kiedis suffered an additional injury in Prague after falling off the stage while attempting to execute a back flip . He was forced to wear a back brace for the next few shows , which restricted his actions to the area around his microphone . After shows in Paris and London , the band returned home to Los Angeles . Kiedis began taking drugs once again , though he forced himself to discontinue after several weeks . The band was then asked to play in the North Pole for roughly 100 contest winners of a concert set up by Molson , a Canadian beer company . While the show was mildly motivating to the band , they returned home after two days . 
 Months went by without any scheduled concerts due to the album 's poor sales . Following another relapse and a stint in rehab , Kiedis and the rest of the band prepared for a summer tour , their first in almost seven months . Before the tour could begin , Kiedis had an accident on his motorcycle and was rushed to the hospital after severely injuring his hand . Due to his drug addiction , it took seven doses of morphine before the pain was assuaged . Following discharge from the hospital , he was forced to wear a full @-@ arm cast for several months , resulting in the cancellation of all remaining scheduled concerts . Halfway through Kiedis 's recovery , the band was asked to play the Fuji Rock Festival in July 1997 . By that time , Kiedis 's cast had receded down to the elbow and he felt well enough to play . A large typhoon had been forecast to hit the festival several hours before the show . The concert took place anyway , and when the Chili Peppers got on stage to play , the audience was being soaked in torrential rains , and the band found it virtually impossible to play their instruments . After eight songs , the lighting and sound equipment was torn from the stage and the band was obliged to an impromptu finish . 
 = = Follow @-@ up album and Navarro 's departure = = 
 Returning home , the Chili Peppers parted ways and , for the most part , remained secluded from each other through the rest of 1997 . No new material was written during that time , and it was not until the beginning of 1998 that the band began rehearsal . At that point , Navarro had become dependent on drugs , with Kiedis also struggling to remain clean . The band decided they would have a talk with Navarro and attempt to convince him to enter rehab . The discussion escalated into a heated dispute , and Navarro fell over an amplifier in a drug @-@ induced daze . In April 2010 , Navarro discussed this incident , stating that : " One [ of the reasons I was fired ] was [ because of ] my drug use at the time . The other was musical differences . Anthony says it was because I tripped and fell over an amp while on drugs . I say that he was on more drugs than me at that point . We both had a loose relationship with reality . Who do you want to believe ? " 
 The band made an attempt to begin writing for a follow @-@ up and had written and began recording one song titled " Circle of the Noose " , but it was never completed or officially released . The song , which is the last to feature guitar work from Navarro prior to his departure , was a tribute to the late qawwali @-@ devotional singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan . Navarro described the song as totally pop , dirge @-@ like and said the song was one of the favorite songs he had done with the band . He said " The best way I can describe it is it 's like <unk> up ' 60s folk with ' 90s ideals , but I would hate to label it as folk because it 's not , it moves . " On June 7 , 2011 , Navarro was asked by a Chili Peppers fan on his blog about " Circle of the Noose " and said he didn 't have the recordings but would love to hear them . Flea was also asked in 2011 through his Twitter page about the song and was shocked that anyone knew about it . He responded by saying " Holy cow ! how in the hell do you know about that ? It had a sample of <unk> <unk> Ali khan in it ... never was finished " . On February 3 , 2016 , a rough mix of " Circle of the Noose " , which had been recorded on March 16 , 1998 , was leaked to the internet . Dave Navarro tweeted " WOW what a trip down memory lane " in response to the leak . 
 At this point in 1998 , Kiedis and Flea decided it was time to fire their guitarist . Navarro was furious when confronted by Kiedis and Flea , but eventually accepted his termination . The Chili Peppers were fighting , and on the verge of breaking up . Flea was beginning to question the band 's future and thought it may be necessary to break the band up . He made one last attempt to keep the band together , asking Frusciante to rejoin . Frusciante had recently completed a drug rehabilitation program after more than five years of heroin addiction , and gladly accepted the invitation . 
 As of 2016 , " Pea " and " Aeroplane " are the only songs from One Hot Minute that the Red Hot Chili Peppers have played in full since Dave Navarro left the band . The band however did tease " My Friends " , " Let 's Make Evil " and " Walkabout " during the I 'm With You World Tour . Chad Smith was asked by fans during a February 2014 online interview about the band 's reasons behind not performing the songs and he responded by saying " We don 't really feel that connected to that record anymore . No special reason , not to say we would never play those songs but we don 't feel that emotionally connected to that music right now . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Red Hot Chili Peppers ( Flea , Kiedis , Navarro , Smith ) . 
 = = Album outtakes = = 
 Twenty @-@ one songs from the One Hot Minute sessions are known to exist . Thirteen made it to the final cut of the album . " Melancholy Mechanics " was released as a b @-@ side to the " Warped " single and " Let 's Make Evil " and " Stretch " ( originally a song that was connected onto the end of " One Big Mob " ) were released on the " My Friends " single . " Bob " ( a song about close friend Bob Forrest ) would finally surface eleven years later as a iTunes bonus track in 2006 . The song features percussion by Stephen Perkins . " Blender " was one of two songs ( " Stretch " being the other ) that was dropped from the album 's final cut at the last minute . The song has never been released . " I Found Out " , a cover song originally recorded by John Lennon was released on the 1995 album Working Class Hero : A Tribute to John Lennon . It is unconfirmed if the song was recorded during the album sessions although many speculate it was because Rick Rubin produced the song . " The Intimidator " and " Slow Funk " , two songs mentioned in interviews by Chad Smith have never been released . It is unknown if either song was a working title for another released song . An <unk> / unmastered version of the album exists which features extended jams , more lyrics , longer intros / <unk> and some studio chatter . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Red Hot Chili Peppers 
 Flea – bass guitar , backing vocals , lead vocals on " Pea " and co @-@ lead vocals on " Deep Kick " 
 Anthony Kiedis – lead vocals 
 Dave Navarro – guitars , backing vocals 
 Chad Smith – drums 
 Additional musicians 
 Keith " Tree " Barry – violin on " Tearjerker " 
 Jimmy Boyle – backing vocals 
 Lenny Castro – percussion on " Walkabout " , " My Friends " , " One Hot Minute " , " Deep Kick " , and " Tearjerker " 
 Aimee Echo – backing vocals on " One Hot Minute " , " One Big Mob " 
 <unk> Kaur Khalsa – chants on " Falling into Grace " 
 John Lurie – harmonica on " One Hot Minute " 
 Stephen Perkins – percussion on " One Big Mob " and " Bob " ( iTunes bonus track ) 
 Kristen Vigard – backing vocals on " Falling into Grace " 
 Recording personnel 
 Stephen Marcussen – mastering engineer 
 Rick Rubin – producer 
 Dave Sardy – mixing engineer , recording engineer 
 Dave Schiffman – engineer 
 Don C. Tyler – digital editor 
 Additional personnel 
 Mark Ryden – album artwork 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruisers , with the Soviet designation as Project 69 heavy cruisers , ( Russian : <unk> крейсера <unk> 69 ) , were ordered for the Soviet Navy in the late 1930s . Two ships were started but none were completed due to World War II . These ships had a complex and prolonged design process which was hampered by constantly changing requirements and the Great Purge in 1937 . They were laid down in 1939 , with an estimated completion date in 1944 , but Stalin 's naval construction program proved to be more than the shipbuilding and armaments industries could handle . Prototypes of the armament and machinery had not even been completed by 22 June 1941 , almost two years after the start of construction . This is why the Soviets bought twelve surplus 38 @-@ centimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) SK C / 34 guns , and their twin turrets , similar to those used in the Bismarck @-@ class battleships , from Germany in 1940 . The ships were partially redesigned to accommodate them , after construction had already begun , but no turrets were actually delivered before Operation Barbarossa . 
 Only Kronshtadt 's hull survived the war reasonably intact and was about 10 % complete in 1945 . She was judged obsolete and the Soviets considered converting her into an aircraft carrier , but the idea was rejected and both hulls were scrapped in 1947 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruisers had their origin in a mid @-@ 1930s requirement for a large cruiser ( Russian : bol <unk> <unk> ) capable of destroying 10 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 10 @,@ 160 t ) cruisers built to the limits imposed by the Washington Naval Treaty , to which the Soviets were not a signatory . Several designs were submitted by the end of 1935 , but the Navy was not satisfied and rejected all of them . It asked for another design , displacing 23 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 22 @,@ 637 long tons ) and armed with 254 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) guns , in early 1936 , eventually designated Project 22 , but this design was cancelled after the Soviets began negotiations in mid @-@ 1936 with the British that ultimately resulted in the Anglo @-@ Soviet Quantitative Naval Agreement of 1937 and agreed to follow the terms of the Second London Naval Treaty which limited battleships to a displacement of 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 35 @,@ 562 t ) . The Soviets had been working on a small battleship design ( Battleship ' B ' ) for service in the Baltic and Black Seas and had to shrink it as a result of these discussions to a size close to that of the Project 22 large cruiser so that the latter was cancelled . Battleship ' B ' was redesignated as Project 25 and given the task of destroying Treaty cruisers and German pocket battleships . The Project 25 design was accepted in mid @-@ 1937 after major revisions in the armor scheme and the machinery layout and four were ordered with construction to begin in late 1937 and early 1938 . However , this decision occurred right before the Great Purge began to hit the Navy in August 1937 and two of the ship 's designers were arrested and executed within a year . The Project 25 design was then rejected on the grounds that it was too weak compared to foreign ships and the whole program was cancelled in early 1938 after an attempt to modify the design with larger guns had been made . 
 However the Soviet Navy still felt a need for a fast ship that could deal with enemy cruisers and the original concept was revived as Project 69 . They wanted a ship not to exceed 23 @,@ 000 metric tons with a speed of 34 knots ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) and an armament of nine 254 mm guns , but the requirement proved to be too ambitious for the specified size and it increased to 26 @,@ 200 metric tons ( 25 @,@ 786 long tons ) in the design submitted in June 1938 . By this time , however , details were becoming available for the Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships and the ship was deemed inferior to the German ships . The State Defense Committee revised the requirements and specified a size about 31 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 30 @,@ 510 long tons ) , an armament of nine 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , an armor belt 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick and a speed about 31 – 32 knots ( 57 – 59 km / h ; 36 – 37 mph ) . A revised design was finished by October which was <unk> against the Japanese Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers , the French Dunkerque @-@ class battleships as well as the Scharnhorst class . It was deemed superior to the <unk> at medium range and inferior to the <unk> at the same range , but generally superior to the Scharnhorsts , although it is doubtful that the Soviets were fully aware of the true specifications of the Kongōs as rebuilt or of the Scharnhorsts as the displacement of the latter had been given as 26 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 25 @,@ 589 long tons ) , more than 5 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 921 long tons ) short of their true displacement . The Navy 's Shipbuilding Administration thought that the original secondary armament of 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) guns was too small and that the armor on the turrets , conning tower and the forward transverse bulkhead was too thin . A revised , 35 @,@ 000 @-@ ton design with 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) guns and extra armor was submitted to the State Defense Council in January 1939 . 
 This was approved and the detailed design work began with the basic concept that the ship should be superior to the Scharnhorst @-@ class ships and able to outrun the Bismarck @-@ class battleships . At this time the horizontal protection was revised after full @-@ scale trials revealed that a 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb would penetrate both a 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) upper deck and a 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) middle deck to burst on the main armor deck . So the middle deck was thickened to 90 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) with the lower deck intended to catch any splinters penetrating the armor deck . This mean that the main belt had to be extended upwards to meet the main armor deck at a significant penalty in weight . The Defense Committee approved the sketch design on 13 July 1939 , but the detailed design was not approved until 12 April 1940 , after construction had already begun on the first two ships . 
 It was already apparent that the 305 mm guns and turrets were well behind schedule when Joseph Stalin asked the German representatives in Moscow on 8 February 1940 to negotiate a trade agreement if it would be possible to use the triple 283 @-@ millimeter ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) turrets in lieu of the triple 305 mm turrets of the Project 69 ships . They replied that the turrets were out of production , but new ones could be built . He then asked if twin 380 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) turrets could be used instead . The Germans said that they would have to check back for the technical details . Krupp had six incomplete turrets on hand that had originally been ordered before the war to rearm the Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships , but they were cancelled after the start of World War II when the Germans decided that they could not afford to have the ships out of service during the war . A preliminary purchase agreement was made to buy twelve guns and six turrets later that month , well before any studies were even made to see if the substitution was even possible . The Shipbuilding Commissariat reported on 17 April that it was possible so the agreement was finalized in November 1940 with the deliveries scheduled from October 1941 to 28 March 1943 . The order also included 10 @-@ meter ( 33 ft ) rangefinders and 150 @-@ centimeter ( 59 in ) searchlights . 
 The Soviets never did get the detailed data required to redesign the ship 's barbettes and magazines , but they did know that the 380 @-@ mm barbettes was bigger in diameter than that of the 305 mm turret as well as taller than the Russian turrets . So the barbette of turret number two had to be raised to clear turret number one and the height of the conning tower had to be raised to clear turret number two . Similarly the 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns behind turret number three had to be raised as well . The new turrets required more electrical power which meant that the output of the turbo generators had to be increased to 1 @,@ 300 kilowatts . All of these changes added over 1 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 984 long tons ) to the ships ' displacement and the sketch design was completed by 16 October 1940 , as Project 69 @-@ I ( <unk> — Imported ) , even though they still lacked data for the turrets and their barbettes . This was presented to the State Defense Committee on 11 February 1941 , but the design was not approved until 10 April when it ordered that the first two ships be completed with German guns while the others would continue to use the 305 mm guns . The detailed design was supposed to be completed by 15 October 1941 , but it was rendered pointless when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Project 69 @-@ class ships were 250 @.@ 5 meters ( 821 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a waterline length of 240 meters ( 787 ft 5 in ) . They had a beam of 31 @.@ 6 meters ( 103 ft 8 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 @.@ 45 meters ( 31 ft 0 in ) . As designed they displaced 35 @,@ 240 metric tons ( 34 @,@ 683 long tons ) at standard load and 41 @,@ 539 metric tons ( 40 @,@ 883 long tons ) at full load . The displacement of the two Project 69 @-@ I @-@ class ships increased to 36 @,@ 250 metric tons ( 35 @,@ 677 long tons ) at standard load and 42 @,@ 831 metric tons ( 42 @,@ 155 long tons ) at full load which increased the draft to 9 @.@ 7 meters ( 31 ft 10 in ) at full load while the waterline length grew to 242 @.@ 1 meters ( 794 ft 3 in ) simply because the extra draft submerged more of the sharply raked stem and spoon @-@ shaped stern . The speed remained the same as the deeper draft was offset by a more efficient propeller form . 
 The hull form was very full with a block coefficient of 0 @.@ 61 which compared badly to the 0 @.@ 54 of the Dunkerque , the 0 @.@ 52 of the German O @-@ class battlecruiser or the 0 @.@ <unk> of the American Alaska @-@ class cruiser . This meant that a lot of horsepower was necessary to achieve even modest speeds . Stalin 's decision that the Project 69 ships would use three shafts increased the shaft loading and reduced propulsive efficiency , although it did shorten the length of the armored citadel and thus overall displacement . The riveted hull was subdivided by 24 transverse bulkheads and used longitudinal framing in the citadel , but transverse framing for the structure fore and aft of the citadel . The metacentric height was 2 @.@ 8 meters ( 9 ft 2 in ) for the 305 mm gunned ships , but dropped to 2 @.@ 58 meters ( 8 ft 6 in ) in the 380 mm gunned ships . The tactical diameter was estimated at about 1 @,@ 200 meters ( 1 @,@ 312 yd ) . 
 The Kronshtadt @-@ class ships were provided with two KOR @-@ 2 flying boats which would be launched by the catapult mounted between the funnels . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The power plant was laid out on a unit system . The forward boiler room contained eight boilers and was followed by an engine room for the two wing propeller shafts . The second boiler room contained four boilers and was followed by a turbine room for the central shaft . The single @-@ reduction , impulse @-@ reduction geared steam turbines were an imported Brown Boveri design shared with the Sovetsky Soyuz @-@ class battleship , but the factory in Kharkiv that was to build them never finished a single turbine before the Germans invaded . They produced a total of 210 @,@ 000 shp ( 156 @,@ 597 kW ) . Twelve <unk> @-@ bis water @-@ tube boilers worked at a pressure of 37 kg / cm2 ( 3 @,@ 628 kPa ; 526 psi ) and temperature of 380 ° C ( 716 ° F ) . There were two other small boilers for harbor service and to power the auxiliary machinery . The electrical plant originally consisted of four 1200 kW turbo generators and four 650 kW diesel generators , but these were upgraded for the Project 69 @-@ I ships . 
 Maximum speed was estimated at 31 knots ( 57 km / h ; 36 mph ) , using the revised propeller design , although forcing the machinery would yield an extra knot . The normal fuel oil capacity was 2 @,@ 920 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 874 long tons ) , which provided an estimated endurance of 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 040 km ; 1 @,@ 270 mi ) at full speed . Maximum fuel capacity was 5 @,@ 570 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 482 long tons ) which gave a range of 8 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 370 km ; 9 @,@ 550 mi ) at 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) and 6 @,@ 900 nmi ( 12 @,@ 780 km ; 7 @,@ 940 mi ) at 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament consisted of three electrically powered MK @-@ 15 triple turrets , each with three 54 @-@ caliber 305 mm B @-@ 50 guns . The turrets were based on the MK @-@ 2 turrets planned for the Project 25 large cruiser . The guns could be depressed to − 3 ° and elevated to 45 ° . They had a fixed loading angle of 6 ° and their rate of fire varied with the time required to relay the gun . It ranged from 2 @.@ 36 to 3 @.@ 24 rounds per minute depending on the elevation . The turrets could elevate at a rate of 10 degrees per second and traverse at 5 @.@ 1 degrees per second . 100 rounds per gun were carried . The gun fired 470 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 040 lb ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 900 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 47 @,@ 580 meters ( 52 @,@ 030 yd ) . 
 The secondary armament consisted of eight 57 @-@ caliber B @-@ 38 152 mm guns mounted in four dual MK @-@ 4 turrets concentrated at the forward end of the superstructure . The forward turrets were inboard and above the outer turrets which provided both turrets with good arcs of fire . Their elevation limits were -5 ° to + 45 ° with a fixed loading angle of 8 ° . Their rate of fire also varied with the elevation from 7 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 8 rounds per minute . The turrets could elevate at a rate of 13 degrees per second and traverse at 6 degrees per second . They had a maximum range of about 30 @,@ 000 meters ( 33 @,@ 000 yd ) with a 55 @-@ kilogram ( 121 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 950 m / s ( 3 @,@ 100 ft / s ) . 
 Heavy anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) fire was provided by eight 56 @-@ caliber 100 mm B @-@ 34 dual @-@ purpose guns in four twin MZ @-@ 16 turrets mounted at the aft end of the superstructure with the aft turrets mounted inboard of the forward turrets . They could elevate to a maximum of 85 ° and depress to -8 ° . They could traverse at a rate of 12 ° per second and elevate at 10 ° per second . They fired 15 @.@ 6 @-@ kilogram ( 34 lb ) high explosive shells at a muzzle velocity of 895 m / s ( 2 @,@ 940 ft / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 22 @,@ 241 meters ( 24 @,@ 323 yd ) against surface targets , but their maximum range against aerial targets was 9 @,@ 895 meters ( 32 @,@ 464 ft ) , the limit of their time fuse . 
 Light AA defense was handled by six quadruple , water @-@ cooled , 46 @-@ K mounts fitted with 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K guns . Two mounts were abreast the forward funnel , two just abaft the rear funnel and the last two on the centerline of the aft superstructure superfiring over the rear main gun turret . Initially seven mounts were planned , but the one above the conning tower was exchanged for a director for the 100 mm guns in early 1940 when the Navy realized that the other directors were blocked by the superstructure . The guns fired <unk> @-@ kilogram ( 1 @.@ 61 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 880 m / s ( 2 @,@ 887 ft / s ) . Their effective anti @-@ aircraft range was 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) . 
 The Germans sold the Soviets twelve 52 @-@ caliber 38 @-@ centimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) SKC / 34 guns and their associated Drh LC / 34 turrets as part of the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . Their elevation limits were <unk> ° to + 30 ° with a fixed loading angle of 2 @.@ 5 ° . Their rate of fire was 2 @.@ 3 rounds per minute . The turrets could elevate at a rate of 6 ° per second and traverse at 5 ° per second . They had a maximum range of 36 @,@ 520 meters ( 39 @,@ 940 yd ) with a 800 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 800 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 820 m / s ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 Two KDP @-@ 8 @-@ III fire @-@ control directors were used to control the main armament . These had two 8 @-@ meter ( 26 ft 3 in ) stereoscopic rangefinders , one to track the target and the other to measure the range to the ship 's own shell splashes . Two of these were protected by 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) of armor and were mounted atop the rear superstructure and the tower @-@ mast . Two KDP @-@ <unk> @-@ II directors , with two 4 @-@ meter ( 13 ft 1 in ) rangefinders each , controlled the secondary armament . The dual @-@ purpose guns were controlled by two , later three , stabilized directors , each with a 3 @-@ meter ( 9 ft 10 in ) rangefinder . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The ships had relatively light armor . The main belt was 230 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) thick , with a taper to the lower edge , and inclined outwards six degrees . It was 5 meters ( 16 ft 5 in ) high of which 1 @.@ 6 meters ( 5 ft 3 in ) was intended to be submerged as originally designed . The belt was 185 meters ( 606 ft 11 in ) long and covered 76 @.@ 8 percent of the waterline ; forward of this was a 20 mm belt that extended all the way to the bow . The forward transverse 330 @-@ millimeter ( 13 @.@ 0 in ) bulkhead was 330 mm thick while the rear bulkhead was 275 millimeters ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The upper deck was only 14 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) thick and was intended to initiate shell and bomb fuzes . The main armor deck , which was even with the top of the waterline belt , was 90 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) thick and a 30 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) splinter deck was underneath it , although it tapered to 15 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) in thickness over the torpedo protection system . The underwater protection was an American @-@ style design with a bulge and four longitudinal bulkheads intended to withstand a 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 102 lb ) warhead of TNT . It covered 61 @.@ 5 % of the ship 's length and had a total depth of 6 meters ( 19 ft 8 in ) , that reduced to 4 meters ( 13 ft 1 in ) forward and aft where the hull lines became finer . 
 The main turrets had 305 mm faces and backs and 125 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) sides and roofs . Their barbettes were protected with 330 mm of armor . The secondary turrets had 100 mm faces with 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) sides and roofs and 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) barbettes . The dual @-@ purpose mountings had 50 mm armor with 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) barbettes . The conning tower had 330 mm sides and a 125 mm roof with a 230 mm communications tube running down to the armor deck . The admiral 's bridge was protected with 50 mm armor . Each of the directors had 14 mm of armor as did the 37 mm gun mounts . The funnels had 20 mm armor for their entire height above the deck and a 50 mm box protected the smoke generators . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Soviet shipbuilding and related industries proved to be incapable of supporting the construction of the four Sovetsky Soyuz @-@ class battleships as well as the two Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruisers at the same time . The largest warships built in the Soviet Union prior to 1938 were the 8 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 7 @,@ 874 @-@ long @-@ ton ) Kirov @-@ class cruisers and even they had suffered from a number of production problems , but the Soviet leadership preferred to ignore the industrial difficulties when making their plans . The shipyards in Leningrad and Nikolayev had less than half the workers intended . Shipbuilding steel proved to be in short supply in 1939 – 1940 and a number of batches were rejected because they did not meet specifications . An attempt to import 14 @,@ 000 long tons ( 14 @,@ 225 t ) of steel and armor plate from the United States in 1939 failed , probably as a result of the Soviet invasion of Poland on 17 September 1939 . Armor plate production was even more problematic as only 27 @,@ 438 metric tons ( 27 @,@ 005 long tons ) were delivered in 1940 of the anticipated 30 @,@ 000 – 32 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 29 @,@ 526 – 31 @,@ 495 long tons ) and 30 – 40 % of that was rejected . Furthermore , the armor plants proved to be incapable of making cemented plates over 230 mm and inferior face @-@ hardened plates had to be substituted for all thicknesses over 200 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 Machinery problems were likely to delay the ships well past their intended delivery dates of 1943 – 44 . The <unk> <unk> Works never completed a single turbine before the German invasion in June 1941 . Another problem were the 305 mm guns and turrets as the armament factories were focused on the higher @-@ priority guns for the Sovetsky Soyuz @-@ class battleships . Prototypes of neither had been completed by the time the Germans invaded . The situation was not much better for the smaller guns as mountings for both the 152 mm and 100 mm guns were still incomplete on 22 June 1941 and all of these programs were terminated quickly afterwards . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 The ships were originally intended to be laid down 1 September 1939 , but they were delayed until November to allow improvements to the shipyards to be completed . A total of sixteen ships were planned in the August 1939 building program , but this was scaled back to four in July 1940 and two in October 1940 when it became clear just how unprepared the Soviets were for any large @-@ scale naval construction program . Work on these ships ceased shortly after the German invasion . 
 Kronshtadt ( Russian : <unk> ) was built by the Shipyard No. 194 , Marti in Leningrad . She was laid down 30 November 1939 and judged 10 @.@ 6 % complete when the Germans invaded . Her building slip was too short for her entire length so her stern was built separately . Some of her material was used during the Siege of Leningrad to repair other ships and in defensive works , but she could have been finished after the end of the war . Proposals were made to complete her as an aircraft carrier and as a base ship for a whaling flotilla , but both ideas were rejected and she was ordered scrapped on 24 March 1947 . Her dismantling began shortly afterwards and was completed the following year . 
 Sevastopol ( Russian : Севастополь ) was built by Shipyard No. 200 , 61 Communards in Nikolayev . She was laid down on 5 November 1939 and estimated as 11 @.@ 6 % complete on 22 June 1941 . She was captured by the Germans when they occupied Nikolayev in late 1941 , but the Germans did little with her other than to use some of her material for defensive positions and some was apparently shipped to Germany . Before the Germans evacuated the city they damaged her building slip and hull with explosives and made her a constructive total loss . She was ordered scrapped on 24 March 1947 and her dismantling began shortly afterwards . It was completed in 1948 . 
 = Tom Kahn = 
 Tom David Kahn ( September 15 , 1938 – March 27 , 1992 ) was an American social democrat known for his leadership in several organizations . He was an activist and influential strategist in the Civil Rights Movement . He was a senior adviser and leader in the U.S. labor movement . 
 Kahn was raised in New York City . At Brooklyn College , he joined the U.S. socialist movement , where he was influenced by Max Shachtman and Michael Harrington . As an assistant to civil rights leader Bayard Rustin , Kahn helped to organize the 1963 March on Washington , during which Martin Luther King delivered his " I Have a Dream " speech . Kahn 's analysis of the civil rights movement influenced Bayard Rustin ( who was the nominal author of Kahn 's " From Protest to Politics " ) . 
 A leader in the Socialist Party of America , Kahn supported its 1972 name change to Social Democrats , USA ( SDUSA ) . Like other leaders of SDUSA , Kahn worked to support free labor @-@ unions and democracy and to oppose Soviet communism ; he also worked to strengthen U.S. labor unions . Kahn worked as a senior assistant to and speechwriter for Democratic Senator Henry " Scoop " Jackson , AFL – CIO Presidents George Meany and Lane Kirkland , and other leaders of the Democratic Party , labor unions , and civil @-@ rights organizations . 
 In 1980 Lane Kirkland appointed Kahn to organize the AFL – CIO 's support for the Polish labor @-@ union Solidarity ; this support was made despite protests by the USSR and the Carter administration . He acted as the Director of the AFL – CIO 's Department of International Affairs in 1986 and was officially named Director in 1989 . Kahn died in 1992 , at the age of 53 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Kahn was born Thomas John Marcel on September 15 , 1938 , and was immediately placed for adoption at the New York Foundling Hospital . He was adopted by Adele and David Kahn , and renamed Thomas David Kahn . His father , a member of the Communist Party USA , became President of the Transport Workers Local 101 of the Brooklyn Union Gas Company . 
 Tom Kahn was a civil libertarian who " ran for president of the Student Organization of Erasmus Hall High School in 1955 on a platform calling for the destruction of the student assembly , because it had no power " , an election he lost . In high school , he met Rachelle Horowitz , who would become his lifelong friend and political ally . 
 = = = Democratic socialism = = = 
 At Brooklyn College ( CUNY ) , the undergraduate students Kahn and Horowitz joined the U.S. movement for democratic socialism after hearing Max Shachtman denounce the 1956 Soviet invasion of Hungary : Shachtman described 
 rolling Russian tanks ... defenceless Hungarian workers and students fighting back with stones ... a heroic people ’ s crushed hopes , and ... our democratic socialist links to those hopes . Freedom , democracy — they were not abstractions ; they were real and could therefore be destroyed . Communist totalitarianism was not merely a political force , an ideological aberration that could be smashed in debate ; it was a monstrous physical force . Democracy was not merely the icing on the socialist cake . It was the cake — or there was no socialism worth fighting for . 
 As young socialists , Kahn 's and Horowitz 's talents were recognized by Michael Harrington . Harrington had joined Shachtman after working with Dorothy Day 's Catholic Worker 's house of hospitality in the Bowery of Lower Manhattan . Harrington was about to become famous in the United States for his book on poverty in the United States , The Other America . Kahn idolized Harrington , particularly for his erudition and rhetoric , both in writing and in debate . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 As a leader of the American socialist movement , Michael Harrington sent Tom Kahn and Rachelle Horowitz to help Bayard Rustin , one of the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement , who became a mentor to Kahn . Kahn and Horowitz were affectionately called the " Bayard Rustin Marching and Chowder Society " by Harrington . Kahn helped Rustin organize the 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage to Washington and the 1958 and 1959 Youth March for Integrated Schools . 
 = = = = Homosexuality and Bayard Rustin = = = = 
 As a young man , Tom Kahn " was gay but wanted to be straight ... It was a different world then " , according to Rachelle Horowitz . He had a short relationship with a member of the Young People 's Socialist League ( YPSL ) : 
 Although everyone active in the movement was aware of it , [ before 1956 ] he was never explicitly out of the closet . He took his sexual orientation as an affliction , a source of pain and embarrassment . In part , perhaps , because he was so unreconciled to his longings , he limited himself for a long time to brief encounters . But then he became involved with one of the YPSL ’ s and was compelled to seek the counsel of a psychiatrist to explain his unfamiliar feelings . The diagnosis , he told me , was “ you ’ re in love . ” 
 Tom Kahn was " very good looking , a very attractive guy " according to longtime socialist David McReynolds , who is also an openly gay New Yorker . Kahn accepted his homosexuality in 1956 , the year that Kahn and Horowitz volunteered to help Bayard Rustin with his work in the civil @-@ rights movement . " Once he met Bayard [ Rustin ] , then Kahn knew that he was gay and had this long @-@ term relationship with Bayard , which went through many stages " , according to Horowitz , who quoted Kahn 's remembrance of Rustin : 
 When I met him for the first time he was a few years younger than I am now , and I was barely on the edge of manhood . He drew me into a vortex of his endless campaigns and projects ... He introduced me to Bach and Brahms , and to the importance of maintaining a balance in life between the pursuit of our individual pleasures and engagements in , and responsibility for , the social condition . He believed that no class , caste or genre of people were exempt from this obligation . 
 However , cohabiting in Rustin 's apartment proved unsuccessful , and their romantic relationship ended when Kahn enrolled in the historically black Howard University . Kahn and Rustin remained lifelong friends and political comrades . 
 = = = = Howard University = = = = 
 Kahn , a white student , enrolled for his junior and senior years at Howard University , where he became a leader in student politics . Kahn worked closely with Stokely Carmichael , who later became a national leader of young civil @-@ rights activists and then one of the leaders of the Black Power movement . Kahn and Carmichael helped to fund a five @-@ day run of Three Penny Opera , by the Marxist playwright Berthold Brecht and the socialist composer Kurt Weill : " Tom Kahn — very shrewdly — had captured the position of Treasurer of the Liberal Arts Student Council and the infinitely charismatic and popular Carmichael as floor whip was good at lining up the votes . Before they knew what hit them the Student Council had become a patron of the arts , having voted to buy out the remaining performances . " Kahn and Carmichael worked with Howard University 's chapter of Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( SNCC ) . Kahn introduced Carmichael and his fellow SNCC activists to Bayard Rustin , who became an influential adviser to SNCC . Kahn and Rustin 's emphasis on economic inequality influenced Carmichael . Kahn graduated from Howard in 1961 . 
 = = = = Leadership = = = = 
 Kahn ( along with Horowitz and Norman Hill ) helped Rustin and A. Philip Randolph to plan the 1963 March on Washington , at which Martin Luther King , Jr. delivered his " I have a dream " speech . For this march , Kahn also ghost wrote the speech of A. Philip Randolph , the senior leader of the civil @-@ rights movement and the African @-@ American labor movement . Kahn 's analysis of the civil @-@ rights movement influenced Bayard Rustin ( who was the nominal author of Kahn 's 1964 – 1965 essay " From protest to politics " ) , Stokely Carmichael , and William Julius Wilson . 
 = = = League for Industrial Democracy = = = 
 Kahn was Director of the League for Industrial Democracy after 1964 . Beginning in 1960 , he wrote several LID pamphlets , many of which were published in political journals like Dissent and Commentary , and some of which appeared in anthologies . Kahn 's The Economics of Equality LID pamphlet gave an " incisive radical analysis of what it would take to end racial oppression " . 
 = = = = Student League for Industrial Democracy : Students for a Democratic Society ( SDS ) = = = = 
 Before Kahn became LID director in 1964 , he was involved with the Student League for Industrial Democracy , which became Students for a Democratic Society ( SDS ) . Along with other LID members Rachelle Horowitz , Michael Harrington , and Don <unk> , Kahn attended the LID @-@ sponsored meeting that discussed the Port Huron Statement . Kahn was listed as a student representative from Howard University and was elected to the National Executive Committee . The LID representatives criticized the Port Huron Statement for promoting students as leaders of social change , for criticizing the U.S. labor movement and its unions , and for its criticisms of liberal and socialist opposition to Soviet communism ( " anti @-@ communism " ) . Kahn believed that the SDS students were " elitist " , being overly critical of labor unions and liberals , and attributed upper @-@ class origins and Ivy @-@ league schooling to them , according to Port @-@ Huron activist Todd Gitlin , who observes that Kahn was the son of a " manual laborer " . 
 LID and SDS split in 1965 , when SDS voted to remove from its constitution the " exclusion clause " that prohibited membership by communists , against Kahn 's arguments . The SDS exclusion clause had barred " advocates of or apologists for " " totalitarianism " . The clause 's removal effectively invited " disciplined cadre " to attempt to " take over or paralyze " SDS , as had occurred to mass organizations in the thirties . Afterward , Marxism Leninism , particularly the Progressive Labor Party , helped to write " the death sentence " for SDS . Nonetheless Kahn continued to argue with SDS leaders about the need for accountable leadership , about tactics , and about strategy . In 1966 , Kahn attended the Illinois Convention of SDS , where his forceful arguments and delivery overwhelmed and were resented by the other activists ; Kahn was then 28 years old . 
 Kahn 's determined style of debate emerged from the socialist movement led by Max Shachtman . Kahn expressed his admiration for Shachtman 's intellectual toughness in his 1973 memorial : " His answers , of course , could not always be correct . But they were on target and always fundamental . " 
 = = = Social Democrats , USA = = = 
 Kahn and Horowitz were leaders in the Socialist Party USA , and supported its change of name to Social Democrats , USA ( SDUSA ) , despite Harrington 's opposition . Ben Wattenberg commented that SDUSA members seemed to be 
 ... ingeniously trying to bury the Soviet Union in a blizzard of letterheads . It seemed that each of Tom 's colleagues — Penn Kemble , Carl Gershman , Josh Muravchik and many more — ran a little organization , each with the same interlocking directorate listed on the stationery . Funny thing : The <unk> Lieutenants did indeed churn up a blizzard , and the Soviet Union is no more . 
 I never did quite get all the organizational acronyms straight — YPSL , LID , SP , SDA , ISL — but the key words were " democratic " , " labor " , " young " and , until events redefined it away from their understanding , " socialist " . Ultimately , the umbrella group became " Social Democrats , U.S.A " , and Tom Kahn was a principal " theoretician . 
 They talked and wrote endlessly , mostly about communism and democracy , despising the former , adoring the latter . It is easy today to say " anti @-@ communist " and " pro @-@ democracy " in the same breath . But that is because American foreign policy eventually became just such a mixture , thanks in part to those " <unk> " ( Young People 's Socialist League ) , with Tom Kahn as provocateur @-@ at @-@ large . 
 On the conservative side , foreign policy used to be anti @-@ communist , but not very pro @-@ democracy . And foreign policy liberal @-@ style might be piously pro @-@ democracy , but nervous about being anti @-@ communist . Tom theorized that to be either , you had to be both . 
 It was tough for labor @-@ liberal intellectuals to be " anti @-@ communist " in the 1970s . It meant being taunted as " Cold Warriors " who saw " <unk> under every bed " and being labeled as — the unkindest cut — " right @-@ wingers " . 
 Kahn worked as a senior assistant and speechwriter for Senator Henry " Scoop " Jackson , AFL – CIO Presidents George Meany and Lane Kirkland , and other leaders of the Democratic Party , labor unions , and civil rights organizations . He was an effective speechwriter because he was able to express ideas to an American audience , according to Wattenberg . 
 = = = <unk> with Harrington = = = 
 Another protégé of Shachtman 's , Michael Harrington , called for an immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam in 1972 . His proposal was rejected by the majority , who criticized the war 's conduct and called for a negotiated peace treaty , the position associated with Shachtman and Kahn . Harrington resigned his honorary chairmanship of the Socialist Party and organized a caucus for like @-@ minded socialists . The conflict between Kahn and Harrington became " pretty bad " , according to Irving Howe . 
 Harrington handed former SDS activist and New York City journalist Jack Newfield a speech by AFL – CIO President George Meany . Addressing the September 1972 Convention of the United Steelworkers of America , Meany ridiculed the Democratic Party Convention , which had been held in Miami : 
 We heard from the gay @-@ lib [ gay @-@ liberation ] people who want to legalize marriage between boys and boys , and between girls and girls ... We heard from the people who looked like Jacks , acted like Jills , and had the odor of Johns [ customers of prostitutes ] about them . 
 This gay @-@ baiting taunt was attributed to Kahn by Harrington , and repeated by Newfield in his autobiography . Maurice Isserman 's biography of Harrington also described this speech as Kahn 's self hatred , as " Kahn 's resort to gay bashing " . 
 The blaming of Kahn for Meany 's speech and Isserman 's scholarship have been criticized by Rachelle Horowitz , Kahn 's friend , and by Joshua Muravchik , then an officer of the Young People 's Socialist League ( 1907 ) . According to Horowitz , Meany had many speechwriters — two specialists besides Kahn and even more writers from the AFL – CIO 's Committee on Political Education ( COPE ) Department . Horowitz stated , " It is in fact inconceivable that Kahn wrote those words . " She quoted a concurring assessment from Arch <unk> : [ Isserman ] " assumes that because Kahn was not publicly gay he had to be a gay basher . He never was . " According to Muravchik , " there is no reason to believe that Kahn wrote those lines , and Isserman presents none . " 
 Harrington failed to support an anti @-@ discrimination ( gay rights ) plank in the 1978 platform of the Democratic Party Convention , but noted his personal support after being criticized in The Nation . Along with others in the AFL – CIO and SDUSA , Kahn was accused of criticizing Harrington 's application for his Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee to join the Socialist International and to organize a 1983 conference on European socialism ; Harrington complained for six pages in his autobiography The Long Distance Runner , and " brooded " about Kahn 's opposition , exaggerating the importance of the Socialist International to America , according to Isserman 's biography . In 1991 , even after Harrington 's 1989 death , Howe warned Harrington 's biographer , Maurice Isserman , that Kahn 's description of Harrington " may well be a little nasty " and " hard line " . 
 = = = AFL – CIO support for free trade @-@ unions = = = 
 After becoming an assistant to the President of the AFL – CIO in 1972 , a position he held until 1986 , Kahn developed an expertise in international affairs . In 1980 AFL – CIO officer Lane Kirkland appointed Kahn to organize the AFL – CIO 's support for the Polish labor @-@ union Solidarity , which was maintained and indeed increased even after protests by the USSR and Carter administration . 
 = = = = Support of Solidarity , the Polish union = = = = 
 Kahn was heavily involved in supporting the Polish labor @-@ movement . The trade union Solidarity ( Solidarność ) began in 1980 . The Soviet @-@ backed Communist regime headed by General Wojciech Jaruzelski declared martial law in December 1981 . 
 In 1980 AFL – CIO President Lane Kirkland appointed Kahn to organize the AFL – CIO 's support of Solidarity . The AFL – CIO sought approval in advance from Solidarity 's leadership , to avoid jeopardizing their position with unwanted or surprising American help . Politically , the AFL – CIO supported the twenty @-@ one demands of the Gdansk workers , by lobbying to stop further U.S. loans to Poland unless those demands were met . <unk> , the AFL – CIO established the Polish Workers Aid Fund . By 1981 it had raised almost $ 300 @,@ 000 , which was used to purchase printing presses and office supplies . The AFL – CIO donated typewriters , duplicating machines , a minibus , an offset press , and other supplies requested by Solidarity . 
 It is up to Solidarity ... to define the aid they need . Solidarity made its needs known , with courage , with clarity , and publicly . As you know , the AFL – CIO responded by establishing a fund for the purchase of equipment requested by Solidarity and we have raised about a quarter of a million dollars for that fund . 
 This effort has elicited from the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia , East Germany , and Bulgaria the most massive and vicious propaganda assault ... in many , many years . The ominous tone of the most recent attacks leaves no doubt that if the Soviet Union invades , it shall cite the aid of the AFL – CIO as evidence of outside anti @-@ Socialist intervention . 
 All this is by way of introducing the AFL – CIO ’ s position on economic aid to Poland . In formulating this position , our first concern was to consult our friends in Solidarity ... and their views are reflected in the statement unanimously adopted by the AFL – CIO Executive Council : 
 The AFL – CIO will support additional aid to Poland only if it is conditioned on the adherence of the Polish government to the 21 points of the Gdansk Agreement . Only then could we be assured that the Polish workers will be in a position to defend their gains and to struggle for a fair share of the benefits of Western aid . 
 In testimony to the Joint Congressional Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe , Kahn suggested policies to support the Polish people , in particular by supporting Solidarity 's demand that the Communist regime finally establish legality , by respecting the twenty @-@ one rights guaranteed by the Polish constitution . 
 The AFL – CIO 's support enraged the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union , and worried the Carter Administration , whose Secretary of State Edmund Muskie told Kirkland that the AFL – CIO 's continued support of Solidarity could trigger a Soviet invasion of Poland . After Kirkland refused to withdraw support to Solidarity , Muskie met with the USSR 's Ambassador , Anatoly <unk> , to clarify that the AFL – CIO 's aid did not have the support of the U.S. government . Aid to Solidarity was also initially opposed by neo @-@ conservatives Norman Podhoretz and Jeane Kirkpatrick , who before 1982 argued that communism could not be overthrown and that Solidarity was doomed . 
 The AFL – CIO 's autonomous support of Solidarity was so successful that by 1984 both Democrats and Republicans agreed that it deserved public support . The AFL – CIO 's example of open support was deemed to be appropriate for a democracy , and much more suitable than the clandestine funding through the CIA that had occurred before 1970 . Both parties and President Ronald Reagan supported a non @-@ governmental organization , National Endowment for Democracy ( NED ) , through which Congress would openly fund Solidarity through an allocation in the State Department 's budget , beginning in 1984 . The NED was designed with four core institutions , associated with the two major parties and with the AFL @-@ CIO and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce ( representing business ) . The NED 's first president was Carl Gershman , a former Director of Social Democrats , USA and former U.S. Representative to the United Nations committee on human rights . From 1984 until 1990 , the NED and the AFL – CIO channeled equipment and support worth $ 4 million to Solidarity . 
 = = = = Director of the AFL – CIO 's Department of International Affairs = = = = 
 In 1986 Kahn became the Director of the AFL – CIO Department of International Affairs , where he implemented Kirkland 's program of having a consensus foreign policy . Working with leaders from member unions , Kahn helped to draft resolutions that represented consensus decisions for nearly all issues . 
 Kahn acted as Director of the AFL – CIO 's Department of International Affairs in 1986 , after Irving Brown suffered a stroke and resigned that same year ; after Brown 's death in 1989 , Kahn was officially named the Director . 
 = = = Living with AIDS = = = 
 Earlier in 1986 , Kahn had learned that he was infected with human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) , " which was then a death sentence " . Kahn longed to spend his remaining years with his " new and most beloved partner " , who was " the love of his life " . However , he accepted the office of Director out of a feeling of duty , knowing that he was taking " a job that would most surely work him to death " . He warned his co @-@ workers that his terminal condition would bring intellectual degeneration , and asked that they monitor him for signs of debilitation . An upgrade of the International Department 's computer systems was to have allowed Kahn to work from home . 
 Kahn died from acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) in Silver Spring , Maryland on March 27 , 1992 , at the age of 53 , after having been cared for by his partner and supported by his friends and colleagues . He was survived by his partner and also his sister and his niece . Kahn planned most of his own memorial service , which was held in the AFL – CIO headquarters . 
 = = Works = = 
 " The Power of the March — And After , " Dissent , vol . 10 , no . 4 ( Autumn 1963 ) , pp. 316 – 320 . 
 " Problems of the Negro Movement , " Dissent , vol . 11 , no . 1 ( Winter 1964 ) , pp. 108 – 138 . 
 The Economics of Equality . Foreword by A. Philip Randolph and Michael Harrington . New York : League for Industrial Democracy , 1964 . 
 Bayard Rustin , From Protest to Politics : The Future of the Civil Rights Movement . New York : League for Industrial Democracy , Feb. 1965 . — Ghost written by Kahn , according to Horowitz ( 2007 ) , pp. 223 – 224 . 
 " Direct Action and Democratic Values , " Dissent , vol . 13 , no . 1 , whole no . 50 ( <unk> 1966 ) , pp. 22 – 30 . 
 " The Riots and the Radicals , " Dissent , vol . 14 , no . 5 , whole no . 60 ( <unk> 1967 ) , pp. 517 – 526 . 
 " The Problem of the New Left , " Commentary , vol . 42 ( July 1966 ) , pp. 30 – 38 . 
 " Max Shachtman : His Ideas and His Movement , " New America , Nov. 15 , 1972 . 
 " Farewell to a Decade of Illusions , " New America , vol . 11 ( Dec. 1980 ) , pp. 6 – 9 . 
 " How to Support <unk> : A Debate . " With Norman Podhoretz ; introduction by Midge Decter ; moderated by Carl Gershman . <unk> , vol . 13 ( Summer 2008 ) , pp. 230 – 261 . 
 " Moral Duty , " Transaction , vol . 19 , no . 3 ( March 1982 ) , pg . 51 . 
 " Beyond the Double Standard : A Social Democratic View of the <unk> versus Totalitarianism Debate , " New America , July 1985 . — Speech of January 1985 . 
 = = = Photographs = = = 
 Picture of Tom Kahn — with Rachelle Horowitz , James Farmer ( CORE leader ) , and Ernest Green — at 1964 World 's Fair , protesting poverty , before their <unk> in Levine , Daniel ( 2000 ) . Bayard Rustin and the civil rights movement . New Jersey : Rutgers University Press. p . 352 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8135 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Tom Kahn with Donald <unk> of Social Democrats , USA . 
 = White stork = 
 The white stork ( Ciconia ciconia ) is a large bird in the stork family <unk> . Its plumage is mainly white , with black on its wings . Adults have long red legs and long pointed red beaks , and measure on average 100 – 115 cm ( 39 – 45 in ) from beak tip to end of tail , with a 155 – 215 cm ( 61 – 85 in ) wingspan . The two subspecies , which differ slightly in size , breed in Europe ( north to Finland ) , northwestern Africa , southwestern Asia ( east to southern Kazakhstan ) and southern Africa . The white stork is a long @-@ distance migrant , wintering in Africa from tropical Sub @-@ Saharan Africa to as far south as South Africa , or on the Indian subcontinent . When migrating between Europe and Africa , it avoids crossing the Mediterranean Sea and detours via the Levant in the east or the Strait of Gibraltar in the west , because the air thermals on which it depends do not form over water . 
 A carnivore , the white stork eats a wide range of animal prey , including insects , fish , amphibians , reptiles , small mammals and small birds . It takes most of its food from the ground , among low vegetation , and from shallow water . It is a monogamous breeder , but does not pair for life . Both members of the pair build a large stick nest , which may be used for several years . Each year the female can lay one clutch of usually four eggs , which hatch asynchronously 33 – 34 days after being laid . Both parents take turns incubating the eggs and both feed the young . The young leave the nest 58 – 64 days after hatching , and continue to be fed by the parents for a further 7 – 20 days . 
 The white stork has been rated as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . It benefited from human activities during the Middle Ages as woodland was cleared , but changes in farming methods and industrialisation saw it decline and disappear from parts of Europe in the 19th and early 20th centuries . Conservation and reintroduction programs across Europe have resulted in the white stork resuming breeding in the Netherlands , Belgium , Switzerland and Sweden . It has few natural predators , but may harbour several types of parasite ; the plumage is home to chewing lice and feather mites , while the large nests maintain a diverse range of <unk> mites . This conspicuous species has given rise to many legends across its range , of which the best @-@ known is the story of babies being brought by storks . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
