 = 1926 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1926 FA Cup Final was a football match between Bolton Wanderers and Manchester City on 24 April 1926 at Wembley Stadium in London . The showpiece match of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( better known as the FA Cup ) , it was the 55th final , and the fourth at Wembley . 
 Each team progressed through five rounds to reach the final . Both teams were members of the Football League First Division , Bolton Wanderers occupying a position in upper @-@ mid @-@ table and Manchester City next to bottom . Consequently , Bolton entered the match as favourites and , as expected , went on to win , their single goal being scored by David Jack . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Bolton Wanderers = = = 
 Both teams entered the competition in the third round , the entry point for First Division clubs . Bolton Wanderers were drawn away at Accrington Stanley but , following a request to the FA , the match was switched to Bolton for crowd safety reasons . Bolton 's David Jack scored the only goal of the game in an unexpectedly close contest . To the resentment of the Bolton crowd , Ted Vizard was sent off for the first time in his career , leading the referee to require a police escort to the railway station . In the fourth round Bolton were held to a surprise draw at Third Division Bournemouth . The Wanderers lost Bill Cope to injury after fifteen minutes . A 1 – 0 half @-@ time lead quickly turned into a 2 – 1 deficit early in the second half but , with five minutes remaining , Jack scored an equaliser . 
 Bolton 's fifth round home tie against South Shields produced a straightforward 3 – 0 victory . The goals were scored by Joe Smith , Jack Smith and David Jack , the latter maintaining his record of scoring in every round . The quarter @-@ final against Nottingham Forest required two replays to produce a winner . Following a 2 – 2 draw in Nottingham and a goalless game in Bolton , the Wanderers prevailed 1 – 0 in another close game held at Old Trafford . Bolton drew Swansea Town , the last remaining Second Division club , in the semi @-@ final . This meant Bolton did not meet a single First Division club in their path to the final . Three early goals gave Bolton a comfortable 3 – 0 win at White Hart Lane . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Manchester City 's third round tie was against the amateur club Corinthians at Crystal Palace . The third round was the furthest <unk> had ever progressed , though until 1923 the club never entered the cup due to club rules preventing them from entering any competition with a prize . Manchester City went behind and only equalised three minutes from time . The Corinthians goalkeeper , Benjamin Howard Baker collided with a team @-@ mate , causing him to take more than four steps with the ball . From the resulting free kick , Frank Roberts scored in a goalmouth melee to take the tie to a replay , held the following Wednesday . The rematch proved less even . Manchester City won 4 – 0 courtesy of goals by Austin ( twice ) , Hicks and Johnson . After his goal , Hicks had to leave the field as he had sustained an injury while performing a celebratory somersault . In the fourth round , City faced league champions Huddersfield Town and again won 4 – 0 . The crowd of 74 @,@ 799 was by far the highest of the round , and only 1 @,@ 200 short of the club record . Manchester City were drawn at home to Crystal Palace in the fifth round . A final score of 11 – 4 set a club record for the number of goals in a game and was City 's biggest margin of victory since 1903 . Frank Roberts scored five and Tommy Browell also scored a hat @-@ trick . Yet another high scoring win was achieved in the quarter @-@ final , when Clapton Orient were beaten 6 – 1 . Johnson scored a hat @-@ trick and Hicks scored for the fifth successive cup match . 
 In the semi @-@ final , Manchester City faced local rivals Manchester United in a derby match at Bramall Lane . Browell scored the opener from a Hicks corner amid vehement protests for handball from the United players . Later in the half , United 's Frank Barson flattened Sam Cowan with an " ugly challenge " for which he later received a suspension . In the second half , Browell and Roberts each scored to make the final score 3 – 0 . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 Both teams had won the FA Cup on one previous occasion and had met in the 1904 FA Cup Final . In that match , Manchester City won 1 – 0 thanks to a Billy Meredith goal . The 1904 meeting was Manchester City 's only previous final , whereas the 1926 tie was the fourth time Bolton had reached the final . They lost in 1894 and 1904 , but won the competition for the first time in the " White Horse Final " of 1923 , the first to be held at Wembley . The 1926 final was the first to be held since the change to the offside rule in 1925 . It now required two defenders behind an attacker receiving the ball instead of three , a change which increased the average number of goals per match . 
 Of the two teams , Bolton Wanderers had the better league form . After rising as high as fourth early in the league season , Bolton spent the majority of the year in mid @-@ table and finally finished 8th of the 22 First Division clubs with 44 points from their 42 league fixtures . Manchester City remained in the lower reaches of the league table throughout the season and were relegated after finishing 21st with 35 points . Their matches were frequently high scoring . City scored more league goals than second @-@ placed Arsenal , but also had the second @-@ worst defensive record in the division . The two league matches between the teams in the 1925 – 26 season ended in a 5 – 1 home win for Bolton in November and a 1 – 1 draw at Maine Road in March . 
 In accordance with changes made for the 1924 final onwards , all tickets were sold in advance to prevent a repeat of the overcrowding at the 1923 final . Approximately 91 @,@ 000 tickets were available . 53 @,@ 000 were standing tickets , 15 @,@ 000 were uncovered seats and 23 @,@ 000 were covered seats . Standing tickets cost two shillings , seat prices ranged from five shillings to one guinea . The majority of tickets were sold before the finalists were known . As a result , few supporters of the participating teams attended ; most were unable to afford the remaining tickets available to the general public , which were typically in the more expensive areas of the stadium . 1 @,@ 750 tickets were allocated directly to each club . Bolton fielded 6 @,@ 000 enquiries and lodged a formal protest about the inadequacy of their allocation . The London , Midland and Scottish Railway laid on a total of seven special trains from Manchester to London on the eve and morning of the match . A number of supporters travelled to London without tickets in the hope of securing one outside the stadium . 5s tickets changed hands for up to 15s , provoking the ire of ticketless supporters who accused the sellers of profiteering . In one such instance , a man selling twenty 2s tic | <unk> at 10s each required the assistance of five police officers to escape the wrath of the crowd . The total gate receipts for the match were £ 23 @,@ 157 , a new record . 
 Manchester City prepared for the match by training in the spa town of Buxton . Bolton Wanderers followed their usual training schedule for most of the week , then travelled to Harrow on the Thursday . All eleven men who played for Bolton in their 1923 triumph were still at the club . Of those , only the injured Alex Finney was absent as they travelled to London . Jack Smith had been injured for several weeks in the run @-@ up to the final , but recovered in time and participated in Bolton 's last league match before the tie . 
 = = Match = = 
 In the hour before kick @-@ off , the crowd was entertained by the bands of the Royal Engineers and the Chatham Naval Dockyard . Following the National Anthem , the players , match officials and club chairmen were introduced to King George V. The toss was then won by the Bolton captain Joe Smith . In contrast to the lengthy delays which marred Bolton 's previous visit to Wembley , the match kicked off three minutes earlier than scheduled . 
 As anticipated , Bolton fielded ten of the eleven who played the 1923 final . Left @-@ back Harry Greenhalgh was the only change from the 1923 line @-@ up . Each team played the formation typical of the era : two full @-@ backs , three half @-@ backs and five forwards . Bolton had the better of the opening exchanges ; the Times correspondent wrote : " In the first five minutes Bolton Wanderers were so superior to their opponents that they might have been giving an exhibition for the cinema against schoolboys " . Manchester City then gradually asserted themselves and had the first clear chance . Frank Roberts took a right @-@ footed shot , but hit the ball straight at Bolton goalkeeper Dick Pym . Overall , the defences enjoyed the better of the play in the first half . Bolton 's Joe Smith was instrumental in much of his team 's attacking play , both he and left @-@ winger Ted Vizard receiving praise for their play . 
 Hicks , who was generally described as the most effective of the Manchester City forwards , had a chance which he hit high over the crossbar . In a rare spell of sustained Manchester City pressure , a free kick by captain Jimmy McMullan forced a save from Pym , and the resulting near @-@ post corner prompted a goalmouth scramble which ended with a foul on Bolton 's Greenhalgh . Pym made further saves from Browell and Hicks , the latter resulting in a corner . From the corner Bolton won the ball and headed upfield on the counter @-@ attack . Billy Butler 's cross from the right went beyond the goal and was retrieved by Vizard on the left wing . The outside @-@ forward then cut inside and played the ball across goal in a manner described by some correspondents as a shot and others as a pass . David Jack received the ball in the six @-@ yard box and put the ball between Goodchild and McCloy into the City goal , giving Bolton the lead with 14 minutes remaining . In the few minutes after the goal , Manchester City came forward in numbers but lacked clear chances and were hindered by over @-@ eager forwards going offside . Following a goal kick by Pym , the referee blew the final whistle . Bolton won the cup for a second time , becoming the first club to win twice at Wembley . 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The Bolton team were greeted by crowds at Bolton Town Hall . In a playful exchange , Joe Smith gave the Cup to the mayor , saying that it had been won for Bolton and was given to Bolton , which the mayor refused . Bolton went on to win a third FA Cup in 1929 , beating Portsmouth 2 – 0 . The 1929 team contained five of the 1926 cup winners . Goalscorer David Jack was transferred to Arsenal in 1928 . The transfer set a world record as the first to exceed £ 10 @,@ 000 . Jack won one more FA Cup with Arsenal . 
 Upon arrival back in Manchester , the Manchester City team were given a civic reception at Manchester Town Hall , then immediately travelled to their Maine Road ground to play a league fixture against Leeds . Manchester City won that match 2 – 1 , but failed to win the following Saturday and were relegated to the Second Division . In doing so they became the first cup finalists ever to be relegated in the same season , a fate since shared by 1969 finalist Leicester City , 1983 finalist Brighton & Hove Albion , 2010 finalist Portsmouth and 2013 winners Wigan Athletic . The final was the last time Albert Alexander 's committee selected the team . Peter Hodge had agreed to join the club as manager well in advance of the final , but was unable to take up the position until his previous club Leicester City completed their league fixtures . Several seasons later , City half @-@ back Sam Cowan went on to captain the club in the 1933 and 1934 finals . 
 = = Match details = = 
 = Ann Eliza Bleecker = 
 Ann Eliza Bleecker ( October 1752 – November 23 , 1783 ) was an American poet and correspondent . Following a New York upbringing , Bleecker married John James Bleecker , a New Rochelle lawyer , in 1769 . He encouraged her writings , and helped her publish a periodical containing her works . 
 The American Revolution saw John join the New York Militia , while Ann fled with their two daughters . She continued to write , and what remained of the family returned to Tomhannock following Burgoyne 's surrender . She was saddened and affected by the deaths of numerous family members over the years , and died in 1783 . 
 Bleecker 's pastoral poetry is studied by historians to gain perspective of life on the front lines of the revolution , and her novel Maria Kittle , the first known Captivity novel , set the form for subsequent Indian Capture novels which saw great popularity after her death . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Ann Eliza Schuyler was born in October 1752 , in New York City in the Province of New York . She was the sixth child born to Margareta Van Wyck ( 1722 – 1777 ) and Brandt Schuyler ( <unk> 1716 – 1752 ) , successful merchants and members of the American Dutch aristocracy . After a long illness , Ann Schuyler 's father died just before she was born in 1752 . As a child , Ann Schuyler was known for her precocious writing ability , and was often asked to recite her poems , which ranged from sentimental or humorous to sophisticated or satirical . She would often compose impromptu poems at the request of friends . Ann 's mother remarried in 1760 ; she and her new husband Anthony <unk> ( 1712 – 1775 ) had one daughter , Susanna <unk> ( <unk> ? ) . The <unk> were also part of the Dutch elite , so Ann Schuyler 's childhood seemed to be filled with security , abundance and happiness . 
 = = Marriage to John James Bleecker = = 
 On March 29 , 1769 , Ann Schuyler married a lawyer from New Rochelle , John James Bleecker ( 1745 – 95 ) . The couple moved to Poughkeepsie shortly after their marriage . John gave up the practice of law and took up agriculture in 1771 , when they moved to his pastoral country estate in Tomhannock , eighteen miles ( 29 km ) north of Albany , in the Schaghticoke region which was settled by Dutch families . " The Bleecker home reflected their wealth by its furnishings and its setting . " " From the beautiful gardens flourishing with beauty , to the young orchard bounded by a thick forest ... to the west , vast cultivated fields and the roaring river of <unk> . " Bleecker considered her home a " retreat " and most of her pastoral poetry was written in the first five years of her life in <unk> . She corresponded with friends and relatives , writing about her isolation and the beauty of her surroundings . An example excerpt from her poem An Evening Prospect : 
 " Cast your eyes beyond this meadow , 
 Painted by a hand divine , 
 And observe the ample shadow 
 of that solemn ridge of pine . " 
 During this time she also had two daughters — Margaretta , born October 11 , 1771 , and <unk> ( Abella ) , born June 5 , 1776 . 
 On November 11 , 1775 , her husband was one of several appointed Deputies ( or delegates ) from Albany County to the Provincial Congress . Her husband encouraged her writing , he called it " her genius " . In the winter of 1779 , Bleecker published a periodical called the " Albany Gazette " . The Gazette was composed entirely of her political essays , poems , and short stories , produced for the sole purpose of sharing entertainment and news with friends and relatives . 
 = = Impact of the American Revolution = = 
 In 1777 , the <unk> ' pastoral lives were interrupted by the American Revolutionary War . British troops , under the command of General John Burgoyne , invaded Tomhannock from Canada ( as part of Burgoyne 's Saratoga campaign to capture the Hudson River ) . In response , John Bleecker joined the New York Militia , and Ann Bleecker fled southward . 
 Ann Bleecker was forced to flee to Albany on foot with her two daughters , infant Abella and 6 @-@ year @-@ old Margaretta . Along the way , Abella died of dysentery . Joined by her mother and sister <unk> <unk> , Ann Bleecker continued on to Red Hook , but her mother died en route there . An excerpt of a poem she wrote , Written in the retreat from Burgoyne , describing how she felt about her daughters death : 
 At length her languid eyes <unk> 'd from the day , 
 The idol of my soul was torn away ; 
 Her spirit fled and left me ghastly clay ! 
 Then — then my soul rejected all relief , 
 Comfort I wish 'd not for , I <unk> 'd my grief : 
 <unk> , my Abella ! ' cried I , ' hear me mourn , ' 
 After Burgoyne 's surrender on October 17 , 1777 ( part of the aftermath of the Saratoga Campaign ) , Ann Bleecker , her daughter and sister ( all that remained of the family ) , and possibly a slave child returned to Tomhannock . Unfortunately , <unk> <unk> ( 1743 – 77 ) died during the return journey . Ann Bleecker was devastated by the loss of three generations of women in her family . 
 Her husband continued to serve in the militia . In 1779 , Ann Bleecker was forced ( it is unclear whether due to British troop activity , Native American activity , or some other reason ) to flee with her surviving daughter to Albany again . But further trauma was yet to come . On hearing in 1781 that her husband had been captured by Loyalist forces or possibly " a band of wandering British soldiers " , she suffered a miscarriage and nervous breakdown . Ann Bleecker never fully recovered from all these traumatic events . Her daughter , Margaretta <unk> , later described how Bleecker developed a tendency toward depression and there was a melancholy reflection in her writings : 
 " … she was frequently very lively , and would then give way to the flights of her fertile fancy , and write songs , satires , and burlesque : but . . . the heaviest dejection would succeed , and then all the pieces which were not as melancholy as herself , she destroyed . " 
 Ann Eliza Bleecker died November 23 , 1783 . She is buried in the cemetery of the Reformed Dutch church in Albany ( though all bodies buried there were moved to Albany Rural Cemetery in the early twentieth @-@ century ) . 
 = = Literary impact = = 
 Bleecker did not write for posterity ; she wrote letters to her friends and relatives which contained poems and short stories , which were later collected and published by her daughter . 
 = = = Posthumous publication = = = 
 In 1793 , a significant part of Bleecker 's work , after first appearing in The New @-@ York Magazine in 1790 and 1791 , was published by her daughter , Margaretta V. Bleecker Faugères , who was also a poet . She edited her mother 's writings and added some of her own poems and essays to a collection entitled The Posthumous Works of Ann Eliza Bleecker ; she included thirty @-@ six poems , twenty @-@ three letters , an unfinished short historical novel , The History of Henry and Ann , and The History of Maria Kittle , a captivity narrative set during the French and Indian War . Due to its popularity , The History of Maria Kittle was republished separately in 1797 . 
 = = = Maria Kittle = = = 
 Bleecker 's epistolary novel The History of Maria Kittle took the Indian Captivity story genre in new directions , as it was possibly the first American fictional account focusing on Native Americans . In the late 18th century , Indian Captivity stories subsequently became very popular . Maria Kittle has many features typical of the Indian Captivity story ; there are many graphic scenes of violence , and it describes Native Americans as terrible savages who cruelly kill babies and women , and tells the story of Maria 's journey as a captive . But by the end of the story , Maria gets rescued , and the real emotion comes out as three women in the story tearfully recount their stories of maternal loss to others . This story has many similarities to Bleecker 's own experience with the death of her own daughter as a result of fleeing from the British Army . In telling her tale of loss , Bleecker hoped to help women overcome their tragedies . Yet these stories also helped foster racism toward Native Americans . 
 Bleecker 's writing was exciting for the time , and her sense of style added dimension to a new type of novel , the didactic novel . Her expression was influenced by the " eighteenth @-@ century British cult of sensibility " . She wrote in a mannered , and often exaggerated way , to express her moral lesson . In addition , she used the <unk> literary device , structuring the story as a series of letters to her half @-@ sister , Susan Ten Eyck , in which she interrupted the narrative to comment on the action and address Susan directly . 
 = = = Poems = = = 
 Ann Eliza Bleecker 's pastoral poems exemplified a new style of American poetry , and , due to her experience of the American Revolutionary tumult , a new sense of national identity . These poems , written in the pastoral tradition , conveyed both the beauty of the colonial New York countryside and the horrific impact of war , suffering , death , and destruction . Because Bleecker was writing from the interesting perspective of a terrified young mother , her articulate depictions of the Revolutionary War are still read by historians today . 
 = True North ( Once Upon a Time ) = 
 " True North " is the ninth episode of the first season of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . In the episode , Sheriff Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) helps two children ( Karley Scott Collins and Quinn Lord ) track down their father before they are placed in a foster care system , in a parallel with the story of Hansel and Gretel . Along the way , they encounter the Evil Queen ( Lana Parrilla ) , and the Blind Witch ( Emma Caulfield ) . 
 " True North " was co @-@ written by Liz Tigelaar and David H. Goodman , while being directed by Dean White . Co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz chose the story of Hansel and Gretel to help reveal Emma 's difficult backstory , as the character lacked a fairytale counterpart . They cast Caulfield because they were fans of her work on the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . The Blind Witch 's gingerbread house had a computer @-@ generated exterior , while its interior set was based on concept art designed by production designer Michael Joy . 
 The episode first aired in the United States on ABC on January 15 , 2012 . An estimated 9 @.@ 84 million viewers watched the episode on its original broadcast . It earned a Nielsen ratings share of 3 @.@ 3 / 8 among adults , meaning that it was seen by 3 @.@ 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . This was a decrease of 11 percent from the previous episode . Critical reception was largely mixed to negative , with critics praising Caulfield 's performance but critiquing other elements . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening Sequence = = = 
 A gingerbread house is shown in the forest . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In a Storybrooke drugstore , Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) meets a young girl named Ava ( Karley Scott Collins ) . Henry is stopped by the store owner for shoplifting , which reveals Ava and her brother Nicholas ( Quinn Lord ) were using Henry to smuggle stolen merchandise . Regina ( Lana Parrilla ) and Sheriff Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) arrive to handle the juveniles . Emma discovers the siblings are living without parents and almost no food . In need of help , Emma resolves to find Ava and Nicholas 's father ( Nicholas Lea ) out of a desire to keep them out of the foster system she herself was raised in . Regina calls social services , but the system would have to place the kids in two different homes in Boston . Determined to keep her promise not to separate them , Emma asks them for something that had belonged to their father . Ava provides her with a compass . 
 Emma asks Mr. Gold ( Robert Carlyle ) about the compass and he searches his records . He finds a card that supposedly says Michael Tillman purchased the compass , and gives Emma this name . The card is revealed to be blank . Michael is the garage mechanic , and tells Emma he can barely handle the garage let alone twins . Emma has no choice but to take Ava and Nicholas to Boston on Regina 's orders , despite Henry 's warnings that no one can leave Storybrooke . That evening as the three are leaving , the vehicle breaks down as they reach the city limits , prompting Emma to call for help . Moments later , Ava notices her compass working . Michael arrives in his tow truck , and Emma explains that he at least has to see his children , as she could not leave Henry after seeing the life he had . Seeing Ava and Nicholas face to face changes his mind , and Michael accepts them into his life . Later , Emma shares Henry 's theory with Mary Margaret ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) , that she is Snow White 's daughter and Mary Margaret is Snow White . Mary finds this laughable , but seeing Emma 's blanket triggers some sort of reaction from her . After a minute , however , she is quick to dismiss it as nothing . 
 In the meantime , Henry asks Emma about his father . Emma tells Henry that his dad was a trainee fireman who used to frequent the diner where she worked . The two of them " hung out " a few times , resulting in Emma being pregnant with Henry before she went to jail . Once there , she tried to tell him about Henry , only to discover that he had died while saving a family from a burning building . However , she later admits to Mary the story she gave Henry was a lie and he should never know the truth about his father . After Emma 's reunion of the children with Michael that evening , Henry arrived with pumpkin pie to give Emma in order to thank her for explaining about his birth father . They are interrupted by a stranger ( Eion Bailey ) on a motorcycle with a unique box . Without giving his name , he asks Emma about finding a place to stay . After referring him to Granny 's Bed & Breakfast , she reminds Henry that he said no one else ever comes to or leaves Storybrooke and Henry replies that they don 't . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 In the Enchanted Forest , Hansel ( Lord ) and Gretel ( Collins ) , are searching for kindling while their father ( Lea ) chops firewood . He gives Gretel a compass so they won 't be separated , but when they return , he is nowhere to be found . As they search they run into The Evil Queen ( Parrilla ) and are captured . She tells the two that she can help find their father , on the condition that they retrieve an item belonging to her from The Blind Witch ( Emma Caulfield ) . They must enter her gingerbread house when The Blind Witch is asleep and fetch The Evil Queen 's leather satchel , but they must not eat a thing . They break in safely , but Hansel gives in to the temptation of taking a bite of a cupcake , causing The Blind Witch to wake up . While she cannot see the children , she can smell their scent . The Blind Witch locks them up and prepares the oven to roast them . The two , working together , are able to push the witch into her own oven as The Evil Queen gleefully watches from her mirror . 
 When the two return to The Evil Queen 's palace , she opens the satchel to reveal a poisoned apple . The Evil Queen offers Hansel and Gretel a home at the palace , but they are adamant about returning to their father . She sends them back into the forest and summons her newest prisoner , Hansel and Gretel 's father . The Evil Queen asks why the children turned down the luxurious life of the palace and he answers that they are family , and family finds each other . Frustrated , she sends him away to see if they indeed find each other . 
 = = Production = = 
 " True North " was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producers David H. Goodman and Liz Tigelaar , while being directed by The Shield veteran Dean White . In an interview with Comic Book Resources , co @-@ creator Edward Kitsis noted that it was difficult to pick iconic stories such as Cinderella and Hansel and Gretel because " the challenge becomes revealing a piece you never knew before or putting a fun twist on it . " According to actress Jennifer Morrison , they chose this particular story as a way to further reveal Emma 's history , as she lacked a fairytale counterpart . Morrison explained , " They ’ re using Hansel and Gretel as they did Cinderella to reveal some of Emma ’ s backstory . So what Emma goes through to try to help these children ends up becoming very personal for her , as her own life [ as a foster kid ] is in a sense revealed . " 
 For the Blind Witch , Kitsis and co @-@ creator Adam Horowitz cast actress Emma Caulfield , as they had been " huge fans " of hers since she had co @-@ starred on Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Kitsis commented , " We couldn ’ t think of anyone better to trap two children in a house and try to eat them . " Caulfield had previously worked with series writer Jane Espenson and producer Liz Tigelaar on Buffy and Life Unexpected . Morrison remarked that while viewers do not see the Blind Witch in Maine , " Everyone who is in fairytale land definitely has a Storybrooke counterpart . Whether or not we see them immediately doesn ’ t mean they don ’ t exist . " 
 The exterior of the gingerbread house was based on concept art created by production designer Michael Joy . While this ended up being computer @-@ generated , Joy and set decorator Mark Lane created a physical set for the interior using an " inside @-@ out cake " as inspiration . The two always enjoyed adding in small details for careful viewers to notice , so in " True North " they used the cookies Hansel and Gretel baked in Storybrooke as part of the house 's interior design . Joy explained , " We 're always trying to find ways to link the two worlds . The audience loves that kind of stuff . " 
 In October 2011 , TV Guide reported that Eion Bailey would be joining the series in a multi @-@ episode arc ; " True North " featured his first appearance as the Stranger . Other guest stars included Quinn Lord as Nicholas / Hansel , Karley Scott Collins as Ava / Gretel , Nicholas Lea as Michael Tillman / <unk> , Gabe <unk> as Mr. Clark / Sneezy , and David Bloom as Mr. " K " <unk> . Lord and Collins had previously guest starred in two Fringe episodes , as younger versions of Peter Bishop and Olivia Dunham . Collins appeared in " Subject 13 " alongside another actor who played Peter . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Besides the main storyline being a retelling of the Hansel and Gretel fairytale , the episode contained a number of other cultural references . A rack full of Marvel Comics , including Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk , are shown in the opening scene , a double reference to both Marvel 's parent company , Disney and the comic book 's writer , Damon Lindelof , co @-@ creator of Lost . An Apollo Bar was among the stolen items , and the Stranger 's motorcycle license plate reads 23 , both also references to Lost . Other comic books seen on the convenience store rack include various issues of Dazzler , Power Pack , West Coast Avengers , and Ka @-@ Zar . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " True North " first aired on January 15 , 2012 in the United States . It earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 3 / 8 among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , meaning that it was seen by 3 @.@ 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . It was viewed by an estimated 9 @.@ 84 million people , down 11 percent from the previous episode . Once Upon a Time finished fourth in its timeslot among total viewers and third among adults . It aired at the same time as the 69th Golden Globe Awards , which earned 16 @.@ 8 million viewers . In Canada , the episode finished in thirteenth place for the week with an estimated 1 @.@ 5 million viewers , an increase from the 1 @.@ 297 million of the previous episode . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " True North " received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Hilary Busis wished the episode " had done more to move the show 's master plot forward , especially since watching it meant missing the first hour of the Golden Globes . " Busis also wished that Caulfield had received more screen time , calling her performance " superbly creepy . " IGN columnist Amy Ratcliffe rated the episode 6 @.@ 5 / 10 , explaining that the tone was " over @-@ the @-@ top " and Emma 's actions to hide the children , rather than report them , " out of character . " Ratcliffe added on a more positive note that the Hansel and Gretel storyline was a " safe choice , but they made it work . " Cassandra Scrimgeour of The Huffington Post found " Parrilla 's emotional reaction to the children 's rejection [ to be ] so effective that despite her evil ways , I actually felt sorry for her . " Scrimgeour concluded that " the most intriguing thing to happen " in the episode was the arrival of the Stranger . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club was more critical of the episode , and gave it a D. He called the visual effects " hilariously bad , " likening the CGI to " a ' 90s computer game . " Sava added , " As mediocre as the series has been , it was on a bit of an upswing with the last few episodes , but ' True North ' is a big step backwards ... The problem isn ’ t that these kids can ’ t act ( although that might be the problem ) , it ’ s that the writing for their characters is horrible ... This week ’ s episode is straight @-@ up children ’ s television , and not in the way that it can be enjoyed by all ages . You need to be a child to suspend your disbelief long enough to watch ' True North . ' " Despite the critique , Sava did enjoy Caulfield 's scenes , as well as Emma and Mary Margaret 's conversation concerning motherhood . Writing for The Wall Street Journal , Gwen Orel opined that the Hansel and Gretel " parallel is clear and rather sweet , with touches of the ongoing story of Emma and Snow White , too . " Orel felt the episode seemed " like a demented episode of Chopped , " and called the gingerbread house " just like it should [ be ] , colorful and <unk> . " 
 = Glik v. Cunniffe = 
 Glik v. Cunniffe , 655 F.3d 78 ( 1st Cir . 2011 ) is a case in which the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit held that a private citizen has the right to record video and audio of public officials in a public place , and that the arrest of the citizen for a wiretapping violation violated his First and Fourth Amendment rights . The case arose when Simon Glik , a private citizen , filmed Boston , Massachusetts , police officers making an arrest in a public park . When the officers observed that Glik was recording the arrest , they arrested him and he was subsequently charged with wiretapping , disturbing the peace , and aiding in the escape of a prisoner . Glik then sued the City of Boston and the arresting officers , claiming that they violated his constitutional rights . 
 In a unanimous decision , the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit held that the officers violated Glik 's constitutional rights and that the officers were not entitled to qualified immunity . The Court ruled that the right to film public officials in public places was " clearly established , " and that Glik 's actions did not violate state law . However , the court also ruled that the right to film public officials was subject to reasonable limitations with respect to the time , place and manner in which the recording was conducted . After losing the appeal , Boston reached a settlement with Glik in which they agreed to pay him $ 170 @,@ 000 in damages and attorney 's fees . This was the first case in which a United States Circuit Court of Appeals explicitly ruled that private citizens have a right to film police officers in public spaces . The case drew media attention across the United States , and was also cited favorably by other United States Circuit Courts of Appeals that reached similar conclusions in other cases . 
 = = Background = = 
 On October 1 , 2007 while walking in Boston Common , Simon Glik observed an arrest by Boston police officers John Cunniffe , Peter <unk> , and Jerome Hall @-@ Brewster . Glik began recording the arrest after he heard a bystander say " [ y ] ou are hurting him , stop " . Because Glik was concerned that the officers were using excessive force , he filmed the encounter with his cell phone . Although Glik was 10 feet away and was not interfering with the arrest , one of the officers turned to him after placing handcuffs on the suspect and said " I think you have taken enough pictures " . Glik replied that he was recording the incident ; he said , " I am recording this . I saw you punch him " . When the officer determined that this included audio , he placed Glik under arrest for violating the Massachusetts wiretapping law . 
 Glik was charged with wiretapping , disturbing the peace , and aiding in the escape of a prisoner . He was taken to the South Boston police station and his cell phone and a computer flash drive were held as evidence . The Commonwealth dropped the charge of aiding in escape prior to trial . The Boston Municipal Court dismissed the other two counts in February 2008 , noting that there was no probable cause for the wiretapping arrest and that the officers were unhappy about being recorded . 
 Glik then filed a complaint with the Internal Affairs section of the Boston Police Department . After the department failed to investigate the complaint , Glik , represented by the American Civil Liberties Union , along with attorneys David Milton and Howard Friedman , filed a civil rights lawsuit against the officers and the city , alleging violations of his First and Fourth Amendment rights . The officers moved for dismissal , based in part on qualified immunity . The United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts denied the motion , noting that " this First Amendment right publicly to record the activities of police officers on public business is established . " 
 The officers then made an interlocutory appeal of the denial to the First Circuit Court of Appeals . 
 = = Opinion of the court = = 
 In a unanimous decision written by Judge Kermit Lipez , the First Circuit Court of Appeals held that the officers violated Glik 's constitutional rights . The court noted the principle of qualified immunity balanced the need to hold public officials accountable with the need to shield such officials from harassment on account of their public duties . The court therefore applied a two @-@ part test : first , did the facts alleged by the plaintiff show a violation of a constitutional right , and second , was the right clearly established at the time of the violation . 
 The court first addressed the question of whether Glik 's First Amendment rights had been violated . It noted that " we have previously recognized that the videotaping of public officials is an exercise of First Amendment liberties " and held that Glik had a constitutional right to videotape a public official in a public place . The court noted that this was not limited to reporters and journalists , but a right of all citizens , subject to reasonable limitations of time , place and manner . The First Circuit concluded that in the current case , none of those limitations applied . 
 Second , the court looked at whether the right to videotape was clearly established at the time of the arrest . The court had " no trouble concluding that ' the state of the law at the time of the alleged violation gave the defendant [ s ] fair warning that [ their ] particular conduct was unconstitutional . ' " The court noted that some constitution violations are " self @-@ evident " and the right to film public officials in a public place was clearly established a decade prior to Glik 's arrest . 
 Next , the court determined if Glik 's Fourth Amendment rights had been violated . The court noted that an arrest must be based upon probable cause . Glik argued that the officers lacked probable cause when they made the arrest , while the officers argued that the allegations in the complaint established that they had probable cause to arrest Glik for violating the wiretap statute . The court looked to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court for the determination of state law . The Massachusetts court required that the recording be made secretly to be a violation , and that when a camera was in plain sight , a recording from that camera cannot be considered " secret " under state law . In Glik 's case , the criminal complaint stated that he had " openly record [ ed ] the police officers " , the recording was not made in secret , and that therefore the officers had no probable cause to arrest Glik . Since there was no probable cause , Glik 's Fourth Amendment rights were violated . 
 Finally , the court determined that the absence of probable cause as a constitutional violation was clearly established in law . The court therefore held that the district court 's denial of the officers of qualified immunity was proper , affirming the decision . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 Despite his victory in court , the case had negative repercussions for Glik , an attorney , who had difficulty obtaining employment as a prosecutor while criminal charges were pending against him . He is now a criminal defense lawyer . After losing the appeal , Boston settled the lawsuit for $ 170 @,@ 000 , paying Glik for damages and legal fees . Additionally , the city reversed its earlier opinion that the officers had done nothing wrong , stating that the officers had shown " unreasonable judgement " by arresting Glik . In 2012 , a Boston Police Department spokesperson stated that the officers involved in the case stood to face " discipline ranging from an oral reprimand to suspension " . The Boston Police Department now trains its officers not to arrest people for openly recording them in public . 
 = = Similar cases in other courts of appeals = = 
 Some scholars have identified Glik as the first case in which a United States Circuit Court of Appeals explicitly held that a citizen had the same rights as a journalist to record public officials in a public place , while other scholars have identified earlier rulings by circuit courts that have upheld a right of " publicly gathering information " while filming the police . Nevertheless , scholars generally consider Glik to be the first case to " to tackle the issue of police recording in the smartphone era " . Following the First Circuit 's ruling , the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals granted an injunction prohibiting the State of Illinois from enforcing its wiretapping law against citizens openly recording public officials in public places . Citing Glik , the Seventh Circuit stated that " applying the statute in the circumstances alleged here is likely unconstitutional . " 
 In addition to the First and the Seventh Circuits , both the Ninth and Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals have held that the public has a First Amendment right to record public officials . In 2000 , in Smith v. City of Cumming , the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit held that the First Amendment protects the right of citizens to film the police . Likewise , in 1995 , in Fordyce v. City of Seattle , the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that a private citizen could film police conduct at a protest because the First Amendment protects the " right to film matters of public interest " . However , both the Third Circuit in Kelly v. Borough of Carlisle ( 2010 ) and the Fourth Circuit in <unk> v. Houck ( 2009 ) have held that even if the constitution protects the right to film the police , such a right was " not clearly established for the purposes of qualified immunity in those cases ’ factual contexts " . Some scholars suggest these various rulings present the potential for a circuit split in cases that involve the filming of police conduct , while others have described the different rulings among circuit courts as " an artificial split — not on the merits of the First Amendment right violated , but on technical qualified immunity ground " . 
 = = = District court opinions = = = 
 In February 2016 , the Judge Mark A. Kearney of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania ruled in Fields v. City of Philadelphia that " observing and recording " police is not expressive conduct under the First Amendment and is therefore not protected by the constitution . Commentators have noted that this opinion " breaks with consensus among federal courts " , and that the case marked " the first time a federal court has not found that recording cops while on duty and in a public setting is protected by the First Amendment " . Eugene Volokh also stated that the case is inconsistent with precedent from other federal circuit courts . Following the publication of the court 's opinion , the American Civil Liberties Union announced that it would appeal the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit . 
 = = Commentary and analysis = = 
 The case drew national media attention , prompting editorials from the Los Angeles Times and The New York Times , among others . The case has also drawn notice in the legal community , with articles in the American Bar Association Journal and the Volokh Conspiracy . In addition , the United States Department of Justice cited the Glik case extensively in a letter to the Baltimore Police Department expressing concerns over policies dealing with officer interactions with citizen photographers and videographers . Commentary from law journals also discussed the lasting impact of the case . In an article for the Case Western Reserve Law Review , Gregory T. Frohman wrote that the court 's ruling " seemingly laid down a nearly unfettered right for <unk> third @-@ party recorders in public places " . In an article for the Northern Illinois University Law Review , Jesse Harlan Alderman wrote that " [ t ] hough Glik and Alvarez hold sway only within their respective jurisdictions , it seems likely that the right to record public police activity will be treated as universal " . Matt Giffin , writing for the Harvard Civil Rights @-@ Civil Liberties Law Review , observed that the case " could play a significant role in solidifying the emerging consensus that citizens have a constitutional interest in monitoring the activities of police officers " . Likewise , in an article for the Cardozo Law Review , Travis S. Triano noted that the Court 's ruling emphasized that " Glik ’ s filming was found to fall well within the bounds of constitutional protections " . 
 However , other analysts have questioned whether the First Circuit 's ruling would , in fact , have a widespread impact in the future . For example , an article in the Harvard Law Review noted that the First Circuit 's ruling in Glik was evidence of the court 's willingness to protect a " vital First Amendment right " , but that " the proliferation of body cameras may make civilians feel as if they no longer need to record officers in the field " . Writing for the Florida Law Review , <unk> Hampton criticized the First Circuit for providing " no guidance for determining what situations constitute a ' public space ' in which a citizen ’ s right to film government officials is safeguarded by the First Amendment " , and absent such guidance , " citizens who choose to record law enforcement officials risk inviting the same Fourth Amendment violation confirmed in Glik " . Additionally , in an article in the St. Louis University Law Journal , Justin <unk> argued that the right to film the police is not absolute , and that " an individual has a First Amendment right to openly record police conduct in a public park , but does not have an established First Amendment right to openly record officers in the discharge of their duties during a traffic stop " because filming the police during a traffic stop may interfere with their ability to work effectively . 
 = Australian Voluntary Hospital = 
 The Australian Voluntary Hospital was a military hospital staffed by Australian expatriates in England that served on the Western Front between 1914 and 1916 . For much of this time it was the only Australian presence on the Western Front . 
 = = Origin = = 
 When the First World War broke out in August 1914 , Lady ( Rachel ) Dudley , the wife of the former Governor @-@ General of Australia , the Lord Dudley , decided to create a hospital from Australian doctors and nurses who were in the United Kingdom . There were relatively large numbers of these ; while doctors and nurses could be trained in Australia , advanced qualifications still required a trip overseas . 
 Lady Dudley discussed her proposal with King George V , and then with the Secretary of State for War , Lord Kitchener , and the British Army 's Director General Army Medical Services , Sir Arthur <unk> , who authorised the hospital . The hospital was formally offered to the British government by the Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , Sir George Reid on 15 August 1914 . Volunteers responded to advertisements that Lady Dudley placed in English newspapers on 17 August 1914 . Women doctors were not accepted , but women nurses were welcomed . 
 The Australian Voluntary Hospital was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel William L 'Estrange Eames CB VD , an officer in the Australian Army Medical Corps who had served in the South African War , and was holidaying in England with his family at the time . He was unable to join the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) , which was not accepting enlistments outside Australia . He was granted the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel in the Royal Army Medical Corps . Ida Greaves RRC , from Royal Newcastle Hospital was appointed matron . The hospital soon reached a strength of 120 staff , of whom 36 were nurses . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The Australian Voluntary Hospital assembled its personnel and equipment at a camp established on the grounds of the Ranelagh Club , which had been loaned for the purpose . It departed for France on 29 August 1914 on Lord Dunraven 's yacht " Greta " , which had been accepted by the Admiralty as a transport for medical units , and moved to Le Havre . Owing to the German advance , the hospital was evacuated to St Nazaire on 2 September , and reopened there 5 September . The 100 @-@ bed hospital was set up in a park under canvas , with a school and house close by rented for various facilities . It began receiving casualties from the Retreat from Mons the next day . 
 On 26 October 1914 , the Australian Voluntary Hospital moved to Wimereux , where it established a 200 @-@ bed hospital . The hospital was well equipped , with motor ambulances donated by organisations in Australia , a pathology laboratory and the only X @-@ ray unit in the area . A day after it opened on 29 October , it began receiving patients from the First Battle of Ypres . Much of the unit 's tents which accommodated the male personnel of the hospital were lost in a blizzard on 11 November 1914 , and the men moved to the Golf club house of the Hôtel du Golf et <unk> in Wimereux , which was eventually leased by the hospital , and became its officers ' mess . 
 For a time , the Australian Voluntary Hospital was the only Australian presence on the Western Front , but in April 1916 , Australian Army units began arriving from the Middle East in large numbers . The Australian Voluntary Hospital 's site in Wimereux was taken over by No. 3 Australian General Hospital , AIF in June 1916 . The Australian Voluntary Hospital was then absorbed into the British Army as No. 32 Stationary Hospital , with Eames remaining in command . By 1 May 1919 , the hospital had treated 73 @,@ 868 patients . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Clifford Scott Green = 
 Clifford Scott Green ( April 2 , 1923 – May 31 , 2007 ) was a judge on the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania . Green was the eighteenth African @-@ American Article III judge appointed in the United States , and the second African @-@ American judge on the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania . 
 During his 36 years on the federal bench Judge Green presided over a number of notable cases , and was regarded as one of the most popular judges in the district . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Judge Green was born on April 2 , 1923 in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . His father , Robert Lewis Green , had come to the United States from St. Thomas island in the U.S. Virgin Islands . Green attended West Philadelphia High School , graduating in 1941 . He initially had " no thought of going to college , " intending instead to go immediately to work . From 1941 to 1942 he worked in a Philadelphia restaurant and at a drug manufacturing company . In 1942 he took a job with the United States Army Signal Corps . 
 In 1943 Judge Green enlisted in the United States Army Air Corps , the predecessor to the United States Air Force . At the time , the armed forces were still segregated . Green was initially " optimistic that the military was going to be a good life , " until his unit was shipped from Fort Lee , Virginia to Keesler Field ( now Keesler Air Force Base ) , in Mississippi . When the unit arrived at Keesler they were driven past the barracks to what Green would later describe as " a tent city . " It was then that Green " realized for real that I was really in a segregated army , and there was always , as long as I was in the service , two standards , one quite unacceptable and the other as acceptable as could be considering the fact that the country was at war . " 
 Green served from 1943 to 1946 , rising to the rank of Sergeant . He returned to Philadelphia in March 1946 , intending to use the benefits of the G.I. Bill to attend Drexel University . He planned to major in electrical engineering , which was the field he had worked in during his time in the Army . Drexel did not have classes starting until September , so Green began to look to work . While seeking employment at Temple University Green learned that Temple had classes beginning in two weeks , so he decided to enroll there . 
 Green entered the School of Business as an economics major , and planned to become a certified public accountant , until an adviser told him that there were no jobs available for African @-@ American accountants in Philadelphia . Green decided to pursue a career in law , something his father had dreamed of doing himself . 
 Green received a B.S. in economics in 1948 , finishing his undergraduate degree in just over two years and graduating with honors . He enrolled at Temple Law School as one of ten black students , of whom two would ultimately graduate ( the other graduate , Larry Perkins , would also go on to become a judge ) . While in law school Green was a member of the moot court team and the law review . He competed on a moot court team which won the Philadelphia regional of the American Bar Association competition . At the national competition , Green 's team faced the Yale moot court team , which included his future law partner and judicial colleague A. Leon Higginbotham , Jr .. In 1951 Green received his LL.B. with honors , graduating in the top three of his class . He was also awarded graduation prizes for receiving the highest grades in constitutional law and conflicts of law . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 Green passed the Pennsylvania bar exam in 1951 , achieving the highest score in the state . Green 's early mentors included Robert N.C. Nix , Sr. , who lived across the street from Green 's family . In January 1952 , after being admitted to the bar , Green took over the practice of Thomas Reed , a black Philadelphia lawyer who was joining the Philadelphia District Attorney 's Office under Richardson Dilworth ( Green had also interviewed at the DA 's office , but decided that he " couldn 't fit in as a prosecutor " ) . 
 Green worked as a solo practitioner until March 1952 , when he entered into a partnership with Harvey Schmidt . The firm was known as Schmidt and Green until 1954 , when Doris M. Harris and A. Leon Higginbotham joined as partners . In 1955 J. Austin Norris , a prominent African @-@ American political figure , joined the firm , which was then known as Norris , Schmidt , Green , Harris , & Higginbotham . The firm was the first African @-@ American law firm in Philadelphia . The firm , which never numbered more than a dozen lawyers at a given time , produced four federal judges ; Higginbotham , Green , and Herbert Hutton all served on the District Court ( Higginbotham was later elevated to the Third Circuit ) , and William Hall was the first African American appointed as a federal magistrate judge . In addition , two members of the firm , Dorris Harris and Harvey Schmidt , were elected judges of the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas , and William Brown was appointed by President Nixon to be chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission . 
 Green 's practice while at the firm was diverse . Initially , the firm 's practice was primarily criminal defense . As new partners were added , the firm expanded to include civil work , which eventually became the overwhelming majority of the work . Green eventually developed a specialized practice representing churches , including the National Baptist Convention , the African Methodist Episcopal Church , the Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ of the Apostolic Faith , and Father Divine . Additionally , Green represented parties both before and after the Supreme Court 's decision in Brown v. Board of Education in an attempt to integrate both the student and teacher populations in area school districts . He remained with the firm until his appointment to the bench . 
 Green first entered public service as a special deputy commonwealth attorney general from 1954 to 1955 . He was assigned as counsel for the Director of the Bureau of Workman 's Compensation . In addition to representing the Director , Green was also responsible for approving all claims for compensation under the occupational disease statute whenever the Commonwealth was involved . In 1954 Green unsuccessfully ran for the Republican nomination for Philadelphia City Council . 
 = = Judicial career = = 
 Green was initially hesitant about seeking a position on the bench because he enjoyed the practice of law . Nevertheless , he began to seek an appointment to the state court in the late 1950s . 
 Green was a lifelong member of the Republican party , serving as a ward leader from the 1952 to 1964 . Green 's first attempt to gain a seat on the bench was in 1959 , when he was unanimously endorsed by the Republican party for a seat on the Municipal Court , but lost in the general election . 
 In 1962 Green joined with a group of Republican ward leaders who broke off from the main party , which was led by Sheriff Austin Meehan , to support Governor William Scranton . All of the other ward leaders were voted out of office , and although Green retained his position Sheriff Meehan told him that he would no longer support his appointment to the bench . 
 Green , however , had the support of Bernard G. Segal , who was then Chancellor of the Philadelphia Bar Association , his former law partner Austin Norris , and the Chancellor of Temple University Robert Johnson . Segal was appointed by Governor Scranton to head a merit commission to select nominees for the state court positions . In addition , Green was endorsed by newspapers across the state . 
 Scranton ultimately did appoint Green as a judge on the Court of Common Pleas of Philadelphia in 1964 . He was elected to a full term in the next general election . Green served primarily as a juvenile court judge while in state court . 
 In 1971 a vacancy was created on the District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania when Judge Harold K. Wood assumed senior status . Senator Hugh Scott supported Green to fill the position . Green also had the support of Billy Meehan , the son of Sheriff Austin Meehan , and at the time the head of the Philadelphia Republican Committee . President Nixon nominated Green on December 1 , 1971 , and he was confirmed by the United States Senate on December 4 , receiving his commission on December 9 . In 1984 Green declined a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit , citing " the joy his district court job provided him and [ the ] numerous friendships he enjoyed there . " He assumed senior status on April 2 , 1988 , and continued serving in that capacity until his death . 
 Throughout his time on the bench , Green remained a popular judge ; a 1994 survey of Philadelphia lawyers concluded " Green is the most well @-@ liked judge on the bench , and attorneys could not praise him enough for his wonderful demeanor . " 
 = = = Notable cases = = = 
 Judge Green presided over a number of notable cases during his 35 @-@ year tenure on the Eastern District . In Bolden v. Pennsylvania State Police Judge Green ordered the Pennsylvania State Police to reinstate William Bolden , a minority trooper who had been dismissed . The case , which began in 1973 , resulted in a consent decree that required the State Police to hire one minority for every non @-@ minority hired , and set additional goals for promotion and retention of minority troopers . Judge Green presided over the consent decree for 25 years , dissolving it in 1999 . The case was credited with helping to abolish racism in the hiring of troopers , and integrate the State Police . 
 In 1981 Judge Green threw out the fraud conviction of Pennsylvania State Senator Vincent Fumo , concluding that the government had failed to prove that Fumo and two others were involved in a single scheme to pad state payrolls with ghost workers as alleged in their indictment . The decision was upheld on appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Judge Green was the first recipient of the NAACP 's William H. Hastie award in 1985 . He was awarded the Spirit of Excellence award by the American Bar Association in 2002 . The Philadelphia chapter of the Judicial Council of the National Bar Association is named in Judge Green 's honor . The Criminal Law Committee of the Federal Bar Association 's Philadelphia Chapter gives a Clifford Scott Green Bill of Rights Award at its biennial dinner event . Judge Green was a lifetime trustee of Temple University , and a former member of the Board of Trustees of Philadelphia State Hospital , and Children 's Hospital of Philadelphia . 
 = = Death = = 
 Judge Green suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and died of pneumonia in Philadelphia on May 31 , 2007 . He was survived by his wife and daughter . 
 = Mongolian language = 
 The Mongolian language ( in Mongolian script : , <unk> <unk> ; in Mongolian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> , Mongol khel ) is the official language of Mongolia and largest @-@ known member of the Mongolic language family . The number of speakers across all its dialects may be 10 million , including the vast majority of the residents of Mongolia and many of the Mongolian residents of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region . In Mongolia , the Khalkha dialect , written in Cyrillic ( and at times in Latin for social networking ) , is predominant , while in Inner Mongolia , the language is <unk> more diverse and is written in the traditional Mongolian script . In the discussion of grammar to follow , the variety of Mongolian treated is Standard Khalkha Mongolian ( i.e. , the standard written language as formalized in the writing conventions and in the school grammar ) , but much of what is to be said is also valid for vernacular ( spoken ) Khalkha and other Mongolian dialects , especially Chakhar . 
 Some classify several other Mongolic languages like Buryat and Oirat as dialects of Mongolian , but this classification is not in line with the current international standard . 
 Mongolian has vowel harmony and a complex syllabic structure for a Mongolic language that allows clusters of up to three consonants syllable @-@ finally . It is a typical agglutinative language that relies on suffix chains in the verbal and nominal domains . While there is a basic word order , subject – object – predicate , ordering among noun phrases is relatively free , so grammatical roles are indicated by a system of about eight grammatical cases . There are five voices . Verbs are marked for voice , aspect , tense , and epistemic modality / evidentiality . In sentence linking , a special role is played by converbs . 
 Modern Mongolian evolved from Middle Mongol , the language spoken in the Mongol Empire of the 13th and 14th centuries . In the transition , a major shift in the vowel harmony paradigm occurred , long vowels developed , the case system was slightly reformed , and the verbal system was restructured . Mongolian is distantly related to the Khitan language . It belongs to the Northern Asian linguistic area including the Turkic , Mongolic , Tungusic , Korean and Japonic languages . These languages have been grouped under the still @-@ debated Altaic language family and contrasted with the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area . Mongolian literature is well attested in written form from the 13th century but has earlier Mongolic precursors in the literature of the Khitan and other Xianbei peoples . 
 = = Geographic distribution = = 
 Mongolian is the official national language of Mongolia , where it is spoken by nearly 2 @.@ 8 million people ( 2010 estimate ) , and the official provincial language of China 's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region , where there are at least 4 @.@ 1 million ethnic Mongols . Across the whole of China , the language is spoken by roughly half of the country 's 5 @.@ 8 million ethnic Mongols ( 2005 estimate ) However , the exact number of Mongolian speakers in China is unknown , as there is no data available on the language proficiency of that country 's citizens . The use of Mongolian in China , specifically in Inner Mongolia , has witnessed periods of decline and revival over the last few hundred years . The language experienced a decline during the late Qing period , a revival between 1947 and 1965 , a second decline between 1966 and 1976 , a second revival between 1977 and 1992 , and a third decline between 1995 and 2012 . However , in spite of the decline of the Mongolian language in some of Inner Mongolia 's urban areas and educational spheres , the ethnic identity of the urbanized Chinese @-@ speaking Mongols is most likely going to survive due to the presence of urban ethnic communities . The multilingual situation in Inner Mongolia does not appear to obstruct efforts by ethnic Mongols to preserve their language . Although an unknown number of Mongols in China , such as the <unk> , may have completely or partially lost the ability to speak their language , they are still registered as ethnic Mongols and continue to identify themselves as ethnic Mongols . The children of inter @-@ ethnic Mongol @-@ Chinese marriages also claim to be and are registered as ethnic Mongols . 
 = = Classification and dialects = = 
 Mongolian belongs to the Mongolic languages . The delimitation of the Mongolian language within Mongolic is a much disputed theoretical problem , one whose resolution is impeded by the fact that existing data for the major varieties is not easily <unk> according to a common set of linguistic criteria . Such data might account for the historical development of the Mongolian dialect continuum , as well as for its sociolinguistic qualities . Though phonological and lexical studies are comparatively well developed , the basis has yet to be laid for a comparative morphosyntactic study , for example between such highly diverse varieties as Khalkha and Khorchin . 
 The status of certain varieties in the Mongolic group — whether they are languages distinct from Mongolian or just dialects of it — is disputed . There are at least three such varieties : Oirat ( including the Kalmyk variety ) and Buryat , both of which are spoken in Russia , Mongolia , and China ; and Ordos , spoken around Inner Mongolia 's Ordos City . 
 There is no disagreement that the Khalkha dialect of the Mongolian state is Mongolian . Beyond this one point , however , agreement ends . For example , the influential classification of <unk> ( 1953 ) proposed a " Mongolian language " consisting of just the three dialects Khalkha , Chakhar , and Ordos , with Buryat and Oirat judged to be independent languages . On the other hand , <unk> ( 1959 ) proposed a much broader " Mongolian language " consisting of a Central dialect ( Khalkha , Chakhar , Ordos ) , an Eastern dialect ( <unk> , Khorchin ) , a Western dialect ( Oirat , Kalmyk ) , and a Northern dialect ( consisting of two Buryat varieties ) . Some Western scholars propose that the relatively well researched Ordos variety is an independent language due to its conservative syllable structure and phoneme inventory . While the placement of a variety like <unk> , which is under the cultural influence of Inner Mongolia but historically tied to Oirat , and of other border varieties like <unk> would very likely remain problematic in any classification , the central problem remains the question of how to classify Chakhar , Khalkha , and Khorchin in relation to each other and in relation to Buryat and Oirat . The split of [ tʃ ] into [ tʃ ] before * i and [ ts ] before all other reconstructed vowels , which is found in Mongolia but not in Inner Mongolia , is often cited as a fundamental distinction , for example Proto @-@ Mongolic * <unk> , Khalkha / <unk> / , Chakhar / <unk> / ' year ' versus Proto @-@ Mongolic * <unk> , Khalkha / <unk> / , Chakhar / <unk> / ' few ' . On the other hand , the split between the past tense verbal suffixes <unk> in the Central varieties vs. <unk> in the Eastern varieties is usually seen as a merely stochastic difference . 
 In Inner Mongolia , official language policy divides the Mongolian language into three dialects : Southern Mongolian , Oirat , and <unk> @-@ Buryat . Southern Mongolian is said to consist of Chakhar , Ordos , <unk> , Khorchin , <unk> , and <unk> . The authorities have synthesized a literary standard for Mongolian in whose grammar is said to be based on Southern Mongolian and whose pronunciation is based on the Chakhar dialect as spoken in the Plain Blue Banner . <unk> , however , western Southern Mongolian dialects are closer to Khalkha than they are to eastern Southern Mongolian dialects : for example , Chakhar is closer to Khalkha than to Khorchin . 
 Besides Mongolian , or " Central Mongolic " , other languages in the Mongolic grouping include <unk> , spoken in eastern Inner Mongolia , Heilongjiang , and in the vicinity of <unk> in Xinjiang ; the <unk> subgroup Shira <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , spoken Qinghai and Gansu regions ; and the possibly extinct <unk> of Afghanistan . 
 As for the classification of the Mongolic family relative to other languages , the Altaic theory ( which is increasingly less well received among linguists ) proposes that the Mongolic family is a member of a larger Altaic family that would also include the Turkic and Tungusic , and usually <unk> languages and Japonic languages as well . 
 = = Grammar = = 
 The following description is based primarily on Khalkha Mongolian . In particular , the phonology section describes the Khalkha dialect as spoken in Ulaanbaatar , Mongolia 's capital . The <unk> of other varieties such as Ordos , Khorchin , and even Chakhar , differ considerably . In contrast , most of what is said about morphology and syntax also holds true for Chakhar , while Khorchin is somewhat more diverse . 
 = = = Phonology = = = 
 This section discusses the phonology of Khalkha Mongolian with subsections on Vowels , Consonants , Phonotactics and Stress . 
 = = = = Vowels = = = = 
 The standard language has seven monophthong vowel phonemes . They are aligned into three vowel harmony groups by a parameter called ATR ( advanced tongue root ) ; the groups are − ATR , + ATR , and neutral . This alignment seems to have superseded an alignment according to oral backness . However , some scholars still describe Mongolian as being characterized by a distinction between front vowels and back vowels , and the front vowel spellings ' ö ' and ' ü ' are still often used in the West to indicate two vowels which were historically front . The Mongolian vowel system also has rounding harmony . 
 Length is phonemic for vowels , and each of the seven phonemes occurs short or long . <unk> , short / o / is highly divergent from long / o / , being the central vowel [ ɵ ] . 
 In the following table , the seven vowel phonemes , with their length variants , are arranged and described phonetically . 
 Khalkha also has four diphthongs : / ui , <unk> , <unk> , ai / . 
 ATR harmony . Mongolian divides vowels into three groups in a system of vowel harmony : 
 As mentioned , for historical reasons these have traditionally been labeled as " front " vowels and " back " vowels . Indeed , in Romanized transcription of Mongolian , the vowels / o / and / u / are often conventionally rendered as 〈 ö 〉 and 〈 ü 〉 , while the vowels / ɔ / and / ʊ / are expressed as 〈 o 〉 and 〈 u 〉 ( this is also the case in the <unk> sections of this article ) . However , for modern Mongolian phonology , it seems more appropriate to instead characterize the two vowel @-@ harmony groups by the dimension of tongue root position . There is also one neutral vowel , / i / , not belonging to either group . 
 All the vowels in a <unk> word , including all its suffixes , must belong to the same group . If the first vowel is − ATR , then every vowel of the word must be either / i / or a − ATR vowel . Likewise , if the first vowel is a + ATR vowel , then every vowel of the word must be either / i / or a + ATR vowel . In the case of suffixes , which must change their vowels to conform to different words , two patterns predominate . Some suffixes contain an <unk> / A / that can be realized as / a , ɔ , e , o / . For example : 
 <unk> household + <unk> ( instrumental ) → <unk> by a household 
 <unk> sentry + <unk> ( instrumental ) → <unk> by a sentry 
 Other suffixes can occur in / U / being realized as / ʊ , u / , in which case all − ATR vowels lead to / ʊ / and all + ATR vowels lead to / u / . For example : 
 aw to take + <unk> ( causative ) → <unk> 
 If the only vowel in the word stem is / i / , the suffixes will use the + ATR suffix forms . 
 Rounding harmony . Mongolian also has rounding harmony , which does not apply to close vowels . If a stem contains / o / ( or / ɔ / ) , a suffix that is specified for an open vowel will have [ o ] ( or [ ɔ ] , respectively ) as well . However , this process is blocked by the presence of / u / ( or / ʊ / ) and / ei / . E.g. <unk> @-@ <unk> came in , but <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> inserted . 
 Vowel length . The pronunciation of long and short vowels depends on the syllable 's position in the word . In word @-@ initial syllables there is a phonemic contrast in length . A long vowel has about 208 % the length of a short vowel . In word @-@ medial and word @-@ final syllables , formerly long vowels are now only 127 % as long as short vowels in initial syllables , but they are still distinct from initial @-@ syllable short vowels . Short vowels in noninitial syllables differ from short vowels in initial syllables by being only 71 % as long and by being centralized in articulation . As they are nonphonemic , their position is determined according to phonotactic requirements . 
 = = = = Consonants = = = = 
 The following table lists the consonants of Khalkha Mongolian . The consonants enclosed in parentheses occur only in loanwords . 
 Mongolian lacks the voiced lateral approximant , [ l ] ; instead , it has a voiced alveolar lateral fricative , / <unk> / , which is often realized as voiceless [ ɬ ] . In word @-@ final position , / n / ( if not followed by a vowel in historical forms ) is realized as [ ŋ ] . The occurrence of palatalized consonant phonemes seems to be restricted to words that contain [ − ATR ] vowels . <unk> consonants are <unk> in medial and word @-@ final contexts , <unk> preceding consonants and vowels . <unk> short vowels are often deleted . 
 = = = = Syllable structure and phonotactics = = = = 
 The maximal syllable is <unk> , where the last C is a word @-@ final suffix . A single short vowel rarely appears in syllable @-@ final position . If a word was monosyllabic historically , * CV has become <unk> . [ ŋ ] is restricted to codas ( else it becomes [ n ] ) , and / p / and / pʲ / do not occur in codas for historical reasons . For two @-@ consonant clusters , the following restrictions obtain : 
 a palatalized consonant can be preceded only by another palatalized consonant or sometimes by / ɢ / and / ʃ / 
 / ŋ / may precede only / ʃ , x , ɡ , <unk> / and / ɢ / 
 / j / does not seem to appear in second position 
 / p / and / pʲ / do not occur as first consonant and as second consonant only if preceded by / m / or / <unk> / or their palatalized counterparts . 
 Clusters that do not conform to these restrictions will be broken up by an epenthetic nonphonemic vowel in a <unk> that takes place from right to left . For example , <unk> ' two ' , <unk> ' work ' , and <unk> ' neutral ' are , phonemically , / <unk> / , / <unk> / , and / <unk> / respectively . In such cases , an epenthetic vowel is inserted so as to prevent disallowed consonant clusters . Thus , in the examples given above , the words are phonetically [ <unk> ̆ r ] , [ <unk> ] , and [ <unk> ] . The phonetic form of the epenthetic vowel follows from vowel harmony triggered by the vowel in the preceding syllable . Usually it is a centralized version of the same sound , with the following exceptions : preceding / u / produces [ e ] ; / i / will be ignored if there is a <unk> vowel earlier in the word ; and a <unk> or palatalized consonant will be followed by an epenthetic [ i ] , as in [ <unk> ] . 
 = = = = Stress = = = = 
 Stress in Mongolian is nonphonemic ( does not distinguish different meanings ) and thus is considered to depend entirely on syllable structure . But scholarly opinions on stress placement diverge sharply . Most native linguists , regardless of which dialect they speak , claim that stress falls on the first syllable . Between 1941 and 1975 , several Western scholars proposed that the leftmost heavy syllable gets the stress . Yet other positions were taken in works published between 1835 and 1915 . 
 Walker ( 1997 ) proposes that stress falls on the rightmost heavy syllable unless this syllable is word @-@ final : 
 A " heavy syllable " is here defined as one that is at least the length of a full vowel ; short word @-@ initial syllables are thereby excluded . If a word is <unk> and the only heavy syllable is word @-@ final , it gets stressed anyway . In cases where there is only one phonemic short word @-@ initial syllable , even this syllable can get the stress : 
 More recently , the most extensive collection of phonetic data so far in Mongolian studies has been applied to a partial account of stress placement in the closely related Chakhar dialect . The conclusion is drawn that di- and <unk> words with a short first syllable are stressed on the second syllable . But if their first syllable is long , then the data for different acoustic parameters seems to support conflicting conclusions : intensity data often seems to indicate that the first syllable is stressed , while F0 seems to indicate that it is the second syllable that is stressed . 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Modern Mongolian is an agglutinative , almost exclusively suffixing language , the only exception being reduplication . Most of the suffixes consist of a single morpheme . There are many derivational morphemes . For example , the word <unk> consists of the root baj- ' to be ' , an epenthetic <unk> , the causative <unk> ( hence ' to found ' ) , the derivative suffix <unk> that forms nouns created by the action ( like <unk> in ' organisation ' ) and the complex suffix – <unk> denoting something that belongs to the modified word ( <unk> would be genitive ) . 
 Nominal compounds are quite frequent . Some derivational verbal suffixes are rather productive , e.g. jar ' - ' to speak ' , <unk> ' to speak with each other ' . Formally , the independent words derived using verbal suffixes can roughly be divided into three classes : final verbs , which can only be used sentence @-@ finally , i.e. <unk> ( mainly future or generic statements ) or – ø ( second person imperative ) ; participles ( often called " verbal nouns " ) , which can be used clause @-@ finally or <unk> , i.e. <unk> ( perfect @-@ past ) or <unk> ( ' want to ' ) ; and converbs , which can link clauses or function <unk> , i.e. <unk> ( qualifies for any adverbial function or neutrally connects two sentences ) or <unk> ( the action of the main clause takes place until the action expressed by the suffixed verb begins ) . 
 Roughly speaking , Mongolian has eight cases : nominative ( unmarked ) , genitive , dative , accusative , ablative , instrumental , comitative and directional . If a direct object is definite , it must take the accusative , while it must take the nominative if it is unspecific . In addition to case , a number of postpositions exist that usually govern genitive , ablative , or comitative case or a form of the nominative that has sometimes <unk> either for lexical historical reasons or analogy ( thus maybe becoming an attributive case suffix ) . Nouns can take reflexive @-@ possessive <unk> indicating that the marked noun is possessed by the subject of the sentence : bi <unk> ( - ) aa <unk> I friend @-@ reflexive @-@ possessive save @-@ perfect ' I saved my friend ' . However , there are also somewhat noun @-@ like adjectives to which case suffixes seemingly cannot be attached directly unless there is ellipsis . Plurality may be left unmarked , but there are overt plurality markers , some of which are restricted to humans . A noun that is modified by a numeral usually does not take any plural affix . 
 Personal pronouns exist for the first and second person , while the old demonstrative pronouns have come to form third person ( proximal and distal ) pronouns . Other word ( sub- ) classes include interrogative pronouns , conjunctions ( which take participles ) , <unk> , and particles , the last being rather numerous . 
 Negation is mostly expressed by <unk> after participles and by the negation particle <unk> after nouns and adjectives ; negation particles preceding the verb ( for example in converbal constructions ) exist , but tend to be replaced by analytical constructions . 
 = = = Syntax = = = 
 = = = = Phrase structure = = = = 
 The noun phrase has the order : demonstrative pronoun / numeral , adjective , noun . Attributive sentences precede the whole NP . Titles or occupations of people , low numerals indicating groups , and focus <unk> are put behind the head noun . Possessive pronouns ( in different forms ) may either precede or follow the NP . Examples : 
 The verbal phrase consists of the predicate in the center , preceded by its complements and by the adverbials modifying it and followed ( mainly if the predicate is sentence @-@ final ) by modal particles , as in the following example with predicate <unk> : 
 In this clause the adverbial , <unk> ' without saying [ so ] ' must precede the predicate 's complement , <unk> ' it @-@ accusative ' in order to avoid syntactic ambiguity , since <unk> is itself derived from a verb and hence an <unk> preceding it could be construed as its complement . If the adverbial was an adjective such as <unk> ' fast ' , it could optionally immediately precede the predicate . There are also cases in which the adverb must immediately precede the predicate . 
 For Khalkha , the most complete treatment of the verbal forms is <unk> ( ed . ) 1987 . However , the analysis of predication presented here , while valid for Khalkha , is adapted from the description of Khorchin by Matsuoka 2007 . 
 Most often , of course , the predicate consists of a verb . However , there are several types of nominal predicative constructions , with or without a copula . Auxiliaries that express direction and aktionsart ( among other meanings ) can with the assistance of a linking converb occupy the immediate <unk> position , e.g. <unk> <unk> drink @-@ converb leave @-@ perfect ' drank up ' . The next position is filled by converb suffixes in connection with the auxiliary , baj- ' to be ' , e.g. ter <unk> <unk> s / he run @-@ converb be @-@ <unk> ' she is running ' . Suffixes occupying this position express grammatical aspect , e.g. , progressive and <unk> . In the next position , participles followed by baj- may follow , e.g. , ter <unk> <unk> s / he come @-@ perfect be @-@ <unk> ' he has come ' . Here , an explicit perfect and habituality can be marked , which is aspectual in meaning as well . This position may be occupied by multiple suffixes in a single predication , and it can still be followed by a converbal Progressive . The last position is occupied by suffixes that express tense , evidentiality , modality , and aspect . 
 = = = = Clauses = = = = 
 Unmarked phrase order is subject – object – predicate . While the predicate generally has to remain in clause @-@ final position , the other phrases are free to change order or to wholly disappear . The topic tends to be placed clause @-@ initially , new information rather at the end of the clause . Topic can be overtly marked with bol , which can also mark contrastive focus , overt additive focus ( ' even , also ' ) can be marked with the clitic č , and overt restrictive focus with the clitic l ( ' only ' ) . 
 The inventory of voices in Mongolian consists of passive , causative , reciprocal , <unk> , and cooperative . In a passive sentence , the verb takes the suffix <unk> and the agent takes either dative or instrumental case , the first of which is more common . In the causative , the verb takes the suffix <unk> , the <unk> ( the person caused to do something ) in a transitive action ( e.g. , ' raise ' ) takes dative or instrumental case , and the <unk> in an intransitive action ( e.g. , ' rise ' ) takes accusative case . <unk> morphology is also used in some passive contexts : 
 The semantic attribute of animacy is syntactically important : thus the sentence , ' the bread was eaten by me ' , which is acceptable in English , would not be acceptable in Mongolian . The reciprocal voice is marked by <unk> , the <unk> by <unk> , and the cooperative by <unk> . 
 Mongolian allows for adjectival <unk> that relate to either the subject or the direct object , e.g. <unk> <unk> <unk> ' Lena sleeps naked ' , while adjectival <unk> are marginal . 
 = = = = Complex sentences = = = = 
 One way to <unk> clauses is to have the first clause end in a converb , as in the following example using the converb <unk> : 
 Some verbal nouns in the dative ( or less often in the instrumental ) function very similar to converbs : e.g. , replacing <unk> in the preceding sentence with <unk> find @-@ imperfective @-@ dative yields ' when we find it we 'll give it to you ' . Quite often , postpositions govern complete clauses . In contrast , conjunctions take verbal nouns without case : 
 Finally , there is a class of particles , usually clause @-@ initial , that are distinct from conjunctions but that also relate clauses : bi <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> I find @-@ perfect but you @-@ dative give @-@ imperfective @-@ negation ' I 've found it , but I won 't give it to you ' . 
 Mongolian has a <unk> auxiliary verb <unk> very similar to Japanese to <unk> <unk> literally means ' to say ' and in converbal form <unk> precedes either a psych verb or a verb of saying . As a verbal noun like <unk> ( with n ' or case ) it can form a subset of complement clauses . As gene it may function as an <unk> marker . 
 Mongolian clauses tend to be combined <unk> , which sometimes gives rise to sentence structures which are <unk> despite resembling <unk> structures in European languages : 
 In the subordinate clause the subject , if different from the subject of main clause , sometimes has to take accusative or genitive case . There is marginal occurrence of subjects taking ablative case as well . Subjects of attributive clauses in which the head has a function ( as is the case for all English relative clauses ) usually require that if the subject is not the head , then it take the genitive , e.g. <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ genitive eat @-@ perfect meal ' the meal that s / he had eaten ' . 
 = = Loanwords and coined words = = 
 In distant times Mongolian adopted loanwords from Old Turkic , Sanskrit ( these often through Uighur ) , Persian , Arabic , Tibetan , Tungusic , and Chinese . Recent loanwords come from Russian , English , and Chinese ( mainly in Inner Mongolia ) . Language commissions of the Mongolian state have been busy translating new terminology into Mongolian , so that the Mongolian vocabulary now has <unk> ' president ' ( " <unk> " ) and <unk> <unk> ' beer ' ( " yellow <unk> " ) . There are quite a few loan translations , e.g. , <unk> <unk> ' train ' ( ' fire @-@ having cart ' ) from Chinese <unk> ( <unk> , fire cart ) ' train ' . Other loan translations include <unk> <unk> ( essence ) from Chinese <unk> ( <unk> , true quality ) , <unk> am ( population ) from Chinese <unk> ( <unk> , person mouth ) , <unk> shish ( corn , maize ) from Chinese <unk> ( <unk> , jade rice ) and <unk> <unk> <unk> ( republic ) from Chinese <unk> ( <unk> , public collaboration nation ) . 
 Examples of Sanskrit loanwords used in contemporary Khalkha Mongolian include shashin ( <unk> <unk> , religion ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , space ) , <unk> ( <unk> ् <unk> <unk> , talent ) , <unk> ( <unk> ् य punya , good deeds ) , <unk> ( क ् <unk> <unk> , instant ) , <unk> ( द ् <unk> <unk> , continent ) , <unk> ( ग ् रह <unk> , planet ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , tales , stories ) , <unk> ( श ् <unk> <unk> , poems , verses ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , strophe ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , mineral water , nectar ) , <unk> ( <unk> ् त ् र shastra , chronicle ) , bud ( <unk> <unk> , Mercury ) , sugar ( <unk> ् र <unk> , Venus ) , <unk> ( <unk> ् <unk> <unk> , Jupiter ) and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , Saturn ) . 
 Examples of Persian loanwords used in contemporary Khalkha Mongolian include <unk> ( <unk> , amethyst ) , <unk> ( <unk> , building ) , bars ( <unk> , tiger ) , <unk> ( <unk> , chess queen / female tiger ) , bold ( <unk> , steel ) , <unk> ( <unk> , crystal ) , <unk> ( <unk> , sesame ) , <unk> ( <unk> , prison ) , dari ( <unk> , powder / gunpowder ) , <unk> ( dur , telescope ) , <unk> ( <unk> , telescope / microscope ) , <unk> ( <unk> , notebook ) , nom ( <unk> , book ) and <unk> ( <unk> , high god ) . 
 Examples of Chinese loanwords used in contemporary Khalkha Mongolian include <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , board ) , <unk> ( <unk> là , candle ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , radish ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , gourd ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , lamp ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , electric lamp ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , paintbrush ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , cutting board ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , pepper ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , leek ) , moog ( <unk> <unk> , mushroom ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , vinegar , soy sauce ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , cabbage ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , steamed bun ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , watermelon ) , <unk> / <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , trade ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , noodles ) , dan ( <unk> <unk> , single ) , gan ( <unk> <unk> , steel ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , sledgehammer ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , window ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , dumplings ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , fried dumpling ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , cream soup ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , flour soup ) , jan ( <unk> <unk> , soy ) , van ( 王 wáng , king ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , princess ) , gun ( <unk> gōng , duke ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , general ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , eunuch ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , recorded disk ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , restaurant ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , lotus ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , flower , used in names ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , peach ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , cherry ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , borrow , lend , with Mongolian denominal verb suffix <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , pea ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , manner , appearance ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , characteristic ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , abacus ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> 'r , pear ) , bai ( <unk> <unk> , target ) , jin ( <unk> jīn , weight ) , bin ( <unk> <unk> , pancake ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , calendar ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , porcelain ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , sleeveless vest ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , potato noodles ) and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , tea ) . 
 In the 20th century there are numerous daily life words loaned from Russia : <unk> ( doctor ) , <unk> ( table ) , <unk> ( chocolate ) , <unk> ( train wagon ) , <unk> ( calendar ) , <unk> , <unk> ( from <unk> T @-@ shirt ) , <unk> ( apple ) , <unk> ( sausage ) , <unk> ( red scarf ) and <unk> ( car ) . In recent times due to fast @-@ phased social and cultural transformations , the Mongolian language loaned numerous words from English ; some have gradually evolved as official terms : <unk> , computer , fail ( file ) , marketing , <unk> , <unk> ( online ) , <unk> ( message ) . Most of these are confined to the Mongolian state . 
 Despite having a diverse pool of loanwords Mongolian uses more native vocabulary than languages like Japanese or Korean where words of Chinese origin take up to 60 % of vocabulary . Volker <unk> points out the relative lexical purity of Mongolian in The Mongolic Languages ( 2003 ) 
 On the basis of a tentative survey of 452 lexical items it seems that the Mongolic languages can be divided into six categories , depending on how large the proportion of Common Mongolic items in their vocabulary is . 
 ( 1 ) Below 50 per cent : The only language belonging to this category is <unk> , in which the proportion of Common Mongolic vocabulary would seem to be as low as 39 per cent . It is obvious that <unk> has suffered a massive loss of native vocabulary , making it , at least lexically , a good candidate for a ‘ mixed language ’ . 
 ( 2 ) 50 @-@ 64 per cent : This category comprises , not surprisingly , two other languages of the Gansu @-@ Qinghai complex , <unk> ( 50 per cent ) and Santa ( 56 per cent ) , as well as <unk> ( 52 per cent ) . 
 ( 3 ) 65 @-@ 84 per cent : This category comprises the two remaining languages of the Gansu @-@ Qinghai complex , <unk> ( 72 per cent ) and Shira <unk> ( 77 per cent ) , as well as <unk> ( 81 per cent ) . 
 ( 6 ) Above 95 percent : This category comprises the rest of the dialects of Mongol proper , notably Khalkha and Khorchin ( as well as , apparently , Modern Written Mongol ) , in which the proportion of native vocabulary in the sample is as high as 98 per cent . Lexically , at least , these are the ‘ most Mongolic ’ of all Mongolic idioms . 
 = = Writing systems = = 
 Mongolian has been written in a variety of alphabets , making it a language with one of the largest number of scripts used historically . The earliest stages of Mongolian ( Xianbei , Wuhuan languages ) may have used an indigenous runic script as indicated by Chinese sources . The Khitan large script adopted in 920 CE is an early Mongol ( or according to some , para @-@ Mongolic ) script . 
 The traditional Mongolian script was adapted from Uyghur script probably at the very beginning of the 13th century and from that time underwent some minor <unk> and <unk> . Between 1930 and 1932 , a short @-@ lived attempt was made to introduce the Latin script in the Mongolian state , and after a preparatory phase , the Mongolian Cyrillic script was declared mandatory by government decree . It has been argued that the 1941 introduction of the Cyrillic script , with its smaller discrepancy between written and spoken form , contributed to the success of the large @-@ scale government literacy campaign , which increased the literacy rate from 17 @.@ 3 % to 73 @.@ 5 % between 1941 and 1950 . Earlier government campaigns to eradicate illiteracy , employing the traditional script , had only managed to raise literacy from 3 @.@ 0 % to 17 @.@ 3 % between 1921 and 1940 . From 1991 to 1994 , an attempt at reintroducing the traditional alphabet failed in the face of popular resistance . In informal contexts of electronic text production , the use of the Latin alphabet is common . 
 In the People 's Republic of China , Mongolian is a co @-@ official language with Mandarin Chinese in some regions , notably the entire Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region . The traditional alphabet has always been used there , although Cyrillic was considered briefly before the Sino @-@ Soviet split . There are two types of written Mongolian used in China : the traditional Mongolian script , which is official among Mongols nationwide , and the Clear script , used predominantly among Oirats in Xinjiang . 
 = = Linguistic history = = 
 The earliest surviving Mongolian text may be the Stele of <unk> , a report on sports composed in Mongolian script on stone , which is most often dated at 1224 or 1225 . The Mongolian @-@ Armenian wordlist of 55 words compiled by Kirakos of <unk> ( 13th century ) is the first written record of Mongolian words . From the 13th to the 15th centuries , Mongolian language texts were written in four scripts ( not counting some vocabulary written in Western scripts ) : Uyghur Mongolian ( UM ) script ( an adaptation of the Uyghur alphabet ) , ' <unk> @-@ pa script ( Ph ) ( used in decrees ) , Chinese ( SM ) ( The Secret History of the Mongols ) , and Arabic ( AM ) ( used in dictionaries ) . While they are the earliest texts available , these texts have come to be called " Middle Mongol " in scholarly practice . The documents in UM script show some distinct linguistic characteristics and are therefore often distinguished by terming their language " Preclassical Mongolian " . 
 The Yuan dynasty referred to the Mongolian language in Chinese as " Guoyu " ( Chinese : 國語 ) , which means " National language " , a term also used by other non @-@ Han dynasties to refer to their languages such as the Manchu language during the Qing dynasty , the Jurchen language during the Jin dynasty ( 1115 – 1234 ) , the Khitan language during the Liao dynasty , and the Xianbei language during the Northern Wei . 
 The next distinct period is Classical Mongolian , which is dated from the 17th to the 19th century . This is a written language with a high degree of standardization in orthography and syntax that sets it quite apart from the subsequent Modern Mongolian . The most notable documents in this language are the Mongolian Kangyur and Tengyur as well as several chronicles . In 1686 , the <unk> alphabet ( Buddhist texts ) was created , giving distinctive evidence on early classical Mongolian phonological peculiarities . 
 = = = Changes in phonology = = = 
 = = = = Consonants = = = = 
 The research into the reconstruction of the consonants of Middle Mongol has engendered several controversies . Middle Mongol had two series of plosives , but there is disagreement as to which phonological dimension they lie on , whether aspiration or voicing . The early scripts have distinct letters for velar plosives and uvular plosives , but as these are in complementary distribution according to vowel harmony class , only two back plosive phonemes , * / k / , * / kʰ / ( ~ * [ k ] , * [ <unk> ] ) are to be reconstructed . One prominent long running disagreement concerns certain correspondences of word medial consonants among the four major scripts ( UM , SM , AM , and Ph , which were discussed in the preceding section ) . Word medial / k / of Uyghur Mongolian ( UM ) has , not one , but two correspondences with the three other scripts : either / k / or zero . Traditional scholarship has reconstructed * / k / for both correspondences , arguing that * / k / got lost in some instances , which raises the question of what the conditioning factors of those instances were . More recently , the other obvious possibility has been assumed , namely that the correspondence between UM / k / and zero in the other scripts points to a distinct phoneme , / h / , which would correspond to the word @-@ initial phoneme / h / that is present in those other scripts . / h / ( sometimes also called / x / ) is sometimes assumed to derive from * / pʰ / , which would also explain zero in SM , AM , Ph in some instances where UM indicates / p / , e.g. <unk> > Khalkha deel . 
 The palatal affricates * č , * <unk> were fronted in Northern Modern Mongolian dialects such as Khalkha . * kʰ was spirantized to / x / in Ulaanbaatar Khalkha and the Mongolian dialects south of it , e.g. Preclassical Mongolian <unk> , reconstructed as * <unk> ' heavy ' , became Modern Mongolian / <unk> / ( but in the vicinity of <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> , many speakers will say [ <unk> ] ) . Originally word @-@ final * n turned into / ŋ / ; if * n was originally followed by a vowel that later dropped , it remained unchanged , e.g. * <unk> became / <unk> / , but * <unk> became / <unk> / . After i @-@ breaking , * [ ʃ ] became phonemic . Consonants in words containing back vowels that were followed by * i in Proto @-@ Mongolian became palatalized in Modern Mongolian . In some words , word @-@ final * n was dropped with most case forms , but still appears with the ablative , dative and genitive . 
 = = = = Vowels = = = = 
 The standard view is that Proto @-@ Mongolic had * i , * e , * y , * ø , * u , * o , * a . According to this view , * o and * u were pharyngealized to / ɔ / and / ʊ / , then * y and * ø were velarized to / u / and / o / . Thus , the vowel harmony shifted from a velar to a pharyngeal paradigm . * i in the first syllable of back @-@ vocalic words was assimilated to the following vowel ; in word @-@ initial position it became / ja / . * e was rounded to * ø when followed by * y . <unk> and <unk> sequences where the second vowel was any vowel but * i were <unk> . In noninitial syllables , short vowels were deleted from the phonetic representation of the word and long vowels became short . 
 E.g. * <unk> ( * i becomes / ja / , * h disappears ) > * <unk> ( unstable n drops ; vowel reduction ) > / <unk> ( n ) / ' <unk> 
 and * <unk> ( regressive rounding assimilation ) > * <unk> ( vowel velarization ) > * <unk> ( vowel reduction ) > / <unk> / ' to <unk> 
 This reconstruction has recently been opposed , arguing that vowel developments across the Mongolic languages can be more economically explained starting from basically the same vowel system as Khalkha , only with * [ ə ] instead of * [ e ] . Moreover , the sound changes involved in this alternative scenario are more likely from an articulatory point of view and early Middle Mongol loans into Korean . 
 = = = Changes in morphology = = = 
 = = = = Nominal system = = = = 
 In the following discussion , in accordance with a preceding observation , the term " Middle Mongol " is used merely as a cover term for texts written in any of three scripts , Uighur Mongolian script ( UM ) , Chinese ( SM ) , or Arabic ( AM ) . 
 The case system of Middle Mongol has remained mostly intact down to the present , although important changes occurred with the comitative and the dative and most other case suffixes did undergo slight changes in form , i.e. , were shortened . The Middle Mongol comitative <unk> @-@ a could not be used <unk> , but it was replaced by the suffix <unk> that originally derived adjectives denoting possession from nouns , e.g. mori @-@ tai ' having a horse ' became mor <unk> ' having a horse / with a horse ' . As this adjective functioned parallel to <unk> ' not having ' , it has been suggested that a " privative case " ( ' without ' ) has been introduced into Mongolian . There have been three different case suffixes in the dative @-@ locative @-@ directive domain that are grouped in different ways : -a as locative and -dur , -da as dative or -da and -a as dative and -dur as locative , in both cases with some functional overlapping . As -dur seems to be grammaticalized from <unk> @-@ a ' within ' , thus indicating a span of time , the second account seems to be more likely . Of these , -da was lost , -dur was first reduced to <unk> and then to <unk> and -a only survived in a few frozen environments . Finally , the directive of modern Mongolian , <unk> , has been innovated from <unk> ' downwards ' . Social gender agreement was abandoned . 
 = = = = Verbal system = = = = 
 Middle Mongol had a slightly larger set of declarative finite verb suffix forms and a smaller number of participles , which were less likely to be used as finite predicates . The linking converb -n became confined to stable verb combinations , while the number of converbs increased . The distinction between male , female and plural subjects exhibited by some finite verbal suffixes was lost . 
 = = = Changes in syntax = = = 
 Neutral word order in clauses with pronominal subject changed from object – predicate – subject to subject – object – predicate , e.g. , 
 " <unk> <unk> spoke saying , ' Alas ! You speak a great boast .... ' " 
 The syntax of verb negation shifted from negation particles preceding final verbs to a negation particle following participles ; thus , as final verbs could no longer be negated , their paradigm of negation was filled by particles . For example , Preclassical Mongolian ese <unk> ' did not come ' vs. modern spoken Khalkha Mongolian <unk> or <unk> . 
 = History of rugby union matches between France and New Zealand = 
 The national rugby union teams of France and New Zealand ( the All Blacks ) have been playing each other for over a century ; as of 19 October 2015 , they have played 56 Test matches against each other . The first encounter , which was also France 's first Test , took place in Paris in January 1906 and was won by New Zealand 38 – 8 . It was not until 1954 that France secured their first win over New Zealand ( 3 – 0 ) . 
 France first toured New Zealand in 1961 – before any of the Home Nations – and the All Blacks won all three Tests . The All Blacks ' first full tour of France was in 1977 , when they won one of the two Tests . France first defeated the All Blacks in New Zealand on Bastille Day 1979 . France achieved a first series win in New Zealand in 1994 , when they won both Tests . Since 2000 , the two teams have contested the Dave Gallaher Trophy . 
 The teams ' World Cup history includes seven matches - the most for any pair of teams . They have played two tournament finals , in 1987 and 2011 ( both at Eden Park and both won by New Zealand ) . 
 Overall , the All Blacks have won 42 Tests against France 's 12 , with one match drawn . The largest winning margin in a Test between the countries was a 61 – 10 victory to the All Blacks at Westpac Stadium in Wellington in 2007 . The most career points scored by members of either team is 92 by Andrew Mehrtens ; he also holds the record for points in one match with 29 . 
 Despite the vastly superior win record of New Zealand in this encounter , France has the greatest number of wins against the All Blacks of any Northern Hemisphere opponent to date . France are sometimes called the " bogey " team of New Zealand , known for having inconsistent results in regular test matches , but have proven to be fierce opponents in the knockout stage of the Rugby World Cup . All Black campaigns in The Rugby World Cup were halted by defeats to France in 1999 and 2007 , and were nearly upset again in 2011 with a very narrow 8 @-@ 7 victory in the final . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early meetings ( 1905 – 25 ) = = = 
 The first @-@ ever New Zealand tour to the Northern Hemisphere was in 1905 – 06 . It was also the first time they wore a black strip and the first time they performed the haka . The team – known today as " The Original All Blacks " – played various club and national sides throughout the British Isles before taking on France on 1 January 1906 . This was France 's first Test and was held at Parc des Princes , Paris . The All Blacks scored ten tries , including six in the second half , to France 's two , and won 38 – 8 . Despite the scoreline , France 's two tries were more than any previous team had scored against the All Blacks on tour . Commenting on the state of French rugby in their book The Complete Rugby Footballer , Original All Blacks Dave Gallaher and Billy Stead wrote : " We are strongly of the opinion that the game will spread in their country and that in the course of time they will put a team in the field which will command the utmost respect of any other . " 
 The 1924 – 25 All Blacks ' Invincibles tour included a Test against France . The teams met at the Stade des Ponts <unk> in Toulouse on 18 January 1925 . Although French rugby had improved since 1906 , the All Blacks still won 30 – 6 , with France scoring two tries . All Blacks ' captain Cliff Porter said of France " Your forwards gave us a lot of bother . Your three @-@ quarters were not so good . " 
 In 1926 , France lost to the New Zealand Maori . Perhaps the " most celebrated Maori side in history " , they undertook a seven @-@ month 1926 – 27 tour of Australia , Ceylon , France , Wales and Canada , playing 38 matches , winning 29 and losing seven , with two draws . In total , the Maori scored 712 points while conceding 215 . This was the last match between a New Zealand representative team and France for nearly three decades . In 1932 the International Rugby Football Board ( IRB ) expelled France from the Five Nations Championship for breaching the professionalism rules in its domestic club competition . Consequently , the All Blacks did not face France during their 1935 British Isles ' tour . Although France was readmitted in 1939 , the Second World War intervened , suspending international competition . 
 In 1946 , France played two matches against a team selected from the New Zealand Expeditionary Force , nicknamed the " Khaki All Blacks " . Despite the team not being a representative New Zealand side , they included many future All Blacks . The games took place on 10 March at Stade Colombes , Paris , and on 24 March at Wallon Stadium , Toulouse . The Khaki All Blacks won both ( 14 – 9 and 13 – 10 ) . 
 = = = Post war ( 1954 – 68 ) = = = 
 The 1954 match at Stade Colombes , Paris , was dominated by the All Blacks who had the majority of possession and territory . Despite this , France scored in the 35th minute after the ball was lost by All Blacks ' half @-@ back Keith Davis 40 metres ( 130 ft ) from France 's line . The ball was picked up by French number eight Robert <unk> who passed to Paul Labadie . Labadie then passed to French captain Jean Prat who scored a try , giving France a 3 – 0 lead that the All Blacks failed to close . Although New Zealand relentlessly attacked the French line – and made several drop goal and penalty attempts – the French defence held , earning France their first win ( 3 – 0 ) over the All Blacks . 
 France first toured New Zealand in 1961 – before any of the Home Nations . The first Test at Eden Park was won 13 – 6 by the All Blacks after they scored two converted tries and a penalty . France 's first five @-@ eighth Pierre Albaladejo kicked all of France 's points with two drop goals , prompting the New Zealanders to nickname him " Monsieur Drop " . The second Test of the tour was played at Athletic Park in Wellington . The wind was very strong and neither team scored during the first half . In the second , playing into the wind , France scored a try to lead 3 – 0 . The All Blacks ' Kel Tremain responded with a try . In one of the best conversions of his career , Don Clarke kicked almost parallel to the goal @-@ line , relying on the strong wind to gust the ball over the posts . The Blacks won 5 – 3 . Although the All Blacks won the final Test in Christchurch 32 – 3 to take the series , the tour had a positive influence in France where it was broadcast on national television via satellite , popularising the sport beyond its traditional heartland of the southwest . 
 The next two matches between the teams were both in Paris . The All Blacks won the first 12 – 3 in 1964 after tries from Ralph <unk> and Ken Gray . In the next match , in 1967 , the All Blacks were coached by Fred Allen and captained by Brian Lochore ; they won 21 – 15 . 
 In 1968 , following their first Five Nations Grand Slam , France toured Australia and New Zealand . They were defeated in their Test against Australia and in all three against the All Blacks . The All Blacks ' side was particularly strong and won all its Tests between 1965 and 1970 . France 's touring losses presaged a string of defeats that did not end until they drew against Wales in the 1969 Five Nations ( in which France finished last ) . 
 = = = Full amateur tours ( 1970 – 1994 ) = = = 
 France achieved only their second Test victory over the All Blacks in 1973 at Parc des Princes , Paris . The All Blacks had defeated England , Scotland and Wales , and drawn with Ireland on their 1973 tour and France was their last Test . France won 13 – 6 , and scored two tries to nil , with two penalties the only points from the All Blacks . In 1977 the All Blacks made their first @-@ ever full tour of France . France won the first Test in Toulouse and the All Blacks the second in Paris . France then reciprocated and toured New Zealand in 1979 . This time , neutral referees were appointed for the first time . The All Blacks won the first Test 23 – 9 at Lancaster Park . However , in the second Test , France upset the All Blacks by winning 24 – 19 on Bastille Day at Eden Park . The victory was France 's first win in New Zealand over the All Blacks . 
 The 1980s saw many France – New Zealand Tests . The first two were in 1981 when the All Blacks toured France , visiting in Toulouse and Paris ; the All Blacks won both Tests , 13 – 9 and 18 – 6 respectively . In 1984 , France visited New Zealand for two Tests . They lost the first , at Lancaster Park , 10 – 9 ( despite repeated French drop goal attempts ) and the second , at Eden Park , 31 – 18 . 
 In 1986 , France played a one @-@ off Test in New Zealand , at Lancaster Park . Many top All Blacks were serving a two @-@ month suspension for participating in the rebel Cavaliers tour to South Africa . The team that faced France became known as the " Baby Blacks " as all bar two of them were either making their Test début or were very inexperienced . The Baby Blacks upset France 18 – 9 in front of 24 @,@ 000 spectators ; the only try coming from number eight Mike Brewer . 
 Later in 1986 , the bans served , the full All Blacks toured France . They won the first Test , in Toulouse , 19 – 7 . Their next match , at Nantes , became known as " the battle of Nantes " . France played aggressively and tried to intimidate the All Blacks . All Black Buck Shelford had his scrotum <unk> in the twentieth minute that required stitches while he was still on the field . He was later knocked out , losing several teeth in the process , and did not finish the match . The aggressive display by France paid off and they won 16 – 3 . 
 The following year France and the All Blacks met in the final of the inaugural Rugby World Cup . The tournament was co @-@ hosted by New Zealand and Australia and the final was held at Eden Park . The All Blacks were captained by David Kirk and went on to win their first World Cup 29 – 9 . According to the All Blacks ' coach at the time , Brian Lochore , the previous year 's loss in Nantes was the catalyst for their World Cup victory . Shelford said of the match " We wanted to play them in the final because we wanted revenge " . The match also helped improve the diplomatic and political rift between France and New Zealand caused by the 1985 bombing of the Rainbow Warrior by French Secret Service agents . 
 France toured New Zealand in 1989 and played a two Test series . They lost both Tests ; the first 25 – 17 at Lancaster Park , and the second 34 – 20 at Eden Park . In both Tests the All Blacks led at the half time break , with France responding by scoring most of their points during the first 15 minutes of the second half before the All Blacks counter @-@ attacked to win in the last quarter . The All Blacks ' reciprocal tour of France came in 1990 . Again two Tests were played and again they were won by the All Blacks ; 24 – 3 at Nantes , and 30 – 12 at the Parc de Princes . The All Blacks first @-@ five eighth Grant Fox , dominated both matches , scoring 16 points in the first Test , and 22 points in the second . 
 The next tour was of New Zealand by France in 1994 . In a major upset for New Zealand rugby , France took the first Test 22 – 8 at Lancaster Park , coinciding with Frenchman Philippe Sella 's hundredth match for his country . Sella said of the game " But this historic victory for my 100th cap , with a score I never imagined — that 's one of my really great , great memories " . The second and final Test on tour was at Eden Park on 3 July 1994 . The All Blacks were winning 20 – 16 with three minutes remaining after Matthew Cooper had kicked a penalty . The French counter @-@ attacked and ran the ball the length of the field from their own in @-@ goal area to win . The ball was handled by nine French players before the try was scored by Jean @-@ Luc <unk> . French captain Philippe Saint @-@ Andre called it " a counter @-@ attack from the end of the world " , and it was then labelled the try from the end of the world . The try gave France a 23 – 20 win and a 2 – 0 series win over the All Blacks . In 2003 , Daily Telegraph readers voted the try the fourth best of all time in either rugby union or rugby league . 
 = = = Professional era ( from 1995 ) = = = 
 On 11 November 1995 , France set a record when they defeated the All Blacks 22 – 15 at Toulouse — their third consecutive victory over the New Zealanders . A week later , on 18 November , at the Parc des Princes in Paris , the All Blacks took their revenge , inflicting a resounding 37 – 12 defeat . It was not until 1999 that the two teams met again , in a one @-@ off Test at Athletic Park in Wellington . The All Blacks won 54 – 7 ; at the time France 's largest ever loss . Tana Umaga scored three tries and Andrew Mehrtens kicked 19 points in the match . 
 After their Athletic Park victory , the All Blacks were heavy favourites to win when they met France in the semi @-@ finals of the 1999 Rugby World Cup . The game was played at the neutral venue of Twickenham Stadium on 31 October 1999 . The All Blacks led 24 – 10 seven minutes into the second half after two tries ( both from Jonah Lomu ) . France then scored two penalties and two drop goals to first five @-@ eighth Christophe Lamaison to reduce the All Blacks ' lead to 24 – 22 with 25 minutes remaining . Scrum @-@ half Fabien <unk> chip kicked the ball to Christophe Dominici who then scored . Another Lamaison kick set up a try for centre Richard <unk> , which Lamaison converted , to take France into the lead , 36 – 24 . France scored another try in the remaining five minutes , and although the All Blacks scored a last @-@ minute try France won 43 – 31 . Lamaison had scored 28 points , and a full house – a try , conversion , penalty and drop goal all in one match . Many have called this match " the greatest game in World Cup history " . 
 The Dave Gallaher Trophy was introduced in 2000 to be contested between the two teams . It was named in memory of All Blacks captain Dave Gallaher who captained the All Blacks against France in 1906 and who died at the Battle of Passchendaele . The Cup was first contested on Armistice Day ( 11 November ) 2000 . The All Blacks won 39 – 26 and scored two tries while Andrew Mehrtens scored nine penalties . The two met again the following week and this time France won 42 – 33 , but as only the first Test counted towards the trophy the All Blacks retained it . 
 The countries met in one @-@ off Tests in 2001 , 2002 and 2003 . The 2001 Test was won 37 – 12 by the All Blacks , the 2002 Test was a 20 all draw and in 2003 the All Blacks won 31 – 23 at Jade Stadium . They met again in 2003 at the Rugby World Cup in Sydney . The match was a third @-@ fourth play @-@ off game and was won 40 – 13 by the All Blacks . In 2004 they met in a one @-@ off Test in Paris . The 2004 Test was the first between the two teams with Graham Henry as All Blacks coach . France were 2004 Six Nations Champions , but were defeated by five tries to nil . The final score was a 45 – 6 win to the All Blacks ; a record at the time . They met in France in 2006 – this time for a two @-@ Test series . The first Test was played in Lyon on Armistice Day . The All Blacks defeated France 46 – 3 which was a record defeat for them at home . This was despite the All Blacks ' team not being their strongest available . Following the defeat France 's manager Jo <unk> said that the All Blacks played the match , " for all the New Zealanders who died during the two World Wars in Europe " . The following week the two teams met in Paris , this time to commemorate the centennial of the first ever All Blacks versus France Test . Despite fielding what coach Graham Henry described as his best team , the All Blacks achieved a less notable 23 – 11 victory . 
 The next year France visited New Zealand for a two @-@ Test series . The final rounds of the 2006 – 07 Top 14 season conflicted with the tour , so France sent a Test team short of 30 of their top players . With their weakened squad , the team was labelled " France C " by the New Zealand media . Featuring six new caps , France were defeated 42 – 11 in the first Test at Eden Park . The second Test was played the following week in Wellington , and the All Blacks achieved their largest ever victory over France with a 61 – 10 win . The defeat was France 's heaviest in their history . 
 France hosted the 2007 World Cup , and the two teams met in the tournament quarter @-@ finals . Despite France 's hosting of the tournament , the match was held at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , Wales . The match was won by France 20 – 18 , and involved several controversial decisions by referee Wayne Barnes , who subsequently received death threats from some fans . France scored one try after the sin binning of All Blacks second five @-@ eighth Luke McAlister , and another from a forward pass unseen by the referee . The All Blacks were strongly criticised for not attempting a drop goal in the game 's final minutes . Their performance was analysed by Palmerston North based company <unk> who had analysed 1 @,@ 500 games since 2000 . They discovered that the All Blacks made 57 tackles to France 's 269 , and they had 66 percent possession and 60 percent territory . The playing time , that is time the ball is in play , was the longest of any game <unk> had ever recorded . An ' Independent Review of the 2007 Rugby World Cup Campaign ' , conducted by Russel McVeagh lawyers and SPARC ( Sport and Recreation New Zealand ) , found that Barnes and the touch judges had a significant impact on the result of the match . The report states that " The penalty count was 10 @-@ 2 against the All Blacks , with none awarded in the second half , despite dominance in territory and possession ( which statistically should result in penalties awarded to the dominant side ) . On anyone 's account the referees and touch judges made mistakes which worked against the All Blacks . " Outside New Zealand and France , the focus was on the fact that , as in 1999 , France had pulled off what The Guardian described as another " incredible triumph against the odds . " 
 In 2011 , New Zealand hosted the Rugby World Cup . Unusually , France and New Zealand played twice at the tournament - both times at Eden Park . Both teams were in Pool A , and on September 24 New Zealand won their first encounter 37 @-@ 17 . New Zealand were pool winners , with France second . On either side of the draw for the knockout stage , both teams made the Final on October 23 . New Zealand won 8 @-@ 7 and for the second time won a home World Cup with France runners up . 
 = = Summary = = 
 As of the end of the 2015 Rugby World Cup , New Zealand and France have played 56 Tests . The All Blacks have won 43 , France 12 , and one has been drawn . Only four matches have been played at neutral venues ; the 1999 World Cup semi @-@ final at Twickenham , London , the 2003 World Cup third / fourth play @-@ off match at Stadium Australia in Sydney , and the 2007 and 2015 World Cup quarter @-@ finals at Millennium Stadium in Cardiff . New Zealand have scored considerably more points than France both in France and New Zealand , and at neutral venues - although at neutral venues France have won two of the four matches . A summary of the Test match statistics can be found below . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 = = = Rugby World Cup matches = = = 
 New Zealand and France have played seven Rugby World Cup games , more than any other pair of teams , including six play @-@ off matches . Five have been won by New Zealand and two by France . France 's wins knocked New Zealand out of the 1999 and 2007 tournaments at the semi @-@ final and quarter @-@ final stage respectively . New Zealand 's first two successful campaigns ( 1987 and 2011 ) ended with wins over France , both at Eden Park . New Zealand 's other victories have come in a quarter @-@ final ( 2015 ) , a pool match ( 2011 , again at Eden Park ) and the 2003 third @-@ place playoff . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Note : Date shown in brackets indicates when the record was or last set . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Oliver Kuhn = 
 Oliver Wall Kuhn ( August 14 , 1898 – October 8 , 1968 ) , nicknamed " Doc Kuhn " , was an American football , baseball and basketball player for the Vanderbilt University Commodores and later a prominent businessman of Tampa , Florida . As a college football quarterback , Kuhn led Vanderbilt to three consecutive Southern titles in 1921 , 1922 , and 1923 – the most @-@ recent conference titles for Vanderbilt football . In 1922 , Vanderbilt tied Michigan at the dedication of Dudley Field , and Kuhn was picked for Walter Camp 's list of names worthy of mention and Billy Evans ' All @-@ America " National Honor Roll . " 
 During his senior year , Kuhn was the captain of Vanderbilt 's football and basketball teams and received the Porter Cup , awarded to Vanderbilt 's best all @-@ around athlete . Kuhn played guard on the basketball team and was a shortstop on the baseball team which won a 1921 conference championship . He was known as a streaky hitter but a star defensive player and was selected All @-@ Southern in 1921 and 1922 . 
 Kuhn moved to Tampa after graduation , where he helped start the athletics program at the University of Tampa , and later notably led an effort to plant <unk> trees in downtown Tampa . 
 = = Early years and background = = 
 Oliver Wall Kuhn was born on August 14 , 1898 , in Nashville , Tennessee , the seventh child of Katherine Wall of Springfield , Kentucky and Ferdinand E. Kuhn , a secretary for the local board of public works . " Doc " , who played old cat as a child , attended preparatory school at Cathedral High School and Montgomery Bell Academy ( MBA ) . At MBA , he won two state football titles , first in 1915 as a sub and then in 1917 as a starter . Kuhn lost just a single game as MBA 's starting quarterback . According to Kuhn 's draft registration , he worked for DuPont as a civil engineer in Jacksonville , Tennessee . He also spent time at Camp Taylor . 
 = = Vanderbilt University = = 
 = = = Football = = = 
 During World War I Kuhn played briefly with George Gipp under coach Knute Rockne at Notre Dame , and he quarterbacked Dan McGugin 's Vanderbilt football teams from 1920 to 1923 , after a year on the scrub team in 1919 . His Commodores compiled an overall win – loss – tie record of 24 – 5 – 4 ( <unk> ) during his four years on the team , and a 15 – 2 – 3 ( <unk> ) record while he was a starter , including three consecutive conference titles , the most recent to date for Vanderbilt . He was also a member of Phi Kappa Psi , and chaired the Vanderbilt University dances . 
 = = = = 1920 = = = = 
 During Kuhn 's first year playing varsity football for Vanderbilt , the Commodores scored 47 points in the first half of an opening @-@ game win against Birmingham @-@ Southern due to the backfield of " Berryhill , Kuhn , Latham and Company " . After two crushing defeats to Georgia Tech and Auburn , Vanderbilt played Kentucky State and won 20 – 0 ; Kuhn subbed for Latham so the starter could rest up for the next week 's game against the Alabama Crimson Tide . 
 In a close game , and Alabama 's first victory over the Commodores , Kuhn substituted for now @-@ injured quarterback Latham and threw the one Vanderbilt touchdown pass to Jess Neely in the 14 – 7 loss . He also had a 60 @-@ yard kick return , and accumulated 94 yards in all . According to The Atlanta Constitution , " Doc Kuhn , subbing for the injured Latham , was the brilliant star of the day . Kuhn was practically unstoppable by the <unk> and , time after time , threatened to lead the team to victory . " In a 7 – 7 tie game against Virginia the following week , starting quarterback Kuhn was cited as an offensive standout . 
 = = = = 1921 = = = = 
 The Commodores tied for the 1921 Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) football championship with an overall record of 7 – 0 – 1 ; Kuhn and Frank Godchaux took turns starting at quarterback . The season opened with a 34 – 0 victory against the Middle Tennessee State Normal School of Murfreesboro . The Commodore , Vanderbilt 's yearbook , described the lopsided win : " Practically the only thing of note was the aerial efficiency — Kuhn to Ryan and Kuhn to McCullough " . 
 The team defeated the Longhorns 20 – 0 at the Texas State Fair in Dallas , although Texas was undefeated in the Southwest Conference the previous year and Vanderbilt was expected to lose by two touchdowns . The 1921 Texas team was considered possibly the best in Longhorns history , and Vanderbilt football seemed to be declining when Georgia Tech defeated it 44 – 0 the year before . Dan McGugin invoked the late former Vanderbilt quarterback Irby Curry , who was killed in the war , before the game . According to Edwin Pope 's book , Football 's Greatest Coaches , " The Texas game , sparked by McGugin 's unforgettable oratory , was the big one ; and Vandy got out of the year without a loss " . In the last scoring drive , Kuhn completed a pass to the end Tot McCullough at the 8 @-@ yard ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) line to put the ball in scoring position for Godchaux after an offside penalty . 
 The next week Vanderbilt played the Tennessee Volunteers on a wet Old Dudley Field . Team captain Pink Wade did not play because of low back pain , and Kuhn substituted as captain . Kuhn rushed for two touchdowns in a 14 – 0 victory . The Tennessee coaches " never saw , in all the spying trips , such interference as the Commodores made yesterday for Doc Kuhn , " remarked Blinkey Horn . In the first quarter , Kuhn 's end run of 19 yards ( 17 m ) made the score 7 – 0 ; in the second , he had a 30 yards ( 27 m ) touchdown run with Lynn Bomar as lead blocker . As Horn recalled , Kuhn " made possible the touchdown by miraculous sidestepping , " evading two tacklers — " miraculous because of the treacherous footing . " 
 In the 14 – 0 victory over Alabama , Kuhn did not start due to injuries . Entering the game in the fourth quarter , with the Commodores leading 7 – 0 , Kuhn completed a 25 @-@ yard ( 23 m ) pass to McCullough after Jess Neely 's 21 @-@ yard ( 19 m ) run . 
 = = = = 1922 = = = = 
 Kuhn was the starting quarterback for a second consecutive undefeated season in 1922 , when Vanderbilt had an 8 – 0 – 1 record . He started all but one game at quarterback , including a scoreless tie with Michigan in the inaugural game at Dudley Field . Vanderbilt held the tie with a goal @-@ line stand , and the result was called " a great surprise to the sporting world " ; Commodore fans celebrated by throwing seat cushions onto the field . 
 After the next game , a 20 – 10 Commodore victory against Texas at the Texas State Fair , Kuhn 's running game and leadership were praised . In a 14 – 6 win against Tennessee , Kuhn caught a 31 @-@ yard ( 28 m ) pass from Jess Neely for a touchdown . He returned a kick for 44 yards ( 40 m ) against Kentucky , tackled by the last man before the end zone , but the half ended before the Commodores could score . The Athens Banner described the team 's arrival for a game with Georgia : " The Commodores arrived here at one o 'clock Friday afternoon , and were whisked directly to the Georgian Hotel . Curious hundreds of Bulldog supporters shuddered at the procession of Vandy giants as they strolled down the sidewalks , led by Huge Tot McCullough , with spry Froggy Miers and clever Doc Kuhn bringing up the rear . " Kuhn dropped back , throwing Lynn Bomar a 40 @-@ plus @-@ yard pass for Vanderbilt 's second touchdown in its 12 – 0 victory over Georgia at Sanford Field . 
 He finished the season against Sewanee on Thanksgiving Day . In the first quarter , a trick play caught Sewanee off guard . On the previous play , Kuhn ran six yards out of bounds . Then , on a fake run , he threw a pass to Bomar , who was alone behind the defense and ran the rest of the way for a touchdown . Kuhn featured in a second @-@ quarter scoring drive , completing a 10 @-@ yard pass to Scotty Neill inside the five @-@ yard line and faking his way through the line for a touchdown . The Commodores won , 26 – 0 ; Kuhn was selected as an All @-@ American by Billy Evans and received an honorable mention on Walter Camp 's team . Kuhn and Centre 's Flash Covington were the two quarterbacks from Evans ' All @-@ Southern team to receive Camp 's mention . At the December 5 , 1922 Vanderbilt football banquet , he was elected Commodore captain for the following season . 
 = = = = 1923 = = = = 
 In late May 1923 , Kuhn received the Porter Cup as Vanderbilt 's best all @-@ around athlete . According to the Atlanta Constitution , " Doc Kuhn , in winning the Porter Cup , has taken the last leaf in the laurel . Offered each year by the Porter Clothing company , the trophy has risen in distinction from a mere silver emblem to a symbol more highly prized than which there is none to offer to a Vanderbilt athlete " . Kuhn was also captain of the basketball team , president of the student council , president of Phi Kappa Psi and Hellenic president . The Atlanta Journal said , " Doc Kuhn is captain and president of everything at Vanderbilt but the co @-@ eds " . The only two football games he lost at Vanderbilt were in 1923 , to undefeated teams : national champion Michigan and the Texas Longhorns . The Commodores were Southern Conference ( SoCon ) co @-@ champion in 1923 , with two All @-@ Southern ends – Lynn Bomar and Hek Wakefield , and All @-@ Southern halfback Gil Reese . 
 Kuhn returned a kickoff 80 yards ( 73 m ) in the season 's first game , against the Howard Bulldogs . A rematch with Michigan at Ferry Field was a 3 – 0 loss , with consensus All @-@ American center Jack Blott kicking the winning field goal for the Wolverines . Although Kuhn and Reese were said to raise fans to their feet with their speed , they were hampered by Michigan 's defense . According to a diagram of the game 's plays , the only completed Vanderbilt pass was from Bomar to Kuhn . 
 After a lackluster 2 – 2 – 1 season start , Vanderbilt beat Tennessee and Georgia by a combined 86 – 14 score with Kuhn scoring the first of the seven touchdowns against Tennessee . He completed a 45 @-@ yard ( 41 m ) pass to Wakefield against Georgia , getting Vanderbilt to the four @-@ yard line . The longest of Gil Reese 's four touchdowns against Georgia was an 81 @-@ yard ( 74 m ) run " behind great interference furnished by the entire Vandy team , and especially Bomar and Kuhn . " According to former Vanderbilt assistant and Alabama head coach Wallace Wade , who was scouting Georgia at the game , the Commodores that day were " the smartest I ever saw " . The season 's final game , against Sewanee in the rain , was a 7 – 0 Vanderbilt win on a touchdown pass from Kuhn to Reese . 
 The Florida Gators defeated the Alabama Crimson Tide 16 – 6 that day , ensuring a share of the Southern title for Vanderbilt . A postseason charity game against former and contemporary Princeton Tigers all @-@ stars ended in a 7 – 7 tie , with the Vanderbilt touchdown scored on an 18 @-@ yard ( 16 m ) pass from Kuhn to Bomar . Vanderbilt and Washington and Lee finished the season as SoCon co @-@ champion . A sportswriters ' poll gave the Commodores the Champ Pickens Trophy as the best team in the South , and it was presented to Kuhn at the annual football banquet on December 4 . 
 = = = Basketball = = = 
 Kuhn lettered at guard for Vanderbilt 's basketball team in 1922 and 1923 . The 1921 – 22 team had an 8 – 8 record . In the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) tournament , the Commodores defeated the Citadel Bulldogs 37 – 22 before losing to the Georgia Bulldogs 27 – 26 . Kuhn scored 10 points against the Citadel and four against Georgia . 
 The 1922 – 23 team , captained by Kuhn , went 16 – 8 , defeating the LSU Tigers before losing to the Virginia Tech Hokies in the SIAA tournament . According to Ed Danforth , " Either Vanderbilt was in rare form or <unk> has a good fighting team with no shooting ability . Fans were treated to the most one @-@ sided contest of opening day when these two clubs met , the Commodores scoring 13 points before the Louisianans had counted once , winning 36 to 10 . " Kuhn scored two points . Sportswriter Morgan Blake called Kuhn " the best basketball player on the Vandy team . " 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 Kuhn was a shortstop for the Vanderbilt Commodores baseball team , including a claim to the 1921 SIAA championship . The 1921 team had a 20 – 5 record ( 14 – 4 SIAA ) . According to Vanderbilt 's yearbook , The Commodore , in a 1921 game against Southwestern Presbyterian University the team scored a world @-@ record 13 runs in one inning with two outs . The Tennessean said : 
 [ Jess ] Neely singled , as did Kuhn ; Neil fanned , but Thomas got his third straight hit and both tallied . Big Tot was hit by a pitched ball and Smith was safe on a fielder 's choice with one out . <unk> flied out to right . Tyner slammed one to center which Jetty juggled and everybody advanced a pair of sacks . Ryan was safe on another error and two runs came over . Neely beat out his second hit of the inning and Kuhn walked . Neil walked . Thomas was safe on an error and Big Tot McCullough picked one over the right field fence , clearing the sacks – but oh , what 's the use ? Why continue ? 
 Kuhn and Dot <unk> of Auburn University were considered the South 's best shortstops . According to a 1922 newspaper report : 
 Doc Kuhn is possibly the greatest ball player on the squad , due to his miraculous fielding around short this season . Starting with the opening college games he went for six straight games without an error , finally putting Tot McCullough off the bag with a wide heave that broke the run . The Michigan and Ohio coaches were loud in their praises for Kuhn as one of the greatest fielding shortstops they had seen in some time . His hitting this season has been hard and timely , including a homer , four triples , and three doubles . He hits in streaks , however , and this alone will keep the phenomenal Vandy star out of a major berth in the near future . Kuhn , Embry and McCullough stand out head and shoulders above anybody in their respective lines that has visited here in recent years . 
 Kuhn was the only Vanderbilt baseball player named All @-@ Southern by either Cliff Wheatley or Morgan Blake in 1922 . Wheatley 's choice read , " Vanderbilt 's sole representative is " Doc " Kuhn , who came in several lengths ahead of the other shortstops . Kuhn is a wonderful batter and fields well enough in comparison with other Dixie infielders " . For Blake , " the best shortstop in the S. I. A. A. was Doc Kuhn of Vanderbilt , a great all @-@ around athlete ... He looks like a big leaguer in action . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 After graduating from Vanderbilt in 1923 with a Bachelor of Science degree in commerce , Kuhn worked for the Cheek @-@ Neal Coffee Company in Chicago . He married Nancy Lee Pierce at <unk> in Nashville , the home of Mr. and Mrs. R. J. Lyles , on October 27 , 1924 . By 1926 he and his wife moved to Tampa , Florida , where Kuhn was an investment broker and spent the rest of his life as one . He was a member of Sacred Heart Catholic Church , Ye Mystic <unk> of Gasparilla and the University Club . Kuhn was a charter member of the <unk> 's Club , the Sword and Shield Club and the Tampa Quarterback Club , and was once president of the State and Tampa Exchange Club and the Tampa Junior Chamber of Commerce . He also aided the start of the athletics program at the University of Tampa . 
 Kuhn led an initiative to plant <unk> trees in downtown Tampa , for which he was named Man of the Year a year before his death . A tree was planted on Bayshore Boulevard in his honor . He died at his home in Tampa on October 8 , 1968 . 
 = The Woman 's Bible = 
 The Woman 's Bible is a two @-@ part non @-@ fiction book , written by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and a committee of 26 women , published in 1895 and 1898 to challenge the traditional position of religious orthodoxy that woman should be subservient to man . By producing the book , Stanton wished to promote a radical liberating theology , one that stressed self @-@ development . The book attracted a great deal of controversy and antagonism at its introduction . 
 Many women 's rights activists who worked with Stanton were opposed to the publication of The Woman 's Bible ; they felt it would harm the drive for women 's suffrage . Although it was never accepted by Bible scholars as a major work , it became a popular best @-@ seller , much to the dismay of suffragists who worked alongside Stanton within the National American Woman Suffrage Association ( NAWSA ) . Susan B. Anthony tried to calm the younger suffragists , but they issued a formal denunciation of the book , and worked to distance the suffrage movement from Stanton 's broader scope which included attacks on traditional religion . Because of the widespread negative reaction , including suffragists who had been close to her , publication of the book effectively ended Stanton 's influence in the suffrage movement . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 19th century advocates of women 's rights began to accumulate rebuttals to arguments used against them founded on traditional interpretations of Bible scriptures . Lucretia Mott countered those who would put her in her place by quoting other Bible passages , or by challenging the original interpretation of the scripture . In 1849 , Mott wrote Discourse on Woman which discussed Adam and Eve , the activities of various women who appear in the Bible , and argued that the Bible supported woman 's right to speak aloud her spiritual beliefs . Independently from Mott , Lucy Stone determined for herself that the male @-@ dominant interpretations of the Bible must be faulty — she worked to learn Greek and Hebrew and thereby gain insight into the earlier Bible translations which she believed would contain wording more favorable to women 's equality . In New York , aided by Mott , Elizabeth Cady Stanton helped draft the Declaration of Sentiments in 1848 and included two Resolutions which protested against man 's usurpation of rights relating to her position in church and to her role under God . By the 1850s , Mott had become expert at disarming men who used Scripture against her . At the National Women 's Rights Convention in 1852 , and again in 1854 , she stood up to debate men who came prepared with Scripture in hand . Reverend Henry Grew told the 1854 convention audience that the Bible proved men were naturally superior to women . He was countered point @-@ by @-@ point by Hannah Tracy Cutler , then in broad societal and political terms by Mott who began by saying : " It is not Christianity , but priestcraft that has subjected woman as we find her . The Church and State have been united , and it is well for us to see it so . " 
 = = Revising Committee = = 
 In 1881 , 1885 and 1894 , the Church of England published a Revised Version of the Bible , the first new English version in over two centuries . Stanton was dissatisfied with the Revised Version 's failure to include recent scholarship from Bible expert Julia Smith . She wrote : 
 Whatever the Bible may be made to do in Hebrew or Greek , in plain English it does not exalt and dignify woman . My standpoint for criticism is the revised edition of 1888 . I will so far honor the revising committee of wise men who have given us the best exegesis they can according to their ability , although Disraeli said the last one before he died , contained 150 @,@ 000 blunders in the Hebrew , and 7 @,@ 000 in the Greek . 
 Stanton assembled a " Revising Committee " to draft commentary on the new Bible version . Many of those she approached in person and by letter refused to take part , especially scholars who would be risking their professional reputations . Some 26 people agreed to help . Sharing Stanton 's determination , the committee wished to correct biblical interpretation which they viewed as being biased against women , and to bring attention to the small fraction of the Bible which discussed women . They intended to demonstrate that it was not divine will that humiliated women , but human desire for domination . The committee was made up of women who were not Bible scholars , but who were interested in biblical interpretation and were active in women 's rights . Among the notable members of the international committee were Augusta Jane Chapin , Lillie Devereux Blake , Matilda Joslyn Gage , Olympia Brown , Alexandra <unk> , Ursula Mellor Bright , Phebe Ann Coffin <unk> , Clara Bewick Colby , and Irma von Troll @-@ <unk> . 
 In 1890 at the formation of the National American Woman Suffrage Association ( NAWSA ) , Stanton was elected president . She left such duties to Susan B. Anthony and instead traveled to Europe for two years . While there she met with women who shared her views , and she gathered critical observations about the place of woman in the Bible . In Greenbank , Bristol , Stanton met with English suffragist Helen Bright Clark , and spoke to a group about the Bible position of woman . Clark questioned whether Stanton 's liberal views had shocked some in attendance , and Stanton replied : " Well , if we who do see the absurdities of the old superstitions never unveil them to others , how is the world to make any progress in the theologies ? I am in the sunset of life , and I feel it to be my special mission to tell people what they are not prepared to hear ... " 
 In 1893 , Matilda Joslyn Gage took time out from her participation in the Revising Committee to write Woman , Church and State , a book which challenged traditional Judeo @-@ Christian teaching that women were the source of sin , and that sex was sinful . Gage wrote that the double standard for morality hurt both sexes . Gage differed from most of the women on the Revising Committee in that she did not feel that the Bible , once interpreted in a more true , original form , would support women 's rights . Gage determined that the Church had acted against women 's interests in important ways : from Roman Catholic canon law , to Scripture , to its advocacy of celibacy and more . Especially troubling to Gage was the story of Adam and Eve . 
 On August 1 , 1895 , the first part of The Woman 's Bible was published , covering the Pentateuch ( the first five books of the Bible ) : Genesis , Exodus , Leviticus , Numbers , and Deuteronomy . The text went through seven printings in six months ; it was a best @-@ seller . In January 1898 , the second part was published , covering the rest of the Old Testament as well as all of the New Testament . It included a Preface written by Stanton in which she acknowledged that " Both friend and foe object to the title . " Nevertheless , she praised the Revising Committee for showing " a more worshipful reverence for the great Spirit of All Good than does the Church . " Stanton wrote : " We have made a <unk> [ sic ] of the Bible long enough . The time has come to read it as we do all other books , accepting the good and rejecting the evil it teaches . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 At its introduction , The Woman 's Bible was widely criticized in editorials and from the pulpit . Stanton wrote that " the clergy denounced it as the work of Satan ... " Some were put off just by its prejudicial , sacrilegious title , especially those who did not take the time to read the book . Others countered the book 's more extreme conclusions one by one in public fora such as letters to the editor . One female reader of The New York Times wrote to decry The Woman 's Bible for its radical statements that the Trinity was composed of " a Heavenly Mother , Father , and Son " , and that prayers should be addressed to an " ideal Heavenly Mother " . Mary Seymour Howell , a member of the Revising Committee , wrote to The New York Times in defense of the book , saying that its title could be better understood as " The Woman 's Commentary on the Women of the Bible " . Stanton countered attacks by women readers , writing " the only difference between us is , we say that these degrading ideas of woman emanated from the brain of man , while the church says that they came from God . " 
 Susan B. Anthony , Stanton 's best and most faithful collaborator , concluded after years of working for women 's rights that the concentration on one issue — votes for women — was the key to bringing success to the movement . The women 's organizations had too varied a membership to agree on anything more complex . Stanton insisted , however , that the women 's rights conventions were too narrowly focused ; she brought forward a variety of challenging concepts in the form of essays for Anthony to read to the audiences . When Stanton made known her interest in completing The Woman 's Bible , Anthony was unhappy at the futility of the effort , a harmful digression from the focused path which led to woman suffrage . Anthony wrote to Clara Bewick Colby to say of Stanton " of all her great speeches , I am always proud — but of her Bible commentaries , I am not proud — either of their spirit or letter ... But I shall love and honor her to the end — whether her Bible please me or not . So I hope she will do for me . " 
 At the NAWSA convention January 23 – 28 , 1896 , Corresponding Secretary Rachel Foster Avery led the battle to distance the organization from The Woman 's Bible . After Susan B. Anthony opened the convention on January 23 , Avery surprised Anthony by stating to the more than 100 members of the audience : 
 During the latter part of the year the work has been in several directions much hindered by the general misconception of the relation of the so @-@ called " Woman 's Bible " to our association . As an organization we have been held responsible for the action of an individual ... in issuing a volume with a pretentious title , covering a jumble of comment ... without either scholarship or literary value , set forth in a spirit which is neither reverent nor inquiring . 
 Avery called for a resolution : " That this Association is non @-@ sectarian , being composed of persons of all shades of religious opinion , and that it has no connection with the so @-@ called ' Woman 's Bible ' , or any theological publication . " The motion was tabled until later , and motions were made to strike Avery 's comments from the official record . A complete account of Avery 's remarks were reported the next day in The New York Times . 
 The opinion of NAWSA delegate Laura Clay , expressed in her Southern Committee report on January 27 that " the South is ready for woman suffrage , but it must be woman suffrage and nothing else , " was typical of responses to The Woman 's Bible conflict . Most suffragists wanted only to work on the right to vote , " without attaching it to dress reform , or bicycling , or anything else ... " 
 On the afternoon of January 28 , a list of Resolutions was put to a vote . The first seven were passed without comment . The eighth was Avery 's proposed dissociation with The Woman 's Bible , and its presence caused an active debate . Anna Howard Shaw , Alice Stone Blackwell , Henry Browne Blackwell , Carrie Chapman Catt and others spoke in favor , while Colby , Lillie Devereux Blake , and more spoke against it . Anthony left her chair to join the debate against the resolution , and spoke at length , saying " Lucretia Mott at first thought Mrs. Stanton had injured the cause of woman 's rights by insisting on the demand for woman suffrage , but she had sense enough not to pass a resolution about it ... " A majority of 53 to 41 delegates approved the resolution , an action which was seen as a censure of Stanton , and one which was never repealed . Avery 's opening report of January 23 was adopted with the part about The Woman 's Bible expunged . 
 Stanton did not attend the 1896 convention ; she was 80 years old , obese , and bedridden . She acknowledged the controversy stirred by the publication of the first part , but continued writing the second part of the book , and she worked on her autobiography Eighty Years & More : Reminiscences 1815 – 1897 . She wrote to her longtime friend Reverend Antoinette Brown Blackwell in April , 1896 to observe : " Our politicians are calm and complacent under our fire but the clergy jump round the moment you aim a pop gun at them ' like parched peas on a hot skillet ' " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stanton wished for a greater degree of scholarship in The Woman 's Bible , but was unable to convince Bible scholars of her day to take part in what was expected to be a controversial project . Scholars continued to avoid addressing the subject of sexism in the Bible until 1964 when Margaret Brackenbury Crook published Women and Religion , a study of the status of women in Judaism and Christianity . In her 1973 book Beyond God the Father , Mary Daly discussed The Woman 's Bible , and subsequent works by Letty Russell and Phyllis <unk> furthered the connection between feminism and the Bible . Today , biblical scholarship by women has come into maturity , with women posing new questions about the Bible , and challenging the very basis of biblical studies . 
 Stanton herself was marginalized in the women 's suffrage movement after publication of The Woman 's Bible . From that time forward , Susan B. Anthony took the place of honor among the majority of suffragettes . Stanton was never again invited to sit in a place of honor on stage at the NAWSA convention . 
 = Battle of Bita Paka = 
 The Battle of Bita Paka ( 11 September 1914 ) was fought south of Kabakaul , on the island of New Britain , and was a part of the invasion and subsequent occupation of German New Guinea by the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) shortly after the outbreak of the First World War . Similar to New Zealand 's operation against German Samoa in August , the main target of the operation was a strategically important wireless station — one of several used by the German East Asiatic Squadron — which the Australians believed to be located in the area . The powerful German naval fleet threatened British interests and its elimination was an early priority of the British and Australian governments during the war . 
 After an unopposed landing , a mixed force of German reservists and half @-@ trained Melanesian police mounted a stout resistance and forced the Australians to fight their way to the objective . After a day of fighting during which both sides suffered casualties , Australian forces captured the wireless station at Bita Paka . The battle was Australia 's first major military engagement of the war and the only significant action of the campaign ; in its aftermath the remaining German forces on New Britain fled inland to Toma . Following a brief siege there the German garrison capitulated , ending resistance to the Australian occupation of the island . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Terrain = = = 
 German New Guinea consisted of north @-@ eastern New Guinea and several nearby island groups that are now part of Papua New Guinea . First established in 1884 , the main part of the colony was Kaiser @-@ Wilhelmsland , in north @-@ eastern New Guinea . The islands to the east were known as the Bismarck Archipelago and consisted of Neu @-@ Pommern ( now New Britain ) and Neu @-@ Mecklenburg ( now New Ireland ) . With the exception of German Samoa , all German islands in the Pacific were administratively part of German New Guinea : the German Solomon Islands ( Buka , Bougainville and several smaller islands ) , the Carolines , Palau , the Marianas ( except for Guam ) , the Marshall Islands and Nauru . Although a relatively minor colony , it covered an extensive land area , totalling around 249 @,@ 500 square kilometres ( 96 @,@ 300 sq mi ) . 
 While the western half of New Guinea had been administered by the Netherlands since 1828 , the eastern half was not annexed by any European power until the 1880s . In 1883 , fearful of growing foreign influence — particularly the influence of Germany — the British colony of Queensland annexed the south @-@ eastern part of New Guinea , against the wishes of the British government . This initiated German interest in the remaining third of the island and on 3 November 1884 , the German flag was raised over Kaiser @-@ Wilhelmsland , the Bismarck Archipelago ( formerly New Britain ) and the German Solomon Islands . On 17 May 1885 , the German Emperor granted an Imperial charter to the newly founded Neuguinea @-@ Kompanie ( New Guinea Company ) for this annexation , which was further extended to the Solomon Islands on 13 November 1886 . 
 On 1 April 1899 , the German government took formal control , establishing a protectorate . A treaty with Spain , signed on 30 July , ensured German control over several other island groups in the Pacific , and these were added to the protectorate of German New Guinea . The economic life of German New Guinea 's small population of European and Asian settlers , as well as that of its Melanesian population , relied heavily on the export of copra and the import of goods and services . It remained a modest outpost , and by August 1914 only 1 @,@ 273 Europeans lived in the colony , while there was also a small but significant number of Japanese , Chinese and Malays . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Planning and preliminary operations = = = 
 Following Britain 's declaration of war on Imperial Germany on 4 August 1914 at the outbreak of the First World War , Australia and the other members of the British Empire were automatically involved , with Prime Minister Joseph Cook stating on 5 August that " ... when the Empire is at war , so also is Australia . " Within days , Brigadier General William Bridges and his staff officer , Major Cyril Brudenell White , had completed plans for the creation of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . White proposed an expeditionary force of 18 @,@ 000 men , including 12 @,@ 000 Australians and 6 @,@ 000 New Zealanders . Cook subsequently approved the proposal , although he increased the offer to 20 @,@ 000 men to serve in any destination desired by the British government . On 6 August 1914 , London cabled its acceptance of the force and asked that it be sent as soon as possible . Recruiting offices opened on 10 August and by the end of 1914 , 52 @,@ 561 volunteers had been accepted , despite strict physical fitness guidelines . 
 Meanwhile , after an additional British request for assistance on 6 August 1914 , the Australian government hurriedly prepared another expeditionary force to destroy the German wireless stations at Yap in the Caroline Islands , Nauru , and Rabaul in New Britain . As with the New Zealand military operation against German Samoa , which was completed in late August , the targets were strategically important wireless stations used by the German East Asiatic Squadron , under the command of Count Maximilian von Spee . The existence of the powerful German fleet — including the modern cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and SMS Gneisenau — in the Pacific at the outbreak of the war worried the British Admiralty and the Australian government , and the elimination of its radio network was a key priority . Although the location of the German fleet was unknown , it was suspected they may have been hiding in the excellent natural harbour at Rabaul . 
 While the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) was being raised for this task , as a prelude to an amphibious landing on the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain , ships of the Australian Squadron conducted a reconnaissance of the area , subsequently entering Blanche Bay on 12 August , while several destroyers also entered Simpson Harbour . Landing parties went ashore to demolish the telephones in the post offices in Rabaul and at the German gubernatorial capital of Herbertshöhe ( present @-@ day <unk> ) , located 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south @-@ east . Enquiries were also made about the location of the radio station , although no information was forthcoming . After threatening to bombard the nearby settlements if the radio station continued to transmit , the Australian warships withdrew . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The AN & MEF comprised one battalion of infantry of 1 @,@ 000 men hurriedly enlisted in Sydney , plus 500 naval reservists and ex @-@ sailors who would serve as infantry . The 1st Battalion , AN & MEF was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Russell Watson , while the naval reservists were formed into six companies under Commander Joseph Beresford . Also included were two machine gun sections , a signals section and a medical detachment . Another battalion of militia from the Queensland @-@ based Kennedy Regiment — which had been dispatched to garrison Thursday Island — also contributed 500 volunteers . Recruitment began on 11 August , with the very few of the infantry having had previous military experience . Under the overall command of Colonel William Holmes , the force departed Sydney on 19 August aboard HMAS Berrima and halted at Palm Island off Townsville until a New Zealand force , escorted by the battlecruiser HMAS Australia , cruiser HMAS Melbourne and the French cruiser Montcalm , occupied Samoa on 30 August . The AN & MEF then moved to Port Moresby , where it met the Queensland contingent already aboard the transport Kanowna . The force sailed for German New Guinea on 7 September , although Kanowna was left behind when her stokers refused to work . The militia were also left in Port Moresby after Holmes decided they were not sufficiently trained or equipped to be committed to the anticipated fighting . 
 At the outbreak of war , German New Guinea was only lightly defended ; even after all available reservists had reported for duty and the Melanesian police had been armed , the total strength was only 61 German officers and non @-@ commissioned officers , and about 240 Melanesian police . To compound the defenders ' problems , most of the Germans were reservists with either limited experience or who had served in the military many years earlier . The Bita Paka radio station itself was occupied by eight Germans and 60 Melanesians , under the command of Hauptmann ( Captain ) Hans Wuchert . Wuchert 's force was assigned to defend against any hostile landing at a point near the coast , and was authorised to withdraw halfway between Toma and Bita Paka to <unk> if necessary , but only after demolishing the radio station . A company of 10 Germans and 140 Melanesians was also stationed at Herbertshöhe , commanded by Leutnant ( Lieutenant ) Mayer , while a squad of Melanesians at Toma under Leutnant Robert von Blumenthal ( " Lord Bob " ) was charged with digging in and improving defences . Section outposts were established at various locations and monitored the coast from St. George 's Channel to Rabaul . Despite the limits of manpower , such arrangements proved effective and the reconnaissance of the Australian Squadron on 12 August had been quickly detected , with German forces subsequently directed towards the coast to repel any invasion . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial landings = = = 
 Off the eastern tip of New Guinea , Berrima rendezvoused with Australia and the light cruiser HMAS Sydney plus a number of destroyers , while Melbourne was detached to destroy the wireless station on Nauru . Melbourne arrived there on 9 September only to find that the radio station had already been disabled by its staff , with Nauru surrendering without opposition . The task force reached Rabaul on 11 September , where they found the port to be free of German forces . Sydney and the destroyer HMAS Warrego landed small parties of naval reservists at the settlements of Kabakaul and at Herbertshöhe . These parties were reinforced firstly by sailors from Warrego and later by infantry from Berrima . Two parties were subsequently landed , one under Sub @-@ Lieutenant C. Webber and the other commanded by Lieutenant Commander J.F. Finlayson . In accordance with German plans , the Australians encountered no opposition at Herbertshöhe , with the German company stationed there having withdrawn to <unk> — between Herbertshöhe and Kabakaul — in the early morning . At 07 : 00 , the Australians raised the Union Jack over the settlement . 
 The Australians believed there were probably two radio stations , one under construction 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) directly inland from Herbertshöhe and the other directly inland from Kabakaul , at Bita Paka . Finlayson remained at Herbertshöhe to guard the stores being landed from Sydney , while Webber 's party began an advance from Herbertshöhe inland along the Toma road . Another party under Lieutenant Rowland Bowen would advance towards Bita Paka , 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) to the south . Bowen 's force , consisting of two officers and 25 naval reservists was subsequently landed at Kabakaul . Also included were about 15 other personnel to provide medical support and maintain communications . 
 = = = Advance inland = = = 
 The advance inland began along the fringe of the dense jungle @-@ edged road to the radio station , with the Australians attempting to avoid the road wherever possible . By 09 : 00 they had penetrated about 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) and with the scrub becoming denser , the scouts pushed away from the road to work their way around the obstacle . They suddenly surprised a group of about 20 Melanesian soldiers led by three German reservists , who were apparently laying an ambush on the road for the advancing Australians . They opened fire , wounding one German in the hand and capturing him , and scattering the Melanesians . By means of a ruse Wuchert and Mayer were also captured , depriving the defenders of two important commanders , while several significant maps also fell into Australian hands at this time . 
 Realising that his advance was going to be contested , Bowen requested reinforcements . Consequently , as an interim measure , 59 men from Warrego and Yarra were landed under Lieutenant G.A. Hill , until infantry could arrive from Berrima , which was still steaming towards Kabakaul from Karavia Bay . Meanwhile , Bowen pushed on and the Australians were again fired upon by the well concealed Germans and their Melanesian troops , as well as by snipers in the treetops . By 09 : 30 the situation had become grave , and the Australians suffered their first casualty of the war , with Able Seaman Billy Williams mortally wounded . Also among the casualties was the medical officer , Captain Brian <unk> , who died of his wounds in the afternoon after being evacuated to Berrima . 
 The reinforcements landed earlier from the destroyers reached Bowen by 10 : 00 however , and the situation was stabilised . The advance was subsequently resumed , but the Australians had not gone more than 500 yards ( 460 m ) when they encountered a strongly held German trench dug across the road . Working together , Hill and Bowen attempted to outflank the Germans , during which Bowen was shot and badly wounded by a sniper , leaving Hill in command . Berrima subsequently landed reinforcements , including a half @-@ battalion commanded by Lieutenant Commander Charles Elwell , as well as a machine @-@ gun section and medical detachment . Among the reinforcements was the battalion commander , Beresford , and the intelligence officer . 
 = = = Fighting for the wireless station = = = 
 Elwell advanced inland rapidly and was soon also engaged , losing one killed and two wounded in a brief skirmish . During the advance the Australians had also uncovered and defused a large pipe mine the Germans had buried under a narrow track and set to detonate using a command wire . These mines had been laid beneath the road with wires leading to an electric battery and a firing key at the bottom of a lookout tree . By 13 : 00 however , Hill 's position was reached and the Australians — now under Elwell 's overall command — launched another flanking attack on the main trench blocking the road . Despite suffering heavy casualties they pressed their attack , forcing the defenders to surrender after charging the trench with fixed bayonets . A German officer and 20 Melanesians were captured . Four Australians were killed , including Elwell who died leading the charge with his sword drawn , and another five were wounded . 
 Now under the command of Hill , and accompanied by two German prisoners acting as interpreters , the Australians proceeded down the road under a flag of truce and persuaded the garrisons of two more trenches to surrender , but not before another skirmish in which the Germans counter @-@ attacked , wounding three more Australians , one fatally . During the firefight one of the unarmed German interpreters was killed by the Australians , as were several of the Melanesians . The advance continued and another group of defenders was encountered and disarmed by nightfall . By 19 : 00 the Australians reached the radio station which was found abandoned ; the mast had been dismantled , although the instruments and machinery remained intact . The surviving defenders had abandoned the defences and withdrawn . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 During the fighting at Bita Paka , seven Australians were killed and five wounded , while casualties among the defenders included one German and about 30 Melanesians killed , and one German and 10 Melanesians wounded ; 19 Germans and 56 Melanesians were captured . Later it was alleged that the heavy losses among the Melanesian troops were the result of the Australians bayoneting a number that they had captured . While the casualties suffered by the Australians were light in the context of later operations , they were disproportionately heavy given the modest territorial and strategic gains and were further compounded by the disappearance of the submarine AE1 during a patrol off Rabaul on 14 September , with all 35 men aboard . After their defeat , the remaining German forces and the civil administration withdrew 19 miles ( 31 km ) inland to Toma , believing they would have time to regroup before the Australians arrived . 
 The German governor — Eduard Haber — continued to hold out for several days , hoping that the German East Asiatic Squadron would arrive to relieve them . Unknown to the Germans , however , an Australian advanced party consisting of a half @-@ battalion of 200 men and a 12 @-@ pounder naval field @-@ gun had followed them , moving along the Toma road . The Australians surrounded the town and proceeded to bombard it ; meanwhile HMAS Encounter arrived on station and fired several shells at a ridge nearby . This show of firepower scattered the Melanesian police and was sufficient to start negotiations , with Toma subsequently occupied . Haber visited Holmes in Herbertshöhe on 15 September , signing terms two days later . All military resistance subsequently ceased and the remaining 40 German soldiers and 110 Melanesians surrendered on 21 September , leaving no effective opposition to the Australian occupation of the territory . 
 = = = Capture of German New Guinea = = = 
 The German colony at Madang on Kaiser @-@ Wilhelmsland ( the New Guinea mainland ) was occupied on 24 September , although the German armed merchant raider SMS Cormoran — which was lurking nearby — escaped undetected . Over the next two months the remaining outposts were also occupied . Meanwhile , the German East Asiatic Squadron steamed across the Pacific before surprising and sinking a British force off Coronel on 1 November . After rounding Cape Horn into the Atlantic and attempting a raid on the Stanley naval station , the squadron was itself destroyed by a more powerful British force during the Battle of the Falkland Islands on 8 December 1914 . Later it was alleged that widespread looting and destruction of civilian property by Australian troops occurred during this period . Indeed , ill @-@ discipline among the Australian force appears to have been an issue — perhaps due to the haste with which the AN & MEF had been raised and the poor character of some of those that were enlisted . Claims in the Australian media of criminal behaviour caused considerable controversy at the time , and later led to a parliamentary enquiry . In the end a number of soldiers were court martialled and imprisoned for looting and theft , although more serious allegations , including rape , also arose . 
 Following the capture of the remaining German possessions in the region , the AN & MEF provided occupation forces for the duration of the war . Holmes subsequently established a military government which continued until 1921 , after which Australia received a mandate from the League of Nations to govern the territory . The Australian military administration continued the exploitative economic policies of the previous German colonial administration , and official policy was to continue the status quo , including the use of indentured Melanesian labour on plantations , the levy of the " native head tax " and official floggings , or corporal punishment . Equally , despite previously being protected by the German colonial administration in 1914 , the hunting of the native bird @-@ of @-@ paradise , crowned pigeon and white heron for the lucrative trade in their feathers and skin , was officially condoned and a custom tax levied on their export . Under the terms of the German surrender , Haber was allowed to return to Germany , while German civilians could remain as long as they swore an oath of neutrality . Those who refused were later transported to Australia , where they could freely travel back to Germany . 
 On 9 January 1915 , Holmes handed over command of the AN & MEF to Brigadier General Sir Samuel Pethebridge , the former Secretary of the Department of Defence . Holmes returned to Australia and re @-@ enlisted in the AIF , as did most of his men . They were replaced by the 3rd Battalion , AN & MEF which was known as the " Tropical Force " because it had been specially enlisted for service in the tropics . Pethebridge established the administrative structures that remained through the period of military occupation . Although required by international law to follow the German forms of government , the territory gradually acquired the appearance of a British colony . As a result of the peace settlement under the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 , Germany lost all of its colonial possessions , including German New Guinea . The colony became the Territory of New Guinea , a League of Nations Mandate Territory under Australian administration in 1921 . It remained as such until 1949 , when it was merged with the Australian territory of Papua to become the Territory of Papua and New Guinea , which eventually became modern Papua New Guinea . Although interrupted by Japanese occupation during the New Guinea campaign ( 1942 – 45 ) in the Second World War , Australian administration over the territory lasted until 1975 , when Papua New Guinea gained its independence . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 Ultimately the Australian operation on New Britain achieved its objectives , with the AN & MEF destroying the wireless station before seizing the colony , reducing a strategic German possession in the Pacific and thereby denying its use to support their naval forces in the region . Yet although successful , it had not been well @-@ managed , and the Australians had been effectively delayed by a few reserve officers and a half @-@ trained Melanesian police force . They finally prevailed because of their unexpected ability to fight in close terrain , while their outflanking of the German positions had unnerved their opponents . The Battle of Bita Paka was Australia 's first major military engagement of the war , yet it soon became little more than a sideshow in a conflict which grew to assume much greater proportions . Later , many men of the AN & MEF volunteered for the AIF and served in Egypt , Gallipoli , Sinai and Palestine and on the Western Front . A large number became casualties , including Holmes , who was killed in action in 1917 . 
 Apart from the very real human suffering of the Melanesian troops killed or wounded at Bita Paka , the reduction in German prestige due to the capture of German New Guinea , and the economic and property losses experienced by some German colonists during the occupation , the battle ultimately held little significance for Germany either . The fighting yielded few tactical lessons given the very different nature of the fighting there to that of the mass industrialised warfare which both the Germans and Australians experienced in Europe . Meanwhile , just as many Australians felt that " the real war was in Europe " , so would have most Germans as the campaign became subsumed by the global conflict of the First World War . It is largely forgotten today as a result . 
 = Clock Tower 3 = 
 Clock Tower 3 is a survival horror video game co @-@ developed by Capcom and Sunsoft for the PlayStation 2 . Released in 2002 , it is the fourth installment in the Clock Tower series , and the first and only video game directed by Japanese film director Kinji Fukasaku . The plot and characters have very little relation with the previous Clock Tower games . The story follows 14 @-@ year @-@ old Alyssa Hamilton who is part of a family lineage of female warriors who travel through time to defeat evil spirits . Alyssa travels from her time in 2003 London to the 1940s and 1960s in order to defeat these " Entities " and bring peace to troubled souls . 
 As opposed to the point @-@ and @-@ click gameplay used in the previous games , Clock Tower 3 is the first game in the series to incorporate direct control over the protagonist . Alyssa is given no weapon for the majority of the game , and must evade and hide from her pursuers . These enemies , known as " Subordinates " , are fought at the end of each level , during which Alyssa is armed with a longbow . The game received mixed reviews and was a commercial failure , selling considerably less than anticipated . The presentation , writing , and graphics were positively received , with many critics praising the cutscenes and Fukasaku 's direction . However , the gameplay was criticized for its repetitive mechanics , and the game itself was felt to be too short . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Clock Tower 3 is a survival horror game played from a fixed third @-@ person camera perspective in which players control 14 @-@ year @-@ old school girl Alyssa Hamilton . Clock Tower 3 is the first game in the series to incorporate direct control over the protagonist , as opposed to the point @-@ and @-@ click gameplay used in the previous games . To progress through the game , the player must find items to unlock new areas , solve puzzles , and flee and hide from enemies ( " Subordinates " ) . Eventually , each Subordinate must be defeated in battle . Throughout each level , the player also encounters the spirits of innocent people slain by the Subordinates . These spirits will attack Alyssa if she approaches them . In order to pacify them , an item of sentimental value must be found and returned to the spirit 's corpse . 
 Alyssa is given no weaponry during the majority of the game , other than a limited supply of holy water , which can be used to temporarily stun pursuing Subordinates . Within each level , the Subordinate can appear in any location after a set period of time , but also randomly or if Alyssa makes noise . They also appear in certain set locations . When one appears , it immediately begins to chase Alyssa , attempting to kill her . The player must either hide from or evade it . Evasion can only be accomplished in certain places , and each evasion point can only be used once . Using an evasion point does not kill the Subordinate , but instead renders them unconscious for a set time . The primary means of eluding one , however , is by hiding . There are multiple hiding points throughout each level , and each one can be used multiple times . However , hiding places are ineffective if the Subordinate sees Alyssa enter them . 
 Throughout most of the game , Alyssa has a " Panic Meter " visible on screen . If she is scared by a Subordinate , attacked by a spirit or simply frightened by her surroundings , the meter will begin to rise . If it fills , she enters " Panic mode " . In this state , the screen starts flashing and Alyssa becomes difficult to control and begins stumbling and falling over . She is also unable to use holy water and cannot enter hiding spots . After a few seconds , she will momentarily freeze , covering her ears . Panic mode only lasts for a certain amount of time , and its duration can be reduced by using " Lavender water " . However , if she is hit by a Subordinate while in Panic Mode , she will die instantly . 
 After the majority of each level has played out , Alyssa must confront the Subordinate who has been chasing her . At this point , her holy water bottle transforms into a longbow , allowing her to fight back . Each battle is confined to a single area , and both Alyssa and the Subordinate have onscreen life bars . During the fight , Alyssa must dodge attacks while firing arrows . In order to inflict any real damage , she must power @-@ up her attacks . However , while powering @-@ up , Alyssa cannot move or re @-@ adjust her aim . This leaves her vulnerable to attacks , and makes it possible for her enemy to move out of her line of sight . A fully powered @-@ up shot will tether the Subordinate to the ground . If it is transfixed with multiple powered @-@ up shots , Alyssa can perform a highly damaging " Super attack " , killing or severely wounding it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story of Clock Tower 3 is set in London in 2003 . Alyssa Hamilton is a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl who has been living at a boarding school for three years . Her mother , Nancy , sent her there after her grandfather , Dick , disappeared . The game begins with Alyssa receiving a letter from her mother telling her to go into hiding until after her fifteenth birthday . Alarmed , Alyssa decides to go against her mother 's wishes and return home . However , when she arrives at the boarding house in which they live , her mother is absent , and the only person there is a man called " The Dark Gentleman " . Determined to find her mother , Alyssa explores her mother 's room . Suddenly , Frédéric Chopin 's Fantaisie @-@ Impromptu begins to play with no apparent source , and Alyssa is transported back in time to the streets of London during World War II . 
 She enters a tailor shop where she witnesses the murder of a young girl by a man wielding a sledgehammer . Eventually , Alyssa is able to piece together what happened : May Norton was killed on Christmas Eve 1942 by Sledgehammer , a stonecutter who went on a killing spree before being caught and executed . Alyssa comes to realise that she must free May 's spirit , which is trapped on Earth , by giving her her father 's pocket watch . On her way to do so , she is confronted by Sledgehammer , whom she destroys . She then gives the watch to May 's spirit , reuniting her with her father . At that moment , Alyssa faints and wakes up back in the boarding house . She explores the house further with her friend , Dennis Owen , and learns more about her past : the girls in her family are known as " <unk> " , young women with supernatural powers . <unk> are the sworn enemies of " Entities " , beings which can infect innocent humans and drive them to acts of murder , at which point the human becomes a " Subordinate " . Rooder powers peak at the age of fifteen , and wane afterward , disappearing completely by the age of twenty . 
 Alyssa then travels to the 1960s , where she enters the house of Dorothy Rand , a blind elderly woman and her son , Albert , and sees them murdered by a man known as <unk> , who throws them into a vat of acid . Alyssa destroys <unk> , and returns a lost shawl to Dorothy 's spirit , freeing both herself and Albert . She then returns to the present , where The Dark Gentleman congratulates her on killing two Subordinates . He sends her to the top of a massive clock tower where he tells her that when her fifteenth birthday arrives they will be united for eternity . He also tells her that her mother is dead . When she refuses to believe him , he flings her from the tower . Regaining consciousness in a sewer system , she is forced to confront another Subordinate , Chopper . She defeats him , but fails to kill him and is sent to a graveyard . She then learns of the " Ritual of Engagement " ; if a human wishes to become an Entity , they must remove the heart of a Rooder to whom they are related on her fifteenth birthday and drink her blood . Eventually , Alyssa fights Chopper again and is able to destroy him . 
 Dennis arrives , and he and Alyssa find their way to an abandoned hospital where they encounter Scissorman and <unk> , who kidnap Dennis . Alyssa is then transported to a castle , where she sees Dick reciting a strange incantation . She learns Dick knew of the Ritual of Engagement , and had discovered that Lord Burroughs , the owner of the castle and from whom he is descended , also knew of the ritual . She then sees an incident from the past of Dick asking for Burroughs ' help to become an Entity , inviting Burroughs to enter his body and for them to complete the Ritual together . Burroughs ' spirit takes possession of Dick , turning into The Dark Gentleman . Meanwhile , Alyssa is able to rescue Dennis from the twins , killing them in the process . The Dark Gentleman then tells Alyssa if she wants to save Nancy 's soul , she must come to the top of the tower . There , The Dark Gentlemen turns into Lord Burroughs and begins the Ritual . However , Dennis distracts Burroughs , allowing Alyssa to fight back . Nancy 's spirit transfers what is left of her own Rooder power into Alyssa , giving her the strength to destroy Burroughs . After she defeats him , she reunites with her mother 's spirit . The tower then collapses . Alyssa awakens in a field , where she sees Dennis . She runs to him and hugs him as she says " Mum ... we did it . We did it , Mum . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Clock Tower 3 was officially announced on April 11 , 2001 , with Capcom revealing they had taken over the Clock Tower series from Human Entertainment , and would be co @-@ developing the new game with Sunsoft . They also revealed that acclaimed Japanese film director Kinji Fukasaku would be directing the cutscenes , Keita <unk> was in charge of character design , Noboru Sugimura was writing the scenario , and Kouji ' Cozy ' Kubo was composing the music . At the time of the announcement , the game was still in the casting phase ; over two hundred actresses had auditioned for the motion capture of Alyssa . The game was first shown at E3 in May 2002 , where a non @-@ playable demo was on show at the Capcom booth . In November , Capcom announced the game would be released in Japan on December 12 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Clock Tower 3 received " mixed or average reviews , " with an aggregate score of 69 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on 28 reviews . Commercially , the game was a failure . Capcom had projected sales of at least 450 @,@ 000 , but the game fell considerably short of that number . By the end of 2002 , it had sold 78 @,@ 961 units , making it the 151st highest selling game in Japan across all systems . In 2003 , it sold a further 43 @,@ 061 units , bringing its total to only 122 @,@ 022 units sold . 
 The game 's presentation was strongly praised , with many pointing out the excellent cinematic style brought together by a strong script and well @-@ directed cutscenes . GameSpy 's Alan <unk> felt the script was the game 's strongest point , and wrote that the " excellent cinema scenes " and " distinct visual style " also contributed to the high quality presentation . The graphics and atmosphere were also well received . IGN 's Jeremy Dunham noted that " Clock Tower 3 successfully captur [ es ] the dirty , musty look of England 's serial killer underworld ... [ it ] is straight out of a Mary Shelley novel . " The cutscene direction from Kinji Fukasaku was positively noted , with Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed calling the cutscenes " exceptionally well @-@ realised . " The camerawork and scariness of the game were both lauded and criticized . 
 While the presentation was received positively , the gameplay received criticism from multiple reviews . More specifically , the boss fights and repetitive hiding and chasing gameplay mechanics were cited as weak . GameSpot 's Brad Shoemaker argued the cinematic portions were underpinned by the gameplay , believing that players would more likely want to finish the game for its storyline than the fun they 'll have playing it . Game Revolution 's AA White stated " Clock Tower 3 is ultimately one of those games whose cinemas are more interesting than the actual gameplay and from a gamer 's standpoint , that 's never a good thing . " Critics also agreed that the game felt too short . 
 = German – Yugoslav Partisan negotiations = 
 The German – Yugoslav Partisan negotiations were held between German commanders in the Independent State of Croatia and the Supreme Headquarters of the Yugoslav Partisans in March 1943 during World War II . The negotiations – focused on obtaining a ceasefire and establishing a prisoner exchange – were conducted during the Axis Case White offensive . They were used by the Partisans to delay the Axis forces while the Partisans crossed the Neretva river , and to allow the Partisans to focus on attacking their Chetnik rivals led by Draža Mihailović . The negotiations were accompanied by an informal ceasefire that lasted about six weeks before being called off on orders from Adolf Hitler . The short @-@ term advantage gained by the Partisans through the negotiations was lost when the Axis Case Black offensive was launched in mid @-@ May 1943 . Prisoner exchanges , which had been occurring between the Germans and Partisans for some months prior , re @-@ commenced in late 1943 and continued until the end of the war . 
 Details of the negotiations were little known by historians until the 1970s , despite being mentioned by several authors from 1949 on . The key Partisan negotiator , Milovan Đilas , was first named in Walter Roberts ' Tito , Mihailović , and the Allies , 1941 – 1945 in 1973 . Roberts ' book was met with protests from the Yugoslav government of Josip Broz Tito . The objections centred on claims that Roberts was effectively equating the German – Partisan negotiations with the collaboration agreements concluded by various Chetnik leaders with the Italians and Germans during the war . Roberts denied this , but added that the book did not accept the mythology of the Partisans as a " liberation movement " or the Chetniks as " traitorous collaborators " . Subsequently , accounts of the negotiations were published by Yugoslav historians and the main Yugoslav protagonists . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1942 , during the Partisan Long March west through the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) , Josip Broz Tito 's Yugoslav Partisans captured a group of eight Germans from the civil and military engineering group Organisation Todt near Livno . The leader of the captured group was a mining engineer , Hans Ott , who was also an officer of the Abwehr , the Wehrmacht 's intelligence organisation . The captured group had been identifying new sources of metal and timber for the Germans , but Ott had also been tasked by the Abwehr with making contact with the Partisans . Following their capture , Ott told his captors that he had an important message to deliver to Partisan headquarters , and after he had been taken there he suggested to the Partisans that his group be exchanged for Partisans held by the Germans in jails in Zagreb . On that basis , Ott was sent to Zagreb on parole , where he met with the German Plenipotentiary General in Croatia , General der Infanterie ( Lieutenant General ) Edmund Glaise @-@ Horstenau . He advised Glaise @-@ Horstenau that Tito was willing to exchange the eight Germans for ten Partisans that were held by the Germans , Italians and NDH authorities . Glaise @-@ Horstenau contacted the commander of the Italian 2nd Army , Generale designato d ’ <unk> ( acting General ) Mario Roatta , who had most of the identified Partisan prisoners in his custody . On 14 August , the German ambassador to the NDH , SA @-@ Obergruppenführer ( Lieutenant General ) Siegfried Kasche sent a telegram to the Reich Foreign Ministry advising of the proposed exchange and asked the Ministry to intercede with the Italians . In his book Tito , Mihailović , and the Allies , 1941 – 1945 , published in 1973 , the former US diplomat Walter Roberts argued that the Abwehr considered some sort of modus vivendi with the Partisans might be possible , and were thinking of more than prisoner exchanges when they gave Ott the task of making contact with the Partisans . The number of Germans in Partisan custody had been increasing , and this made some sort of prisoner swap agreement more likely . These agreements were initially led by Marijan Stilinović on behalf of the Partisan Supreme Headquarters . On 5 September , a prisoner swap was completed in an area between <unk> and Livno , where 38 Partisans and family members were exchanged for one senior German officer who had been captured during the Battle of Livno in December 1942 . 
 Continuing negotiations between the Germans and Partisan headquarters resulted in a further prisoner exchange on 17 November 1942 . The second of these was negotiated by Stilinović and Vladimir Velebit , also a member of the Partisan Supreme Headquarters , and Ott was involved on the German side . On the day of the second prisoner exchange , the Partisans delivered a letter addressed to Glaise @-@ Horstenau which apparently explained that the Partisans were " an independent armed force with military discipline and not an agglomeration of bands " , and " proposed mutual application of the rules of international law , especially in regard to prisoners and wounded , a regular exchange of prisoners , and a sort of armistice between the two sides " . Glaise @-@ Horstenau , Kasche and others wanted to continue exchanging prisoners as a means of obtaining intelligence , and also wanted a modus vivendi with Partisans to allow the Germans to exploit the mineral resources of the NDH without disruption . In particular , they wanted to minimise disruption in the NDH south of the Sava river and on the Zagreb – Belgrade railway line . However , Adolf Hitler and Reich Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop were opposed to a modus vivendi , as they were afraid it would give the Partisans the status of a regular belligerent . As a result of Hitler 's opposition , this Partisan proposal was not answered . 
 = = March negotiations = = 
 From 20 January 1943 , the Partisans had been hard @-@ pressed by the Axis Case White offensive . Throughout that offensive , Partisan Supreme Headquarters engaged the Germans in negotiations to gain time to cross the Neretva river . In late February or early March 1943 , the Partisans captured a German officer and about 25 soldiers , who joined about 100 Croatian Home Guards , and 15 Italian officers and 600 soldiers already being held as prisoners of war by the Partisans . Due to their desperate situation at this stage of Case White , and their need to delay the Axis in order to cross the Neretva river before the Germans struck , they decided to use the recently captured German officer to initiate negotiations . The German historians Ladislaus <unk> and Martin <unk> concluded that at this critical period , Tito was also concerned that by the end of the war the attrition to his Partisan forces would be such that Mihailović 's Chetniks would be more powerful . They suggest that Tito may have been willing to agree to a truce with the Germans in order to destroy the Chetniks . 
 The negotiations commenced on 11 March 1943 in Gornji Vakuf . According to the historian Jozo Tomasevich , the three Partisans tasked with the negotiations show the importance that the Partisans placed on the outcome . They were : Koča Popović , Spanish Civil War veteran and commander of the 1st Proletarian Division ; Milovan Đilas , a member of the Partisan Supreme Headquarters and member of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( using the alias of Miloš Marković ) ; and Velebit ( using the alias of Dr. Vladimir Petrović ) . The German negotiators were led by the commander of the 717th Infantry Division Generalleutnant ( Major General ) Benignus Dippold , one of his staff officers and a Hitler Youth representative . In their written statement , the Partisans : 
 identified their prisoners and indicated who they wanted in exchange , emphasising that they wanted to complete the exchange as soon as possible ; 
 said that if the Germans accepted the Partisan proposal , especially in regard to the wounded and captured , the Partisans would reciprocate ; 
 stated that Partisan Supreme Headquarters believed that , in the circumstances , there was no reason for the Germans to attack the Partisans , and it would be in the interests of both if hostilities stopped and areas of responsibilities were agreed ; 
 stated that they considered the Chetniks their main enemies ; 
 proposed that an armistice should apply during the negotiations ; and 
 required a signature from their higher headquarters on any final agreement . 
 Popović returned to report to Tito , and the Wehrmacht Commander South @-@ East Generaloberst ( Senior General ) Alexander Löhr approved an informal ceasefire while the talks continued . On 17 March , Kasche reported on the negotiations to the Reich Foreign Ministry , requesting approval to continue discussions , and asking for instructions . The following is an extract from Kasche 's telegram : 
 Under circumstances possibility exists that Tito will demonstratively turn his back on Moscow and London who left him in the lurch . The wishes of the Partisans are : Fight against the Chetniks in the Sandžak , thereafter return to their villages and pacification in Croatian and Serbian areas ; return of camp @-@ followers to their villages after they are disarmed ; no executions of leading Partisans on our part ... It is my opinion that this possibility should be pursued since secession from the enemy of this fighting force highly regarded in world opinion would be very important . In fact , the Tito Partisans are , in their masses , not Communists and in general have not committed extraordinary excesses in their battles and in the treatment of prisoners and the population . I refer to previous written reports and also to my conversation with State Secretary von <unk> . Request instructions . In talks with <unk> [ Italian Minister in Zagreb ] and Lorković [ Croatian Foreign Minister ] I found that the above development would be treated positively . 
 According to Roberts , it is clear that the next phase of negotiations was intended to go beyond prisoner exchanges , as the prisoner of war negotiator Stilinović was not involved . Đilas and Velebit were passed through the German lines to Sarajevo and were then flown to Zagreb on 25 March in a military aircraft . These negotiations were with German representatives supervised by Ott , apparently on all the points discussed at Gornji Vakuf , and the Partisans made it clear to the Germans that their proposals did not amount to an offer of surrender . Velebit met personally with Glaise @-@ Horstenau , as the Austrian had known Velebit 's father , a Yugoslav general . After this first visit to Zagreb , Velebit visited Partisan commanders in Slavonia and eastern Bosnia passing on orders for the suspension of attacks on the Germans and their rail communications , and the release of prisoners . 
 Kasche had not received a reply to his telegram of 17 March , so he sent a further telegram to von Ribbentrop on 26 March . In it he advised that two Partisan representatives had arrived in Zagreb for negotiations , and named them using their aliases . He pointed out that the Partisan interest in an armistice had increased , and emphasised that he considered this a significant development . By this time , Đilas and Velebit had returned to Zagreb , where they reiterated that the Partisans wanted recognition as a regular belligerent , and emphasised the futility of continued fighting . They effectively asked to be left alone to fight the Chetniks . According to Pavlowitch , it is not clear which side posed the question of what the Partisans would do if the British were to land in Yugoslavia without Partisan authorisation , but Đilas and Velebit said they would fight them as well as the Germans . They stated that their propaganda had been slanted towards the Soviet Union because they did not want to communicate with London . Their determination to fight the British if they landed was because they believed that the British would try to thwart their objective of seizing power in Yugoslavia . They further stated that the Chetniks would not fight the British because such a landing was exactly what they were waiting for . 
 Von Ribbentrop responded on 29 March , prohibiting all further contact with the Partisans and inquiring about what evidence Kasche had gathered to support his optimistic conclusions . When told of the talks with the Partisans , Hitler apparently responded , " One does not negotiate with rebels — rebels must be shot " . On 31 March , Kasche responded with a further telegram , saying that there had been no direct contact with Tito , and contradicted his earlier telegram by stating that the contacts had been strictly about prisoner exchanges . Kasche stated that Tito had abided by his promises thus far , and : 
 I think the Partisan question is misjudged by us . Our fight therefore has been practically without success anywhere . It should be based more on political and less on military means . Complete victory over the Partisans is unattainable militarily or through police measures . Military measures can destroy clearly defined areas of revolt , security measures can discover communications and serve to finish off Partisans and their helpers . The extent of success depends on troops and time available . If both are scarce the possibility of political solutions should not be rejected out of hand . 
 Kasche further stated that it would be useful from a military perspective if the Partisans were allowed to fight the Chetniks without German interference , and counselled against trying to fight the Partisans and the Chetniks at the same time . On 30 March , Đilas had returned to Partisan headquarters with 12 more Partisans that had been held in the Ustaše @-@ run concentration camp of Jasenovac . Velebit remained in Zagreb to complete a further task : he successfully arranged the release of a detained Slovenian communist , Herta Haas , who was Tito 's wife and the mother of his two @-@ year @-@ old son , Aleksandar . 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 Mihailović was the first to receive reports of contact between the Germans and Partisans , and passed them on to his British Special Operations Executive liaison officer , Colonel Bill Bailey . When Bailey 's report arrived in London on 22 March , it was not taken seriously . Italian military intelligence also became aware of the talks . Tito himself mentioned the prisoner exchanges to the Comintern in Moscow , but when they realised more was being discussed and demanded an explanation , Tito was taken aback . He responded that he was not getting any external support , and needed to look after the interests of captured Partisans and refugees . 
 German – Partisan prisoner exchanges re @-@ commenced in late 1943 , but became the responsibility of the Partisan Chief Headquarters for Croatia rather than Partisan Supreme Headquarters . Initially these were organised by Stilinović , then by Dr. Josip <unk> , before Boris <unk> took over the role . Between March 1944 and May 1945 , <unk> attended about 40 meetings with German representatives , 25 of which were in Zagreb under agreements for safe conduct . On the German side , Ott continued to play a leading role . These negotiations resulted in the exchange of between 600 to 800 Partisans in total . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The negotiations were first mentioned publicly in 1949 when Stephen Clissold published his Whirlwind : An Account of Marshal Tito 's Rise to Power . This was closely followed by Wilhelm Höttl 's Die Geheime Front , Organisation , <unk> und <unk> des deutschen <unk> ( The Secret Front , the Organisation , People and Activities of the German Secret Service ) in 1950 . There was another mention in a book published in German in 1956 , General Rudolf <unk> 's Die <unk> . Der <unk> eines <unk> ( The Croats : The Fateful Path of the South Slav People ) . Ilija <unk> obtained evidence from German Foreign Ministry sources , which he included in his 1965 book Pogledi na <unk> , <unk> i <unk> <unk> narodna ( Views on the Past , Present and Future of the Croatian Nation ) , published in London . In 1967 , the Yugoslav historian <unk> <unk> was officially commissioned to produce a full report on the talks . In 1969 , Ivan <unk> published his Mihailović <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Mihailović according to German documents ) , which used captured German military documents . 
 In 1973 , Roberts published Tito , Mihailović , and the Allies , 1941 – 1945 which included information about the German – Partisan negotiations of March 1943 . The publishing of the book disturbed the Yugoslav government , which lodged a complaint with the US Department of State . The thrust of the Yugoslav complaint was that the book equated the Partisans with the Chetniks . Roberts denied this , stating that his book did not equate the two or accept the Partisan mythology of the Partisans as a " liberation movement " or the Chetniks as " traitorous collaborators " . The book also identified Đilas as the main negotiator . In 1977 , Đilas confirmed his involvement in his book Wartime , but stated that he would not have disclosed the details of the negotiations if it had not already been known through Roberts ' book . In 1978 , Tito admitted that the negotiations occurred , but characterised their purpose as " solely to obtain German recognition of belligerent status for the Partisans " . In 1985 , after Tito 's death , <unk> was able to publish the results of his investigation that had started in 1967 , in <unk> <unk> 1943 ( The March Negotiations 1943 ) . In 1989 , Popović gave his version of events in Aleksandar <unk> 's <unk> s <unk> ( Conversations with Koča ) , followed by Velebit in Mira <unk> 's Vladimir Velebit : <unk> <unk> ( Vladimir Velebit : Witness to History ) in 2001 , and in his own <unk> i <unk> <unk> <unk> rata ( Secrets and Traps of the Second World War ) the following year . 
 = Amino acid = 
 Amino acids are biologically important organic compounds containing amine ( -NH2 ) and carboxylic acid ( <unk> ) functional groups , usually along with a side @-@ chain ( R group ) specific to each amino acid . The key elements of an amino acid are carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , and nitrogen , though other elements are found in the side @-@ chains of certain amino acids . About 500 amino acids are known ( though only 20 appear in the genetic code ) and can be classified in many ways . They can be classified according to the core structural functional groups ' locations as alpha- ( α- ) , beta- ( β- ) , gamma- ( γ- ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) amino acids ; other categories relate to polarity , pH level , and side @-@ chain group type ( aliphatic , acyclic , aromatic , containing hydroxyl or sulfur , etc . ) . In the form of proteins , amino acids comprise the second @-@ largest component ( water is the largest ) of human muscles , cells and other tissues . Outside proteins , amino acids perform critical roles in processes such as neurotransmitter transport and biosynthesis . 
 In biochemistry , amino acids having both the amine and the carboxylic acid groups attached to the first ( alpha- ) carbon atom have particular importance . They are known as 2- , alpha- , or α @-@ amino acids ( generic formula <unk> in most cases , where R is an organic substituent known as a " side @-@ chain " ) ; often the term " amino acid " is used to refer specifically to these . They include the 23 proteinogenic ( " protein @-@ building " ) amino acids , which combine into peptide chains ( " polypeptides " ) to form the building @-@ blocks of a vast array of proteins . These are all L @-@ stereoisomers ( " left @-@ handed " isomers ) , although a few D @-@ amino acids ( " right @-@ handed " ) occur in bacterial envelopes , as a neuromodulator ( D @-@ serine ) , and in some antibiotics . Twenty of the proteinogenic amino acids are encoded directly by triplet codons in the genetic code and are known as " standard " amino acids . The other three ( " non @-@ standard " or " non @-@ canonical " ) are selenocysteine ( present in many <unk> as well as most eukaryotes , but not coded directly by DNA ) , pyrrolysine ( found only in some archea and one bacterium ) and N @-@ formylmethionine ( which is often the initial amino acid of proteins in bacteria , mitochondria , and chloroplasts ) . Pyrrolysine and selenocysteine are encoded via variant codons ; for example , selenocysteine is encoded by stop codon and SECIS element . Codon – tRNA combinations not found in nature can also be used to " expand " the genetic code and create novel proteins known as <unk> incorporating non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids . 
 Many important proteinogenic and non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids also play critical non @-@ protein roles within the body . For example , in the human brain , glutamate ( standard glutamic acid ) and gamma @-@ amino @-@ butyric acid ( " GABA " , non @-@ standard gamma @-@ amino acid ) are , respectively , the main excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters ; hydroxyproline ( a major component of the connective tissue collagen ) is synthesised from proline ; the standard amino acid glycine is used to synthesise porphyrins used in red blood cells ; and the non @-@ standard carnitine is used in lipid transport . 
 Nine proteinogenic amino acids are called " essential " for humans because they cannot be created from other compounds by the human body and so must be taken in as food . Others may be conditionally essential for certain ages or medical conditions . Essential amino acids may also differ between species . 
 Because of their biological significance , amino acids are important in nutrition and are commonly used in nutritional supplements , fertilizers , and food technology . Industrial uses include the production of drugs , biodegradable plastics , and chiral catalysts . 
 = = History = = 
 The first few amino acids were discovered in the early 19th century . In 1806 , French chemists Louis @-@ Nicolas Vauquelin and Pierre Jean <unk> isolated a compound in asparagus that was subsequently named asparagine , the first amino acid to be discovered . Cystine was discovered in 1810 , although its monomer , cysteine , remained undiscovered until 1884 . Glycine and leucine were discovered in 1820 . The last of the 20 common amino acids to be discovered was threonine in 1935 by William Cumming Rose , who also determined the essential amino acids and established the minimum daily requirements of all amino acids for optimal growth . 
 Usage of the term amino acid in the English language is from 1898 . Proteins were found to yield amino acids after enzymatic digestion or acid hydrolysis . In 1902 , Emil Fischer and Franz Hofmeister proposed that proteins are the result of the formation of bonds between the amino group of one amino acid with the carboxyl group of another , in a linear structure that Fischer termed " peptide " . 
 = = General structure = = 
 In the structure shown at the top of the page , R represents a side @-@ chain specific to each amino acid . The carbon atom next to the carboxyl group ( which is therefore numbered 2 in the carbon chain starting from that functional group ) is called the α – carbon . Amino acids containing an amino group bonded directly to the alpha carbon are referred to as alpha amino acids . These include amino acids such as proline which contain secondary amines , which used to be often referred to as " imino acids " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The alpha amino acids are the most common form found in nature , but only when occurring in the L @-@ isomer . The alpha carbon is a chiral carbon atom , with the exception of glycine which has two indistinguishable hydrogen atoms on the alpha carbon . Therefore , all alpha amino acids but glycine can exist in either of two enantiomers , called L or D amino acids , which are mirror images of each other ( see also Chirality ) . While L @-@ amino acids represent all of the amino acids found in proteins during translation in the ribosome , D @-@ amino acids are found in some proteins produced by enzyme posttranslational modifications after translation and translocation to the endoplasmic reticulum , as in exotic sea @-@ dwelling organisms such as cone snails . They are also abundant components of the peptidoglycan cell walls of bacteria , and D @-@ serine may act as a neurotransmitter in the brain . D @-@ amino acids are used in racemic crystallography to create centrosymmetric crystals , which ( depending on the protein ) may allow for easier and more robust protein structure determination . The L and D convention for amino acid configuration refers not to the optical activity of the amino acid itself but rather to the optical activity of the isomer of glyceraldehyde from which that amino acid can , in theory , be synthesized ( D @-@ glyceraldehyde is <unk> ; L @-@ glyceraldehyde is <unk> ) . In alternative fashion , the ( S ) and ( R ) designators are used to indicate the absolute stereochemistry . Almost all of the amino acids in proteins are ( S ) at the α carbon , with cysteine being ( R ) and glycine non @-@ chiral . Cysteine has its side @-@ chain in the same geometric position as the other amino acids , but the R / S terminology is reversed because of the higher atomic number of sulfur compared to the carboxyl oxygen gives the side @-@ chain a higher priority , whereas the atoms in most other side @-@ chains give them lower priority . 
 = = = Side chains = = = 
 In amino acids that have a carbon chain attached to the α – carbon ( such as lysine , shown to the right ) the carbons are labeled in order as α , β , γ , δ , and so on . In some amino acids , the amine group is attached to the β or γ @-@ carbon , and these are therefore referred to as beta or gamma amino acids . 
 Amino acids are usually classified by the properties of their side @-@ chain into four groups . The side @-@ chain can make an amino acid a weak acid or a weak base , and a <unk> if the side @-@ chain is polar or a <unk> if it is nonpolar . The chemical structures of the 22 standard amino acids , along with their chemical properties , are described more fully in the article on these proteinogenic amino acids . 
 The phrase " branched @-@ chain amino acids " or <unk> refers to the amino acids having aliphatic side @-@ chains that are non @-@ linear ; these are leucine , isoleucine , and valine . <unk> is the only proteinogenic amino acid whose side @-@ group links to the α @-@ amino group and , thus , is also the only proteinogenic amino acid containing a secondary amine at this position . In chemical terms , proline is , therefore , an imino acid , since it lacks a primary amino group , although it is still classed as an amino acid in the current biochemical nomenclature , and may also be called an " N @-@ alkylated alpha @-@ amino acid " . 
 = = = Zwitterions = = = 
 The α @-@ carboxylic acid group of amino acids is a weak acid , meaning that it releases a hydron ( such as a proton ) at moderate pH values . In other words , carboxylic acid groups ( − <unk> ) can be deprotonated to become negative carboxylates ( − CO2 − ) . The negatively charged carboxylate ion predominates at pH values greater than the pKa of the carboxylic acid group ( mean for the 20 common amino acids is about 2 @.@ 2 , see the table of amino acid structures above ) . In a complementary fashion , the α @-@ amine of amino acids is a weak base , meaning that it accepts a proton at moderate pH values . In other words , α @-@ amino groups ( NH2 − ) can be protonated to become positive α @-@ ammonium groups ( + NH3 − ) . The positively charged α @-@ ammonium group predominates at pH values less than the pKa of the α @-@ ammonium group ( mean for the 20 common α @-@ amino acids is about 9 @.@ 4 ) . 
 Because all amino acids contain amine and carboxylic acid functional groups , they share <unk> properties . Below pH 2 @.@ 2 , the predominant form will have a neutral carboxylic acid group and a positive α @-@ ammonium ion ( net charge + 1 ) , and above pH 9 @.@ 4 , a negative carboxylate and neutral α @-@ amino group ( net charge − 1 ) . But at pH between 2 @.@ 2 and 9 @.@ 4 , an amino acid usually contains both a negative carboxylate and a positive α @-@ ammonium group , as shown in structure ( 2 ) on the right , so has net zero charge . This molecular state is known as a zwitterion , from the German <unk> meaning hermaphrodite or hybrid . The fully neutral form ( structure ( 1 ) on the right ) is a very minor species in aqueous solution throughout the pH range ( less than 1 part in 107 ) . Amino acids exist as <unk> also in the solid phase , and crystallize with salt @-@ like properties unlike typical organic acids or amines . 
 = = = <unk> point = = = 
 The variation in titration curves when the amino acids are grouped by category can be seen here . With the exception of tyrosine , using titration to differentiate between hydrophobic amino acids is problematic . 
 At pH values between the two pKa values , the zwitterion predominates , but coexists in dynamic equilibrium with small amounts of net negative and net positive ions . At the exact midpoint between the two pKa values , the trace amount of net negative and trace of net positive ions exactly balance , so that average net charge of all forms present is zero . This pH is known as the isoelectric point pI , so pI 
 = ½ ( pKa1 + pKa2 ) . The individual amino acids all have slightly different pKa values , so have different isoelectric points . For amino acids with charged side @-@ chains , the pKa of the side @-@ chain is involved . Thus for Asp , Glu with negative side @-@ chains , pI = 
 ½ ( pKa1 + pKaR ) , where pKaR is the side @-@ chain pKa . Cysteine also has potentially negative side @-@ chain with pKaR 
 = 8 @.@ 14 , so pI should be calculated as for Asp and Glu , even though the side @-@ chain is not significantly charged at neutral pH . For His , Lys , and Arg with positive side @-@ chains , pI = 
 ½ ( pKaR + pKa2 ) . Amino acids have zero mobility in electrophoresis at their isoelectric point , although this behaviour is more usually exploited for peptides and proteins than single amino acids . Zwitterions have minimum solubility at their isoelectric point and some amino acids ( in particular , with non @-@ polar side @-@ chains ) can be isolated by precipitation from water by adjusting the pH to the required isoelectric point . 
 = = Occurrence and functions in biochemistry = = 
 = = = <unk> amino acids = = = 
 Amino acids are the structural units ( monomers ) that make up proteins . They join together to form short polymer chains called peptides or longer chains called either polypeptides or proteins . These polymers are linear and unbranched , with each amino acid within the chain attached to two neighboring amino acids . The process of making proteins is called translation and involves the step @-@ by @-@ step addition of amino acids to a growing protein chain by a ribozyme that is called a ribosome . The order in which the amino acids are added is read through the genetic code from an mRNA template , which is a RNA copy of one of the organism 's genes . 
 Twenty @-@ two amino acids are naturally incorporated into polypeptides and are called proteinogenic or natural amino acids . Of these , 20 are encoded by the universal genetic code . The remaining 2 , selenocysteine and pyrrolysine , are incorporated into proteins by unique synthetic mechanisms . Selenocysteine is incorporated when the mRNA being translated includes a SECIS element , which causes the UGA codon to encode selenocysteine instead of a stop codon . Pyrrolysine is used by some methanogenic archaea in enzymes that they use to produce methane . It is coded for with the codon UAG , which is normally a stop codon in other organisms . This UAG codon is followed by a <unk> downstream sequence . 
 = = = Non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids = = = 
 Aside from the 22 proteinogenic amino acids , there are many other amino acids that are called non @-@ proteinogenic . Those either are not found in proteins ( for example carnitine , GABA ) or are not produced directly and in isolation by standard cellular machinery ( for example , hydroxyproline and selenomethionine ) . 
 Non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids that are found in proteins are formed by post @-@ translational modification , which is modification after translation during protein synthesis . These modifications are often essential for the function or regulation of a protein ; for example , the carboxylation of glutamate allows for better binding of calcium cations , and the hydroxylation of proline is critical for maintaining connective tissues . Another example is the formation of <unk> in the translation initiation factor <unk> , through modification of a lysine residue . Such modifications can also determine the localization of the protein , e.g. , the addition of long hydrophobic groups can cause a protein to bind to a phospholipid membrane . 
 Some non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids are not found in proteins . Examples include lanthionine , 2 @-@ aminoisobutyric acid , <unk> , and the neurotransmitter gamma @-@ aminobutyric acid . Non @-@ proteinogenic amino acids often occur as intermediates in the metabolic pathways for standard amino acids – for example , ornithine and <unk> occur in the urea cycle , part of amino acid catabolism ( see below ) . A rare exception to the dominance of α @-@ amino acids in biology is the β @-@ amino acid beta alanine ( 3 @-@ <unk> acid ) , which is used in plants and microorganisms in the synthesis of pantothenic acid ( vitamin B5 ) , a component of coenzyme A. 
 = = = D @-@ amino acid natural abundance = = = 
 D @-@ isomers are uncommon in live organisms . For instance , gramicidin is a polypeptide made up from mixture of D- and L @-@ amino acids . Other compounds containing D @-@ amino acids are <unk> and <unk> . These compounds disrupt bacterial cell walls , particularly in Gram @-@ positive bacteria . Only 837 D @-@ amino acids were found in Swiss @-@ <unk> database ( 187 million amino acids analysed ) . 
 = = = Non @-@ standard amino acids = = = 
 The 20 amino acids that are encoded directly by the codons of the universal genetic code are called standard or canonical amino acids . The others are called non @-@ standard or non @-@ canonical . Most of the non @-@ standard amino acids are also non @-@ proteinogenic ( i.e. they cannot be used to build proteins ) , but three of them are proteinogenic , as they can be used to build proteins by exploiting information not encoded in the universal genetic code . 
 The three non @-@ standard proteinogenic amino acids are selenocysteine ( present in many non @-@ eukaryotes as well as most eukaryotes , but not coded directly by DNA ) , pyrrolysine ( found only in some archaea and one bacterium ) , and N @-@ formylmethionine ( which is often the initial amino acid of proteins in bacteria , mitochondria , and chloroplasts ) . For example , 25 human proteins include selenocysteine ( Sec ) in their primary structure , and the structurally characterized enzymes ( selenoenzymes ) employ Sec as the catalytic moiety in their active sites . Pyrrolysine and selenocysteine are encoded via variant codons . For example , selenocysteine is encoded by stop codon and SECIS element . 
 = = = In human nutrition = = = 
 When taken up into the human body from the diet , the 20 standard amino acids either are used to synthesize proteins and other biomolecules or are oxidized to urea and carbon dioxide as a source of energy . The oxidation pathway starts with the removal of the amino group by a transaminase ; the amino group is then fed into the urea cycle . The other product of transamidation is a keto acid that enters the citric acid cycle . <unk> amino acids can also be converted into glucose , through gluconeogenesis . Of the 20 standard amino acids , nine ( His , Ile , Leu , Lys , Met , Phe , Thr , Trp and Val ) , are called essential amino acids because the human body cannot synthesize them from other compounds at the level needed for normal growth , so they must be obtained from food . In addition , cysteine , taurine , tyrosine , and arginine are considered <unk> amino @-@ acids in children ( though taurine is not technically an amino acid ) , because the metabolic pathways that synthesize these amino acids are not fully developed . The amounts required also depend on the age and health of the individual , so it is hard to make general statements about the dietary requirement for some amino acids . Dietary exposure to the non @-@ standard amino acid BMAA has been linked to human neurodegenerative diseases , including ALS . 
 = = = Non @-@ protein functions = = = 
 In humans , non @-@ protein amino acids also have important roles as metabolic intermediates , such as in the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitter gamma @-@ amino @-@ butyric acid ( GABA ) . Many amino acids are used to synthesize other molecules , for example : 
 <unk> is a precursor of the neurotransmitter serotonin . 
 Tyrosine ( and its precursor phenylalanine ) are precursors of the catecholamine neurotransmitters dopamine , epinephrine and norepinephrine and various trace amines . 
 Phenylalanine is a precursor of phenethylamine and tyrosine in humans . In plants , it is a precursor of various phenylpropanoids , which are important in plant metabolism . 
 Glycine is a precursor of porphyrins such as heme . 
 Arginine is a precursor of nitric oxide . 
 Ornithine and S @-@ adenosylmethionine are precursors of polyamines . 
 Aspartate , glycine , and glutamine are precursors of nucleotides . 
 However , not all of the functions of other abundant non @-@ standard amino acids are known . 
 Some non @-@ standard amino acids are used as defenses against herbivores in plants . For example , <unk> is an analogue of arginine that is found in many legumes , and in particularly large amounts in Canavalia <unk> ( sword bean ) . This amino acid protects the plants from predators such as insects and can cause illness in people if some types of legumes are eaten without processing . The non @-@ protein amino acid <unk> is found in other species of legume , in particular Leucaena leucocephala . This compound is an analogue of tyrosine and can poison animals that graze on these plants . 
 = = Uses in industry = = 
 Amino acids are used for a variety of applications in industry , but their main use is as additives to animal feed . This is necessary , since many of the bulk components of these feeds , such as soybeans , either have low levels or lack some of the essential amino acids : lysine , methionine , threonine , and tryptophan are most important in the production of these feeds . In this industry , amino acids are also used to chelate metal cations in order to improve the absorption of minerals from supplements , which may be required to improve the health or production of these animals . 
 The food industry is also a major consumer of amino acids , in particular , glutamic acid , which is used as a flavor enhancer , and aspartame ( <unk> @-@ phenylalanine @-@ 1 @-@ methyl ester ) as a low @-@ calorie artificial sweetener . Similar technology to that used for animal nutrition is employed in the human nutrition industry to alleviate symptoms of mineral deficiencies , such as anemia , by improving mineral absorption and reducing negative side effects from inorganic mineral supplementation . 
 The chelating ability of amino acids has been used in fertilizers for agriculture to facilitate the delivery of minerals to plants in order to correct mineral deficiencies , such as iron chlorosis . These fertilizers are also used to prevent deficiencies from occurring and improving the overall health of the plants . The remaining production of amino acids is used in the synthesis of drugs and cosmetics . 
 Similarly , some amino acids derivatives are used in pharmaceutical industry . They include 5 @-@ HTP ( 5 @-@ <unk> ) used for experimental treatment of depression , L @-@ DOPA ( L @-@ dihydroxyphenylalanine ) for Parkinson 's treatment , and <unk> drug that inhibits ornithine decarboxylase and used in the treatment of sleeping sickness . 
 = = = Expanded genetic code = = = 
 Since 2001 , 40 non @-@ natural amino acids have been added into protein by creating a unique codon ( recoding ) and a corresponding transfer @-@ RNA : aminoacyl – tRNA @-@ synthetase pair to encode it with diverse physicochemical and biological properties in order to be used as a tool to exploring protein structure and function or to create novel or enhanced proteins . 
 = = = Nullomers = = = 
 Nullomers are codons that in theory code for an amino acid , however in nature there is a selective bias against using this codon in favor of another , for example bacteria prefer to use CGA instead of AGA to code for arginine . This creates some sequences that do not appear in the genome . This characteristic can be taken advantage of and used to create new selective cancer @-@ fighting drugs and to prevent cross @-@ contamination of DNA samples from crime @-@ scene investigations . 
 = = = Chemical building blocks = = = 
 Amino acids are important as low @-@ cost feedstocks . These compounds are used in chiral pool synthesis as enantiomerically pure building @-@ blocks . 
 Amino acids have been investigated as precursors chiral catalysts , e.g. , for asymmetric hydrogenation reactions , although no commercial applications exist . 
 = = = <unk> plastics = = = 
 Amino acids are under development as components of a range of biodegradable polymers . These materials have applications as environmentally friendly packaging and in medicine in drug delivery and the construction of prosthetic implants . These polymers include polypeptides , polyamides , polyesters , polysulfides , and <unk> with amino acids either forming part of their main chains or bonded as side @-@ chains . These modifications alter the physical properties and reactivities of the polymers . An interesting example of such materials is polyaspartate , a water @-@ soluble biodegradable polymer that may have applications in disposable diapers and agriculture . Due to its solubility and ability to chelate metal ions , polyaspartate is also being used as a biodegradeable anti @-@ scaling agent and a corrosion inhibitor . In addition , the aromatic amino acid tyrosine is being developed as a possible replacement for toxic phenols such as bisphenol A in the manufacture of <unk> . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 As amino acids have both a primary amine group and a primary carboxyl group , these chemicals can undergo most of the reactions associated with these functional groups . These include nucleophilic addition , amide bond formation , and imine formation for the amine group , and esterification , amide bond formation , and decarboxylation for the carboxylic acid group . The combination of these functional groups allow amino acids to be effective <unk> ligands for metal @-@ amino acid <unk> . The multiple side @-@ chains of amino acids can also undergo chemical reactions . The types of these reactions are determined by the groups on these side @-@ chains and are , therefore , different between the various types of amino acid . 
 = = = Chemical synthesis = = = 
 Several methods exist to synthesize amino acids . One of the oldest methods begins with the bromination at the α @-@ carbon of a carboxylic acid . <unk> substitution with ammonia then converts the alkyl bromide to the amino acid . In alternative fashion , the Strecker amino acid synthesis involves the treatment of an aldehyde with potassium cyanide and ammonia , this produces an α @-@ amino nitrile as an intermediate . Hydrolysis of the nitrile in acid then yields a α @-@ amino acid . Using ammonia or ammonium salts in this reaction gives unsubstituted amino acids , whereas substituting primary and secondary amines will yield substituted amino acids . Likewise , using ketones , instead of aldehydes , gives α , α @-@ disubstituted amino acids . The classical synthesis gives racemic mixtures of α @-@ amino acids as products , but several alternative procedures using asymmetric auxiliaries or asymmetric catalysts have been developed . 
 At the current time , the most @-@ adopted method is an automated synthesis on a solid support ( e.g. , polystyrene beads ) , using protecting groups ( e.g. , <unk> and t @-@ Boc ) and activating groups ( e.g. , DCC and DIC ) . 
 = = = Peptide bond formation = = = 
 As both the amine and carboxylic acid groups of amino acids can react to form amide bonds , one amino acid molecule can react with another and become joined through an amide linkage . This polymerization of amino acids is what creates proteins . This condensation reaction yields the newly formed peptide bond and a molecule of water . In cells , this reaction does not occur directly ; instead , the amino acid is first activated by attachment to a transfer RNA molecule through an ester bond . This aminoacyl @-@ tRNA is produced in an ATP @-@ dependent reaction carried out by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase . This aminoacyl @-@ tRNA is then a substrate for the ribosome , which catalyzes the attack of the amino group of the elongating protein chain on the ester bond . As a result of this mechanism , all proteins made by ribosomes are synthesized starting at their N @-@ terminus and moving toward their C @-@ terminus . 
 However , not all peptide bonds are formed in this way . In a few cases , peptides are synthesized by specific enzymes . For example , the <unk> glutathione is an essential part of the defenses of cells against oxidative stress . This peptide is synthesized in two steps from free amino acids . In the first step , gamma @-@ <unk> synthetase condenses cysteine and glutamic acid through a peptide bond formed between the side @-@ chain carboxyl of the glutamate ( the gamma carbon of this side @-@ chain ) and the amino group of the cysteine . This dipeptide is then condensed with glycine by glutathione synthetase to form glutathione . 
 In chemistry , peptides are synthesized by a variety of reactions . One of the most @-@ used in solid @-@ phase peptide synthesis uses the aromatic oxime derivatives of amino acids as activated units . These are added in sequence onto the growing peptide chain , which is attached to a solid resin support . The ability to easily synthesize vast numbers of different peptides by varying the types and order of amino acids ( using combinatorial chemistry ) has made peptide synthesis particularly important in creating libraries of peptides for use in drug discovery through high @-@ throughput screening . 
 = = = Biosynthesis = = = 
 In plants , nitrogen is first assimilated into organic compounds in the form of glutamate , formed from alpha @-@ ketoglutarate and ammonia in the mitochondrion . In order to form other amino acids , the plant uses transaminases to move the amino group to another alpha @-@ keto carboxylic acid . For example , aspartate aminotransferase converts glutamate and oxaloacetate to alpha @-@ ketoglutarate and aspartate . Other organisms use transaminases for amino acid synthesis , too . 
 <unk> amino acids are usually formed through modifications to standard amino acids . For example , homocysteine is formed through the <unk> pathway or by the demethylation of methionine via the intermediate metabolite S @-@ adenosyl methionine , while hydroxyproline is made by a posttranslational modification of proline . 
 Microorganisms and plants can synthesize many uncommon amino acids . For example , some microbes make 2 @-@ aminoisobutyric acid and lanthionine , which is a sulfide @-@ bridged derivative of alanine . Both of these amino acids are found in peptidic <unk> such as alamethicin . However , in plants , 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ carboxylic acid is a small disubstituted cyclic amino acid that is a key intermediate in the production of the plant hormone ethylene . 
 = = = Catabolism = = = 
 Amino acids must first pass out of organelles and cells into blood circulation via amino acid transporters , since the amine and carboxylic acid groups are typically ionized . Degradation of an amino acid , occurring in the liver and kidneys , often involves deamination by moving its amino group to alpha @-@ ketoglutarate , forming glutamate . This process involves transaminases , often the same as those used in amination during synthesis . In many vertebrates , the amino group is then removed through the urea cycle and is excreted in the form of urea . However , amino acid degradation can produce uric acid or ammonia instead . For example , serine dehydratase converts serine to pyruvate and ammonia . After removal of one or more amino groups , the remainder of the molecule can sometimes be used to synthesize new amino acids , or it can be used for energy by entering glycolysis or the citric acid cycle , as detailed in image at right . 
 = = <unk> properties of amino acids = = 
 The 20 amino acids encoded directly by the genetic code can be divided into several groups based on their properties . Important factors are charge , hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity , size , and functional groups . These properties are important for protein structure and protein – protein interactions . The water @-@ soluble proteins tend to have their hydrophobic residues ( Leu , Ile , Val , Phe , and Trp ) buried in the middle of the protein , whereas hydrophilic side @-@ chains are exposed to the aqueous solvent . ( Note that in biochemistry , a residue refers to a specific monomer within the polymeric chain of a polysaccharide , protein or nucleic acid . ) The integral membrane proteins tend to have outer rings of exposed hydrophobic amino acids that anchor them into the lipid bilayer . In the case part @-@ way between these two extremes , some peripheral membrane proteins have a patch of hydrophobic amino acids on their surface that locks onto the membrane . In similar fashion , proteins that have to bind to positively charged molecules have surfaces rich with negatively charged amino acids like glutamate and aspartate , while proteins binding to negatively charged molecules have surfaces rich with positively charged chains like lysine and arginine . There are different hydrophobicity scales of amino acid residues . 
 Some amino acids have special properties such as cysteine , that can form covalent disulfide bonds to other cysteine residues , proline that forms a cycle to the polypeptide backbone , and glycine that is more flexible than other amino acids . 
 Many proteins undergo a range of posttranslational modifications , when additional chemical groups are attached to the amino acids in proteins . Some modifications can produce hydrophobic lipoproteins , or hydrophilic glycoproteins . These type of modification allow the reversible targeting of a protein to a membrane . For example , the addition and removal of the fatty acid palmitic acid to cysteine residues in some signaling proteins causes the proteins to attach and then detach from cell membranes . 
 = = = Table of standard amino acid abbreviations and properties = = = 
 Two additional amino acids are in some species coded for by codons that are usually interpreted as stop codons : 
 In addition to the specific amino acid codes , placeholders are used in cases where chemical or crystallographic analysis of a peptide or protein cannot conclusively determine the identity of a residue . They are also used to summarise conserved protein sequence motifs . The use of single letters to indicate sets of similar residues is similar to the use of abbreviation codes for degenerate bases . 
 Unk is sometimes used instead of <unk> , but is less standard . 
 In addition , many non @-@ standard amino acids have a specific code . For example , several peptide drugs , such as Bortezomib and MG132 , are artificially synthesized and retain their protecting groups , which have specific codes . Bortezomib is <unk> @-@ Phe @-@ <unk> , and MG132 is Z @-@ Leu @-@ Leu @-@ Leu @-@ al . To aid in the analysis of protein structure , photo @-@ reactive amino acid analogs are available . These include <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = Layer Pyramid = 
 The Layer Pyramid ( known locally in Arabic as il @-@ <unk> il @-@ <unk> , Arabic : <unk> <unk> , meaning ' rubble @-@ hill pyramid ' ) is a ruined step pyramid dating to the 3rd Dynasty of Egypt ( 2686 BC to 2613 BC ) and located in the necropolis of <unk> el <unk> . Its ownership is uncertain and may be attributable to pharaoh Khaba . The pyramid architecture , however , is very similar to that of the Buried Pyramid of king Sekhemkhet and for this reason is firmly datable to the 3rd Dynasty . 
 The pyramid was excavated at the beginning of the 20th century by two different teams who reported conflicting estimates regarding its size and number of subterranean chambers . No artefacts were found over the course of the excavations , and no trace of a burial could be found . For this reason , it is unclear whether the pyramid was used to bury a pharaoh or was abandoned following the premature death of the king . 
 At the time of its construction the pyramid was surrounded by a necropolis housing large mastabas belonging to the high officials of the 3rd Dynasty state . A mortuary temple was built on the eastern side of the pyramid and a valley temple was possibly located several hundred metres from it . Nowadays , the pyramid is located within the confines of a restricted military area , barring modern excavations of the site . 
 = = Research history = = 
 The layer pyramid was first examined and its surroundings explored in 1839 by John Shae Perring . Soon after , in 1848 , the pyramid was identified as such by Karl Richard Lepsius , who listed it as number XIV in his pioneering list of pyramids . Around 40 years later , in 1886 , Gaston Maspero unsuccessfully searched for the entrance of the subterranean passages of the pyramid , which was discovered in 1896 by Jacques de Morgan . The latter undertook excavations of the pyramid but stopped after clearing the first few steps of the descending stairway . 
 Further investigations were then performed in 1900 by Alessandro Barsanti , who uncovered the vertical access shaft leading to the burial chamber . Barsanti , seeing that several corridors and chambers were seemingly unfinished and that all were completely devoid of artefacts , deemed that the pyramid had never been used . Shortly after , in 1910 – 1911 , George Reisner and Clarence S. Fisher worked on the site , excavating the north and east exteriors of the pyramid as well as the cemeteries surrounding it . The dimensions of the pyramid as estimated by Barsanti , Reisner and Fisher differ greatly and even the numbers of subterranean galleries they report are in disagreement . Unfortunately , the pyramid lies within a restricted military area since 1970 and consequently no excavation has been undertaken there since Reisner and Fisher 's superficial work , leaving the structures beneath the pyramid in doubt . Furthermore , the pyramid is now sanded up , hampering modern estimations of its dimensions . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The Layer Pyramid lies close to the necropolis of <unk> el <unk> , 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) south @-@ west of Giza and 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) north of Saqqara . The main structure is located on a rock ridge just above the floodplain . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Layer Pyramid has a square base whose side is about 84 m ( 276 ft ) long , slightly smaller than the step pyramids of Djoser and Sekhemket . Based on the dimensions of the pyramid of Djoser , the egyptologist Jean @-@ Philippe Lauer estimated that the layer pyramid was originally planned to comprise five steps and would have reached c . 42 – 45 m ( 138 – 148 ft ) in height . Today , only two of these steps remain , reaching a height of about 17 m ( 56 ft ) . The current ruined state of the pyramid allows a view of its core , which is a 11 m2 ( 120 sq ft ) pyramidal mound made of poor quality rough stone blocks taken from the local bedrock . This core is surrounded by a 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) thick casing of the same masonry . This is in turn surrounded by 14 layers of mud bricks bonded with clay mortar and disposed almost vertically , with an inward inclination angle of 68 ° . Just as the inner @-@ most stone casing of the pyramid core , each mud brick layer is 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) thick . 
 Whether the pyramid was finished or left unfinished is disputed among experts . The egyptologist Rainer Stadelmann believes that the pyramid was indeed finished , but others , such as Miroslav Verner , think that the building was left unfinished because of the pharaoh 's premature death . In particular , no traces of outer cladding were found , which could hint that there never was one because the pyramid was not completed . 
 Mud bricks were found at the base of the pyramid , which are not associated with the pyramid itself , but are interpreted as remnants of a construction ramp . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The disposition of the substructures of the layer pyramid is extremely similar to that found in the Buried Pyramid of Sekhemket . Consequently , Mark Lehner and others suggest that the two pyramids must have been constructed very close in time . 
 The entrance to the subterranean structures lies on the east , a disposition which would be unparalleled until the construction of the pyramid of Senusret II , almost 1000 years later . The egyptologists Vito <unk> and Celeste Rinaldi proposed that this unique feature was chosen by the Egyptian architects in order to free the north side of the pyramid for the construction of a temple . Aidan Dodson showed however that in this situation , the pyramid construction ramp would have " impinged on any northern temple construction even more <unk> " . Rather , he explains this unique eastern entrance as resulting from a desire by the architects to allow for easy access to the pyramid store rooms , located immediately beneath the eastern entrance . 
 The entrance immediately leads to a 36 m ( 118 ft ) long steep stairway and then down on to a corridor which heads west . The corridor ends in a straight vertical shaft , at the top of which is the so @-@ called upper corridor , an unfinished passage which goes south toward the center of the pyramid . At the bottom of the shaft is a T @-@ shaped crossway . To the left , this crossway leads south to the lower corridor , half @-@ way of which is a narrow stairway , so narrow that a sarcophagus could hardly have been passed through it . The lower corridor then finishes in the king 's burial chamber . In this area of the stairway , Barsanti drew another gallery leading above the burial chamber , but this gallery is absent in Reisner 's and Fisher 's notes . To the right of the T @-@ shaped crossway is a U @-@ shaped gallery system . The ground plan of the gallery system resembles that of a comb , comprising rows of chambers , totalling 32 , which were possibly destined to be storage rooms for the <unk> . The gallery proved to be " clean and empty , as if the workmen had only left " . 
 The king 's burial chamber is located 26 m ( 85 ft ) below ground , is nearly square in shape , with a base of 3 @.@ 63 m × 2 @.@ 65 m ( 11 @.@ 9 ft × 8 @.@ 7 ft ) , and a ceiling height of 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . The burial chamber contained no traces of a sarcophagus , which together with the absence of artefacts in the gallery , hints to the premature death of the king . 
 = = Funerary Complex and Necropolis = = 
 = = = Funerary Complex = = = 
 Interestingly , the funerary complex of the layer pyramid shows no trace of an enclosure wall , which is present in both earlier and later pyramid complexes . This could be because the stones constituting the wall were robbed over time , or simply because the wall was never started , being usually the last element of the pyramid complex to be built . At the eastern side of the pyramid , the remnants of brick walls could indicate the presence of a mortuary temple , but the archaeological traces are so tenuous that any closer examination and more precise reconstruction is impossible today . The same goes for the ruins of a building several hundred metres away from the pyramid , and which might have been the valley temple . If this was indeed a valley temple , its east @-@ west orientation would be unique in all pyramid complexes . 
 = = = Necropolis = = = 
 The layer pyramid is surrounded by a total of five cemeteries dating to the 1st Dynasty , 2nd Dynasty , late 3rd Dynasty , 18th Dynasty and Roman Period . Of these cemeteries , only the one dating to the late 3rd Dynasty contains large tombs , of which are four mud brick mastabas . Reisner and Fisher observe that this is to be expected of the necropolis surrounding the pyramid of a pharaoh , the large tombs being those of the royal family and court officials . In particular , around 200 metres ( 660 ft ) north of the layer pyramid is a huge mastaba , today known as Mastaba <unk> , which yielded eight marble bowls inscribed with the serekh of king Khaba . Reisner and Fisher therefore conclude that " if the mastabas belong to people connected with the king who built the pyramid , it is probable that the king ’ s name was Khaba " . This opinion is shared by most egyptologists who attribute the layer pyramid to Khaba . 
 = = Date and attribution = = 
 The architecture of the layer pyramid allows it to be securely dated to the time span between the reigns of king Sekhemkhet and that of king <unk> , the founder of the 4th Dynasty . Rainer Stadelmann , Miroslav Verner and Jean @-@ Philippe Lauer compare the architecture of the layer pyramid with that of the step pyramids of Djoser and Sekhemkhet , expecting the layer pyramid to have originally consisted of five steps , just as its near @-@ contemporary predecessors . The layer pyramid exhibits at one site both complex developments concerning its substructures and simplifications concerning the building methods employed for the superstructure . According to these egyptologists , the layer pyramid is a clearly advanced version of the buried pyramid of Sekhemkhet . 
 The remaining problem about the layer pyramid is the question of who had it built . Most scholars today believe that it was likely king Khaba of the late 3rd Dynasty . This conclusion is based on stone bowls and vases bearing the serekh of Khaba discovered in Mastaba <unk> , located just north of the pyramid . Rainer Stadelmann goes further and identifies Khaba with king Huni , the last ruler of the 3rd Dynasty . His hypothesis is based on his reading of the Turin canon , a <unk> compiled in the early Ramesside period c . 1300 BC , some 1400 years after Huni 's lifetime . The Turin canon credits Huni with a relatively long reign of 24 years . According to Stadelmann , this time would be sufficient to cover the time span needed to complete the building of the layer pyramid . He also argues that royal monuments of the first three Egyptian dynasties only present a king 's <unk> name in a serekh and only later do they record the throne or birth name . Thus , the serekh of Khaba could correspond to the throne name Huni . In this case , the layer pyramid would be Huni 's tomb . This conclusion is contested by most Egyptologists who think that Huni instead built the <unk> Pyramid , point to the apparent unfinished state of the layer pyramid and identify Khaba with king <unk> II mentioned on the Turin canon . 
 = Infinity on High = 
 Infinity on High is the third studio album by American rock band Fall Out Boy , released on February 6 , 2007 by Island Records as the follow @-@ up to the band 's commercially successful 2005 album From Under the Cork Tree . Pre @-@ production began in the group 's hometown of Chicago , where writing and rehearsal sessions took place . It was recorded from July to October 2006 at the Pass Studios in Los Angeles , California and mixed at the Paramount Recording Studios in Hollywood . The music was composed by lead singer and guitarist Patrick Stump and the lyrics were penned by bassist Pete Wentz . 
 The album features collaborations with new producers and guest artists such as Babyface and Jay @-@ Z , and sees the band experimenting with musical genres other than pop punk including R & B , soul , and flamenco . The group also utilized instruments such as horns , violins and pianos , which had not been used on previous releases . As reported by Billboard , Fall Out Boy " drifts further from its pop punk roots to write increasingly accessible pop tunes , " a slight departure from the group 's previous sound . Critics felt that the lyrics served as a response to the band 's rise to fame . The group embarked on several tours to promote the album , including the Friends or Enemies Tour , the Honda Civic Tour , and the Young Wild Things Tour . In the wake of the album 's leak on the internet , the band included a download code for Leaked in London , a live extended play , with each purchase made during the first week of its initial release . 
 Infinity on High debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 , selling 260 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , making it Fall Out Boy 's first number one album and second top ten effort . It also reached number one in New Zealand and opened inside the top five worldwide in countries including Canada , the United Kingdom and Australia . Infinity on High has sold over two million units worldwide , with 1 @.@ 4 million sales in the US as of February 2013 . Four of the album 's fourteen songs were released as singles , of which three charted on the Billboard Hot 100 , led by the lead single " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " at number two . The album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 12 , one month after its release , for shipments of one million copies . It received generally positive reviews from music critics , with many praising Stump 's vocals and the album 's new musical direction . 
 = = Background = = 
 After taking a two @-@ month break following the band 's Black Clouds and Underdogs tour in promotion of their 2005 album From Under the Cork Tree , Fall Out Boy returned to the studio to begin work on their follow @-@ up effort . The band began writing songs for the new album while touring , and intended to quickly make a new album in order to keep momentum in the wake of their breakthrough success . Vocalist Patrick Stump stated that he wished to begin working on the record earlier , but the group 's management urged the members to take time off to recuperate from their constant touring schedule . 
 The band 's label , Island Records , underwent changes while the group prepared to record , which postponed the studio schedule for three weeks . Bassist / lyricist Pete Wentz asserted that " We 're definitely writing all the time , so we 're not going to try to squeeze every last drop out of the stone . That 's part of what 's been wrong with the rock industry : they keep fans waiting far too long , and bands go away and disappear off the face of the planet . That 's not the way it 's going to be for Fall Out Boy . " During this time off , Fall Out Boy contributed a cover of the song " What 's This ? " for the 2006 rerelease of The Nightmare Before Christmas soundtrack , as well as a remix of their song " Of All the Gin Joints in All the World " for the Snakes on a Plane soundtrack . Wentz also purchased a house in Los Angeles , where he spent much time writing lyrics to new songs . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 While writing the album , Fall Out Boy began searching for potential producers . The band sought out R & B singer / producer Babyface , as they admired his work on the soundtrack to the 2001 film version of Josie and the Pussycats . Babyface saw one of the interviews in which the band discussed its desire to work with him and contacted the group . Babyface produced two of the songs , " I 'm Like a Lawyer with the Way I 'm Always Trying to Get You Off ( Me & You ) " and " Thnks fr th Mmrs " . Neal Avron , who also produced the band 's previous album , handled production for eleven of Infinity on High 's fourteen tracks . Before recording , the band began with six weeks of pre @-@ production , which was encouraged by Avron . This period included both rehearsals and writing , as well as working out all the sounds and arrangements . It began in Chicago before the group relocated to the Swing House studios in Los Angeles . Additionally , some rough recordings of songs were created to be used in the studio as a future reference . 
 Infinity on High was recorded from July to October 2006 at the Pass Studios in Los Angeles . Much of the writing process was done individually by the band members . Generally , Wentz would write his lyrics first and send them to Stump , who would create a melody by playing guitar along to the words to " find a groove " . Stump 's goal with his songs was to create his music while changing Wentz ’ s original lyrics as little as possible . After a melody was written , Stump would create a general rhythm for the song . Although Fall Out Boy has no specific rhythm or lead guitar roles , Stump viewed himself as more of a rhythm guitarist on the album due to his experience as a drummer in previous bands . Guitarist Joe Trohman often wrote his guitar parts after hearing Stump ’ s work , filling in the " empty spaces " in the songs with " tons of guitars and Johnny Marr @-@ type atmospheric parts " . The group felt that this writing process helped create a more full sound . 
 Upon listening to the finished tracks , the members selected guest appearances they felt would work with the songs . The group " aim [ ed ] for the stars " on its choices of collaborators , with Wentz stating , " I want to bring in people who no one would expect ... This year it 's like , we made some new friends , like Lil Wayne . Or let 's get Jay @-@ Z on there . " Wentz commented on working with Jay @-@ Z , saying " It was insane . We called him up and thought we were gonna talk to his assistant . Then he answers the phone , like , ' Yo , this is Hov , ' and we were like , ' Um ... ' It just happened like that . And it was pretty crazy . " Jay @-@ Z recorded his introduction to the album 's opening song " Thriller " while on tour in Australia and sent it to the band , who later put the vocal on the album . At a fashion show in Los Angeles , Wentz met rapper Kanye West , who invited Wentz and Stump to his home to share new music . West then agreed to create a remix of " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " three weeks before the scheduled release of the album . The band was unable to include the remix on the album due to time constraints , but a remix of West 's version featuring Lil Wayne , Lupe Fiasco , Travis McCoy , Paul Wall and Tyga was released in July 2007 . 
 During the recording of the album , the band members pursued other various activities . Stump , who co @-@ produced " Don 't You Know Who I Think I Am ? " from Infinity on High , was also working on fellow Fueled By Ramen act The Hush Sound 's album Like Vines . Wentz was conceiving a social networking website called <unk> as well as designing for his clothing line , Clandestine Industries . Wentz was often interviewed about the album at Clandestine fashion shows . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The album marked a departure in Fall Out Boy 's sound in which the band implemented a diverse array of musical styles . As reported by Billboard , Fall Out Boy " drifts further from its hardcore punk roots to write increasingly accessible pop tunes , " a slight departure from the group 's previous more pop punk sound . Infinity on High has been compared to the work of pop punk bands such as Green Day , with Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times commenting , " Whatever snot and feedback courses through these songs , sweetness always triumphs , carried forth by bubblegum bass lines , snappy drums and tunes as comforting as lullabies . " Stump explained that the album contains a variety of different moods : " It ’ s one of those things where you get older as a band and you do your own thing ... The older Fall Out Boy elements , from the early records , are definitely there , and this album is an extension of that . " 
 Stump called " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " the " funkiest thing we ’ ve ever done " , and attributes the change in musical style to his love of soul music , which he acquired by listening to oldies stations as a child . Wentz describes the song " a bit of ' 70s funk mixed with [ the band ’ s 2003 album ] Take This to Your Grave with tight verses and big , fat choruses " . The song closing sing @-@ along was influenced by Justin Timberlake 's " Señorita " . Cory Apar of Allmusic compared the Babyface @-@ produced track " I 'm Like a Lawyer with the Way I 'm Always Trying to Get You Off ( Me & You ) " to Maroon 5 . Wentz characterized Stump ’ s vocal performance on the song as " straight @-@ up Motown " , continuing to say " If there wasn 't a rock band playing , it 'd be straight R & B , and he 'd go on tour with just an upright bass and a drum and open up for R. Kelly . " " The Carpal Tunnel of Love " has been referred to as " a prime slab of what the boys have become famous for : highly caffeinated pop @-@ punk mixed with a little white @-@ boy soul and some hard @-@ core yelping . " The song features Stump singing in a falsetto in the chorus over Trohman ’ s " crunchy " guitars , as well as a breakdown in which Wentz employs death growl @-@ style vocals . 
 The band also used instruments that did not appear on previous albums , such as horns and violins . The members became more open to experimentation , but attempted to not over @-@ produce the album ; Stump stated that he " had to resist the temptation to use a lot of strings . " " Golden " consists exclusively of vocals and piano , and Stump dubbed the song " much softer than anything we ’ ve ever done " . The group utilizes a full horn section on " I 've Got All This Ringing in My Ears and None on My Fingers " , a track which has been likened to Queen . Violins are used on both " Thnks fr th Mmrs " , in addition to an acoustic guitar strummed flamenco @-@ style , and " The ( After ) Life of the Party " , which also features electronic @-@ influenced sounds . Commenting on the instruments used on " Thnks fr th Mmrs " , Stump stated " I never thought I 'd get a euphonium onto a Fall Out Boy record " . " You 're Crashing , But You 're No Wave " features a gospel choir , while " Thriller " contains a spoken @-@ word intro from Jay @-@ Z. Barry Nicolson of NME referred to the song as a " towering , Foo Fighters @-@ esque slice of thunderous rhythm and radio @-@ friendly melody . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 While writing the album , Wentz drew lyrical inspiration from rapper Lil Wayne , whom he called " the best lyricist of [ 2006 ] . " Speaking of Infinity on High 's lyrical themes , Wentz stated , " On the last record , the lyrics were about ' This is where we 're going to be a year from now , and this is what you 're going to be saying about us . ' But this time , we realized that a lot of bands should spend less time running their mouths and more time writing their songs . " In 2013 , Wentz reflected , " on a record like Infinity on High , I feel like I tried really hard to explain my perspective – and when I look back on it in hindsight I think it ’ s an extremely unrelatable record . Critics felt that much of the lyrics address the band 's rise to fame and the pressure of maintaining a loyal fanbase . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker commented that " The only top @-@ ten acts that talk about fame as much as Fall Out Boy does are rappers , although their take on selling records is less conflicted . " Cory Apar of Allmusic opined that " Wentz ' lyrics are oftentimes resentful , full of fame @-@ induced angst , and really emphasize his need to drive home his position that stardom has not changed the band . " 
 " Thriller " serves as an autobiographical recap of the two years following From Under the Cork Tree 's release , referencing the band 's mediocre CD reviews and breakout success , as well as thanking their " diehard " fans . The song discusses the band 's Best New Artist Grammy loss , and Wentz calls it the " most narcissistic song on the album " . The line " Fix me in forty @-@ five " is a reference to the length of a therapy session . On " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " , Wentz uses wartime @-@ inspired metaphors to discuss their newfound popularity ; he called the song " kind of a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek look at the way we are so addicted and obsessed with new arts , cultures and loves – to the point where it just becomes oversaturated . " " I 'm Like a Lawyer ... " has been described as " about as close to a love song as you 'll get from this band , a rare moment of tenderness among songs about blog entries , guest lists , and therapy sessions . " In a tribute to the politicized Chicago hardcore scene , Wentz describes the story of a rigged court case of African @-@ American civil rights activist Fred Hampton , Jr. in " You 're Crashing , But You 're No Wave " . The song has been described as a " very well @-@ written track , a welcome respite from the one @-@ liners which permeate the majority of the record . " 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The album 's title is taken from a letter written by Vincent van Gogh to his brother Theo in 1888 , in which he describes his renewed health and the positive effect it has had on his painting . Originally written in Dutch , Van Gogh 's phrasing has been translated as " Be clearly aware of the stars and infinity on high . Then life seems almost enchanted after all " . Speaking of the title shortly after its announcement in November 2006 , Wentz stated " As for what that means in relation to the record , we 'll just let it unfold when people hear it . " While Wentz declined to reveal the relationship between the title and the album 's songs , MTV reporter James Montgomery opined that " It 's not difficult to see it as a statement about the band rising above detractors and finding strength within themselves . " 
 The photography for the album was done by Pamela <unk> , and the sets on the album artwork were designed by Todd <unk> . Chuck Anderson of <unk> designed the artwork for the album . A winged sheep is depicted on the cover of the album in a bedroom with the moon and stars in the background , while the inside of the CD booklet features " tarot card " designs with photos of each of the band members . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Promotion for the album began in November 2006 with the band performing " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " for the first time at the American Music Awards on November 21 . The song was shipped to radio the same night as the performance . In the week following the performance , the single was the top added track at Pop and Alternative radio . While the song was the first song revealed from the album , it would not receive an official single release until January 2007 . " The Carpal Tunnel of Love " was released as a digital promotional single in December 2006 . It was a minor hit in the United States , peaking at 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The band then began the Friends or Enemies Tour in January 2007 to build interest in the album . The tour consisted of intimate club shows in fifteen cities throughout the United States , with New Found Glory , The Early November , Permanent Me and Lifetime . Two weeks before Infinity on High was released , the album was leaked online , which led to rumors on the band 's message boards that the album would be released a week early . Although these rumors were incorrect , Fall Out Boy responded to the leak by including an exclusive live EP , Leaked in London , recorded in London 's Hammersmith Palais at their sold @-@ out show on January 29 , 2006 , with each purchase to encourage fans to buy the album . The EP could be downloaded from the band 's website between Tuesday , February 6 , 2007 and Tuesday , February 13 , 2007 using <unk> software along with inserting a physical copy of Infinity on High into the CD @-@ ROM drive of one 's computer . Infinity on High was the final release from Rabid Neurosis , a warez organization responsible for leaking 20 @,@ 000 albums before their release . 
 On February 6 , 2007 , the day of the album 's release , Fall Out Boy played three free shows , each in a different city in the United States . The day started with a morning performance in Times Square in New York City , followed by a gig in the band 's hometown of Chicago , and then a late @-@ night show in Los Angeles . In March 2008 , Fall Out Boy attempted to enter the The Guinness Book of World Records for being the only band to perform in all seven continents in nine months , planning to perform in Antarctica for an audience of scientists while working with Greenpeace to raise awareness about global warming . However , the group was unable to make the flight from Punta Arenas , Chile to Antarctica due to poor weather . Instead , Wentz and Stump went on to break the world record for the most interviews conducted by a duo in a 24 @-@ hour period , setting the mark at seventy @-@ four . 
 To promote the album after its release , Fall Out Boy embarked on an extensive tour schedule , with concerts across the United States , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Europe and Asia . It began with the 2007 Honda Civic Tour with Paul Wall , + 44 , The Academy Is ... , and Cobra Starship . The tour was originally planned to begin on April 18 , 2007 but the band decided to postpone the date until May 11 , citing health issues and exhaustion . Wentz stated " It 's a health issue , but not a health issue that anyone needs to worry about . It 's not life @-@ threatening , it 's more about being overworked and worn down . " In honor of the tour , the group designed a custom Honda Civic Hybrid which was given away to a fan in a contest . Wentz described the tour as " our biggest show ever " , with Stump adding that " We 've been working really hard to make this show look and sound the best it 's ever been for Fall Out Boy . " For a Kiss @-@ inspired fan contest , Wentz 's brother created prints of images based on the record , created with ink mixed with the band members ' blood . The band gave away prints to winners at every stop on the Honda Civic Tour . Wentz hoped that the contest would serve to " [ shed ] some light on the much @-@ needed support for blood drives . " A live concert CD and DVD recorded at a show in Phoenix was later released in 2008 , entitled Live in Phoenix . 
 The band also headlined the Young Wild Things Tour , an international arena tour featuring Gym Class Heroes , Plain White T 's and Cute Is What We Aim For . Of the thirty one dates , twenty nine were in the US with two in Canada . The tour was inspired by Maurice Sendak 's 1963 children 's book Where the Wild Things Are , and included sets designed by artist Rob Dobi containing images from the book . Commenting on the decision to incorporate elements from the book , Wentz explained " Where the Wild Things Are is a great narrative . It encapsulates pretty much every FOB song ever written : You know , tantrums and monster islands and all . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 Four songs were released as singles from the album 's fourteen tracks , of which three charted on the US Billboard Hot 100 and all reaching international charts . Infinity on High was spurred on by the lead single " This Ain 't a Scene , It 's an Arms Race " , which became the highest charting song for band and their first to chart worldwide . Wentz commented on the band 's decision to pick " This Ain 't a Scene ... " as the first single , saying " There may be other songs on the record that would be bigger radio hits , but this one had the right message . " It was sent to radio weeks before its digital release in January 2007 ; upon digital release the track debuted and peaked at number two on the Hot 100 where it stayed at that position for two consecutive weeks , spending nine weeks in the top ten . The single sold 162 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its opening week , breaking various music industry records and becoming the highest debut of 2007 . With this total it was the largest opening @-@ week tally for a group since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking digital sales in 2003 and set a new record for the highest bow for a band since radio only titles joined the chart in 1998 . It also reached number one on the defunct @-@ Pop 100 , number one on Billboard Digital Songs and came at number eight on Alternative Songs . Internationally , " This Ain 't a Scene ... " debuted and peaked inside the top ten of many charts . It reached number one in New Zealand , number two in the UK , number four and Platinum status in Australia , number four on the Canadian Hot 100 and in Ireland , and placed at number nine on the European Hot 100 . 
 " Thnks fr th Mmrs " was released as the second single in the US in March 2007 . It peaked at number eleven on the Hot 100 with twenty @-@ eight chart weeks before it was retired . It came at number five on Digital Songs , but performed weaker on the Radio Songs chart at number forty . It reached the two @-@ million sales mark week ending December 27 , 2009 in the US . Its highest charting was in Australia where it peaked at number three on the Australian ARIA chart and achieved Platinum status in the region . In New Zealand , the UK , Canada and Ireland " Thnks fr th Mmrs " reached the top twenty . 
 " " The Take Over , the Breaks Over " " was released in August 2007 in the US as the third single and failed to chart on the Hot 100 , although it did reach number 48 on the UK Singles Chart , with its highest position at number seventeen in Australia , becoming the third consecutive top twenty hit from Infinity on High in that region . The fourth and last single , " I 'm Like a Lawyer with the Way I 'm Always Trying to Get You Off ( Me & You ) " managed to reach number 68 in the US and made the top 30 in Australia . " The Carpal Tunnel of Love " was not an official single but it was leaked online by the band before Infinity 's release and was later given as an exclusive download to iTunes ; it managed to reach number eighty @-@ one on the Hot 100 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Infinity on High received generally positive reviews from music critics , with many praising Stump 's vocals and the album 's new musical direction . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 75 , based on 23 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A- , commending the band 's " new sense of swing " on its R & B @-@ influenced songs and noting that Stump " has evolved into a superb frontman . " Dave de Silva of Sputnikmusic agreed about Stump 's new vocal style , saying that " his tone is smoother and more well @-@ rounded , he ’ s cut out the borderline screechy high @-@ end which made parts of the previous album unlistenable and , though occasionally still nasally , his tones are far more varied and adaptable to different styles " as well as calling Wentz ' lyrics " as sharp as ever " . Andrew Blackie of PopMatters called the album " wildly exciting and experimental " and felt it greatly improved upon From Under the Cork Tree . Aaron Burgess of The A.V. Club enjoyed the disc 's new pop direction and felt that the songs that were more typical of Fall Out Boy 's original sound , such as " The Carpal Tunnel of Love " undermined the album 's potential . Sven Philipp of Billboard called Infinity on High a " shamelessly melodic , wild and powerful pop record " and referred to Stump as the album 's " true surprise " . The album was ranked No. 38 on Q 's 50 Best Albums of 2007 . 
 However , some critics felt that the album was overly ambitious and that the band 's musical departure may alienate listeners . Chad Grischow of IGN felt that the album 's dramatic hooks seem " bloated " at times : " The band does a great of focusing on what they do best , but the album does drown itself a bit with all the overwhelming enormity of it all . " Scott Shetler of Slant disliked the " melodramatic " undertones of " I 've Got All This Ringing in My Ears and None on My Fingers " and " Golden " , writing " they don 't handle that style quite as well as Panic ! at the Disco " . Cory Apar of AllMusic opined that the album 's pop direction contradicts the band 's lyrical claims of wishing to stick to their roots . He called the album 's various styles " hit and miss " , yet commented that " Once Infinity on High sinks in , it 's indeed a fun record . But for a band that was once so self @-@ assured and able to utilize its talents so compellingly , the album is regrettably haphazard . " Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian believed that the album was overly sullen , but noted that " They may not be happy , but they haven 't forgotten to be catchy . " Barry Nicholson of NME found the amount of guest producers to be unnecessary and disliked some of the songs , but admired the album 's " infectious " nature . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Infinity on High was a major commercial success , debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first week sales of 260 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Infinity has sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies in the US to date February 2013 . It was the band 's first US number one album and second consecutive top ten effort , as its previous release , From Under the Cork Tree , peaked at number nine . The album spent its first six weeks in the top ten , out of a total of fifty two chart weeks . Infinity on High also opened at number one on Billboard 's Rock Albums , Tastemaker Albums , and Digital Albums charts , with over 27 @,@ 000 digital sales making up the total first week tally . In its second week , it fell to number five on the Billboard 200 , selling 119 @,@ 000 copies with a 54 % decline during a post @-@ Grammy week . The album rose to number three in its third week with 79 @,@ 000 units sold . In its fourth week , the disc slipped to number four and sold 67 @,@ 000 copies . Infinity on High 's sales again fell in its fifth week , moving 58 @,@ 000 copies and descending to number eight on the chart . In its sixth and last week in the top ten it fell to number nine and sold 43 @,@ 000 copies . In April 2007 , the album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting the shipment of one million copies . It finished the year at number twenty @-@ one on IFPI 's list of the " Top 50 Global Best Selling Albums of 2007 " . Infinity on High has shipped over two million copies worldwide . 
 The album also charted inside the top five worldwide , making it the band 's most successful and breakthrough album internationally . Infinity on High charted all over Europe , debuting at number eight on Billboard 's European Albums chart . In Australia , it debuted at its peak of number four on the Australian ARIA Albums Chart . It remained on the Australian chart for a total of fifty weeks , spending its first seven weeks in the top ten . In its 31st chart week it broke into the top ten again where it remained for another six weeks in a row , accumulating a total of thirteen weeks in the top ten . The CD was certified Double Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 140 @,@ 000 copies . Infinity on High debuted at number one in New Zealand , and remained at the top position for six consecutive weeks , logging a total of thirty @-@ seven chart weeks , making it the fifth longest chart sitter on the New Zealand charts in 2007 . After marking its first twelve weeks in the top ten , it went on to spend a combined total of twenty @-@ six weeks inside the top twenty and received a Platinum accreditation from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for 15 @,@ 000 shipments . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number three with 64 @,@ 054 first week sales and made nine weeks in the top twenty , being certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for 300 @,@ 000 units shipped . It went on to sell 446 @,@ 807 in the UK to date January 2015 . The album debuted at number two in Canada with 21 @,@ 000 first week sales . Infinity was certified Platinum by Music Canada for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . In Ireland , the record peaked at number six according to the Irish Recorded Music Association with fourteen weeks within the top twenty , and also went Platinum there . After entering the French albums chart at number 64 , Infinity on High reached its peak of number 17 and held on for 64 weeks in the top 150 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Pete Wentz , all music composed by Fall Out Boy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Church of St George , Kyustendil = 
 The Church of St George ( Bulgarian : църква „ Свети <unk> “ , tsarkva „ Sveti Georgi “ ) is a medieval Eastern Orthodox church in the city of Kyustendil , which lies in southwestern Bulgaria and is the administrative capital of Kyustendil Province . The church is located in the <unk> neighbourhood , which was historically separate from the city . The church was constructed in the 10th – 11th century and its frescoes are somewhat later , as the earliest layers were painted in the 11th – 12th century . 
 = = History = = 
 The Church of St George is dated to the late 10th or early 11th century based on its architectural appearance and mural paintings , which makes it the oldest preserved church in the city . It is located in Kyustendil 's southwestern part , in the former village of <unk> , which in 1939 was merged into the city . 
 There is a theory that Bulgarian emperor Michael Shishman was buried in the Church of St George after he perished in the Battle of Velbazhd in 1330 . The battle was a Serbian victory over the Second Bulgarian Empire which paved the way for the short @-@ lived Serbian dominance over the Balkans in the mid @-@ 14th century . However , scholar Bistra Nikolova entirely dismisses this theory as an " erroneous reference in [ Bulgarian history ] literature " . 
 Despite being located outside Kyustendil at the time , up until the construction of the city 's main Bulgarian National Revival @-@ style church in 1816 , the Church of St George served as Kyustendil 's cathedral . The church suffered some severe damage during the 19th century , the time of the Ottoman rule of Bulgaria ; it was mostly destroyed , leaving only the foundations of the arches . It was reconstructed in 1878 – 1880 , just after the establishment of the Principality of Bulgaria , with further restoration in the 2000s . 
 = = Architecture and decoration = = 
 The church follows the Byzantine cross @-@ in @-@ square design and measures 10 by 8 @.@ 70 metres ( 32 @.@ 8 ft × 28 @.@ 5 ft ) . The dome is octagonal and features eight bays , four of which contain windows . There is no narthex and the cella appears square . A total of six pillars support the church from the inside . Two frame the entrance of the altar , while the remaining four stand below the dome . The church has three apses , all of a semicircular design . Materials used for the church 's construction were bricks and mortar , resulting in interchanging rows of red and white . 
 The church 's interior has preserved a number of medieval frescoes , particularly in the lower reaches of the walls and pillars . The paintings in the altar were done in the 11th – 12th century , while the decoration of the pillars dates to the 12th century . All inscriptions that accompany the murals are in Medieval Greek . The altar features the images of four deacons bearing a censer and <unk> as well as two bishops who could possibly be identified as Basil of Caesarea and John Chrysostom . A number of saints are also depicted inside the church , including Saint Elijah , Saints Cosmas and Damian , Saint <unk> , Saint Pantaleon , and four unidentified female saints . There are also later works of art in the church . It boasts icons or murals by painter Ivan <unk> from 1881 as well as works by Mihail <unk> . 
 Due to its architectural and artistic value , the Church of St George has been part of the list of Bulgaria 's monuments of cultural of national importance since 1927 . With the reorganization of the list in the 1960s , it was included on it both as an architectural and as an artistic monument , in 1968 and 1969 respectively . Together with the native house of Dimitar <unk> and the city art gallery , since 2010 it has been listed as number 26 among the 100 Tourist Sites of Bulgaria . 
 = Chloë Sevigny = 
 Chloë Stevens Sevigny ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born November 18 , 1974 ) is an American actress , fashion designer , director and former model . Sevigny was discovered on the street in New York City in 1992 by a magazine editor , who offered her jobs both modeling and interning at Sassy Magazine , a teen magazine aimed at girls with alternative tastes . In 1994 , she attracted the attention of journalist Jay McInerney , who wrote a 7 @-@ page article about her for The New Yorker , in which he called a then 19 @-@ year @-@ old Sevigny the " coolest girl in the world . " 
 Sevigny made her film debut with a lead role in the controversial film Kids ( 1995 ) , written by her then boyfriend Harmony Korine and received an Independent Spirit Award nomination for her performance . A long line of roles in generally well @-@ received independent and often experimental films throughout the decade established Sevigny 's reputation as " Queen of the Indies . " In 1999 , Sevigny gained recognition outside of the independent film world for her role as Lana Tisdel in the true story Boys Don 't Cry , earning her Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress . Despite her brush with mainstream success , Sevigny continued acting in mostly independent art house films , such as American Psycho ( 2000 ) , Party Monster ( 2003 ) , and Dogville ( 2003 ) . Her role in the art house film The Brown Bunny ( 2003 ) caused significant controversy because of a scene in which she performs unsimulated fellatio . Her films since then have included Melinda and Melinda ( 2004 ) , Manderlay ( 2005 ) , and Zodiac ( 2007 ) , the latter of which marked Sevigny 's transition into a more big budget studio picture . 
 From 2006 to 2011 , Sevigny played the polygamist Nicolette Grant in the HBO television series Big Love , for which she won a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress in 2010 . She then appeared in several television projects , including lead roles in Hit & Miss ( 2012 ) and American Horror Story : Hotel ( 2015 – 2016 ) , and recurring roles on American Horror Story : Asylum ( 2012 – 2013 ) , Bloodline ( 2014 ) , and Portlandia . Sevigny has two Off @-@ Broadway theatre credits , and has starred in several music videos . She has also designed several wardrobe collections , most recently with Manhattan 's Opening Ceremony boutique . The short film Kitty , which Sevigny directed , closed the 2016 Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sevigny was born in Springfield , Massachusetts , the second child of Janine ( née Malinowski ) and H. David Sevigny . She has one older brother , Paul . Her mother is Polish American , and her father was of French Canadian heritage . Sevigny was raised in Darien , Connecticut , where her father worked as an accountant turned local art teacher . Sevigny 's father died of cancer in 1996 . Despite Darien 's affluence , Sevigny 's parents had a " frugal " household , and were considered " the poor bohemians in [ an ] extremely prosperous neighborhood . " Sevigny expressed interest in acting as a child , and spent summers attending theatre camp , with leading roles in plays run by the YMCA . She was raised Roman Catholic , and attended Darien High School , where she was a member of the Alternative Learning Program . While in high school , she often babysat actor Topher Grace and his younger sister . As a teenager , she worked sweeping the tennis courts of a country club her family could not afford to join . 
 During her teenage years , Sevigny became rebellious : " I was very well @-@ mannered , and my mother was very strict . But I did hang out at the Mobil station and smoke cigarettes . " Between her junior and senior year of high school , she shaved her head and sold her hair to a Broadway wigmaker . She openly admitted to using drugs as a teenager , especially hallucinogens . She has commented that her father was aware of her experimentation with hallucinogens and marijuana , and even told her that it was okay , but that she had " to stop if she had bad trips " . Despite her father 's leniency , her mother later chose to send her to Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . In 2007 , she told The Times that " I had a great family life – I would never want it to look as if it reflected on them . I think I was very bored , and I did just love taking hallucinogens ... but I often feel it 's because I experimented when I was younger that I have no interest as an adult . I know a lot of adults who didn 't , and it 's much more dangerous when you start experimenting with drugs as an adult . " She often described herself as a " loner " and a " depressed teenager " . Her only extracurricular activity was occasionally skateboarding with her older brother , and she spent most of her free time in her bedroom : " Mostly I sewed . I had nothing better to do , so I made my own clothes . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1992 – 94 : Beginnings = = = 
