 The $ 15 million price tag for the 2000 bra worn by Gisele Bündchen earned a place in the Guinness World Records as the most expensive item of lingerie ever created . The $ 3 million 2009 Harlequin Fantasy Bra and the $ 2 million 2010 Bombshell Fantasy Bra were designed by Damiani . Listed below are the prices per set ( including accessories for the 2007 and 2013 editions , the 2013 bra alone is worth $ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . The 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra was accompanied by a $ 500 @,@ 000 perfume bottle . 
 In 2014 , for the first time , two fantasy bras were created . They were worn by Alessandra Ambrosio and Adriana Lima and were valued at $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 each . 
 = Boston Police Strike = 
 In the Boston Police Strike , Boston police officers went on strike on September 9 , 1919 . They sought recognition for their trade union and improvements in wages and working conditions . Police Commissioner Edwin Upton Curtis denied that police officers had any right to form a union , much less one affiliated with a larger organization like the American Federation of Labor ( AFL ) . Attempts at reconciliation between the Commissioner and the police officers , particularly on the part of Boston 's Mayor Andrew James Peters , failed . 
 During the strike , Boston experienced several nights of lawlessness , although property damage was not extensive . Several thousand members of the State Guard , supported by volunteers , restored order . Press reaction both locally and nationally described the strike as Bolshevik @-@ inspired and directed at the destruction of civil society . The strikers were called " deserters " and " agents of Lenin . " 
 Samuel Gompers of the AFL recognized that the strike was damaging the cause of labor in the public mind and advised the strikers to return to work . Commissioner Curtis refused to re @-@ hire the striking policemen . He was supported by Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge , whose rebuke of Gompers earned him a national reputation . The strike proved a setback for labor unions , and the AFL discontinued its attempts to organize police officers for another two decades . Coolidge won the Republican nomination for vice @-@ president of the U.S. in the 1920 presidential election . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1895 , the Massachusetts legislature transferred control of the Boston police department from Boston 's mayor to the governor of Massachusetts , whom it authorized to appoint a five @-@ person board of commissioners to manage the department . In 1906 , the legislature abolished that board and gave the governor the authority to name a single commissioner to a term of five years , subject to removal by the governor . The mayor and the city continued to have responsibility for the department 's expenses and the physical working conditions of its employees , but the commissioner controlled department operations and the hiring , training , and discipline of the police officers . 
 In 1918 , the salary for patrolmen was set at $ 1 @,@ 400 a year . Police officers had to buy their own uniforms and equipment which cost over $ 200 . New recruits received $ 730 during their first year , which increased annually to $ 821 @.@ 25 and $ 1000 , and to $ 1 @,@ 400 after six years . In the years following World War I , inflation dramatically eroded the value of a police officer 's salary . From 1913 to May 1919 , the cost of living rose by 76 % , while police wages rose just 18 % . Discontent and restiveness among the Boston police force grew as they compared their wages and found they were earning less than an unskilled steelworker , half as much as a carpenter or mechanic and 50 cents a day less than a streetcar conductor . Boston city laborers were earning a third more on an hourly basis . 
 Police officers had an extensive list of grievances . They worked ten @-@ hour shifts and typically recorded weekly totals between 75 and 90 hours . They were not paid for time spent on court appearances . They also objected to being required to perform such tasks as " delivering unpaid tax bills , surveying rooming houses , taking the census , or watching the polls at election " and checking the backgrounds of prospective jurors as well as serving as " errand boys " for their officers . They complained about having to share beds and the lack of sanitation , baths , and toilets at many of the 19 station houses where they were required to live , most of which dated to before the Civil War . The Court Street station had four toilets for 135 men , and one bathtub . 
 Boston 's police officers , acting with the sponsorship of the police department , had formed an association known as the Boston Social Club in 1906 . In 1917 , a committee of police officers representing the Social Club met with Commissioner Stephen O 'Meara to ask about a raise . He was sympathetic , but advised them to wait for a better time . They pressed the issue in the summer of 1918 and , near the end of the year , Mayor Andrew Peters offered salary increases that would affect about one @-@ fourth of the officers . O 'Meara died in December 1918 , and Governor Samuel McCall appointed Edwin Upton Curtis , former Mayor of Boston , as Commissioner of the Boston Police Department . After another meeting where representatives of the Social Club repeated their salary demands , Peters said : " while the word ' strike ' was not mentioned , the whole situation is far more serious than I realized . " He also made it clear to the rank and file that they were not entitled to form their own union . Curtis did not share his predecessor 's or the mayor 's sympathy for the police , but in February 1918 he offered a wage compromise that the police rejected . In May , Governor Coolidge announced raises , which were also rejected . When the Social Club 's representatives tried to raise grievances with him , Curtis set up his own grievance committee to handle management @-@ employee disputes , based on the election of representatives from each precinct house by secret ballot , and it met just once . 
 A few months later , in June 1919 , the American Federation of Labor ( AFL ) , responding to repeated requests from local police organizations , began accepting police organizations into their membership . By September , it had granted charters to police unions in 37 cities , including Washington , D.C. , Los Angeles , Miami , and St. Paul , though not without protests from some city officials , who opposed the unionization of police , firefighters , and teachers . 
 = = Events leading to the strike = = 
 The Boston police decided to organize under an AFL charter in order to gain support from other unions in their negotiations and any strike that might ensue . On August 9 , 1919 , the Boston Social Club requested a charter from the AFL . On August 11 , Curtis issued a General Order forbidding police officers to join any " organization , club or body outside the department " , making an exception only for patriotic organizations such as the American Legion . His administration argued that such a rule was based on the conflict of interest between police officers ' duties and union membership : 
 It is or should be apparent to any thinking person that the police department of this or any other city cannot fulfill its duty to the entire public if its members are subject to the direction of an organization existing outside the department .... If troubles and disturbances arise where the interests of this organization and the interests of other elements and classes in the community conflict , the situation immediately arises which always arises when a man attempts to serve two masters , – he must fail either in his duty as a policeman , or in his obligation to the organization that controls him . 
 On August 15 , the police received their AFL charter . On August 17 , the Central Labor Union of Boston welcomed the police union and denounced Curtis for his assertions that the police had no right to unionize . Curtis refused to meet with the eight members of the police union 's committee . He suspended them and 11 others who held various union offices and scheduled trials to determine if they had violated his General Order . At this point , Curtis was a hero to business interests . Late in August , the New Hampshire Association of Manufacturers called him " the Ole Hanson of the east , " equating the events they anticipated in Boston with the earlier Seattle General Strike . 
 Mayor Peters sought to play an intermediary role by appointing a Citizen 's Committee to review the dispute about union representation . He chose a well @-@ known local reformer as its chair , James J. Storrow . Storrow 's group recommended that Curtis and the police agree to a police union without AFL ties and without the right to strike . Curtis in turn would recognize the police union and the union would agree to remain " independent and unaffiliated " . Storrow 's group also recommended that no action be taken against the 19 men whom Curtis had suspended . Four of Boston 's five newspapers backed the compromise , with only the Boston Transcript holding to a consistent anti @-@ union position . The Boston Chamber of Commerce backed it as well . 
 Curtis , with the backing of Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge , rejected the Storrow Commission 's proposal . He proceeded with department trials of the 19 and on September 8 found them guilty of union activity . Rather than dismiss them from the police force , he extended their suspensions . He later explained that he was giving them an opportunity to reconsider their actions and avoid discharges , which would have been irrevocable . The police union members responded that same day by voting 1134 to 2 in favor of a strike and scheduled it to start at evening roll call the next day . Their stated grounds omitted wages and working conditions . They said the strike 's rationale was to protest the Commissioner 's denial of their right to ally themselves with the AFL . 
 In anticipation of the strike , all of Boston 's newspapers called it " <unk> , " pleaded with the police to reconsider and predicted dire consequences . One also warned the police that their eventual defeat was guaranteed , that they would lose because " behind Boston in this skirmish with Bolshevism stands Massachusetts , and behind Massachusetts stands America . " 
 = = Strike = = 
 On September 9 , Boston Police Department officers went on strike at 5 : 45 p.m. Of the force 's 1 @,@ 544 officers and men , 1 @,@ 117 ( 72 % ) failed to report for work . Coolidge assigned 100 members of the state 's Metropolitan Park Police Department to replace the striking officers , but 58 of them refused to participate and were suspended from their jobs . Despite assurances from Commissioner Curtis to Mayor Peters and Governor Coolidge , Boston had little police protection for the night of September 9 . Volunteer replacements were still being organized and due to report the next morning . 
 Over the night of September 9 – 10 , the city witnessed an outbreak of hooliganism and looting . Some was rowdy behavior that scared respectable citizens , such as youths throwing rocks at streetcars and overturning the carts of street vendors . More overtly criminal activity included the smashing of store windows and looting their displays or setting off false fire alarms . Such activity was restricted to certain parts of the city and , according to the New York Times , " throughout the greater part of the city the usual peace and quiet prevailed . " In the morning the Mayor asked the Governor to furnish a force of State Guards ; Coolidge promptly agreed and eventually provided almost 5 @,@ 000 men . Commissioner Curtis later praised the State Guards ' performance in his Annual Report : " The whole community is now aware of the effectiveness with which the Massachusetts State Guard worked when it came into the city . I cannot add anything to the universal chorus of commendation that has greeted their work . " The morning papers following the first night 's violence were full of loud complaints and derogatory terms for the police : " deserters " , " agents of Lenin . " 
 Violence peaked the next evening , the night of September 10 – 11 . Businesses were better prepared . Some had boarded up and others stayed open all night with armed guards visible to discourage thieves taking advantage of the strike . Gamblers played dice in open view , and women had their handbags snatched . But the Guard 's inexperience at handling crowds resulted in dangerous attempts to assert control . Gunfire in South Boston left two dead and others wounded . One person died in a riot at Scollay Square , a center of amusement halls and theaters . Whether the crowds were threatening property or making trouble because they were in sympathy with the strikers is unknown . The death total ultimately reached nine . 
 City life continued relatively normally , especially during daytime hours . Schools remained open . Later claims against the city for losses incurred during the two nights of disorder ran to $ 35 @,@ 000 , of which the city paid $ 34 @,@ 000 . Those figures represent a non @-@ partisan calculation of the costs of the strike to the Boston business community . 
 When Governor Coolidge called the strikers " deserters " and " traitors , " a mass meeting of the Boston Police Union responded : 
 When we were honorably discharged from the United States army , we were hailed as heroes and saviors of our country . We returned to our duties on the police force of Boston . 
 Now , though only a few months have passed , we are denounced as deserters , as traitors to our city and violators of our oath of office . 
 The first men to raise the cry were those who have always been opposed to giving to labor a living wage . It was taken up by the newspapers , who cared little for the real facts . You finally added your word of condemnation .... 
 Among us are men who have gone against spitting machine guns single @-@ handed , and captured them , volunteering for the job . Among us are men who have ridden with dispatches through shell fire so dense that four men fell and only the fifth got through . 
 Not one man of us ever disgraced the flag or his service . It is bitter to come home and be called deserters and traitors . We are the same men who were on the French front . 
 Some of us fought in the Spanish war of 1898 . Won 't you tell the people of Massachusetts in which war you served ? 
 On the evening of September 11 , the Central Labor Union met to consider calling a general strike in support of the striking police . Earlier it had expressed enthusiasm for a general strike , more likely as an expression of solidarity than a declaration of serious intent . It collected the votes of its constituent unions and on September 12 announced it was delaying a decision . Their statement explained their reasoning : " We are not to act in a manner that will give the prejudiced press and autocratic employers a chance to criticize us . " 
 On September 11 , Matthew Woll , an AFL vice @-@ president , said his organization discouraged strikes by government employees but defended their right to organize : " all wage earners have the right to associate with one another and collectively to improve their condition " . He blamed the strike on government managers who failed to recognize that right and put the Boston situation in the context of the broader union movement : " On the question of industrial democracy [ i.e. , unionization ] , we find still that group of employers , <unk> in character , who believe democracy means for them to ruin or rule industrially . They cannot conceive that works have any right in the management of industry . ... The time has past when any man can say that he is the ruler of the people in his employment . " AFL President Samuel Gompers , just returned from Europe , quickly assessed the situation and the strength of public sentiment . On September 12 , he urged the strikers to return to work , asking the city to agree to suspend judgment on whether to recognize the police union . In a telegram to Mayor Peters he cited the model of Washington , D.C. , which had , at the suggestion of President Wilson , suspended its regulation forbidding police officers to join a union affiliated with the AFL until a conference scheduled for October 6 . The police accepted Gompers ' recommendation immediately . Coolidge replied with a statement of support for Curtis ' hard line . Gompers telegraphed Coolidge again , this time blaming Curtis for the crisis . Coolidge dismissed the Commissioner 's behavior as irrelevant , because no provocation could justify the police walkout . His terse summation created his reputation on the national scene : " There is no right to strike against the public safety , anywhere , anytime . " Coolidge said he would continue to " defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts . " 
 By the weekend , the presence of the State Guards had become a curiosity . Larger than usual crowds strolled in the center of the city . Thousands attended a band concert on the Boston Common . " The shootings of the last few days for interference with guardsmen , " said the New York Times , " seem to have had a marked effect . " 
 Coolidge said he originally hoped to reinstate the officers , stating in a telegram to a labor convention , " I earnestly hope that circumstances may arise which will cause the police officers to be reinstated " . Over the objections of Mayor Peters , Commissioner Curtis announced on September 13 that he planned to recruit a new force . He fired roughly 1 @,@ 100 and hired 1 @,@ 574 replacement police officers from a pool of unemployed World War I veterans . Members of the United Garment Workers refused to sew uniforms for the new hires , who had to report for work in civilian clothing . 
 The new officers hired in the wake of the strike received higher salaries and more vacation days than the strikers had . They enjoyed a starting salary of $ 1 @,@ 400 along with a pension plan , and the department covered the cost of their uniforms and equipment . The population of Boston raised $ 472 @,@ 000 to help pay for the State Guards until new police officers could be recruited . 
 = = National reaction = = 
 In an editorial on the first morning of the strike , the New York Times supported the police commissioner and said that the strikers were " [ i ] <unk> unconsciously by anti @-@ social ideals , or acting by ' suggestion ' of their London and Liverpool brethren " , which had recently seen similar strikes . It said : 
 A policeman has no more right to belong to a union than a soldier or a sailor . He must be ready to obey orders , the orders of his superiors , not those of any outside body . One of his duties is the maintenance of order in the case of strike violence . In such a case , if he is faithful to his union , he may have to be unfaithful to the public , which pays him to protect it . The situation is false and impossible .... It is the privilege of Boston policemen to resign if they are not satisfied with the conditions of their employment .... but it is intolerable that a city ... should be deserted by men who misunderstand their position and function as policemen , and who take their orders from outside .... [ I ] t is an imported , revolutionary idea that may spread to various cities . There should be plain and stern law against it . It is practically an analogue of military desertion ... [ I ] t ought to be punished suitably and repressed . 
 It later called the strike " this Boston essay in Bolshevism " and lamented the attempt of Mayor Peters and the Storrow Commission " to submit to compromise an issue that could not be compromised " . Newspaper accounts exaggerated the level of crime and violence that accompanied the strike , resulting in a national furor that shaped the political response . A Philadelphia paper viewed the Boston violence in the same light as other labor unrest and numerous race riots in 1919 : " Bolshevism in the United States is no longer a specter . Boston in chaos reveals its sinister substance . " President Woodrow Wilson , speaking from Montana , branded the walkout " a crime against civilization " that left the city " at the mercy of an army of thugs . " He said that " the obligation of a policeman is as sacred and direct as the obligation of a soldier . He is a public servant , not a private employee , and the whole honor of the community is in his hands . He has no right to prefer any private advantage to the public safety . " Elihu Root , a former Secretary of War and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , told a Carnegie Hall audience on September 17 that the strike was an attack on constitutional government because it represented " the passing of power to enforce laws , the power to punish crime , the power to maintain order from the whole people of the United States " to the 3 % of the population represented by the AFL . 
 A report from Washington , D.C. included this headline : " Senators Think Effort to <unk> the Government Is Started . " Senator Henry Cabot Lodge saw in the strike the dangers of the national labor movement : " If the American Federation of Labor succeeds in getting hold of the police in Boston it will go all over the country , and we shall be in measurable distance of Soviet government by labor unions . " The Ohio State Journal opposed any sympathetic treatment of the strikers : " When a policeman strikes , he should be debarred not only from resuming his office , but from citizenship as well . He has committed the unpardonable sin ; he has forfeited all his rights . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the police commissioner 's Annual Report for 1919 , Curtis presented his view of the strike . He argued that he could not have requested State Guards for the strike 's first night because the city remained quiet and he had reports that many policemen would not join the strike . By the end of the year the strikers had formed a new organization called the Association of Former Police of the City of Boston . 
 The strike gave momentum to Coolidge 's political career . In 1918 , he had narrowly been elected governor . In 1919 he won 62 % of the votes when running against an opponent who favored reinstating the strikers . He failed to carry Boston by just 5 @,@ 000 votes , an impressive showing for a Republican in a strongly Democratic city . The Boston Transcript reported : 
 Massachusetts is hailed today from Maine to California as the winner of a shining triumph for straight Americanism . The voting booths of the old Bay State were a battleground for the nation . The ancient faith was under fire . Law and order formed the line of cleavage . The Governor was the Commander @-@ in @-@ chief , the people of the commonwealth were the invincible army , the issue was America , and in the triumph of that issue all America triumphs . 
 Coolidge himself later said , " No doubt it was the police strike in Boston that brought me into national prominence . " In a post @-@ election congratulatory telegram President Wilson wrote : " I congratulate you upon your election as a victory for law and order . When that is the issue , all Americans must stand together . " His role in the strike , however limited , became a prominent feature of his resume as he sought higher office . According to one obituary , " the Boston police strike of 1919 ... brought him national prominence and the nomination for the Vice Presidency " in 1920 . When he succeeded to the presidency in 1923 upon the death of Warren Harding , the New York Times headlined its biography : " Coolidge <unk> Won Recognition ; His Suppression of the Boston Police Strike Made Him a National Figure " . Coolidge 's political rivals interpreted his role differently . In 1925 , U.S. Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin said that Coolidge 's failure to intervene in that year 's coal strike mirrored his 1919 actions when he " persistently refused to act upon the requests of the Mayor of Boston for assistance until riot and bloodshed had aroused the entire State . Then when order had been restored by the efforts of Mayor Peters and the Storrow committee Coolidge sent in the militia and claimed full credit for restoring ' law and order ' . " 
 The strike heightened public fear of labor unrest and the possible radicalism that lay behind it . It contributed to the public anxiety of the period known as the Red Scare of 1919 – 1920 . The failure of this and other strikes in the years following World War I contributed to declining union membership in subsequent years . The American Federation of Labor responded to political pressure experienced during the strike and revoked the charters it had granted to police unions . That ended police unionism in the U.S. for two decades , as police would not try to organize until World War II . 
 In 1930 , a history of the Boston Transcript , the most resolutely anti @-@ union of Boston 's newspapers in 1919 , perpetuated its original account of urban chaos during the strike 's first nights . It described large crowds , including a number of sailors from docked naval ships , that took to the streets , smashing windows , committing robbery and stoning bystanders and cars . It said that the northern , southern , and western areas of the city were all taken over by armed gangs . 
 In 1931 , the Massachusetts legislature voted to allow the officers who had struck to be rehired . In 1937 , Massachusetts Governor Charles F. Hurley , after meeting with some of the 1919 strikers , backed the decision of Police Commissioner Joseph <unk> not to reinstate them . 
 The Boston Police Patrolman 's Association was formed in 1965 following the enactment of a state statute allowing state and municipal workers to organize for the sake of collective bargaining . 
 No police officers in the U.S. went out on strike until July 1974 , when some Baltimore police , estimated at 15 % to 50 % of the force , refused to report for work for several days as a demonstration of support for other striking municipal unions . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Dropkick Murphys album Rock Against Bush Volume 2 includes the song " We Got the Power " about the Boston police strike . 
 Dennis Lehane 's novel The Given Day is partly set during the Boston police strike . 
 Issue number 7 of Alan Moore 's comic book series Providence is set on the backdrop of the Boston police strike . 
 = Charles Lloyd ( Australian general ) = 
 Major General Charles Edward Maurice Lloyd , CBE ( 2 February 1899 – 31 May 1956 ) was a senior officer in the Australian Army . Lloyd graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon in 1918 as a regular officer in the artillery and subsequently served in a range of staff and regimental positions in the inter @-@ war years . He later saw service in the Second World War , during which he held senior staff and administrative positions in the Middle East , the Netherlands East Indies , Papua and Australia . Later he worked as a newspaper executive , as chief of several United Nations agencies , and in private enterprise . Lloyd died in 1956 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Lloyd was born on 2 February 1899 at South Fremantle , Western Australia , the second and only surviving child of Thomas Edward Lloyd , a postmaster , and his wife Edith , née Lock . His parents separated in 1901 and two years later his father committed suicide . He was subsequently raised by his mother who worked as a telephone attendant at Coolgardie , and then in Fremantle from 1909 . Lloyd was educated at Beaconsfield , Fremantle Boys ' Central and Perth Modern schools . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Entering the Australian Army in 1915 , Lloyd graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon in December 1918 as a regular officer in the artillery , too late to see action during the First World War . Lloyd was nicknamed " Gaffer " by the other cadets due to his serious demeanor , and Gavin Long considered him among the " ablest " of the group of officers that joined the Staff Corps at that time . He was appointed as a lieutenant in the Australian Imperial Force upon completing his training at Duntroon and embarked from Sydney in January 1919 , being sent to the United Kingdom and later posted to France . Returning to the Permanent Military Force as the AIF was demobilised , he later completed his training serving with the British Army in England and India in 1919 – 20 . 
 Lloyd married Sybil Drummond in Melbourne on 31 December 1921 . He subsequently held junior staff and regimental postings in Australia during the 1920s , at the same time studying law at the University of Sydney . His next postings included various adjutant and quartermaster roles at battery and brigade level in the 2nd and 3rd Military Districts . Later he attended Staff College , Camberley , in the United Kingdom during 1932 – 33 . Next he was appointed Brigade Major of the 4th Divisional Artillery in Melbourne in 1934 , and was promoted to major in 1937 . He was posted to the Directorate of Artillery at Army Headquarters in Melbourne from 1938 to 1939 . 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Lloyd was seconded to the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) for overseas service . He held administrative posts in the 6th Division and I Australian Corps in the Middle East during 1940 , but was transferred before the 6th Division went into combat for the first time . In December that year , ranked colonel , he was posted to the 9th Division as the senior operational officer , serving as chief of staff to Major General Sir Leslie Morshead . In March , the 9th Division moved into the Western Desert , where they were to finalise their training and prepare to join the British advance through Libya . The landing of German forces around Tripoli in April forced the British and Commonwealth armies into withdrawal from Benghazi as the Afrika Korps arrived to reinforce the Italians in North Africa . The Axis forces subsequently began to advance west towards the strategic port of Tobruk . During the Siege of Tobruk which followed , Lloyd saw action between April and October 1941 , until the Australian units were relieved by British forces . Following the evacuation of the 9th Division from Tobruk by sea , Lloyd then served as chief liaison officer at AIF Headquarters , Middle East . 
 Departing the Middle East in late January 1942 , Lloyd was promoted to brigadier and flew to Batavia in the Netherlands East Indies , where elements of the 2nd AIF had been diverted to whilst returning from the Middle East in order to meet the Japanese threat following their initial attacks against British Commonwealth and US forces in the Pacific in December 1941 . He subsequently filled a senior staff posting in General Sir Archibald Wavell 's ABDA Command during its brief existence , holding the position of Deputy Intendant @-@ General with the temporary rank of major general between January and February 1942 . Rising from major to major general in less than two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , he became the youngest general officer in the Australian Army at the age of 42 . In this role he acted as Wavell 's chief administrative officer ; however , he advocated to the Australian high command against British proposals for I Corps remain in Java , which he believed was unsound and likely result in its loss given the precarious tactical situation there , and that it should instead be returned to Australia to be concentrated for operations against the Japanese elsewhere . Ultimately while a few Australian units were landed in Java , where they were inevitably captured in the fighting that followed , the bulk of the 6th and 7th Divisions were returned to Australia following pressure from the Australian government . 
 Following the Netherlands East Indies campaign , Lloyd returned to Australia in April 1942 and reverted to the rank of brigadier . He was subsequently appointed Director of Staff Duties at Land Headquarters ( LHQ ) in July . In September he was briefly posted to I Corps in Papua as Brigadier General Staff under Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Rowell . In February 1943 , Lloyd was promoted again to major general and appointed Adjutant General at LHQ by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , remaining in this position until 1946 . Blamey had reportedly been " dissatisfied " with the performance of the previous Adjutant General , Major General Victor Stantke , and appointed Lloyd to rejuvenate the office . Leaving the full @-@ time army , he transferred to the inactive reserve in February 1946 . Described by Chester Wilmot as " one of the ablest staff officers and most colourful characters of the AIF " , and by Wavell as " a staff officer of great quality " , during his service Lloyd had been appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( 1941 ) and was mentioned in despatches three times ( 1941 – 42 ) . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1946 , Lloyd became a senior executive of the Argus & Australasian newspaper , before unsuccessfully seeking Liberal Party pre @-@ selection for a seat in Federal parliament the same year . In 1948 , he was appointed as a member of the government committee that reported on the administration of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan . His later work included postings as chief of the United Nations Refugee Organisation in Australia and New Zealand ( 1948 – 51 ) , and Chief of Mission of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency ( 1951 – 53 ) . On return to Australia he took up a position as vice @-@ chairman of Navcot ( Aust . ) Pty Ltd , a private enterprise which was involved in shipping refugees from Europe as part of the post @-@ war immigration program . Whilst visiting relatives in Western Australia , Lloyd died of jaundice in the Repatriation General Hospital , in Hollywood , Perth , on 31 May 1956 and was buried in Karrakatta Cemetery . He was survived by his wife , daughter and two sons . 
 = Nonviolent Communication = 
 Nonviolent communication ( abbreviated NVC , also called compassionate communication or collaborative communication ) is a communication process developed by Marshall Rosenberg beginning in the 1960s . It focuses on three aspects of communication : self @-@ empathy ( defined as a deep and compassionate awareness of one 's own inner experience ) , empathy ( understanding and sharing an emotion expressed by another ) , and honest self @-@ expression ( defined as expressing oneself authentically in a way that is likely to inspire compassion in others ) . 
 Nonviolent communication is based on the idea that all human beings have the capacity for compassion and only resort to violence or behavior that harms others when they don 't recognize more effective strategies for meeting needs . Habits of thinking and speaking that lead to the use of violence ( psychological and physical ) are learned through culture . NVC theory supposes all human behavior stems from attempts to meet universal human needs and that these needs are never in conflict . Rather , conflict arises when strategies for meeting needs clash . NVC proposes that if people can identify their needs , the needs of others , and the feelings that surround these needs , harmony can be achieved . 
 While NVC is ostensibly taught as a process of communication designed to improve compassionate connection to others , it has also been interpreted as a spiritual practice , a set of values , a parenting technique , an educational method and a worldview . 
 = = Applications = = 
 NVC has been applied in organizational and business settings , in parenting , in education , in mediation , in psychotherapy , in healthcare , in addressing eating issues , in prisons , and as a basis for a children 's book , among other contexts . 
 Rosenberg says he has used Nonviolent Communication in peace programs in conflict zones including Rwanda , Burundi , Nigeria , Malaysia , Indonesia , Sri Lanka , Colombia , Serbia , Croatia , Ireland , and the Middle East including the Occupied Palestinian Territories . 
 = = History and development = = 
 According to a biography of Rosenberg on the Center for Nonviolent Communication ( CNVC ) website , Nonviolent Communication training evolved from his search for a way to rapidly disseminate peacemaking skills . CNVC says that NVC emerged from work he was doing with civil rights activists in the early 1960s , and that during this period he also mediated between rioting students and college administrators , and worked to peacefully desegregate public schools in long @-@ segregated regions . 
 An MA thesis by Marion Little ( 2008 ) says that the roots of the NVC model developed in the late 1960s , when Rosenberg was working on racial integration in schools and organizations in the Southern United States . The earliest version of the model ( observations , feelings , and action @-@ oriented wants ) was part of a training manual Rosenberg prepared in 1972 . The model had evolved to its present form ( observations , feelings , needs and requests ) by 1992 . The dialog between Rosenberg and NVC colleagues and trainers continued to influence the model , which by the late 2000s placed more importance on self @-@ empathy as a key to the model 's effectiveness . Another shift in emphasis , since 2000 , has been the reference to the model as a process . The focus is thus less on the " steps " themselves and more on the practitioner 's intentions in speaking ( " is the intent to get others to do what one wants , or to foster more meaningful relationships and mutual satisfaction ? " ) in listening ( " is the intent to prepare for what one has to say , or to extend heartfelt , respectful attentiveness to another ? " ) and the quality of connection experienced with others . 
 Also according to Little 's thesis , Rosenberg 's work with Carl Rogers on research to investigate the components of a helping relationship was central to the development of NVC . Rogers emphasized : 1 ) experiential learning , 2 ) " frankness about one ’ s emotional state , " 3 ) the satisfaction of hearing others " in a way that resonates for them , " 4 ) the enriching and encouraging experience of " creative , active , sensitive , accurate , empathic listening , " 5 ) the " deep value of congruence between one ’ s own inner experience , one ’ s conscious awareness , and one ’ s communication , " and , subsequently , 6 ) the enlivening experience of unconditionally receiving love or appreciation and extending the same . 
 Little says Rosenberg was Influenced by Erich Fromm , George Albee , and George Miller to adopt a community focus in his work , moving away from clinical psychological practice . The central ideas influencing this shift by Rosenberg were that : ( 1 ) individual mental health depends on the social structure of a community ( Fromm ) , ( 2 ) therapists alone are unable to meet the psychological needs of a community ( Albee ) , and ( 3 ) knowledge about human behavior will increase if psychology is freely given to the community ( Miller ) . 
 According to Little , Rosenberg ’ s early work with children with learning disabilities shows his interest in psycholinguistics and the power of language , as well as his emphasis on collaboration . In its initial development , the NVC model re @-@ structured the pupil @-@ teacher relationship to give students greater responsibility for , and decision @-@ making related to , their own learning . The model has evolved over the years to incorporate institutional power relationships ( i.e. , police @-@ citizen , boss @-@ employee ) and informal ones ( i.e. man @-@ woman , rich @-@ poor , adult @-@ youth , parent @-@ child ) . The ultimate aim is to develop societal relationships based on a restorative , " partnership " paradigm and mutual respect , rather than a retributive , fear @-@ based , " domination " paradigm . 
 Little also says Rosenberg identified Mahatma Gandhi as an inspiration for the NVC model , and that Rosenberg ’ s goal was to develop a practical process for interaction rooted in the philosophy of Ahimsa , which Little translates as " the overflowing love that arises when all ill @-@ will , anger , and hate have subsided from the heart . " 
 In order to show the differences between communication styles , Rosenberg started to use two animals . The violent communication is represented by the carnivorous Jackal as a symbol of aggression and especially dominance . The herbivorous Giraffe on the other hand , represents his NVC strategy . The Giraffe was chosen as symbol for NVC as its long neck is supposed to show the clear @-@ sighted speaker , being aware of his fellow speakers ' reactions , and simply because the Giraffe is the land @-@ living mammal with the biggest heart , representing the compassionate side of NVC . In his courses he tends to use these animals in order to make the differences in communication clearer to the audience . 
 = = NVC theory = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Nonviolent Communication holds that most conflicts between individuals or groups arise from miscommunication about their human needs , due to coercive or manipulative language that aims to induce fear , guilt , shame , etc . These " violent " modes of communication , when used during a conflict , divert the attention of the participants away from clarifying their needs , their feelings , their perceptions , and their requests , thus perpetuating the conflict . 
 Marshall Rosenberg , the founder of Nonviolent Communication , published numerous training materials to help in efforts to bring about radical social change . He was concerned with transforming the " gangs and domination structures " through the method he called " ask , ask , ask " . He suggested social change activists could focus on gaining access to those in power in order to " ask , ask , ask " for changes that will make life better for all including the powerful . He wrote about the need for the protective use of force , distinguishing it from the punitive use of force . 
 = = = Theories = = = 
 Two NVC trainers characterize the assumptions underlying NVC as follows : 
 All human beings share the same needs 
 Our world offers sufficient resources for meeting everyone 's basic needs 
 All actions are attempts to meet needs 
 Feelings point to needs being met or unmet 
 All human beings have the capacity for compassion 
 Human beings enjoy giving 
 Human beings meet needs through interdependent relationships 
 Human beings change 
 Choice is internal 
 The most direct path to peace is through self @-@ connection 
 = = = Intentions = = = 
 The trainers also say that practicing NVC involves having the following intentions : 
 Open @-@ Hearted Living 
 Self @-@ compassion 
 Expressing from the heart 
 Receiving with compassion 
 <unk> connection 
 Moving beyond " right " and " wrong " to using needs @-@ based assessments 
 Choice , Responsibility , Peace 
 Taking responsibility for our feelings 
 Taking responsibility for our actions 
 Living in peace with unmet needs 
 Increasing capacity for meeting needs 
 Increasing capacity for meeting the present moment 
 Sharing Power ( Partnership ) 
 Caring equally for everyone ’ s needs 
 Using force minimally and to protect rather than to educate , punish , or get what we want without agreement 
 = = = Communication that blocks compassion = = = 
 Rosenberg says that certain ways of communicating tend to alienate people from the experience of compassion : ( <unk> ) 
 Moralistic judgments implying wrongness or badness on the part of people who don 't act in harmony with our values . Blame , insults , put @-@ downs , labels , criticisms , comparisons , and diagnoses are all said to be forms of judgment . ( Moralistic judgments are not to be confused with value judgments as to the qualities we value . ) The use of moralistic judgments is characterized as an impersonal way of expressing oneself that does not require one to reveal what is going on inside of oneself . This way of speaking is said to have the result that " Our attention is focused on classifying , analyzing , and determining levels of wrongness rather than on what we and others need and are not getting . " 
 Demands that implicitly or explicitly threaten listeners with blame or punishment if they fail to comply . 
 Denial of responsibility via language that obscures awareness of personal responsibility . It is said that we deny responsibility for our actions when we attribute their cause to : vague impersonal forces ( " I had to " ) ; our condition , diagnosis , personal or psychological history ; the actions of others ; the dictates of authority ; group pressure ; institutional policy , rules , and regulations ; gender roles , social roles , or age roles ; or uncontrollable impulses . 
 Making comparisons between people . 
 A premise of deserving , that certain actions merit reward while others merit punishment . 
 = = = Four components = = = 
 Rosenberg invites NVC practitioners to focus attention on four components : 
 Observation : the facts ( what we are seeing , hearing , or touching ) as distinct from our evaluation of meaning and significance . NVC discourages static generalizations . It is said that " When we combine observation with evaluation others are apt to hear criticism and resist what we are saying . " Instead , a focus on observations specific to time and context is recommended . ( <unk> ) 
 Feelings : emotions or sensations , free of thought and story . These are to be distinguished from thoughts ( e.g. , " I feel I didn 't get a fair deal " ) and from words colloquially used as feelings but which convey what we think we are ( e.g. , " inadequate " ) , how we think others are evaluating us ( e.g. , " unimportant " ) , or what we think others are doing to us ( e.g. , " misunderstood " , " ignored " ) . Feelings are said to reflect whether we are experiencing our needs as met or unmet . Identifying feelings is said to allow us to more easily connect with one another , and " Allowing ourselves to be vulnerable by expressing our feelings can help resolve conflicts . " ( <unk> ) 
 Needs : universal human needs , as distinct from particular strategies for meeting needs . It is posited that " Everything we do is in service of our needs . " 
 Request : request for a specific action , free of demand . Requests are distinguished from demands in that one is open to hearing a response of " no " without this triggering an attempt to force the matter . If one makes a request and receives a " no " it is recommended not that one give up , but that one empathize with what is preventing the other person from saying " yes , " before deciding how to continue the conversation . It is recommended that requests use clear , positive , concrete action language . ( <unk> ) 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 There are three primary modes of application of NVC : 
 Self @-@ empathy involves compassionately connecting with what is going on inside us . This may involve , without blame , noticing the thoughts and judgments we are having , noticing our feelings , and most critically , connecting to the needs that are affecting us . ( <unk> ) 
 Receiving <unk> , in NVC , involves " connection with what 's alive in the other person and what would make life wonderful for them ... It 's not an understanding of the head where we just mentally understand what another person says ... Empathic connection is an understanding of the heart in which we see the beauty in the other person , the divine energy in the other person , the life that 's alive in them ... It doesn 't mean we have to feel the same feelings as the other person . That 's sympathy , when we feel sad that another person is upset . It doesn 't mean we have the same feelings ; it means we are with the other person ... If you 're mentally trying to understand the other person , you 're not present with them . " ( <unk> ) Empathy involves " emptying the mind and listening with our whole being . " NVC suggests that however the other person expresses themselves , we focus on listening for the underlying observations , feelings , needs , and requests . It is suggested that it can be useful to reflect a paraphrase of what another person has said , highlighting the NVC components implicit in their message , such as the feelings and needs you guess they may be expressing . ( <unk> ) 
 Expressing honestly , in NVC , is likely to involve expressing an observation , feeling , need , and request . An observation may be omitted if the context of the conversation is clear . A feeling might be omitted if there is sufficient connection already , or the context is one where naming a feeling isn ’ t likely to contribute to connection . It is said that naming a need in addition to a feeling makes it less likely that people will think you are making them responsible for your feeling . Similarly , it is said that making a request in addition to naming a need makes it less likely that people will infer a vague demand that they address your need . The components are thought to work together synergistically . According to NVC trainer Bob Wentworth , " an observation sets the context , feelings support connection and getting out of our heads , needs support connection and identify what is important , and a request clarifies what sort of response you might enjoy . Using these components together minimizes the chances of people getting lost in potentially disconnecting speculation about what you want from them and why . " 
 = = Research = = 
 NVC lacks significant " longitudinal analytical research , " and few studies have evaluated the effectiveness of NVC training programs . To date , there has been little discussion of NVC in academic contexts . Most evidence for the effectiveness of NVC has been anecdotal or based on theoretical support . 
 <unk> produced a systematic review of research related to the impact of NVC on the development of empathy . She found 13 studies which met her inclusion criteria ( three were published in peer reviewed journals ; ten were unpublished theses or researcher reports ) . Eleven of these suggested an increase in empathy subsequent to the application of NVC ( five of these with evidence of statistical significance ) and two did not . <unk> notes several shortcomings of her review . None of the studies she included were randomized and only three used validated instruments . As a result she used a narrative synthesis review format , which , " lacks precision , " but allows the <unk> of studies of different types , sizes , outcome measures and aims . She suggests the primary limitation of her review is that a number of relevant studies exist that could not be included due to lack of availability . She suggests these might have significantly altered her results . Finally , she includes the following caveat : " I must mention the inevitable subjectivity bias present throughout the whole review . In spite of the efforts made towards ‘ disciplined subjectivity ’ ... my decisions show a degree of uncertainty and inaccuracy born via the tension between the weak evidence of the studies and my own convictions about the NVC model . " Her overall assessment of the current research on NVC 's efficacy in promoting the development of empathy is that the results are promising , but " would need to be confirmed with further studies bearing stronger designs and more appropriate measures . " She notes that a major shortcoming of the existing research is the " mismatch between the constructs of the model and the validated empathy measures " and suggests that improved instruments need to be developed to adequately test NVC . 
 As of 2013 , eight Master 's theses and Doctoral dissertations are known to have tested the model on sample sizes of 108 or smaller and generally have found the model to be effective . 
 Allan <unk> , who first met Rosenberg in 1972 and was a founder of the Center for Nonviolent Communication , explains the paucity of academic literature as follows : 
 Virtually all conflict resolution programs have an academic setting as their foundation and therefore have empirical studies by graduate students assessing their efficacy . NVC is remarkable for its roots . Marshall Rosenberg , Ph.D. ( clinical psychology , U of Wisconsin ) comes from a full time private practice in clinical psychology and consultation , never an academic post . NVC , his creation , is entirely a grassroots organization and never had until recently any foundation nor grant monies , on the contrary funded 100 % from trainings which were offered in public workshops around the world . ... Empirical data is now coming slowly as independent researchers find their own funding to conduct and publish empirical studies with peer review . 
 Richard Bowers ’ thesis ( 2012 ) , updated to book form by Bowers and Moffett ( 2012 ) , asserts that NVC has been absent from academic programs due to a lack of research into the theoretical basis for the model and lack of research on the reliability of positive results . Bowers ’ thesis meets the first objection through an analysis of existing theories which provide solid support for each element of the NVC ( mediation ) model . Without this theoretical understanding , it would not be clear what aspects of the NVC model make it work or even if it can be effectively applied by anyone other than Marshall Rosenberg . This theoretical analysis can provide a foundation for further empirical research on the effectiveness and reliability of the model . 
 NVC has reportedly been an element of a bundle of interventions that produced dramatic changes in forensic psychiatric nursing settings in which a high level of violence is the norm . NVC was adopted , in combination with other interventions , in an effort to reduce violence . The interventions were said to reduce key violence indicators by 90 percent over a three @-@ year period in a medium security unit , and by around 50 percent in a single year in a maximum security unit . 
 A 2014 study examined the effects of combined NVC and mindfulness training on 885 male inmates of the Monroe Correctional Complex in Monroe , Washington . The training was found to reduce recidivism from 37 % to 21 % , and the training was estimated as having saved the state $ 5 million per year in reduced incarceration costs . The training was found to increase equanimity , decrease anger , and lead to abilities to take responsibility for one 's feelings , express empathy , and to make requests without imposing demands . 
 NVC has also been reported as effective in reducing domestic violence . Male participants who graduated from an NVC @-@ based batterer intervention program in California had zero percent recidivism within 5 years , according to the relevant District Attorneys ' offices . The news report contrasted this with a recidivism rate of 40 percent within 5 years as reported by the Domestic Abuse Intervention Project for graduates of their batterer intervention program based on the Duluth Model , said to previously offer the lowest known domestic violence recidivism rate . 
 Some recent research appears to validate the existence of universal human needs . 
 Bowers and Moffett provide a thoughtful study of the important role of empathy and human needs in mediation through the development of a theoretical model to explain the effectiveness of NVC mediation . The authors present theories of human needs and the basis for a common core of needs . They discuss theories that explain the importance of understanding human needs in the context of conflict resolution . They clearly distinguish core human needs from interests ( strategies ) and how focusing on needs is a paradigm shift in the field of conflict resolution . Further , Bowers and Moffett present theories of empathy from the pioneering work of Carl Rogers , Heinz Kohut , and others . Empathy is distinguished from sympathy and active listening , pointing out how the word empathy is often confused in the literature by using it interchangeably with these other two terms . They also examine stage theories of the development of empathy as well as constructive @-@ developmental theories related to empathy . 
 = = Relationship to spirituality = = 
 As Theresa Latini notes , " Rosenberg understands NVC to be a fundamentally spiritual practice . " Marshall Rosenberg has , in fact , described the influence of his spiritual life on the development and practice of NVC : 
 " I think it is important that people see that spirituality is at the base of Nonviolent Communication , and that they learn the mechanics of the process with that in mind . It ’ s really a spiritual practice that I am trying to show as a way of life . Even though we don ’ t mention this , people get seduced by the practice . Even if they practice this as a mechanical technique , they start to experience things between themselves and other people they weren ’ t able to experience before . So eventually they come to the spirituality of the process . They begin to see that it ’ s more than a communication process and realize it ’ s really an attempt to manifest a certain spirituality . " 
 Rosenberg further states that he developed NVC as a way to " get conscious of " what he calls the " Beloved Divine Energy " . 
 Some Christians have found NVC to be complementary to their Christian faith . Many people have found Nonviolent Communication to be very complementary to Buddhism , both in theory and in manifesting Buddhist ideals in practice . 
 = = Relationship to other models = = 
 Marion Little examines theoretical frameworks related to NVC . The influential interest @-@ based model for conflict resolution , negotiation , and mediation developed by Fisher , Ury , and Patton at the Harvard Negotiation Project in the 1980s appears to have some conceptual overlap with NVC , although neither model references the other . Little suggests The Gordon Model for Effective Relationships ( 1970 ) as a likely precursor to both NVC and interest @-@ based negotiation , based on conceptual similarities , if not any direct evidence of a connection . Like Rosenberg , Gordon had worked with Carl Rogers , so the models ' similarities may reflect common influences . 
 Suzanne Jones sees a substantive difference between active listening as originated by Gordon and empathic listening as recommended by Rosenberg , insofar as active listening involves a specific step of reflecting what a speaker said to let them know you are listening , whereas empathic listening involves an ongoing process of listening with both heart and mind and being fully present to the other 's experience , with an aim of comprehending and empathizing with the needs of the other , the meaning of the experience for that person . 
 Gert Danielsen and <unk> Kök both note an overlap between the premises of NVC and those of Human Needs Theory ( <unk> ) , an academic model for understanding the sources of conflict and designing conflict resolution processes , with the idea that " Violence occurs when certain individuals or groups do not see any other way to meet their need , or when they need understanding , respect and consideration for their needs . " 
 Chapman Flack sees an overlap between what Rosenberg advocates and critical thinking , especially Bertrand Russell 's formulation uniting kindness and clear thinking . 
 Martha Lasley sees similarities with the Focused Conversation Method developed by the Institute of Cultural Affairs ( ICA ) , with NVC 's observations , feelings , needs , and requests components relating to FCM 's objective , reflective , interpretive , and <unk> stages . 
 = = Responses = = 
 There is little published critique of NVC . Some researchers have noted that NVC lacks an evidence base beyond the copious anecdotal claims of effectiveness and similarly lacks discussion in the literature of the theoretical basis of the model . 
 Several researchers have attempted a thorough evaluation of criticisms and weaknesses of NVC and assessed significant challenges in its application . These span a range of potential problems , from the practical to the theoretical , and include concerns gathered from study participants and researchers . 
 The difficulty of using NVC as well as the dangers of misuse are common concerns . The NVC four step model is seen as problematic for a number of reasons : 
 the notion of unbiased observations has been criticized because multiple interpretations of events and behaviors are likely ; 
 people may not understand their own feelings and needs and therefore expressing them may be challenging , if not impossible ; 
 the model often causes people to feel awkward and requires more trust in others than is typically found in everyday interactions ; 
 the process of paraphrasing and attempting to guess the identity of people 's feelings can be off putting for some ; 
 the demands of successfully requesting positive actions using appropriate NVC language is daunting and requires a level of investment of time and reflection not typically available in most people 's interactions . 
 In addition , <unk> and Flack find a paradoxical potential for violence in the use of NVC , occasioned by its unskilled use . <unk> further suggests that the use of NVC is unlikely to allow everyone to express their feelings and have their needs met in real life as this would require inordinate time , patience and discipline . Those who are skilled in the use of NVC may become prejudiced against those who are not and prefer to converse only among themselves . 
 Oboth suggests that people might hide their feelings in the process of empathy , subverting the nonviolence of communication . 
 The massive investment of time and effort in learning to use NVC has been noted by a number of researchers . 
 Chapman Flack , in reviewing a training video by Rosenberg , finds the presentation of key ideas " spell @-@ binding " and the anecdotes " humbling and inspiring , " notes the " beauty of his work , " and his " adroitly doing fine attentive thinking " when interacting with his audience . Yet Flack wonders what to make of aspects of Rosenberg 's presentation , such as his apparent " dim view of the place for thinking " and his building on Walter Wink 's account of the origins of our way of thinking . To Flack , some elements of what Rosenberg says seem like pat answers at odds with the challenging and complex picture of human nature history , literature and art offer . 
 Flack notes a distinction between the " strong sense " of nonviolent communication as a virtue that is possible with care and attention , and the " weak sense , " a mimicry of this born of ego and haste . The strong sense offers a language to examine one 's thinking and actions , support understanding , bring one 's best to the community , and honor one 's emotions . In the weak sense , one may take the language as rules and use these to score debating points , label others for political gain , or insist that others express themselves in this way . Though concerned that some of what Rosenberg says could lead to the weak sense , Flack sees evidence confirming that Rosenberg understands the strong sense in practice . Rosenberg 's work with workshop attendees demonstrates " the real thing . " Yet Flack warns that " the temptation of the weak sense will not be absent . " As an antidote , Flack advises , " Be conservative in what you do , be liberal in what you accept from others , " ( also known as the robustness principle ) and guard against the " metamorphosis of nonviolent communication into subtle violence done in its name . " 
 Bowling Green State University Professor Ellen <unk> , assessing Rosenberg 's book , " Nonviolent Communication : A Language of Compassion " ( 1999 ) in the context of geopolitical rhetoric , states that " the relative strength of the individual is vastly overestimated while the key issue of structural violence is almost completely ignored . " 
 <unk> Press reports that NVC has been endorsed by a variety of public figures . 
 Sven Hartenstein has created a series of cartoons spoofing NVC . 
 = = Organizations = = 
 The Center for Nonviolent Communication ( CNVC ) , founded by Marshall Rosenberg , has trademarked the terms NVC , Nonviolent Communication and Compassionate Communication , among other terms , for clarity and branding purposes . 
 CNVC certifies trainers who wish to teach NVC in a manner aligned with CNVC 's understanding of the NVC process . CNVC also offers trainings by certified trainers . 
 Some trainings in nonviolent communication are offered by trainers sponsored by organizations considered as allied with , but having no formal relationship with , the Center for Nonviolent Communication founded by Marshall Rosenberg . Some of these trainings are announced through CNVC . Numerous NVC organizations have sprung up around the world , many with regional focuses . 
 = = Articles about NVC = = 
 Atlee , T. " Thoughts on Nonviolent Communication and Social Change . " Co @-@ intelligence Institute . 
 <unk> , R. and M. Cullen ( 2004 ) " The Traveling Peacemaker : A Conversation with Marshall Rosenberg . " Inquiring Mind , Fall issue . 
 Moore , P. ( 2004 ) " <unk> Communication as an Evolutionary Imperative @-@ The <unk> of Marshall Rosenberg " Alternatives , Issue 29 , Spring . 
 Simons , G. ( 2003 ) " Review of Nonviolent Communication " <unk> Europa Newsletter , November . 
 Sauer , M. ( 2004 ) " Expert on conflict resolution believes nonviolence is in our nature " San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , October 14 , 2004 . 
 van Gelder , S. ( 1998 ) " The Language of Nonviolence " Yes Magazine , Summer 1998 
 = Who 's Your Neighbor ? = 
 Who 's Your Neighbor ? is a 1917 silent American propaganda and drama film directed by S. Rankin Drew . The film 's plot focuses around reformers who pass a law to force prostitutes , including Hattie Fenshaw , out of the red light district . Fenshaw becomes Bryant Harding 's mistress and lives in an apartment next door to a reformer , and continues to ply her trade . After Fenshaw becomes familiar with Harding , his son , daughter and the daughter 's fiance , the climax of the film occurs as the cast assembles at Fenshaw 's apartment . Harding returns and a fight breaks out that results in the reformers ' arrival and concludes with the presumption that Fenshaw returns to a place of " legalized vice " . The drama was written by Willard Mack and was his first foray into screen dramas . The film proved controversial , but is noted as a great success . The film originally debuted on June 15 , 1917 , but it was rejected by the National Board of Review and was later approved after a revision , but the film continued to be labeled as an immoral production . The film is presumed to be lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A group of reformers , led by Mrs. Bowers , moves to have the red light district closed and force the girls out . District Attorney Osborne , believes that it will turn out poorly for the town and tries to persuade the reforms that it would be like scattering smallpox . He fails to persuade them and the law is passed . The film focuses on one of the prostitutes , Hattie Fenshaw , who is forced out from her place of vice . According to H. D. Fretz 's review , Fenshaw is determined to let those at a prominent hotel know that " women such as she had better be left alone " , but is quickly recognized and evicted . At the hotel , Fenshaw makes an acquaintance of Bryant Harding who decides to keep her as his mistress and pays Fenshaw 's rent in an apartment next door to one of the reformers , Mrs. Osborne . Fenshaw also charms Dudley Carleton , who breaks off his engagement to Betty Hamlin , the daughter of Harding , who uses her divorced mother 's maiden name . Hamlin and Fenshaw meet through an introduction with Mrs. Bowers , and Hamlin , unaware of Fenshaw 's character is telephoned by Fenshaw to come and sew for her to earn some money . Hal Harding , a college student with a desire to see the city , is introduced to Fenshaw during his father 's absence . The cast assembles at Fenshaw 's apartment when Hamlin arrives and interrupts Fenshaw 's party with her ex @-@ fiance and her brother , Hal . She is then introduced to her brother under and assumed name and is in the apartment when Bryant Harding returns . A fight breaks out and Harding nearly kills Carleton and knocks Fenshaw unconscious and shoots at his daughter , but misses . Alerted by the shot , the District Attorney , Mrs. Bowers and her reformer friends arrive and learn of Hattie Fenshaw 's vice . Shorey 's film review concludes with the presumption that Fenshaw returns to a place of " legalized vice " with Mrs. Bowers ' permission . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Christine Mayo as Hattie Fenshaw 
 Anders <unk> as Bryant M. Harding ( Richard Harding in Fretz 's review ) 
 Evelyn Brent as Betty Hamlin 
 Frank Morgan as Dudley Carlton 
 William Sherwood as Hal Harding 
 Gladys Fairbanks as Mrs. Bowers 
 Franklyn Hanna as District Attorney Osborne 
 Mabel Wright as Betty 's mother 
 George <unk> ( Undetermined role ) 
 Dean Raymond ( Undetermined role ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Willard Mack had registered and copyrighted " Who 's Your Neighbor ? " on March 9 , 1917 . Speculation by Motography states that Mack 's " contribution to the screen drama was probably prompted by the distressing Ruth Cruger mystery , which was so cleverly solved by Mrs. Grace <unk> , and follows very closely many of the phases of drama in real life that shocked the world . " The April 17 , 1917 issue of Motography profiled the film , the first production of Master Drama Features , noting that it would be shown on a " stage @-@ right " basis after a New York City premier at a Broadway theater . H. D. Fretz noted that the majority of the scenes were shot indoors and described the photography as excellent . The film was described as breaking a record by <unk> because of the use of a triple exposure . The brief note stated that it is a delicate and precise work that required perfect synchronization that " ( the film ) had to be taken twenty times before the result was satisfactory to Director S. Rankin Drew . " Who 's Your Neighbor ? was the first film produced by Edward Small . According to the American Film Institute , the film was edited by Frank Lawrence . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film debuted at the Broadway Theater on June 15 , 1917 . After its debut , the film received many bids from buyers for the film . The original film had seven reels , but the June 30 edition of The Moving Picture World stated that it was six reels for unknown reasons . Shortly after the film 's completion , S. Rankin Drew sailed for France to join the American Ambulance Corps . He was killed in action when his plane was shot down over France during the First World War on May 19 , 1918 . 
 The film was originally set for a winter release , and was the subject of speculation by Lynn Kear , author of Evelyn Brent : The Life and Films of Hollywood 's Lady Crook , the film was delayed because of the fears that World War I would hurt viewer attendance . Lynn also speculated that it may have been due to the film having received condemnation from the National Board of Review . Master Drama Features general manager Herman Becker told the media the film was held for a winter release , due to expectation of a decrease in viewership due to the ongoing war , but the film was released because the vaudeville theaters wanted new acts . Becker also noted the advertising greatly boosted sales of the film . While the film did initially get condemnation from the board , it was later given a full approval following a revision according to the September 1 publication of Motion Picture News . The film was also quick to sell the state rights as noted in the July 28 edition of Motography . Becker sold states rights to " California , Washington , Nevada , Arizona , New Mexico , Colorado , Utah , Wyoming , Montana , Oregon , Idaho and northern New Jersey . " This purchase of rights was made by F. E. Backer of Mammoth Film Corporation after seeing the film . 
 According to Kear , advertising for the film focused on Evelyn Brent and cited an ad that appeared in the Los Angeles Times on December 5 , 1917 . Though Exhibitor 's Herald cited that the advertising for the film would include " four kinds of one @-@ sheet , three @-@ sheet , six @-@ sheet and 24 @-@ sheet lithographs , newspaper cuts , slides , window cards , banners , heralds , throw aways and many other novelties never before seen . " For advertisement purposes , the Otis Lithograph Company was contracted by the studio 's director of publicity , Arthur M. <unk> . The description of the varied materials were noted in greater detail in a column in Motion Picture News . 
 Though the film had its debut on June 15 , the American Film Institute states that the film was released in October . This conflicts with a claim from the Paris Theater in Denver , Colorado , found in the September 29 issue of Motography , where the film was said to be popular . The Paris Theater would also run into legal troubles over the films showing , a fact reported in the October 6 edition of Motography . Newspaper accounts for a late October run begin in the San Francisco Chronicle with the Portola Theater debuting the film , originally for one week , starting on October 28 , 1917 . The film was popular enough to run a second week at the Portola . The film would be part of the vaudeville show at the Wigwam for four days starting on November 14 . The film was suggested for mature audiences by the Portola Theater and the Wigwam Theater , both did not allow children under the age of 16 to enter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 George N. Shorey 's review of the initial seven reel Broadway release declared it another masterpiece of Mack 's writing and notes that the film would be the best example to go before the courts to argue for " free speech " in films . Shorey notes that the propaganda film " is bold , clear , tremendous in the force of its convincing showing that to drive the scarlet woman from a restricted district into the hotels and apartment houses of a city is a worse crime than it seeks to cure . " The only complaint was found that it " does not sufficiently misrepresent the ease and luxury of the underworld . It shows a scarlet woman who finds the " easiest way " truly easy . She does not die , nor even suffer . The intended moral of the picture , that once abandoned to that life a woman finds it to her taste to remain in it and cannot be " reformed , " necessarily does include the above corollary to that proposition . " The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that the film " deals with a question that has perplexed the sages from the beginning of time and it traverses life 's scroll , writing with thought and deed certain actions of everyday application . There are tense dramatic scenes , and above all there is the question that must be faced , " Who 's Your Neighbor ? " " 
 The film was declared to be the " most satisfactory picture Denver has had in many months " by the Paris Theater in the September 29 issue of Motography . Though the October 6 edition of Motography noted that W. A. Roderick and F. O. Brown , officers of Paris Theater Company were charged for showing the film which violated a city ordinance on " immoral pictures " . The men rejected that claim , citing that it was not immoral , but was rejected by the censorship board because it was a propaganda film and not on the film 's morality . The city had threatened to file charges and prosecute them for each exhibition of the film . 
 Ben H. Grimm 's review in The Moving Picture World was completely negative and described it as " one of the most insidious , moral @-@ destroying pictures ever produced . It will lower to the level of a bawdy house any theater in which it is shown . It reeks of a filthy sex element that struts across the screen in the sheep 's clothing of alleged propaganda advocating the segregation of vice . " Grimm highlights how the film 's prostitute sells herself and finds not ill , but instead gets worldly gains . Grimm also notes that the production is based on the premise that a prostitute is a prostitute by choice , does not want reform and infers that she can not be reformed . Grimm 's review stated that the great production was even more detrimental with a metaphor that stated a well @-@ dressed criminal was less likely to be suspected than a poorly dressed criminal . 
 The film is believed to be lost . 
 = Sydney Rowell = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Fairbairn Rowell , KBE , CB ( 15 December 1894 – 12 April 1975 ) was an Australian soldier who served as Chief of the General Staff from 17 April 1950 to 15 December 1954 . As Vice Chief of the General Staff from 8 January 1946 to 16 April 1950 , he played a key role in the post @-@ Second World War reorganisation of the Army , and in the 1949 Australian coal strike . However , he is best known as the commander who was dismissed in the Kokoda Track campaign . 
 As a young officer , Rowell served at Gallipoli but was invalided back to Australia with typhoid fever in January 1916 . The end of the war found Rowell junior in rank to his contemporaries with more distinguished war records , but he managed to catch up in the post @-@ war period . Rowell spent five years with the British Army or at British staff colleges , establishing valuable contacts with his British counterparts . In 1939 he was appointed chief of staff of the 6th Division and later I Corps , serving in that capacity in the Battle of Greece and the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign . In 1942 he commanded I Corps in the Kokoda Track campaign but was sacked . His subsequent rise to become Chief of the General Staff demonstrated that the circumstances of his dismissal in 1942 were indeed extraordinary . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sydney Fairbairn Rowell was born on 15 December 1894 at <unk> , South Australia , the fourth son of James Rowell , an English @-@ born soldier and orchardist who served as a senator from 1916 to 1922 , and his Australian @-@ born second wife Zella Jane née Williams . He acted as an ' unofficial batman ' to his father , who was colonel commanding the South Australian Brigade from 1907 to 1911 . Rowell was educated at Adelaide High School and was one of the first cadets to enter the Royal Military College , Duntroon when it opened in 1911 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 On 15 September 1914 Rowell and his classmates were commissioned as first lieutenants in the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . At the time , Rowell 's class had not yet completed its military training . The AIF 's commander , Major General William Throsby Bridges , decided that regimental duty would rectify that deficiency , so he allotted the Duntroon cadets as regimental officers of the AIF , rather than as staff officers . The cost of this decision was high ; of the 134 commissioned in time to serve at the front , 42 were killed and 38 wounded . Cadets were posted to units being formed in their home states , so Rowell was posted to the 10th Infantry Battalion . When he discovered that the 3rd Light Horse Regiment was to be commanded by his cousin , Lieutenant Colonel F. M. Rowell , Sydney obtained permission to swap places with another member of his Duntroon class Lieutenant Eric Wilkes Talbot Smith . It was a fateful decision ; Smith was fatally wounded on Anzac Day . 
 Rowell contracted pneumonia and did not embark with the main body of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment . Instead , he left with its First Reinforcements on HMAT Thirty @-@ Six on 21 December 1914 . Rowell joined the regiment in Heliopolis in January . The next month he broke his left leg in a riding accident . For a time it looked like Rowell would again miss the embarkation of his regiment , but the intervention of his father ensured that he reached Anzac Cove with the 3rd Light Horse on 12 May 1915 . He was evacuated sick to Egypt and then Malta in July , and returned to his regiment at Quinn 's Post in August . Rowell was promoted to the temporary rank of captain on 9 September , briefly assuming command of a squadron before becoming the regimental adjutant three days later . In November Rowell was again evacuated to Egypt , this time with typhoid fever , the disease that had killed his cousin . On 20 January 1916 , Rowell was returned to Australia . Because of a policy that a regular officer , once invalided to Australia , could not again be posted overseas , Rowell 's period of active service was over . He was posted , along with several other Duntroon graduates who had been invalided home , to Duntroon , as an instructor at the Officers ' Training School . This was closed in June 1917 and Rowell was posted to the staff of the 4th Military District in Adelaide . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 On 20 August 1919 at the Chalmers Church , North Terrace , Adelaide , Rowell married Blanche May Murison , the daughter of a Scottish engineer . Blanche had served in the Royal Australian Army Nursing Corps in Australia during the war . Due to his brief overseas service , the end of the war found Rowell still a lieutenant and thus junior in rank to his contemporaries but the snail @-@ like pace of promotions between the wars allowed him to gradually catch up . He was promoted to captain on 1 January 1920 , major on 1 January 1926 , and the brevet rank lieutenant colonel on 1 July 1935 , with substantive rank on 1 January 1936 . His inter @-@ war career consisted of a long series of staff postings , interspersed with training courses . 
 In 1924 , Rowell passed the staff college examination for one of the two Australian spots . Qualifying in first place gave him a choice between the Staff College , Camberley and its counterpart at Quetta , and Rowell chose the former , attending from 1925 to 1926 . At this time , the commandant was Major General Edmund Ironside ; the staff included Colonel J. F. C. Fuller and Lieutenant Colonels Alan Brooke and Bernard Montgomery . Fellow students included Captains Frank Messervy and Francis <unk> . From 1935 to 1937 , Rowell was on exchange to the British Army as a staff officer with the 44th ( Home Counties ) Infantry Division . He then attended the Imperial Defence College . The class was a distinguished one , including two Victoria Cross winners , Group Captain Frank McNamara from Australia and Lieutenant Colonel George Pearkes from Canada ; other students included Lieutenant Colonel William Slim and Wing Commander Keith Park . For his staff work , Rowell was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the King 's Birthday Honours in 1938 . 
 Rowell returned to Australia to become Director of Military Operations and Intelligence at Army Headquarters in Melbourne but in August 1938 he became staff officer to the Inspector General , Lieutenant General Ernest Squires , partly because Rowell was recognised as " one of the ablest of the early Duntroon graduates " but also because he had spent five of the previous thirteen years with the British Army or at British staff colleges . The government 's decision to appoint a British officer to produce an authoritative report into the Army was widely seen as demonstrating the government 's lack of confidence in its own officer corps . Squires ' first recommendation was to restructure the military districts into four " commands " . This required legislation amending the Defence Act and was not implemented until October 1939 . The second recommendation was the formation of a regular brigade . The death of Prime Minister Joseph Lyons in April 1939 and his subsequent replacement by Robert Menzies caused this to be shelved . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Libya = = = 
 When the 6th Division was formed in October 1939 , Sir Thomas Blamey appointed Rowell as its GSO1 ( chief of staff ) . Rowell joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) and was given the AIF service number <unk> . Gavin Long described Rowell as " clear and incisive in thought , sensitive in feeling , frank and outspoken in approach to men and to problems . Five recent years of service either at English staff colleges or on exchange duty made it probable that wherever he went his opposite numbers in British formations would be men with whom he had previously worked and played . " Comparing him to the AA & QMG , Colonel George Alan Vasey , Long noted that both " were not only efficient soldiers but men of commanding temperament and talent " . 
 Rowell was promoted to colonel on 13 October 1939 , and when the government decided to form I Corps in April 1940 , Blamey was given the command and Rowell became brigadier , general staff ( BGS ) , with the rank of brigadier . Blamey and Rowell prepared I Corps for operations as best they could , completing the force 's structure and integrating new units as they arrived in the Middle East . Rowell strove to establish good relations with the British Army , while occasionally having to remind them that the AIF was answerable to its own commander in chief and its own government . Rowell 's efforts to create an administrative headquarters to free the I Corps staff for operational duties foundered on Blamey 's reluctance to delegate authority . The best that he could achieve was the creation of a Base and Line of Communications Units command under Brigadier Allan Boase but I Corps remained responsible for organisation and training . 
 I Corps ' part in the Western Desert Campaign was brief . Its headquarters opened near Benghazi on 15 February 1941 , replacing British XIII Corps . Rowell studied the prospects of an advance on Tripoli , but the headquarters was recalled to Egypt on 24 February to participate in the Battle of Greece . Nonetheless , for his part , Rowell was mentioned in despatches , and appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = = Greece = = = 
 In Greece , I Corps was employed as such for the first time . The campaign was another short one , but very trying on the participants . Just three days after headquarters opened on 5 April 1941 , the Germans broke through and the corps was thrown into a retreat that eventually led to its re @-@ embarkation . Blamey and his staff worked under tremendous pressure ; the operational situation was precarious ; and German air attacks were frequent . Rowell later wrote : 
 What history should record is that , in the face of a desperate situation , HQ I Corps never lost control of the battle ; made sound tactical decisions with limited resources and succeeded finally in bringing its troops to the beaches with limited resources and with no loss of cohesion . 
 Tempers flared when I Corps headquarters was ordered to evacuate to Egypt . Blamey 's aide recalled : 
 We had now now come to our last hours in Greece . They were marked by tension and anger . When Rowell was told that he was to leave almost immediately to fly to Egypt with Blamey , his first reaction was to declare that he had no intention of leaving . The hostility in this exchange opened up a rift between the two men . Rowell had always been completely frank in putting his views to Blamey , but not defiant . On this occasion it took a sharp and direct order to remind Rowell who was in command . 
 If Rowell felt that Blamey had shown a lack of moral courage in failing to stand up to the political and military superiors who had directed the ill @-@ fated campaign , Blamey felt that the campaign had revealed flaws in Rowell 's character . He wrote to the Chief of the General Staff , Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee : 
 Rowell has very great ability ; is quick in decision and sound in judgement . There can be no question of his personal courage , but he lacks the reserves of nervous energy over a period of long strain . I found him difficult in the last days in Greece and , as commander , had to exercise considerable tact . Rather a reverse of what it should be . 
 I was a little disappointed in both him and Bridgeford over their attitude in one or two matters . They were over @-@ impressed with the danger of the dive bomber and talked a little too freely about its effect on the men . However , a short rest fixed them both up and they are doing a great job in Syria . 
 For his part in the campaign in Greece , Rowell was mentioned in despatches a second time . 
 = = = Syria = = = 
 I Corps was alerted to take part in the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign although , Blamey having been promoted to Deputy Commander in Chief Middle East Command , it lacked a commanding officer . Apparently , General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson believed that I Corps ' loss of transport and signal equipment precluded it from participating in the campaign from the outset . Instead , Wilson attempted to exercise command from the King David Hotel . This proved to be a serious error , as his staff were preoccupied with political and administrative issues , and were too remote from the battlefields to exercise the close command required — something that Rowell foresaw . Following a series of reverses , Rowell predicted on 16 June that " it won 't be long now . " I Corps headquarters was sent for on 18 June , and Lieutenant General John Lavarack assumed command that day . 
 = = = Defence of Australia = = = 
 In August 1941 , Rowell returned to Australia to take up the post of Deputy Chief of the General Staff ( DCGS ) , with the rank of major general . He expected that his main task would be to support the AIF ; but it turned out the primary concern was the looming war with Japan , which broke out soon after . It was at this juncture that Rowell was approached by Major General George Vasey , who had a scheme to retire all officers over the age of fifty , and making Major General Horace Robertson Commander in Chief . Presumably Vasey expected Rowell , as a fellow Duntroon graduate , to be sympathetic . A heated argument ensued , ending with Rowell telling Vasey that " if he weren 't so bloody big , I 'd toss him out of the room " . Rowell immediately went to Sturdee , who had Lavarack with him , and told him what had transpired . 
 In Blamey 's subsequent shake @-@ up of higher command arrangements , Rowell was appointed to command I Corps . This was his first command since his three @-@ day stint in command of a light horse squadron at Gallipoli . He became the first Duntroon graduate to command a corps , and the first to be promoted to the rank of lieutenant general . The old I Corps headquarters was largely absorbed into Lavarack 's new First Army headquarters , so a new one was formed from Headquarters , Southern Command . Initially located in Melbourne , it soon moved to Esk , Queensland . 
 = = = Kokoda Track = = = 
 On 31 July 1942 , Blamey informed Rowell that I Corps headquarters would be sent to Port Moresby to control operations in New Guinea . Rowell arrived in Port Moresby on 13 August 1942 and assumed command of New Guinea Force from Major General Basil Morris . Rowell 's I Corps headquarters took over operational control from Morris 's , which became that of ANGAU . The only warning that Morris had of Rowell 's arrival was a message from the DCGS , Vasey , which simply said : " Syd is coming " . The situation was dire . Japanese were steadily advancing on Port Moresby along the Kokoda Trail and were also threatening Milne Bay and Wau . Rowell and his staff were all seasoned officers with combat experience in the Middle East and the Battle of Malaya and " brought to New Guinea skill and organisation that Morris and his staff had been unable to provide " . However , the main body of Rowell 's staff did not arrive until 17 August . Rowell turned down a suggestion from Blamey that he needed additional base staff to cope with his administrative problems , given that a corps headquarters was a tactical headquarters , intended to operate as part of an army , with the latter handling most of the administrative work . Rowell 's staff gradually discovered how enormous the task before them was ; they had few maps , the only transport aircraft were destroyed in a Japanese raid , and the supplies that had been forwarded by air to Kokoda could not be located . 
 Rowell refused to give General Douglas MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) in Brisbane a " ball to ball " description of the action , sending only factual information at stated times . Failure to keep GHQ up to date could only lead to fears of the worst , which were confirmed when Major General George Kenney reported that in his opinion Port Moresby would soon fall unless something drastic was done , and Rowell was " defeatist " . On 17 September , the General MacArthur discussed the situation in New Guinea with Prime Minister John Curtin on the <unk> . He pointed out that while the Japanese faced all the same difficulties as the Australian troops fighting on the Kokoda Track , the Japanese were advancing and the Australians were retreating , and the whole situation seemed to MacArthur to be a lot like the Malaya . He recommended that General Blamey be sent up to New Guinea to take personal command of the situation . 
 " I 'm leaving for New Guinea in a few days , " Blamey told Burston , his Director General of Medical Services , on 18 September . 
 " Why ? " Burston asked . " Are you worried about New Guinea ? " 
 " No , " said Blamey , " But Canberra 's lost it ! " 
 They were talking in Blamey 's office in Victoria Barracks , Melbourne . Blamey had just had talks on the <unk> with both Curtin and MacArthur . Each of them had instructed him to go to Port Moresby . These were not recommendations or requests ; they were orders for every practical purpose . " I remember what happened to the Auk in the desert and I 'm off ! " Blamey told Burston . 
 Blamey took over command of New Guinea Force , but not I Corps . The difference was academic insofar as there was only one staff . Blamey wrote a letter to Rowell to explain the situation in advance of his arrival in Port Moresby on 23 September : 
 The powers that be have determined that I shall myself go to New Guinea for a while and operate from there ... I hope you will not be upset at this decision , and will not think that it implies any lack of confidence in yourself . I think it arises out of the fact that we have very inexperienced politicians who are inclined to panic on every possible occasion , and I think that the relationship between us personally is such that we can make the arrangement work without any difficulty . 
 Rowell took it very badly . He wrote to Major General Cyril Clowes at Milne Bay : 
 The plain fact is that he [ Blamey ] hasn 't enough moral courage to fight the Cabinet on an issue of confidence in me . Either I am fit to command the show or I am not . If the latter , then I should be pulled out . He comes here when the tide is on the turn and all is likely to be well . He cannot influence the local situation in any way , but he will get the kudos and it will be said , rather <unk> , that he came here to hold my hand and bolster me up . " 
 On 25 September , at MacArthur 's suggestion , Blamey flew to Milne Bay with Brigadier General Kenneth Walker and ordered Clowes to send a force by air to Wanigela . This would be an important step forward . Rowell , Kenney noted , was " not even consulted anymore " . Rowell was furious at Blamey bypassing him . Blamey reported back to Prime Minister Curtin that : 
 On arrival here I informed General Rowell of my instructions from the Prime Minister and the <unk> SWPA [ MacArthur ] . He proved most difficult and recalcitrant considering himself very unjustly used . I permitted him to state his case with great frankness . It was mainly statement of grievances primarily against myself because he had received only one decoration for war services in Middle East where certain other officers had received two . 
 He charged me with having failed to safeguard his interests and he felt he was being made to eat dirt . All my persuasion could not make him see matters realistically . 
 On second evening I asked General Burston as an old friend of Rowell to endeavour to induce a proper frame of mind but Burston met with no success . 
 Instead of setting out full information here for me I have to search out details and feel a definite atmosphere of obstruction . 
 Urge that Herring be sent immediately by air as successor to Rowell . If Herring not approved , Mackay second choice but Herring much younger , this important in this climate . 
 Re disposal of Rowell if you decide to continue his services he could replace Herring in command of II Corps but events here make me doubtful of wisdom of allocating disgruntled officer to this appointment . In this connection Morshead now cables that he would be glad to accept Stevens as second in command AIF in Middle East . Rowell competent to fill Darwin which is a major general 's command . II Corps command could be operated by senior division commander temporarily and by General Eichelberger with a mixed American and Australian staff . 
 = = = Exile = = = 
 On further consideration , Blamey decided that he might need Stevens , " a first rate fighter " , and that it would be better to send Rowell to the Middle East , although such a move would involve Rowell being reduced in rank to major general so as to be junior to Morshead . Rowell paid a visit to MacArthur in Brisbane on his way south . MacArthur was unimpressed . He told the Prime Minister that " Rowell 's attitude to a superior officer in a theatre of active operations was quite unpardonable " and hoped for Rowell 's sake that there would be no enquiry into the matter . MacArthur was dissatisfied with the way that Rowell had prosecuted the campaign in Papua , and was opposed to Rowell returning to New Guinea . Curtin granted Rowell an interview on 3 October . He explained to Rowell that Blamey had gone to New Guinea on his orders and had expressed the fullest confidence in his commanders in New Guinea . Not until the end of January did the Prime Minister finally decide to send Rowell to the Middle East , as a major general . 
 By the time Rowell arrived in the Middle East , Morshead and most of the troops had departed . Rowell filed regular reports on the progress of the war in the Mediterranean , and processed Australian prisoners of war who had been liberated from the Italians . In December 1943 , Rowell took up the appointment as Director of Tactical Investigation at the War Office in London vice Lieutenant General Alfred Reade Godwin @-@ Austen at the instigation of Richard Casey . Despite the important sounding title and a " high powered staff " , the job was a sinecure . When Blamey and Curtin visited London in May 1944 , Rowell was on his " best behaviour " . For his services at the War Office , Rowell was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1946 New Year Honours . 
 = = Post war = = 
 Blamey 's appointment as Commander in Chief was terminated in November 1945 and the new Prime Minister Ben Chifley appointed Sturdee in his place . Rowell was recalled from Europe to assume the new post of Vice Chief of the General Staff . He dropped in on Chifley in Canberra at the Prime Minister 's invitation . " I hate bloody injustice ! " Chifley told him . Rowell presided over the Army 's transition to peacetime . 
 = = = Coal strike = = = 
 In June 1949 , while Rowell was acting Chief of the General Staff , the country was rocked by the 1949 Australian coal strike . The strike began when stocks of coal were already low , especially in New South Wales and rationing was introduced . The Chifley government turned to the Army to get the troops to mine coal . This became possible when the transport unions agreed to transport coal that was mined . Rowell delegated responsibility for planning and organising the effort to Lieutenant General Berryman , while Rowell flew " top cover " , liaising with the government ministers in Sydney . Rowell managed to get the government to pay a bonus to soldiers mining coal , and persuaded the government to allow soldiers to have beer in their canteens , although the local civilians had none . Soldiers began mining at Muswellbrook and Lithgow on 1 August and by 15 August , when the strike ended , some 4 @,@ 000 soldiers and airmen were employed . They continued work until production was fully restored . 
 = = = Chief of the General Staff = = = 
 Sturdee retired in April 1950 and Rowell became the first Duntroon graduate to become Chief of the General Staff , the post of Vice Chief disappearing for a generation . Within months , Australian troops would be committed to the Korean War . Rowell paid visits to Korea in 1952 and 1953 . He presided over the Korean War expansion of the Regular Army , the National Service Scheme , and the re @-@ establishment of the women 's services . Rowell , as Chief of the General Staff , was Army 's chief mourner at Blamey 's funeral in 1951 , also serving as one of the pallbearers along with Frank Berryman , William Bridgeford , Edmund Herring , Iven Mackay , Leslie Morshead , John Northcott , Stanley Savige , Vernon Sturdee , and Henry Wells . For his services as Chief of the General Staff , Rowell was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours in 1953 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Rowell retired from the Army on 15 December 1954 , following a ceremony at Duntroon , where his career had begun over 43 years before . He turned to gardening , cricket , horse @-@ racing , reading , and crossword puzzles . He became a director of Smith , Elder & Co. in 1954 and of the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation in 1956 , serving as its chairman from 1957 to 1968 . From 1958 to 1968 he was chairman of the Australian Boy Scouts ' Association and a member of the Rhodes Scholarships Selection Committee for Victoria . He was offered but declined the post of Australian consul general in New York . In 1974 he published his memoirs , entitled Full Circle — the only Chief of the General Staff to have done so . Rowell died at his South Yarra home , twelve days before Lady Rowell , and was cremated . They were survived by their daughter . Sir Ivor Hele 's portrait of Rowell is held by the Australian War Memorial , as are his papers . 
 = Tatuidris = 
 Tatuidris , or armadillo ant , is a rare genus of ants consisting of a single species , Tatuidris tatusia . The ants are small in size and inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to Brazil . Workers are ferruginous @-@ colored to dark red and present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield @-@ like head with a broad vertex , ventrally @-@ turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside @-@ down . Little is known about the biology of the ants , but they are likely nocturnal and specialist predators . 
 Tatuidris was first described in 1968 and initially placed in the <unk> tribe <unk> , together with two fossil genera . Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Tatuidris tatusia is the only species in Tatuidris , a monotypic genus and one of only two extant genera in the subfamily Agroecomyrmecinae . A new species , T. <unk> , was described by <unk> & <unk> in 2012 , but has now been relegated to a junior synonym under T. tatusia based on the extent of the morphological variability encountered throughout this broad geographic range . Analysis of DNA barcodes indicated a pattern of genetic isolation by distance , suggesting the presence of a single species undergoing allopatric differentiation . 
 It was first described by Brown & Kempf in 1968 based on two workers collected in a <unk> sample of humus in El Salvador . Due to morphological similarities , they considered it a very primitive ant and placed it in what was then a <unk> tribe , the <unk> , together with ants known from Early Eocene Baltic amber ( <unk> ) and late Eocene Florissant shale ( <unk> ) . 
 It bears superficial resemblance to some extant genera ( Strumigenys , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) but these similarities are considered to be due to convergent evolution . Due to similarities in the habitus , Brown & Kempf ( 1968 ) linked Tatuidris to the <unk> genus <unk> ( currently a junior synonym of Strumigenys ) and <unk> . However they concluded : " analysis of these similarities indicates [ ... ] that they are mostly convergent and not based on close phylogenetic relationship " . Further work explored the similarities of Tatuidris with <unk> ( Bolton 1984 ) and <unk> ( Brown 1977 ) . While these taxa share some characteristics , including an expanded head vertex , deep antennal scrobes and a compact mesosoma , the similarities were again deemed convergent . 
 Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate . Bolton ( 2003 ) was the first to suggest the taxonomic instability of Tatuidris within Myrmicinae and raised the genus to the level of a new subfamily , the Agroecomyrmecinae , suggesting that Agroecomyrmecinae might be the sister taxon to Myrmicinae . The subfamily rank was re @-@ assessed by Baroni Urbani & de Andrade in 2007 , this was the first attempt to include Tatuidris as a terminal taxon in a morphological cladistic analysis . In their study , Baroni Urbani & de Andrade identified morphological synapomorphies shared between Tatuidris and the <unk> , justifying the inclusion of the genus within Myrmicinae . In addition , two autapomorphies ( a differently shaped <unk> tergum and sternum , and the eyes at or close to the apex of the antennal scrobe ) separated Tatuidris from all other extant ant genera included in their study . 
 Unlike phylogenetic studies based on morphological traits , molecular analyses of the internal phylogeny of the ants have given strong evidence that the armadillo ants are neither closely related to nor nested within the Myrmicinae . Brady et al . ( 2006 ) , Moreau et al . ( 2006 ) and <unk> et al . ( 2008 ) reconstructed phylogenetic trees with the <unk> inside the ' <unk> ' group of subfamilies , close to the <unk> , and gave support for the exclusion of the genus from the Myrmicinae , a subfamily located inside the ' <unk> ' clade . Given the early appearance of the Agroecomyrmecinae in the geologic record , the similarities of armadillo ants to Myrmicinae were hypothesized to represent convergence and / or retention of plesiomorphic forms . 
 The name Tatuidris means " armadillo ant " , which is also the common name for this species ; tatu comes from the Tupi and Portuguese word for " armadillo " ; the specific epithet for the single described species , tatusia , is an old generic name for armadillo . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Tatuidris is rare but broadly distributed . The ants inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to French Guiana , central Brazil , and Amazonian Peru . No collections are known from the Caribbean , Galápagos , or other islands . Most specimens and collections are currently known to occur in localities west of the Andes , with more collections tending to occur towards Central America and Mexico . Most collections come from mountainside ( pre @-@ montane ) areas at mid elevations ( usually 800 – 1200 meters of altitude ) . Collections from lowland Amazonia are few . Published records are few , but with the advent of litter sifting and Winkler extraction as a popular method of ant collecting , Tatuidris are not as rare as they used to seem . Although not very abundant , with frequent litter sifting they can be reliably found in Costa Rican wet forests . 
 = = Description = = 
 Workers of Tatuidris present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield @-@ like head with a broad vertex ( upper surface of the head ) , ventrally @-@ turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , deep antennal scrobes ( an impression that receives parts of the antenna ) with eyes at or close to their apex , compact and fused mesosoma , 7 @-@ segmented antenna , first gastral segment ventrally directed , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside @-@ down on the roof of the expanded frontal lobe . 
 The body of a worker is short and compact , ferruginous @-@ colored to dark red , with thick and rigid integument ( external " skin " ) . The body is covered by hairs , which are variable in length and inclination . The head is pyriform ( pear @-@ shaped ) , broadest behind , with small eyes . Queens are similar to workers , but yellow @-@ colored and paler . Their wings are about 60 % longer than total body length . Males , also similar to workers ( except head ) , are darker and have wings about 50 % longer than the body . The eyes of the queens and males are larger than in workers . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Specimens of Tatuidris are small , about 3 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) in total length , but specimens can vary greatly in size , with larger specimens being twice as large as the smaller ones . Size variability within trap catches ( possibly same colonies ) may be considerable . For example , workers from one collection catch in Nicaragua varied 30 % in size . It is still unclear whether intra @-@ colony size variation is due to the presence of morphological worker castes ( e.g. minor and major castes ) or continuous size variability . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) revealed that most variability among specimens is related to size , with shape explaining little of total variation . 
 = = = Pilosity variability = = = 
 Four pilosity patterns ( patterns of hair @-@ like setae ) are known to occur within Tatuidris collections . Pilosity pattern A consists of a mix of both long flexuous and short appressed setae . This is the most common pilosity pattern and the one that most resembles the type specimens from El Salvador and the gyne from <unk> , Ecuador . Pilosity pattern B is characterized by very short , fully appressed , and regular spaced setae arrayed homogeneously and equidistantly on the head , mesosoma , petiole , postpetiole and gaster . Pilosity pattern C is characterized by dense <unk> @-@ looking setae . Pilosity pattern D consists of short and uniform <unk> ( strongly inclined but not fully appressed ) setae scattered throughout the body . 
 = = = Eyes = = = 
 The relative position of eyes is highly variable within the species . For example , eye location ranges from being completely within the antennal scrobes to completely outside the scrobes . In some cases the eye itself is located outside the antennal scrobe , but the eye 's fossa is well marked and confluent with the antennal scrobe . In most specimens , the antennal carina ( ridge extending along the dorsal antennal region ) <unk> from the antennal scrobes and lies straight above the eyes . However , in specimens from Nicaragua , a strongly impressed antennal carina is present . In these specimens about 40 % of the eye 's area lies within the antennal scrobes . In the gyne , only ~ 1 / 6 of the eye lies within the antennal scrobes . A depression sometimes forms in the integument in the sides of the propodeum , below the propodeal spiracle and above the metapleural gland . The depth of this depression varies among specimens and tends to be deepest in larger specimens . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The biology is poorly known ; the male and female reproductive castes were described for the first time in 2012 . The genus is known mainly from isolated workers found in Winkler or <unk> samples . Tatuidris workers have peculiar mandibular brushes and a powerful sting , which led Brown & Kempf to speculate that Tatuidris might be specialist predators of active or slippery arthropod prey . Until 2011 , no observations of live specimens were registered . Details of a first collection event of a small live colony ( 3 workers and 4 gynes ) by Thibaut <unk> in a mid @-@ elevation forest in southeastern Ecuador suggest that Tatuidris may well be a highly specialized predator , as colonies kept in captivity did not accept any food item offered to them . Food items rejected by the ants included live and dead termites , millipedes , mites , various insect parts , sugar water , tuna , biscuits , live and dead fruit flies ( Drosophila ) , live springtails , live myriapods ( <unk> and <unk> ) , live and dead <unk> , small live spiders , small live pseudoscorpions , one small snail , uncooked hen egg ( i.e. piece of cotton wool soaked with fresh whisked hen egg ) , ant larvae ( <unk> sp . ) , and live ant workers ( <unk> sp . , <unk> sp . ) . Potential food items ( arthropods ) for Tatuidris were taken from soil samples and Winkler samples collected at the site where Tatuidris was a priori determined to be present . 
 Further observations suggest that Tatuidris may be a sit @-@ and @-@ wait predator . <unk> observed that " both workers and gynes moved very slowly and were very clumsy . They often remained motionless during several tens of seconds or even several minutes when disturbed ( either by my handling or by the contact with another arthropod ) . " These observations were mainly performed at night , suggesting that Tatuidris may be nocturnal , a hypothesis also supported by collection patterns . For example , in the Río <unk> forest of Ecuador Tatuidris specimens tend to fall in pitfall traps , instead of Winkler sacs . Because pitfall traps usually work 24 @-@ h , but Winkler sacs generally uses litter sifted during the day , then ants with nocturnal habits may be underrepresented in Winkler samples . The small eyes of <unk> species provide further support for this hypothesis . 
 = Go , Stewie , Go ! = 
 " Go , Stewie , Go ! " is the 13th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 14 , 2010 . The episode features Stewie after he auditions , cross @-@ dressed under the pseudonym Karina Smirnoff , for a female role in the American version of Jolly Farm Revue , and eventually ends up falling in love with a female co @-@ star on the show . Meanwhile , Lois finds herself attracted to Meg 's surprisingly normal boyfriend , once Peter causes her to realize her advancing age . 
 The episode was written by Gary Janetti and directed by Greg Colton . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 72 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Stephen Bishop , Mo Collins , Colin Ford , Lucas Grabeel , Anne Hathaway , Nana Visitor and Mae Whitman , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Go , Stewie , Go ! " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brian , walking in drunk , notices that Stewie has resumed watching Jolly Farm Revue , after previously swearing off the show in " Road to Europe " . Remembering a story he had seen in the local newspaper , Brian tells Stewie about upcoming auditions for an American version of the show . Jumping at the opportunity , the two show up to the auditions , but quickly learn that there is only one female role remaining . Determined to win a spot on the show , Stewie decides to cross @-@ dress as a woman , naming his new identity " Karina Smirnoff " . Beginning his audition , he starts by telling a completely fabricated story . Convincing the producers that he is telling a true tale , he wins the role . The next morning , on the first day of filming , Stewie as Karina introduces himself to the rest of the cast , and quickly falls in love with a female co @-@ star named Julie . Another co @-@ star , Randall , objects to the new role that Karina was cast to play , and takes Julie away from him to prevent their friendship . As they continue shooting , however , the two develop a friendly relationship , eventually deciding to hold a sleepover , where they become even closer . The next day , Julie professes her love for Karina by wishing that she was actually a boy , causing Stewie , as Karina , to come on to her . Julie insists that she is not a lesbian , so Stewie decides to unveil his true identity to the entire cast during a live taping of the show . Shocked that Karina was actually a boy , Julie 's mother refuses to let her speak to him , with Stewie left to regret his decision to come out as a cross @-@ dresser , and decides to go get ice cream with Brian , as he can no longer wear that dress . 
 Meanwhile , Peter begins to insult Lois about her advancing age , including her minor strands of gray hair . This makes her extremely self @-@ conscious , and soon Lois becomes aware of her lust for a younger man . After introducing her new boyfriend , Anthony , to the family , Meg goes on to make out with him on the family couch , with Lois watching over nearby . Jealous of her daughter 's new @-@ found love , she begins hitting on Anthony . Later that day , Lois sends Meg to pick up her grandfather , leaving her all alone with Anthony . The two then begin making out on the couch , but Meg returns to the house only a few moments later and discovers them . Angry at her mother for ruining her chance at having a normal boyfriend , Meg threatens Lois to lay off of him , pulling out one of her own teeth in frustration . Lois quickly agrees , but is still angry with Peter for continually insulting her . She confronts him about this , and he admits that he was actually embarrassed about his own advancing age , as well as his lack of fitness , and was only insulting Lois in order to distract her from the fact that she could be with a much better @-@ looking man . He apologizes for his behavior , and Lois forgives him . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by returning writer Gary Janetti , his first episode since the fourth season episode " Stewie B. Goode " . In addition , the episode was directed by series regular Greg Colton , before the conclusion of the seventh production season . The episode was Colton 's second for the season , the first being the season premiere , " Road to the Multiverse " , which received high praise from critics . The episode saw the third re @-@ appearance , the first being an equally brief appearance in " Spies Reminiscent of Us " and the second in " Road to the Multiverse " , by former main cast member Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy , in order to star as the character in his own spin @-@ off , entitled The Cleveland Show . 
 " Go , Stewie , Go ! " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , musician Stephen Bishop rerecorded his single " It Might Be You " , actress Mo Collins appeared as a little girl , voice actor Colin Ford appeared briefly as Randall , actress Anne Hathaway appeared as Mother Maggie , actor Lucas Grabeel appeared as Meg 's new boyfriend Anthony , voice actress Nana Visitor appeared briefly as the audition caller and voice actress Mae Whitman appeared as Julie . Recurring guest voice actors Ralph Garman , writer Gary Janetti , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , actress Jennifer Tilly and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Although never specifically referenced or mentioned in the episode itself , Stewie 's alter @-@ ego is named after well @-@ known ballroom dancer Karina Smirnoff , who had previously danced professionally on the American television reality show Dancing with the Stars . Most of the storyline following Stewie is a homage of the 1982 film Tootsie . The episode 's title is also a reference to the song " Go , Tootsie , Go " played during the photo @-@ shoot montage in the film . A similar scene featuring the song was slightly modified , replacing " Tootsie " with " Stewie , " in the lyrics to the song . Another song from the film , " It Might Be You " by Stephen Bishop , is played during the closing credit sequence . 
 As Stewie and Brian watch a recorded episode of Jolly Farm Revue , Stewie notes the introduction of several new characters to the show . The television screen is then shown , as Karina reveals the characters to his co @-@ star , Julie . The new characters include parodies of the Sesame Street characters Big Bird , who describes himself as a " big bird , " and a self @-@ described " <unk> " named " Moody Green Garbage Creature " , who resembles Oscar the Grouch , and butch and femme versions of Bert and Ernie , who try to protect Karina and Julie from Oscar . 
 After sending Meg out on an errand to pick up her grandfather , Lois continues to seduce Anthony , having been interested in him since Peter had begun insulting her about her advancing age . Quickly returning after forgetting the car keys , Meg discovers her mother making out with her new boyfriend on the couch . The bass jingle used extensively in the long @-@ running NBC sitcom Seinfeld is then heard , with the scene pausing , before transitioning to the Jolly Farm studio . In a surprise visit to the Griffin family home , Julie unexpectedly appears when Stewie opens the front door . Expecting Julie to recognize him , he forgets that he is not dressed as Karina , causing him to hurriedly change clothing , while pretending to have an argument with his fabricated persona . A similar scene is featured in the 1993 film Mrs. Doubtfire , starring actor Robin Williams . Stewie and Jolly Farm make a reference to Pan Am Flight 103 , a Boeing 747 – 100 destroyed by a terrorist bomb over Lockerbie , Scotland , killing all 259 occupants . Large portions of the plane fell onto Lockerbie , which killed 11 people , escalating the death toll to 270 . A song features on Jolly Farm that explicitly describes debris from the newly disintegrated plane falling into Lockerbie , sung in the fashion of that of a nursery rhyme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In an improvement over the previous two episodes , the episode was viewed in 6 @.@ 72 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , as well as the series premiere of Sons of Tucson , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mixed , calling the storyline a " [ good source of ] material in the long @-@ running dysfunctional yet affectionate relationship between Brian and Stewie , " while criticizing its multiple cultural references . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the episode a " pleasant surprise , " enjoying Stewie 's storyline , while criticizing the subplot between Lois and Meg . Ramsey Isler of IGN was much more critical of the episode , however , saying that " while there [ were ] a couple of funny moments , there are more misses than hits , " giving the episode a 6 out of 10 . In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Isler listed " Go , Stewie , Go ! " as being " full of the lowest of the lowest @-@ common @-@ denominator " jokes " , with heavy reliance on toilet humor and the characteristic cutaway gags that have steadily gotten more random and less funny . " In contrast , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode , saying that it " [ offered ] an emotional glimpse into the characters . " 
 Naming the episode as its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for " strong sexual content , " the Parents Television Council called the episode a " nauseating new low , " criticizing multiple scenes , including Lois making out with a minor , as well as the confrontation between Brian and Karina at the bar . The PTC also criticized Seth MacFarlane for attempting to " elicit disgust " throughout the episode by " [ choosing ] incest and rape " in order to " provoke [ emotions ] . " 
 = Gettysburg ( The Office ) = 
 " Gettysburg " is the eighth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office . It was written by Robert Padnick and directed by Jeffrey Blitz . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on November 17 , 2011 . " Gettysburg " guest stars Lindsey Broad as Cathy Simms . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) takes some of the office staff on a field trip to Gettysburg for inspiration . Meanwhile , the rest of the office , under orders from Robert California ( James Spader ) , are tasked with coming up with a new business idea for Dunder Mifflin . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) proposes several vending machine ideas that capture California 's imagination . 
 " Gettysburg " would be the last episode to feature Jenna Fischer before she went on maternity leave . The episode received mixed reviews , with commentators mainly criticizing the episode for recycling jokes . According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Gettysburg " drew 5 @.@ 50 million viewers , and ranked first in its time slot and was the highest @-@ rated NBC show of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) decides to motivate and inspire everyone by taking them on a field trip to Gettysburg . At Gettysburg , Andy is unhappy with the lack of morale and belief in his leadership and attempts to make an analogy between running a paper company and fighting in the Civil War . Andy starts to lead a haphazard tour , and eventually most of the office members sit down to rest . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) follow Andy after he presses on , and eventually tell him to stop trying to impress the office . They reinforce the fact that his co @-@ workers like him the way he is . 
 During the tour , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) argues with Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) about what he claims is the northernmost battle of the Civil War : the Battle of Schrute Farms . Dwight maintains that its absence from the history books is an example of re @-@ writing history , whereas Oscar maintains that the battle is a fictitious creation . After tracking down a historian , Dwight and Oscar learn that the Battle of Schrute Farms did in fact take place . However , the " battle " was really a code term . During the Civil War , Schrute Farms was a safe haven for artists and poets ( and , as heavily implied , homosexuals ) . Oscar finds this fascinating , whereas Dwight leaves in disgust . Meanwhile , Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) is sidetracked by another tour group who assume that he is an Abraham Lincoln impersonator . He acquiesces and delivers an improvised but applauded performance . 
 Meanwhile , at the office , half of the office opts to stay behind . Robert California ( James Spader ) makes a spontaneous visit and asks them to come up with Dunder Mifflin / Sabre 's next big idea . However , the office fails to impress Robert with their ideas . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) details an idea he has about cookie placement in the vending machine , but Robert gets the impression that he is extremely clever and is speaking only in metaphors . Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) , who has been annoyed the entire day with Kevin being creative and Robert rejecting his ideas , later tricks Kevin into explaining an idea he has involving the Big Mac , and Robert realizes that there was no subtext to Kevin 's ideas . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by story editor Robert Padnick , his second writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff the previous season . It was directed by frequent director of The Office , Jeffrey Blitz . The episode also marks the second appearance of Lindsey Broad , who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season . Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy , " Gettysburg " would be the last episode of 2011 to feature Pam . The episode was not filmed on location in Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt noted that the writers ' used Andy 's " overeager qualities " to have the office group skip the official tour , allowing for " some random California heritage site " to stand in for the real Gettysburg . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Andy preparing the office to go to Gettysburg , and Kevin discussing his new @-@ found approval by California . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on NBC on November 17 , 2011 , " Gettysburg " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 50 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode marked a three percent decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " Pam 's Replacement " . Despite this , the episode ranked first in its timeslot , beating the Fox drama series , Bones which received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 percent share , CBS drama , Person of Interest which received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) medical drama , Private Practice which received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 percent share , although all three shows received more total viewers than " Gettysburg " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Gettysburg " received mixed reviews from critics , ranging from negative to slightly positive . Hollywood writer Hannah Lawrence was heavily critical of the episode and wrote , " This episode seemed like a joke to me . I really didn 't like it . " What Culture ! reviewer Joseph Kratzer gave the episode three out of five stars and wrote , " While the episode was technically satisfactory , it didn 't carry much momentum . " McNutt referred to the " Battle of Schrute Farms " gag as a " payoff , " but was overall negative . He concluded that although " The Office is still capable of finding humor in [ ... ] situations [ but ] it doesn 't feel like the show is willing to explore that humor , instead content on making the same statements the show has been making for quite some time . " He ultimately gave it a " C – " . 
 Not all reviews were negative . IGN writer Cindy White awarded the episode 7 out of 10 , signifying a " good " episode . However , she heavily criticized the recycling of story lines , writing , " It may have been heartwarming in the premiere , but now it feels repetitive , and it 's still not funny . " M. Giant of Television without Pity gave the episode a " B – " . Chris Plante from New York wrote a generally positively review , saying " No episode has done the ensemble work better than “ Gettysburg , ” a kind of sitcom buffet , its many stories giving the audience a small taste of every personality . That isn 't to say every character has been fleshed out well . [ ... ] Andy and California seem off point . " 
 The episode 's opening , featuring Pam Halpert ( Fischer ) faking her water breaking , received mixed reviews . White called the sequence her " favorite part " and felt an empathetic connection to the character . Kratzer claimed that he enjoyed the scene . McNutt , however , wrote that the opening concludes that " Pam and Jim are basically total jerks " . 
 = John Deere House and Shop = 
 The John Deere House and Shop is located in the unincorporated village of Grand Detour , Illinois , near the Lee County city of Dixon . The site is known as the location where the first steel plow was invented by John Deere in 1837 . The site includes Deere 's house , a replica of his original blacksmith shop , a gift shop , and an archaeological exhibit showing the excavation site of his original blacksmith shop . The Deere House and Shop is listed on the National Register of Historic Places ; it joined that list in 1966 , the year the Register was established . Prior to that , it was designated a National Historic Landmark on July 19 , 1964 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1836 , native <unk> John Deere set out from Rutland , Vermont to Grand Detour , Illinois , founded by his friend and fellow Vermont native Leonard Andrus . The town lacked a local blacksmith , Deere 's trade , and within two days Deere had a forge and new business established . In Vermont , Deere produced plows made from cast @-@ iron and when he first arrived in Illinois he produced the same plows . Soil conditions in Illinois differ from those in Vermont . In Vermont the soil is sandy and falls easily away from the plow blade but in Illinois the soil is thicker and wetter ; it stuck to the plow and had to be scraped off by the farmer as he plowed . 
 There are varying tales as to the inspiration for Deere to create the invention he is famed for , the steel plow . In one version he recalled the way the polished steel pitchfork tines moved through hay and soil and thought that the same effect could be obtained for a plow . By early 1838 , Deere completed his first steel plow and sold it to a local farmer , Lewis Crandall . Crandall spread word of his success with Deere 's plow quickly , and two neighbors soon placed orders with Deere . By 1841 he was manufacturing 75 plows per year , and 100 plows per year in 1876 . 
 = = John Deere Historic Site = = 
 The John Deere Historic Site in Grand Detour , Illinois is operated by the John Deere Company and has five components . Outside of the perimeter , which is surrounded by a white , wooden fence , are 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) of prairie restoration . Inside of the fenced area is the replica blacksmith shop , the John Deere House and the visitor 's center which is a gift shop . Also on the grounds is a building which houses the 1960s archaeological dig site . The blacksmith shop is a replica of the original Deere Shop , unearthed during the 1960s dig . The shop recreates Deere 's shop and includes a demonstration by a modern blacksmith using antique tools of the trade and an open furnace . The visitor 's center is inside an 1843 home built by a Deere neighbor , it houses a gift shop which has an original Deere family wall clock on display . The home was originally owned by William Dana . The house is furnished with period items as well as the gift shop 's merchandise . The entire site is operated by John Deere Company employees . 
 Part of the John Deere Historic Site is listed on the National Register of Historic Places along with being designated a National Historic Landmark . The only contributing property on the National Register listing for the site is the John Deere House . The house is also the only " property type " listed on the National Historic Landmarks ' online database entry for the site . The house obtained National Historic Landmark status on July 19 , 1964 and was added to the National Register of Historic Places soon after its inception on October 15 , 1966 . 
 = = House = = 
 The John Deere House was built in 1836 when Deere arrived in Grand Detour and the building was added onto as his family grew . It is furnished with period furniture and household objects that would have been common around the time the Deere family occupied the home . The house has two levels with four rooms on the main level and two rooms upstairs . Each of the upstairs rooms is accessible via a private staircase and it is believed one of the rooms was used by Deere 's apprentices while the other was used as a children 's bedroom . 
 The front entry leads into the living room where polished wood is found throughout as well as 19th century furnishings . The front room is part of the original building which consisted of one room . The room acted as the Deere 's kitchen , living room , bedrooms , essentially everything . Deere eventually added onto the house , including a bedroom and an upstairs loft . The first floor bedroom would have been used for John and his wife , and possibly a couple of the children while the upstairs room would was used for the rest of the children . The <unk> left the home in 1847 when they moved to Moline , Illinois . 
 = = Shop = = 
 The original blacksmith shop on the site is long gone , however , in 1962 an archaeological team made of students from the University of Illinois approached the Deere Company about excavating the site where the shop once stood . The team unearthed the location of the original Deere Blacksmith Shop where the first successful steel plow was developed in 1837 . The dig site is preserved beneath a building , known as the pavilion . The site is surrounded by museum exhibits which include artifacts , news clippings , and photographs . 
 A blacksmith shop does occupy the current John Deere Historic Site grounds . Archaeologists used a magnetometer to locate the position of the forge in the original blacksmith shop , thus , the current shop shares an interior which is an exact replica of the original . The exterior of the building has the same dimensions as the original as well . 
 = = Historic significance = = 
 The John Deere House and Shop is historically significant for its influence in the areas of commerce , agriculture , industry , and invention . The site was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark on July 19 , 1964 . The Landmark designation was assigned by the U.S. Department of Interior because of the House and Shop 's association with John Deere , founder of the John Deere Company and inventor of the first steel plow . His invention was of significance to the entire United States and made large scale cultivation of areas in Illinois , Indiana and Ohio possible . When the U.S. National Register of Historic Places was established in 1966 the John Deere House and Shop was among the first properties to join that list . It was added to the National Register on October 15 , 1966 , the same day the National Register was established . 
 = Polygon ( website ) = 
 Polygon is an American video game website that publishes news , culture , reviews , and videos . It launched as Vox Media 's third property on October 24 , 2012 . The site was built over the course of ten months , and its 16 @-@ person founding staff included the editors @-@ in @-@ chief of the gaming sites Joystiq , Kotaku and The Escapist . Vox produced a documentary series about the founding of the site . The site sought to distinguish itself from competitors by focusing on the stories of the people behind the games instead of the games themselves . They also produced long @-@ form magazine @-@ style feature articles , invested in video content , and chose to allow their review scores to be updated as the game changed . The site was built to HTML5 responsive standards with a pink color scheme , and their advertisements focused on direct sponsorship of specific kinds of content . 
 = = History = = 
 The gaming blog Polygon was launched on October 24 , 2012 , as Vox Media 's third property . The site grew from technology blog The Verge , which was launched a year earlier as an outgrowth of sports blog network SB Nation before the Vox Media was formed . Vox Media CEO Jim Bankoff approached Joystiq editor @-@ in @-@ chief Christopher Grant in early 2011 about starting a video game website . Bankoff considered video games to be a logical vertical market for Vox , whose sites attracted an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . He also saw games to be an expanding market in consideration of mobile and social network game categories . Forbes described Bankoff 's offer as a " serious commitment to online journalism " in an age of content farms and disappearing print publications , but Grant did not trust the offer and declined . Upon seeing the effort that Vox put into The Verge , their Chorus content management system , and the quality of their content and sponsorships , Grant changed his mind and returned to pitch Bankoff . Grant wanted the new site to compete with top gaming websites GameSpot and IGN , but still be able to run longform " magazine @-@ style journalism " that could be of historic interest . As part of the site 's attempt to " redefine games journalism " , Vox made a 13 @-@ part documentary series of the site 's creation ( " Press Reset " ) that tracked the site 's creation from start to launch . 
 Forbes described Polygon 's original 16 @-@ person staff as " star @-@ studded " for including the editors @-@ in @-@ chief from three competing video game blogs . Grant left Joystiq in January 2012 and brought the editors @-@ in @-@ chief of Kotaku and The Escapist , Brian Crecente and Russ Pits . Other staff included Joystiq managing editor Justin McElroy and staff from UGO , IGN , MTV , Videogamer.com , and 1UP.com. Ben Kuchera joined the site after The Penny Arcade Report closed in November 2013 . The team works remotely from places including Philadelphia , New York , West Virginia , San Francisco , Sydney , London , and Austin , though Vox Media is headquartered in Washington , D.C. The site was developed over the course of ten months , where the staff chose the site 's name and set standards for their reporting and review score scale . Polygon staff published on The Verge as " Vox Games " beginning in February 2012 and ending with their October launch . The site 's name was announced at a PAX East panel in April . It refers to a polygon — " the basic visual building block of video games " . 
 In March 2016 , editors from Polygon and SB Nation launched a new Vox Media venture , The Rift Herald , which covers League of Legends esports . 
 = = Content = = 
 Polygon publishes video game news , entertainment , reviews , and video . They sought to set their content apart from other games journalism outlets by focusing on the people making and playing the games rather than the games alone . At the site 's outset , Polygon planned to run multiple longform feature articles weekly , which they intended to be comparable in intent to the cover stories of magazines . They also decided to allow their game review scores to be updated as the games were updated , so as to more adequately reflect games that had changed with downloadable content and updates since their original release . The site received criticism for its comparatively low review score given to The Last of Us , which was later increased with the game 's remastered edition . In consideration of games that may differ in quality before and after release , Polygon later began to mark pre @-@ release reviews as " provisional " to defer final scoring until after their public release . 
 After raising money in a second round of funding in late 2013 , Vox announced that they would be investing further in the site 's video product , such that it " feels as much like TV programming as magazine publishing " . The site announced in June 2014 that features editor Russ Pitts would be leaving Polygon along with their video director and video designer as the site planned to run fewer feature articles in the future . Polygon 's <unk> podcast was named among iTunes 's best of 2015 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The site uses a pink color palette and emulates the magazine @-@ style layout of The Verge . The site was programmed to use HTML 5 standards with a responsive design that adapts to the screen dimensions of laptops , tablets , and cell phones . This is partially to remove need for a separate mobile version . Their longform journalism was optimized for reading on tablets . 
 = = Business = = 
 The site uses a " direct content sponsorship " model of online advertising used by SB Nation and The Verge . For example , a video series sponsorship pairs brands with specific editorial content . Forbes wrote that Vox 's avoidance of content farm and news aggregator tactics , and interest shown in building communities is desirable to " magazine @-@ quality advertisers " . The site pitched its longform journalism to advertisers as an indicator of high @-@ quality content . The site 's founding sponsors included Geico , Sony , and Unilever . 
 As of June 2014 , Polygon ranks fourth among games sites by <unk> web traffic data : behind IGN , GameSpot , and Kotaku . The same month , Grant reported that the previous month had been their most highly popular . 
 = Hogwarts Express ( Universal Orlando Resort ) = 
 The Hogwarts Express is an 1 @,@ 800 mm ( 5 ft 10 7 ⁄ 8 in ) broad gauge funicular railway , people mover , and attraction within the Universal Orlando Resort in Orlando , Florida , United States . The route runs 676 metres ( 2 @,@ 218 ft ) between Hogsmeade station in the Islands of Adventure theme park and King 's Cross station in the London area of the Universal Studios Florida theme park . It provides a connection between the Diagon Alley and Hogsmeade areas which together form The Wizarding World of Harry Potter themed area , based on the Harry Potter film series . 
 The attraction , which was manufactured by the Doppelmayr <unk> Group , is operated with two replicas of the Hogwarts Express . The two directions of travel provide two different experiences . Because the trains transport guests between stations in two separate theme parks , riders must have an admission pass valid for both theme parks , with ticket inspectors checking prior to boarding . 
 The Hogwarts Express soft @-@ opened to the public on 1 July 2014 before officially opening seven days later along with the rest of the Diagon Alley expansion on 8 July 2014 . Within one month of its opening , one million riders had travelled on the trains . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of creating a Hogwarts Express @-@ related attraction came from Mark Woodbury , the president of Universal Creative . After the opening of the Hogsmeade attraction at the Islands of Adventure theme park in 2010 , Universal began considering how to keep attendance balanced between the adjacent parks . At first , the creative team considered putting Diagon Alley within Islands of Adventure . Eventually they decided that the London and Hogsmeade environments should not be visible between one another . As a result , Woodbury proposed building Diagon Alley in Universal Studios Florida and then connecting the two Harry Potter @-@ themed lands with the Hogwarts Express train . 
 Rumours that Universal Orlando was planning to expand The Wizarding World of Harry Potter began in early 2011 after construction surveying was spotted in the Lost Continent section of Islands of Adventure and the resort began asking visitors about a possible expansion . On 2 December 2011 , the resort announced the Jaws attraction would close on 2 January 2012 to make way for a future attraction . In the same month , speculation arose that an expansion would include the Hogwarts Express to connect Hogsmeade in Islands of Adventure and Diagon Alley in Universal Studios Florida . In June 2012 , theme park enthusiasts discovered that applications for permits had been submitted to the South Florida Water Management District and the City of Orlando suggesting that the resort was planning to build a track connecting the two theme parks , as well as one station building in each park . Almost a year later , WESH , a local news channel , reported that an elevated track system had been installed at Universal Orlando and that the track ran between Hogsmeade in Islands of Adventure and a construction area in Universal Studios Florida ; suggesting the rumours were true . 
 On 8 May 2013 , Universal Orlando announced the expansion of Wizarding World of Harry Potter , Diagon Alley , along with the Hogwarts Express attraction , to be located on the former site of the Jaws attraction . By the end of August 2013 , all six passenger cars and both tenders had been spotted in the backstage area , waiting to be assembled on the track . The first of the two trains was installed on the track on 24 October 2013 . By the beginning of December 2013 , the second train had been placed on the track . In January , the resort previewed the interior of the Hogwarts Express through a live cast . On 2 December 2013 , Orlando Attractions Magazine , an amusement park website , spotted one of the trains being tested for the first time . In mid @-@ March 2014 , Universal Orlando Resort released further information about the ride , including concept animations . On 24 June 2014 , the resort announced that the Diagon Alley expansion , including the Hogwarts Express , would officially open to the public on 8 July 2014 . A week later , Universal Orlando soft @-@ opened the Hogwarts Express , without any announcement . Within a month of the Hogwarts Express ' opening , one million riders had ridden the attraction . It had taken approximately two and a half years to develop . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Theme park guests may use the Hogwarts Express to travel between Hogsmeade and King 's Cross in London , close to Diagon Alley . They can travel in either direction as long as the guest has purchased a Park @-@ to @-@ Park ticket , which gives guests access to both of Universal Orlando 's theme parks within the same day . Two different experiences are provided depending on the destination of the train , both of which are approximately four minutes long . 
 = = = Hogsmeade to King 's Cross = = = 
 At the entrance of the queue , ticket inspectors check passengers ' tickets for Universal Studios . The queue then leads into a forested area which later leads into the Hogsmeade station building . Upon climbing a flight of steps , travellers reach the Hogsmeade station platform . Once the arriving passengers on the Hogwarts Express have left the platform , passengers waiting may then board the train and enter one of the twenty @-@ one passenger compartments within the train . 
 As the train departs towards King 's Cross , Rubeus Hagrid waves riders goodbye outside of the window . Shadows of Harry Potter , Ron Weasley , and Hermione Granger can also been seen walking down the train corridor , looking for an empty compartment . Following this , Buckbeak flies outside the window , while Hogwarts can be seen in the background . Shortly after , the train enters a forest where centaurs are running . Upon exiting the forest , Hogwarts can be seen once again in the background . Fred and George Weasley appear , flying broomsticks and playing with fireworks . The Hogwarts Express then enters a tunnel , after which riders find themselves in the middle of a storm and pass Malfoy Manor . The journey then enters a second tunnel ; Harry , Ron , and Hermione appear again in the train corridor . As a spider crawls up the compartment door , Ron eats it and the trio continue to walk on down the corridor . After the tunnel the journey continues into London passing by an industrial factory and then a residential area . The Knight Bus then appears ; squeezing between buildings and shrinking to pass under a bridge . As the bus drives away , the train enters King 's Cross station , where Alastor Moody greets passengers . 
 Passengers then disembark onto Platform 9 ¾ of King 's Cross and proceed down some stairs into a 2010 @-@ era King 's Cross Station , before arriving at the London waterfront area , adjacent to Diagon Alley . 
 = = = King 's Cross to Hogsmeade = = = 
 The King 's Cross station part of the attraction is built on a site that previously held the Jaws attraction . The entrance to the station , which is a quarter @-@ scale replica of the real London King 's Cross railway station , is located in the London area , close to Diagon Alley . Passengers enter the station building and have their admission ticket checked . They then enter a queue which takes them farther into the station building , under a split @-@ flap department board , and past London @-@ related advertisements , several stacks of suitcases and a shop selling food . After ascending a flight of stairs , passengers find themselves between signs for King 's Cross Platform 9 and Platform 10 . They can see those ahead of them walking through the " wall " forming the entrance to Platform 9 ¾ . This effect uses the Pepper 's ghost illusion . After continuing around several corners , guests arrive on Platform 9 ¾ itself to wait for the next train to arrive . After the Hogwarts Express has reversed into Platform 9 ¾ and the arriving passengers have disembarked , the next passengers enter one of the twenty @-@ one compartments in the three passenger carriages . 
 As the train departs King 's Cross , Hedwig the owl flies alongside while passing through the outskirts of London . Hedwig flies away and Dementors arrive from over the nearby buildings . At the same time Harry , Ron , and Hermione pass along the corridor side of the carriage looking for food . The journey enters a tunnel ; upon its exit , it passes by Malfoy Manor during a stormy night . Next , the train passes through a second tunnel and the lights in the compartments go out as a Dementor enters the train and passes along the corridor ; Harry Potter uses his magic to defeat the Dementor . After exiting the tunnel , riders are greeted by Hagrid flying on a motorbike with Hogwarts in the background . As the train enters a forest , the flying Ford Anglia appears and starts driving through the terrain . The car crashes soon after and the train leaves the forest , passing by Hogwarts once again before arriving at Hogsmeade Station with Hagrid greeting passengers . 
 Passengers then disembark the train , walk down a ramp past the front of the Hogwarts Express and follow a path leading to Hogsmeade . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The track of the Hogwarts Express is a single @-@ track funicular elevated railway running over the backlot between the two theme parks , with a two @-@ track passing loop at the midpoint . It is 676 metres ( 2 @,@ 218 ft ) long and has a track gauge of 1 @,@ 800 mm ( 5 ft 10 7 ⁄ 8 in ) . On the track , there is a haul rope and a counter rope , each with a diameter of 46 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) . The cable winding motor is located at King 's Cross station and has a rated load of 215 kilowatts ( 300 hp ) and a peak power rating of 636 kilowatts ( 900 hp ) . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 The Hogwarts Express uses two trains that can transport 168 passengers each , giving a total of 336 passengers per cycle . Each train is an articulated cable car formed of five sections : a replica of steam @-@ locomotive and its tender plus a set of three passenger vehicles . Originally each train was planned to have only two passenger carriages — this was increased following a survey that suggested potential passengers saw the connecting Hogwarts Express as an attraction instead of only as a means of transportation between the parks . The locomotive on the 70 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 230 ft ) trains weigh 13 tonnes ( 29 @,@ 000 lb ) , the tenders weigh 15 tonnes ( 33 @,@ 000 lb ) , and each passenger carriage weighs 27 tonnes ( 60 @,@ 000 lb ) . Since the attraction is set up with a funicular track system , both trains depart and arrive at the end stations at the same time and travel at the same speed of 3 @.@ 4 metres per second ( 12 km / h ; 7 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 On both trains , the locomotive faces towards Hogsmeade station ; it is not possible for the trains to face Kings Cross . The Hogwarts Express enters King 's Cross in reverse but forwards at Hogsmeade ; the train departs Kings Cross forwards and in reverse at Hogsmeade . As a result , the trains are only designed to be seen from one side as the locomotives ' false driving wheels and specific detailing only exist on one side . 
 The trains were built in <unk> , Switzerland . CWA Constructions designed both the exterior and interior of the trains to make them look as faithful as possible to the Hogwarts Express seen in the Harry Potter film franchise . They are based on the steam locomotive GWR 4900 Class <unk> <unk> Hall ( as <unk> Hogwarts Castle ) and were built from aluminum and glass @-@ reinforced plastics . Afterwards , an artificial weathering process was applied to give the appearance of a historic train . 
 Frey AG was responsible for wiring the trains ; specifically for the video and sounds components . The company also installed other technical equipment that allow the trains to be controlled by a computer system . 
 = = = = Media = = = = 
 Each compartment has a curved screen where the window would be . There are two different experiences , depending on the destination of the train . The special effects in both video components were designed by Double Negative . 
 The London Symphony Orchestra recorded the music played throughout the journey at Abbey Road Studios on 25 March 2014 . The music for the northbound journey is called " Connector Train – Hogsmeade to London " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The ride received mostly positive reviews upon its July 2014 opening . Lance Hart from Screamscape was impressed with the fact that the King 's Cross entrance was hidden from the rest of the Diagon Alley area . He also credited Universal for making the train look as realistic as possible : " Clearly they went to great lengths to create these cars to be replicas of what you see in the films , both on the outside as well as on the inside as you move down the hallway towards your cabin to take your seat " . In terms of the overall experience Hart said , " Universal has managed to turn what would simply be a method of transporting guests between their two parks into yet another must @-@ see attraction ... tying together the overall story and theme of visiting Hogwarts at Islands of Adventure and Diagon Alley inside Universal Studios Florida " . 
 Robert Niles from Theme Park Insider mentioned how the attraction " broke walls " ; including the separation of the Wizarding and Muggle worlds , how Universal made the audience the performers ( in the part of the King 's Cross queue where guests walk through the wall leading to Platform 9 ¾ ) , and how , " It 's become convention for theme park attractions to drop you off at or very near the same point where you boarded the ride , so it 's a bit disorienting when you exit the Hogwarts Express and find that you 're not only in a different train station — you 're in a different theme park . " 
 Arthur Levine from About.com was disappointed that Universal had not tried to re @-@ create the magical aspect of guests entering Platform 9 ¾ , " When it 's time to make their own way to the platform , however , it appears to would @-@ be wizards that they are merely entering a darkened corridor . Aside from an audible " whoosh " sound , there is , regrettably , no attempt to reproduce the magical , molecule @-@ shifting phenomenon " . He also found it awkward that the Hogwarts Express reverses into Platform 9 ¾ at King 's Cross — although in Hogsmeade the train arrives facing forwards . Overall Levine said that the attraction does more than just making it a ride , " By making it an integral and compelling part of The Wizarding World , most guests would want to ride it to get the complete Potter experience . By making it an inter @-@ park ride and requiring a two @-@ park ticket to board it , Universal will surely help up @-@ sell a lot more more customers to higher @-@ priced passes , encourage multi @-@ day visits , increase demand for its on @-@ property hotels , and drive business at its CityWalk dining / shopping / entertainment district " . 
 In 2014 , attendance at Universal Studios Florida increased to 8 @.@ 3 million visitors , compared to 7 @.@ 1 million in the previous year . However , attendance at Islands of Adventure did not change . According to vice president of AECOM 's economics , Brian Sands , the attendance increase at the Studios was likely due to the Diagon Alley expansion . Sands also mentioned attendance at Islands of Adventure remained the same since " visitors go to the new thing " , though the Hogwarts Express likely prevented attendance from decreasing at the park . 
 = 509th Composite Group = 
 The 509th Composite Group ( 509 CG ) was a unit of the United States Army Air Forces created during World War II and tasked with the operational deployment of nuclear weapons . It conducted the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Japan , in August 1945 . 
 The group was activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah . It was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Paul W. Tibbets . Because it contained flying squadrons equipped with Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress bombers and C @-@ 47 Skytrain and C @-@ 54 Skymaster transport aircraft , the group was designated as a " composite " rather than a " bombardment " formation . It operated Silverplate B @-@ 29s , which were specially configured to enable them to carry nuclear weapons . 
 The 509th Composite Group began deploying to North Field on Tinian , Northern Mariana Islands , in May 1945 . In addition to the two nuclear bombing raids , it carried out 15 practice missions against Japanese @-@ held islands , and 12 combat missions against targets in Japan dropping high @-@ explosive pumpkin bombs . 
 In the postwar era , the 509th Composite Group was one of the original ten bombardment groups assigned to Strategic Air Command on 21 March 1946 and the only one equipped with Silverplate B @-@ 29 Superfortress aircraft capable of delivering atomic bombs . It was standardized as a bombardment group and redesignated the 509th Bombardment Group , Very Heavy , on 10 July 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 See the 509th Operations Group for additional group history and lineage . 
 = = = Organization , training , and security = = = 
 The 509th Composite Group was constituted on 9 December 1944 , and activated on 17 December 1944 , at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah . It was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Paul W. Tibbets , who received promotion to full colonel in January 1945 . It was initially assumed that the group would divide in two , with half going to Europe and half to the Pacific . In the first week of September Tibbets was assigned to organize a combat group to develop the means of delivering an atomic weapon by airplane against targets in Germany and Japan , then command it in combat . Because the organization developed by Tibbets was self @-@ sustained , with flying squadrons of both Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress bombers and transport aircraft , the group was designated as a " composite " rather than a " bombardment " unit . 
 On 8 September , working with Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . ' s Manhattan Project , Tibbets selected Wendover for his training base over Great Bend Army Air Field , Kansas , and Mountain Home Army Airfield , Idaho , because of its remoteness . On 14 September 1944 , the 393d Bombardment Squadron arrived at Wendover from its former base at Fairmont Army Air Base , Nebraska , where it had been in operational training ( OTU ) with the 504th Bombardment Group since 12 March . When its parent group deployed to the Marianas in early November 1944 , the squadron was assigned directly to the Second Air Force until creation of the 509th Composite Group . Originally consisting of twenty @-@ one crews , fifteen were selected to continue training , and were organized into three flights of five crews , lettered A , B , and C. The 393d Bombardment Squadron was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas J. Classen , who like Tibbets had combat experience in heavy bombers , commanding a Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress with the 11th Bombardment Group . 
 The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron , the other flying unit of the 509th , came into being because of the highly secret work of the group . The organization that was to become the 509th required its own transports for the movement of both personnel and materiel , resulting in creation of an ad hoc unit nicknamed " The Green Hornet Line " . Crews for this unit were acquired from the five 393d crews not selected to continue B @-@ 29 training . All those qualified for positions with the 320th chose to remain with the 509th rather than be assigned to a replacement pool of the Second Air Force . They began using C @-@ 46 Commando and C @-@ 47 Skytrains already at Wendover , and in November 1944 acquired three C @-@ 54 Skymasters . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron originally consisted of three C @-@ 54 and four C @-@ 47 aircraft . In April 1945 the C @-@ 47s were transferred to the 216th AAF Base Unit and two additional C @-@ 54s acquired . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron was constituted and activated on the same dates as the group . 
 Other support units were activated at Wendover from personnel already present and working with Project Alberta or in the 216th AAF Base Unit , both affiliated with the Manhattan project . Project Alberta was the part of the Manhattan Project at Site Y in Los Alamos , New Mexico responsible for the preparation and delivery of the nuclear weapons . It was commanded by U.S. Navy Captain William S. Parsons , who would accompany the Hiroshima mission as weaponeer . 
 The 390th Air Service Group was created as the command echelon for the 603rd Air Engineering Squadron , the <unk> Air Material Squadron , and its own Headquarters and Base Services Squadron , but when these units became independent operationally , it acted as the basic support unit for the entire 509th Composite Group in providing quarters , rations , medical care , postal service and other functions . The 603rd Air Engineering Squadron was unique in that it provided depot @-@ level B @-@ 29 maintenance in the field , obviating the necessity of sending aircraft back to the United States for major repairs . On Tinian the 603rd Air Engineering Squadron was assigned to the 313th Bombardment Wing 's " C " and " D " Service Centers , where it performed provided depot @-@ level ( " third echelon " ) maintenance for the entire 313th Bombardment Wing when it was not engaged in 509th activities . The 393d Bombardment Squadron 's maintenance section was re @-@ organized as a " combat line maintenance " section ( also called PLM , or " production line maintenance , " a technique developed by the Air Transport Command in India for " Hump " aircraft ) to maximize use of personnel for first and second echelon maintenance . 
 The 393d Bombardment Squadron conducted ground school training only until delivery of three modified Silverplate airplanes in mid @-@ October 1944 allowed resumption of flight training . These aircraft had extensive bomb bay modifications and a " weaponeer " station installed . Initial training operations identified numerous other modifications necessary to the mission , particularly in reducing the overall weight of the airplane to offset the heavy loads it would be required to carry . Five more Silverplates were delivered in November and six in December , giving the group 14 for its training operations . In January and February 1945 , 10 of the 15 crews under the command of the Group S @-@ 3 ( operations officer ) were assigned temporary duty at Batista Field , San Antonio de los Baños , Cuba , where they trained in long @-@ range over @-@ water navigation . 
 On 6 March 1945 , concurrent with the activation of Project Alberta , the 1st Ordnance Squadron , Special ( Aviation ) was activated at Wendover , again using Army Air Forces personnel on hand or already at Los Alamos . Its purpose was to provide " skilled machinists , welders and munitions workers " and special equipment to the group to enable it to assemble atomic weapons at its operating base , thereby allowing the weapons to be transported more safely in their component parts . A rigorous candidate selection process was used to recruit personnel , reportedly with an 80 % " washout " rate . Not until May 1945 did the 509th Composite Group reach full strength . 
 = = = Overseas movement = = = 
 With the addition of the 1st Ordnance Squadron to its roster , the 509th Composite Group had an authorized strength of 225 officers and 1 @,@ 542 enlisted men , almost all of whom deployed to Tinian . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron kept its base of operations at Wendover . In addition to its authorized strength , the 509th had attached to it on Tinian 51 civilian and military personnel of Project Alberta , and two representatives from Washington , D.C. , the deputy director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Thomas Farrell , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell of the Military Policy Committee . 
 Two anecdotes illustrate the level of security affecting the 509th 's personnel and equipment . En route to Tinian on 4 June 1945 , the B @-@ 29 that became The Great Artiste made an intermediate stop at Mather Field , near Sacramento , California . The commanding general of the base allegedly attempted to enter the aircraft to inspect it and was warned by a plane guard who aimed his carbine at the general 's chest that he could not do so . A similar incident occurred to a Project Alberta courier , 2nd Lieutenant William A. King . King was escorting the plutonium core of the Fat Man implosion bomb to Tinian , strapped to the floor of one of the 509th 's C @-@ 54s . On 26 July 1945 it made a refueling stop at Hickam Field , Hawaii . The commander of a combat unit returning to the United States learned that the Skymaster had only one passenger and attempted to enter the C @-@ 54 to requisition it as transport for his men . He was prevented from doing so by King , who aimed a .45 caliber automatic pistol at the colonel . 
 The 509th transferred four of its 14 training Silverplate B @-@ 29s to the 216th AAF Base Unit in February 1945 . In April the third modification increment of Silverplates , which would be their combat aircraft , began coming off the Martin @-@ Omaha assembly line . These " fly @-@ away " aircraft were equipped with fuel @-@ injected engines , Curtiss Electric reversible @-@ pitch propellers , pneumatic actuators for rapid opening and closing of bomb bay doors and other improvements . The remaining 17 Silverplate B @-@ 29s were placed in storage . Each bombardier completed at least 50 practice drops of inert pumpkin bombs before Tibbets declared his group combat @-@ ready . 
 The ground support echelon of the 509th Composite Group , consisting of 44 officers and 815 enlisted men commanded by Major George W. Westcott of the Headquarters Squadron , received movement orders and moved by rail on 26 April 1945 to its port of embarkation at Seattle , Washington . On 6 May the support elements sailed on the SS Cape Victory for the Marianas , while group materiel was shipped on the SS Emile Berliner . The Cape Victory made brief port calls at Honolulu and Eniwetok but the passengers were not permitted to leave the dock area . An advance party of the air echelon , consisting of 29 officers and 61 enlisted men commanded by Group Intelligence Officer ( S @-@ 2 ) Lieutenant Colonel Hazen Payette , flew by C @-@ 54 to North Field , Tinian , between 15 and 22 May . It was joined by the ground echelon on 29 May 1945 , marking the group 's official change of station . Project Alberta 's " Destination Team " also sent most of its members to Tinian to supervise the assembly , loading , and dropping of the bombs under the administrative title of 1st Technical Services Detachment , Miscellaneous War Department Group . 
 = = = Equipment and crews = = = 
 The air echelon consisted of the members of the 393d Bombardment Squadron . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron remained at Wendover . It began deploying from Wendover 4 June 1945 , with the first B @-@ 29 arriving at North Field on 11 June . The group was assigned to the 313th Bombardment Wing , whose four groups had been flying missions against Japan since mid @-@ February , but for security reasons their permanent base area was near the runways on the island 's north tip , several miles away from the main installations in the center of Tinian . The 509th , after spending most of June in an area previously occupied by the Seabees of the 18th Naval Construction Battalion , took over the 13th Naval Construction Battalion Area just west of North Field 's Runway D , a self @-@ contained base with 89 Quonset huts , a huge storage warehouse , a consolidated mess hall , chapel , administrative area , theater , and other amenities . 
 Each crew was required to attend the 313th Bombardment Wing 's week @-@ long " Lead Crew Ground School " on its arrival . The ground school indoctrinated combat crews in procedures regarding air @-@ sea rescue , ditching and bailouts , survival , radar bombing , weather , wing and air force regulations , emergency procedures , camera operation , dinghy drills , and other topics related to combat operations . Two of the group 's bombers were not delivered by Martin @-@ Omaha until early July . They remained at Wendover until 27 July to act as transports for two of the Fat Man assemblies . 
 Because of their geographical isolation from the combat crews of other groups , rigidly enforced security measures , and exclusion from participation in regular bombing missions , crews of the 393d Bombardment Squadron were resented and ridiculed as " lacking in discipline " and having a " soft life " . The official history of the Army Air Forces characterized the ridicule as " epitomized in a satirical verse entitled Nobody Knows , with a recurring refrain , ' For the 509th is winning the war . ' " 
 The group was assigned tail markings of a circle outline ( denoting the 313th Wing ) around an arrowhead pointing forward , but at the beginning of August its B @-@ 29s were repainted with the tail markings of other XXI Bomber Command groups as a security measure , because it was feared that Japanese survivors on Tinian were reporting the 509th 's activities to Tokyo by clandestine radio . The Victor ( identification assigned by the squadron ) numbers previously assigned the 393d aircraft were changed to avoid confusion with B @-@ 29s of the groups from whom the tail identifiers were borrowed . Victor numbers 82 , 89 , 90 , and 91 ( including the Enola Gay ) carried the markings of the 6th Bombardment Group ( Circle R ) ; Victors 71 , 72 , 73 , and 84 those of the <unk> Bombardment Group ( large " A " ) ; Victors 77 , 85 , 86 , and 88 those of the 444th Bombardment Group ( triangle N ) ; and Victors 83 , 94 , and 95 those of the 39th Bombardment Group ( square P ) . 
 * These airplane commanders and crews exchanged aircraft assignments on 9 August 1945 
 Although all of the B @-@ 29s were named as shown , the only nose art applied to the aircraft before the atomic bomb missions was that of Enola Gay . With the exceptions of Victors 71 and 94 , the others were applied some time in August 1945 . Luke the Spook was not named until November 1945 , and it is not known if nose art was ever applied to Jabit III . 
 = = = Combat operations = = = 
 After ground training for the combat crews , the 509th began operations on 30 June 1945 , with a calibration flight involving nine of the B @-@ 29s on hand . During the month of July and the first eight days of August the thirteen bombers of the 393d Bombardment Squadron flew an intensive training and mission rehearsal program that consisted of : 
 17 individual training sorties without ordnance , 
 15 practice bombing missions between 1 and 22 July against airfields on Japanese @-@ held Truk , Marcus , Rota , and <unk> in which 90 B @-@ 29 sorties dropped 500- and 1000 @-@ pound bombs to practice radar and visual bombing procedures , 
 12 combat missions between 20 and 29 July against targets in Japan dropping high @-@ explosive pumpkin bombs , in which 37 B @-@ 29 sorties delivered conventional @-@ bomb replications of the Fat Man : four on 20 July , three on 24 July , two on 26 July , and three on 29 July . Some 27 sorties were made visually and 10 by radar , striking 17 primary targets , 15 secondary targets , and five targets of opportunity . Two other aircraft did not drop their bombs : one jettisoned its pumpkin bomb into the sea near Iwo Jima , and the Strange Cargo 's bomb came loose from the bomb rack and plunged through the closed bomb bay doors while the bomber was still on the ground . One B @-@ 29 incurred minor battle damage in the attacks . Flying at 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) put them above the effective range of flak . Each pumpkin bomb mission was conducted by a formation of three aircraft in the hope of convincing the Japanese military that small groups of B @-@ 29s did not justify a strong response . This strategy proved successful , and Japanese fighters only occasionally attempted to intercept the 509th Composite Group 's aircraft . 
 7 component @-@ tests between 23 July and 8 August involving rehearsal drops of four inert Little Boy gun @-@ type fission weapons and three Fat Man assemblies , and 
 a practice mission on 29 July to Iwo Jima in which an inert Little Boy was unloaded and then reloaded to rehearse the contingency plan for using a back @-@ up bomber in an emergency . 
 While this training was taking place , the components of the first two atomic bombs were shipped to Tinian by various means . For the uranium bomb code @-@ named " Little Boy " , fissile components consisted of a cylindrical target and nine washer @-@ like rings that made up the hollow cylinder projectile . When the bomb detonated , these would be brought together to create a cylindrical core . The uranium @-@ 235 projectile and bomb pre @-@ assemblies ( partly assembled bombs without the fissile components ) left Hunters Point Naval Shipyard , California , on 16 July aboard the cruiser USS Indianapolis , arriving 26 July . The Little Boy pre @-@ assemblies were designated L @-@ 1 , L @-@ 2 , L @-@ 3 , L @-@ 4 , L @-@ 5 , L @-@ 6 , L @-@ 7 and L @-@ 11 . L @-@ 1 , L @-@ 2 , L @-@ 5 and L @-@ 6 were expended in test drops . L @-@ 6 was used in the Iwo Jima dress rehearsal on 29 July . This was repeated on 31 July , but this time L @-@ 6 was test dropped near Tinian by Enola Gay . L @-@ 11 was the assembly used for the Hiroshima bomb . On 26 July three C @-@ 54s of the 320th Troop Carrier Squadron left Kirtland Army Air Field , each with three of the uranium @-@ 235 target rings , and landed at North Field on 28 July . 
 The components for the bomb code @-@ named the Fat Man arrived by air the same day . The bomb 's plutonium core ( encased in its insertion capsule ) and the beryllium @-@ polonium initiator were transported from Kirtland to Tinian by C @-@ 54 in the custody of Project Alberta couriers . Three Fat Man high explosive pre @-@ assemblies designated F31 , F32 , and F33 were picked up at Kirtland on 28 July by three B @-@ 29s , two from the 509th and one from the 216th AAF Base Unit , and transported to North Field , arriving 2 August . The B @-@ 29s were Luke the Spook and Laggin ' Dragon of the 509th , and 42 @-@ <unk> , a phase 3 Silverplate of the 216th AAF Base Unit . F33 was expended during the final rehearsal on 8 August , and F31 was the bomb dropped on Nagasaki . F32 presumably would have been used for a third attack or its rehearsal . 
 The final item of preparation for the operation came on 29 July 1945 . Orders for the attack were issued to General Carl Spaatz on 25 July under the signature of General Thomas T. Handy , the acting Chief of Staff of the United States Army , since General of the Army George C. Marshall was at the Potsdam Conference with the President . The order designated four targets : Hiroshima , Kokura , Niigata , and Nagasaki , and ordered the attack to be made " as soon as weather will permit after about 3 August . " 
 = = = Atomic bomb missions = = = 
 The mission profile for both atomic missions called for weather scouts to precede the strike force by an hour , reporting weather conditions in code over each proposed target . The strike force consisted of a bombing aircraft , with the aircraft commander responsible for all decisions in reaching the target and the bomb commander ( weaponeer ) responsible for all decisions regarding dropping of the bomb ; a blast instrumentation aircraft which would fly the wing of the strike aircraft and drop instruments by parachute into the target area ; and a camera ship , which would also carry scientific observers . Each mission had an additional " spare " aircraft pre @-@ positioned on Iwo Jima to take over carrying the bomb if the strike aircraft encountered mechanical problems . The six combat crews of the Hiroshima mission were briefed on their targets , operational flight data , and the effects of the bomb on 4 August 1945 . Their pre @-@ mission briefing on 5 August , under the terms of Operations Order No. 35 , covered details on weather and air @-@ sea rescue . The Order described the bomb to be used as " special " . 
 Special Mission 13 , attacking Hiroshima , was flown as planned and executed without significant problems or diversion from plan . Enola Gay took off at 02 : 45 , 7 @.@ 5 long tons ( 7 @.@ 6 t ) overweight and near maximum gross weight . Arming of the bomb began eight minutes into the flight and took 25 minutes . The three target @-@ area aircraft arrived over Iwo Jima approximately three hours into the mission and departed together at 06 : 07 . The safeties on the bomb were removed at 07 : 30 , 90 minutes before time over target , and 15 minutes later the B @-@ 29s began a climb to the 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) bombing altitude . The bomb run began at 09 : 12 , with the drop three minutes later , after which the B @-@ 29s immediately performed steep diving turns . The detonation followed 45 @.@ 5 seconds after the drop . Primary and " echo " shock waves overtook the B @-@ 29s a minute following the blast , and the smoke cloud was visible to the crews for 90 minutes , by which time they were almost 400 miles ( 640 km ) miles away . Enola Gay returned to Tinian at 14 : 58 . 
 Special Mission 16 was moved up two days from 11 August because of adverse weather forecasts . Weather also dictated a change in rendezvous to Yakushima , much closer to the target , and an initial cruise altitude of 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) instead of 9 @,@ 300 feet ( 2 @,@ 800 m ) , both of which considerably increased fuel consumption . Pre @-@ flight inspection discovered an inoperative fuel transfer pump in the 625 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 2 @,@ 370 l ) aft bomb bay fuel tank , but a decision was made to continue anyway . The plutonium bomb did not require arming in flight , but did have its safeties removed 30 minutes after the 03 : 45 takeoff ( all times Tinian ; Nagasaki times were one hour earlier ) when Bockscar reached 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of altitude . When the daylight rendezvous point was reached at 09 : 10 , the photo plane failed to appear . The weather planes reported both targets within the required visual attack parameters while Bockscar circled Yakushima waiting for the photo plane . Finally the mission proceeded without the photo plane , thirty minutes behind schedule . When Bockscar arrived at Kokura 30 minutes later , cloud cover had increased to 70 % of the area , and three bomb runs over the next 50 minutes were fruitless in bombing visually . The commanders decided to reduce power to conserve fuel and divert to Nagasaki , bombing by radar if necessary . The bomb run began at 11 : 58 . ( two hours behind schedule ) using radar ; but the Fat Man was dropped visually when a hole opened in the clouds at 12 : 01 . The photo plane arrived at Nagasaki in time to complete its mission , and the three aircraft diverted to Okinawa , where they arrived at 13 : 00 . Trying in vain for 20 minutes to contact the control tower at Yontan Airfield to obtain landing clearance , Bockscar nearly ran out of fuel . 
 While the Nagasaki mission was in progress , two B @-@ 29s of the 509th took off from Tinian to return to Wendover . The crews of Classen in the unnamed Victor 94 , and Captain John A. Wilson in Jabit III , together with ground support crews , were sent back to the United States to stage for the possibility of transporting further bomb pre @-@ assemblies to Tinian . Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for shipment on 13 August and use on 19 August , with three more available in September and a further three in October . Groves ordered that all shipments of material be stopped on 13 August , when the third bomb was still at Site Y. 
 = = = Post atomic bomb operations = = = 
 After each atomic mission the group conducted other combat operations , making a series of pumpkin bomb attacks on 8 and 14 August . Six B @-@ 29s visually attacked targets at Yokkaichi , Uwajima , Tsuruga , and Tokushima on 8 August , bombing two primary and three secondary targets with five bombs . Seven aircraft visually attacked Koroma and Nagoya on 14 August . Some <unk> ( Crew B @-@ 7 , Price ) is believed to have dropped the last bombs by the Twentieth Air Force in World War II . After the announcement of the Japanese surrender , the 509th Composite Group flew three further training missions involving 31 sorties on 18 , 20 and 22 August , then stood down from operations . The group made a total of 210 operational sorties from 30 June to 22 August , aborted four additional flights , and had only a single aircraft fail to take off . Altogether , 140 sorties involved the dropping of live ordnance . Some 60 flights were credited as combat missions : 49 pumpkin bomb and 11 atomic bomb sorties . 
 Three B @-@ 29s ( Full House , Straight Flush , and Top Secret ) flew six combat missions each . Crews A @-@ 1 ( Taylor ) and C @-@ 11 ( Eatherly ) flew the most combat missions , six ( including one atomic mission ) each , while six other crews each flew five . Only the late arrivals ( A @-@ 2 [ Costello ] and C @-@ 12 [ Zahn ] ) did not participate in any combat missions , although Costello 's B @-@ 29 was used by another crew for weather reconnaissance of Nagasaki on the second mission . Including training and test flights , crews B @-@ 8 ( McKnight ) and C @-@ 13 ( Bock ) flew the most missions , with 20 total ( 5 combat ) . Crew B @-@ 7 ( Price ) is the only crew to fly all of its missions ( 18 total , 5 combat ) in its normally assigned aircraft , Some <unk> . 
 The 509th Composite Group returned to the United States on 6 November 1945 , and was stationed at Roswell Army Airfield , New Mexico . Colonel William H. Blanchard replaced Tibbets as group commander on 22 January 1946 , and also became the first commander of the 509th Bombardment Wing . It was one of the original ten bombardment groups assigned to Strategic Air Command when it was formed on 21 March 1946 . The 715th and <unk> Bombardment Squadrons were assigned to the 509th on 6 May 1946 , and the group was redesignated the 509th Bombardment Group , Very Heavy on 10 July . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron was inactivated on 19 August . At Roswell , the 509th became the nuclear strike and deterrence core of the Strategic Air Command , and was the only unit capable of delivery of nuclear weapons until June 1948 , when B @-@ 50 Superfortresses were initially deployed . The 509th itself converted to the B @-@ 50 in 1950 , and transferred its Silverplate B @-@ 29s to the squadrons of the 97th Bombardment Wing at Biggs Air Force Base , Texas . 
 = = Organization = = 
 ¹ The 393d Bombardment Squadron was part of the 504th Bombardment Group ( VH ) from 12 March to 14 September 1944 . 
 ¹ The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron was activated on 17 December 1944 , and ² disbanded 19 August 1946 . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 The training and operations of the 509th Composite Group were dramatized in a Hollywood film , Above and Beyond ( 1952 ) , with Robert Taylor cast in the role of Tibbets . The story was retold in a partly fictionalized made @-@ for @-@ television film Enola Gay : The Men , the Mission , the Atomic Bomb ( 1980 ) , with Patrick Duffy portraying Tibbets . The operations of the 509th Composite Group were treated to a lesser extent in the docudrama The Beginning or the End ( 1947 ) , with Barry Nelson as Tibbets . 
 = = Lineage = = 
 Established as 509th Composite Group on 9 December 1944 
 Activated on 17 December 1944 
 Redesignated : 509th Bombardment Group , Very Heavy , on 10 July 1946 
 Redesignated : 509th Bombardment Group , Medium , on 2 July 1948 
 Inactivated on 16 June 1952 
 Redesignated 509th Operations Group on 12 March 1993 
 Activated on 15 July 1993 
 Source : Fact Sheet – 509 Operations Group ( ACC ) 
 = = Assignments = = 
 Second Air Force , 17 December 1944 ; 
 315th Bombardment Wing , 18 December 1944 ; 
 313th Bombardment Wing , c . June 1945 ; 
 Second Air Force , 10 October 1945 ; 
 58th Bombardment Wing , 17 January 1946 ; 
 Fifteenth Air Force , 31 March 1946 
 Source : Fact Sheet – 509 Operations Group ( ACC ) 
 = = Stations = = 
 Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , 17 December 1944 
 North Field , Tinian , 29 May 1945 
 Roswell Army Airfield , New Mexico , 6 November 1945 
 Source : Maurer 1983 , p . 372 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 Air Combat , Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign 
 Air Offensive , Japan 
 Eastern Mandates 
 Western Pacific 
 Source : Maurer 1983 , p . 372 
 = = Honors = = 
 Department of the Air Force Special Order GB @-@ 294 , dated 2 September 1999 , awarded the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award ( with Valor ) to the 509th Composite Group for outstanding achievement in combat for the period 1 July 1945 to 14 August 1945 . 
 = Italian cruiser Giovanni Bausan = 
 Giovanni Bausan was a protected cruiser of the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) that was designed and built by Sir W G Armstrong Mitchell & Co . ' s Elswick Works in England in the mid @-@ 1880s . The finished ship entered service in May 1885 . She was the first ship of this type to be built for the Italian fleet , and she provided the basis for subsequent designs built in Italy , including the Etna class . Giovanni Bausan was intended to serve as a " battleship destroyer " , and was armed with a main battery of two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns to give her the ability to defeat heavy armor , but design flaws rendered her unfit for this role . 
 Giovanni Bausan frequently served abroad . She participated in the conquest of Eritrea in 1887 – 88 as the flagship of the Italian squadron during the campaign . She took part in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 alongside British and German warships . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , she provided gunfire support to Italian troops ashore in North Africa . By the outbreak of the First World War , Giovanni Bausan had been relegated to secondary duties , first as a distilling ship , and later as a depot ship for seaplanes . The ship was disarmed during the conflict and ultimately was sold to ship @-@ breakers in March 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design of Giovanni Bausan was based on that of Elswick 's earlier Esmeralda , built for Chile and designed by George Rendel , and was the first modern protected cruiser constructed for the Italian Navy . The new ship was ordered in 1882 by Guglielmo Acton , then the Minister for the Navy , and was named for Giovanni Bausan , a Neapolitan naval commander who fought in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . Referred to by some as a torpedo ram , she was one of the first ships of her type . Giovanni Bausan was intended for use as a " battleship destroyer " , but the low rate of fire of her guns and her lack of steadiness as a gun platform made her ineffective in this role . She nevertheless represented a temporary embrace of the theories of the Jeune École doctrine espoused by French naval architects and strategists . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Giovanni Bausan was 84 @.@ 12 meters ( 276 @.@ 0 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 89 @.@ 32 m ( 293 @.@ 0 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 12 @.@ 85 m ( 42 @.@ 2 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 98 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) . Giovanni Bausan was steel @-@ hulled , and had a crew of 295 officers and enlisted men , though later in her career this was reduced to 256 . The four Etna @-@ class cruisers were half @-@ sisters of Giovanni Bausan , built to a modified , slightly enlarged design . She was equipped with a ram bow and initially fitted with rigging as a schooner . 
 Giovanni Bausan was powered by two compound @-@ expansion steam engines that each drove a screw propeller . Steam was provided by four cylindrical Scotch boilers , which were trunked into two funnels on the centerline . On trials , the engines produced 6 @,@ 470 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 820 kW ) for a top speed of 17 @.@ 4 knots ( 32 @.@ 2 km / h ; 20 @.@ 0 mph ) . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , the ship could steam for 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) . The schooner rig was intended to provid an auxiliary method of propulsion if the ship 's engines broke down ; by the time Giovanni Bausan entered service in the mid @-@ 1880s , marine steam engines had become reliable enough that auxiliary sails were no longer necessary , and hers were later removed . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Armament was heavy for her size , with the main battery consisting of a pair of 10 @-@ inch 30 @-@ caliber breech @-@ loading ( BL ) guns mounted in individual barbettes fore and aft , capable of training up to 30 degrees abaft of the beam . These were Pattern G models manufactured by Elswick Ordnance Company . Six BL 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) , 26 @-@ caliber secondary guns were mounted in sponsons , three on a side , comprised the secondary battery . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a tertiary battery of four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ pounder ( 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) ) 40 @-@ caliber guns and two QF 1 @-@ pounder ( 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) ) guns . She was also equipped with three 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside above water and one submerged tube in the bow . 
 She was fitted with an armored deck that ran from stem to stern . It was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) in thickness over the boilers and engines and reduced in thickness to .75 inches ( 19 mm ) fore and aft . The ship also had an " armor " belt of cork at her waterline , which was intended to swell through water absorption after being hit . This proved to be unsuccessful as hits would result in the destruction of the cork . Giovanni Bausan 's conning tower was protected with armor plating 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick and the breeches of her main guns were also protected by 2 inches of armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Giovanni Bausan was laid down at the Armstrong Whitworth shipyard in Elswick in England on 21 August 1882 . Her completed hull was launched on 15 December 1883 . After her commissioning on 9 May 1885 , she departed from England on 21 May to join the <unk> <unk> ( Permanent Squadron ) , and in 1887 – 1888 she participated in the conquest of Eritrea , where she acted as the flagship of the Italian Red Sea Squadron . Following the conclusion of the Eritrean campaign , Giovanni Bausan returned to Italy . In 1888 , she took part in the annual fleet maneuvers , along with four ironclads , three other protected cruisers , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . On 5 July 1889 , she collided with the torpedo cruiser Folgore , badly damaging her . Giovanni Bausan thereafter spent much of her time in service overseas , particularly in the Americas . During this service , she made a port visit to New York City in 1892 , during which she was the first foreign warship to be repaired at the Brooklyn Navy Yard in 15 years . 1896 , she took part in the annual summer maneuvers in July as part of the Second Division of the Active Squadron , which also included the ironclads Francesco Morosini and Andrea Doria and the torpedo cruiser Tripoli . In 1899 , Giovanni Bausan had her 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch guns replaced by modern QF 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . 
 In late 1902 , Giovanni Bausan was sent to Venezuelan waters during the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 , when an international force of British , German , and Italian warships blockaded Venezuela over the country 's refusal to pay foreign debts . The Italian contingent also included the protected cruiser Elba and the armored cruiser Carlo Alberto . The following year , she and the protected cruisers Etna and Dogali represented Italy at the international naval review in New York , held at the start of the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago . The Exposition marked the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus 's arrival in North America . Contingents from France , Germany , Britain , Spain , and several other nations also participated in the celebration . In 1904 , Giovanni Bausan returned to Italy , where she was assigned to the Reserve Division , and two of her 6 @-@ inch guns were removed , though she was slated to be replaced by the new armored cruiser Francesco Ferruccio , when she entered service in September 1905 . 
 From 1905 , Giovanni Bausan served as a training ship for stokers and mechanics until the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1912 . Returning to active duty as Flagship Cyrenaica , she served in the shore bombardment role until the end of the war , when she was again returned to second @-@ line service as a distilling ship . Fitted with four distillers and capable of producing 200 tons of fresh water every 24 hours , she was operating in this role at the start of the First World War . Because of the pressing need for artillery for service with the army , Giovanni Bausan was partially disarmed in 1915 , losing her 10 @-@ inch guns and two of the 6 @-@ inch pieces . Later in the war , the rest of her armament was removed . She was reassigned for service as a seaplane depot ship at Brindisi . Decommissioned in 1919 , she was sold for scrap in March 1920 and broken up soon after . 
 = Typhoon Karen = 
 Typhoon Karen was the most powerful tropical cyclone to strike the island of Guam , and has been regarded as one of the most destructive events in the island 's history . It was first identified as a tropical disturbance on November 6 , 1962 , well to the southeast of Truk . Over the following two days , the system tracked generally northward and quickly intensified . Karen became a tropical storm late on November 7 , and within two days it explosively intensified into a Category 5 @-@ equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . Turning westward , the typhoon maintained its intensity and struck Guam with winds of 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) on November 11 . Once clear of the island , it strengthened slightly and reached its peak intensity on November 13 with winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 894 mb ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 40 inHg ) . The storm then gradually turned northward as it weakened , brushing the Ryukyu Islands on November 15 , before moving east @-@ northeastward over the open waters of the Pacific . Karen continued to weaken and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on November 17 before losing its identity the following day between Alaska and Hawaii . 
 Karen devastated Guam with wind gusts estimated up to 280 km / h ( 185 mph ) . Ninety @-@ five percent of homes were damaged or destroyed , leaving at least 45 @,@ 000 people homeless . Communication and utilities were crippled , forcing officials to set up water distribution centers to prevent disease . Total losses on the island amounted to $ 250 million . Despite the severity of the damage , only 11 people were killed . In the wake of the storm , a massive relief operation evacuated thousands to California , Hawaii , and Wake Island . Thousands more were sheltered in public buildings , and later tent villages , for many months . More than $ 60 million in relief funds were sent to Guam over the following years to aid in rehabilitation . Though the storm was devastating , it spurred new building codes and a revitalized economy . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 6 , 1962 , a tropical disturbance was identified over the Pacific Ocean several hundred miles south @-@ southeast of Truk , in the Federated States of Micronesia , by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . Tracking northwestward , the disturbance intensified and was classified as a tropical depression early on November 7 . Later that day , the system passed to the east of Truk and turned due north before attaining gale @-@ force winds . Around 18 : 00 UTC , the JTWC issued their first advisory on Tropical Storm Karen , the 27th named storm of the 1962 season . Several hours later , a reconnaissance mission into the storm revealed a partially closed 35 km ( 22 mi ) wide eye . Over the following 30 hours , Karen underwent a period of explosive intensification as its eye became small and increasingly defined . Between 00 : 00 UTC on November 8 and 03 : 40 UTC on November 9 , Karen 's barometric pressure plummeted from 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 24 inHg ) to 899 mb ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 55 inHg ) , a drop of 91 mb ( hPa ; 2 @.@ 69 inHg ) . At the end of this phase , Karen featured an 8 to 10 km ( 5 to 6 mi ) wide eye and had estimated surface winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) , ranking it as a modern @-@ day Category 5 @-@ equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . 
 After attaining this initial peak intensity on November 9 , Karen weakened somewhat as it gradually curved west @-@ northwestward . By 15 : 14 UTC , the storm began to undergo an eyewall replacement cycle as a larger secondary eyewall , approximately 64 km ( 40 mi ) in diameter , started developing . Although the storm 's winds failed to drop significantly , Karen 's central pressure rose to 919 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 14 inHg ) during this phase . Accelerating slightly , Karen tracked steadily west @-@ northwestward towards Guam . By November 11 , the system had regained a well @-@ defined eye and deepened once more . Between 12 : 10 and 12 : 35 UTC on November 11 , the 14 km ( 9 mi ) wide eye of Karen passed directly over southern Guam . At this time , the storm was estimated to have had winds of 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) , which would have made it the most intense typhoon to strike the island since 1900 . However , years of post @-@ storm analyses have indicated that it may have been somewhat weaker when it passed over Guam . At the Weather Bureau station at the north end of Guam , a pressure of 942 @.@ 4 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 83 inHg ) was measured . Farther south at Anderson Air Force Base , 939 @.@ 7 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 75 inHg ) was recorded . The lowest verified pressure was 931 @.@ 9 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 52 inHg ) at the Agana Naval Air Station . Closest to the eye was Naval Magazine where a pressure of 907 @.@ 6 mb ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 80 inHg ) was estimated but never verified . 
 Continuing west @-@ northwestward , Karen attained its peak intensity on November 13 with a central pressure of 894 mb ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 40 inHg ) . Between November 13 and 14 , Karen gradually turned towards the north as it underwent another eyewall replacement cycle . During this time , Karen finally weakened below Category 5 status as its winds dropped below 251 km / h ( 156 mph ) . This marked the end of its near @-@ record 4 @.@ 25 @-@ day span as a storm of such intensity , second only to Typhoon Nancy of 1961 which maintained Category 5 status for 5 @.@ 5 days . Over the following days , the typhoon 's structure gradually became disorganized , with its eye no longer well @-@ defined by November 15 . By this time , Karen began accelerating northeastward and later east @-@ northeastward over the open ocean . The combination of its rapid movement and entrainment of cold air into the circulation ultimately caused the system to transition into an extratropical cyclone on November 17 . The remnants of Karen continued tracking east @-@ northeast and were last noted by the JTWC on November 18 roughly halfway between the southern Aleutian Islands and northern Hawaiian Islands . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Guam = = = 
 Following the identification of a tropical disturbance on November 6 , a level four Typhoon Condition of Readiness ( TCOR ) , the lowest level of alert , was raised for Guam . By November 8 , three days prior to Karen 's arrival , this was raised to level three , prompting residents and military personnel to stock up on supplies . A public announcement was made that day as well , warning residents that the typhoon would likely strike the island . At 9 : 00 p.m. on November 10 ( 11 : 00 UTC ) , a level two TCOR was put in place for Guam and a typhoon emergency was declared . Buildings were boarded up and emergency supplies were distributed . By 8 : 00 a.m. ( 22 : 00 UTC on November 10 ) , this was raised to level one , the highest level of warning . At this time , the USS Haverfield , USS Brister , USS <unk> , and USS Banner sought refuge from the storm over open waters . All personnel on the island were ordered to evacuate to typhoon @-@ proof shelters and emergency rations were prepared . Strategic air command planes stationed on the island were relocated to avoid damage . Many residents on the island sought refuge in government buildings designed to withstand powerful storms while others evacuated to Wake Island . Roughly 24 hours after the typhoon 's passage , all warnings were discontinued . 
 Striking Guam as a Category 5 @-@ equivalent typhoon , Karen produced destructive winds across much of the island . With the eye passing over the southern tip of the territory , the most intense winds were felt over central areas . Wind gusts over the southern tip of Guam were estimated to have peaked around 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Due to the extreme nature of these winds , all anemometers on the island failed before the most intense portion of the storm arrived , and there were no measurements of the strongest winds ; however , post @-@ storm reports estimated that sustained winds reached 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) in some areas . The highest measured gust was 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) at a United States Navy anemometer on Nimitz Hill just before 11 : 00 UTC on November 11 , roughly two hours before the typhoon 's eye passed the station . Based on this measurement , a study in 1996 estimated that gusts peaked between 280 and 295 km / h ( 175 and 185 mph ) over southern areas of the island . Newspaper reports indicated that a gust of 272 km / h ( 169 mph ) was measured on the island before the anemometer was destroyed . There was also an unverified report of a 333 km / h ( 207 mph ) wind gust . Nearly all measurements of rainfall during the typhoon were lost ; the only known total is 197 mm ( 7 @.@ 76 in ) at the Weather Bureau station for the period of November 10 – 12 . 
 Surveys of damage revealed belt @-@ like damage patterns from the winds , with some homes being leveled and others nearby having only minor damage , akin to the impacts of tornadoes . The winds uprooted and snapped palm trees across the island and , in some instances , stripped the bark of tree trunks and branches as if they had been sandblasted . Vegetation was completely defoliated across central areas of the island . In some places , it was described as the aftermath of a forest fire . The winds also blew debris across the island . Metal roofing was found wrapped around trees . In one instance , a twin @-@ engine aircraft was carried 2 @.@ 4 km ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) from the hangar it was tied down in . A metal sign bolted into a warehouse was tossed 3 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) and found half @-@ buried in the ground . Elsewhere , a quonset hut was lofted and carried for 125 m ( 411 ft ) , intact , before being crushed on impact . Along the coast , the USS Arco was torn from her moorings , severing two anchors and shearing a cleat – tested for over 23 @,@ 000 and 45 @,@ 000 kg ( 50 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 lb ) , respectively – in the process . The ROK Han Ra San and RPS Negros Oriental sank in the inner harbor of Guam . 
 Karen is regarded as the worst typhoon to ever impact Guam . Acting governor Manuel Guerrero stated that " the entire territory was devastated . " Almost all structures , both civilian and military , were severely damaged or destroyed . Even reinforced concrete structures at Anderson Air Force Base sustained severe damage . Though these structures withstood the direct impact of winds , sudden drops in pressure caused windows to shatter in most structures , ultimately exposing the interior to water damage . Military structures suffered the most from this phenomenon as the buildings were designed in a way that pressure differences between the interior and exterior would not equal out . Debris from damaged or destroyed homes became projectiles during the storm that created further damage , like " shrapnel or artillery missiles . " 
 George Washington High and Tumon Junior High were both destroyed . Guam Memorial Hospital and the island 's public works department were extensively damaged . Downtown Hagåtña , Guam 's largest city , was flattened . Along the city 's main road , Marine Drive , 20 cm ( 8 in ) of sand accumulated from Karen 's storm surge . Overall , the city was 85 percent destroyed , while the villages of Yona and Inarajan were 97 and 90 percent destroyed , respectively . Additionally , Agana Heights and <unk> were reportedly leveled . The communication network on the island was completely destroyed as antennas and transmission equipment were blown away . Approximately 30 percent of telephone poles between the island 's naval station and Nimitz Hill and 95 percent of civilian telephone poles were downed . The power grid was also destroyed . The Guam portion of the Pacific Scatter Communications System suffered extensive damage , with all four 61 m ( 200 ft ) antennas at <unk> Point being reduced to a " mess of tangled , twisted steel and cable . " Losses from the antennas alone reached $ 1 million . All airstrips on the island were rendered inoperable , hampering initial relief efforts . Numerous roads across the island were also impassable , covered by downed trees and smashed vehicles . The wreckage left in the wake of the storm was described as a " massive junkyard " . 
 Throughout Guam , 95 percent of homes were destroyed , and those left standing were damaged . Nearly every non @-@ typhoon @-@ proof home was severely damaged or destroyed and a majority of typhoon @-@ proof buildings sustained extensive damage . Preliminary surveys by the Red Cross on November 15 indicated that at least 5 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and another 3 @,@ 000 were severely damaged . Approximately 45 @,@ 000 people , mostly <unk> , were left homeless . A total of 11 people lost their lives and about 100 others were injured . At least four of the deaths were due to collapsed buildings , including three in one home that buckled due to pounding surf . Another death resulted from decapitation by airborne debris . Losses across the island amounted to $ 250 million ( 1962 USD ) . The damage across Guam was described as " ' much more serious " than it had been during the second Battle of Guam , when American troops retook the island from the Japanese . The U.S. Navy described the damage as equal to that of an indirect hit from a nuclear bomb . Guerrero said that the recovery effort of the previous 17 years had been " completely wiped out " . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In the Mariana Islands , three ships under the command of Rear Admiral J. S. <unk> Jr. sank ; however , the crew had been evacuated prior to the storm 's arrival . 
 On November 13 , a level three TCOR was issued for Okinawa . This prompted military personnel to begin securing the island and preparing planes without hangars for evacuation . Brushing the region as a Category 3 @-@ equivalent typhoon , Karen caused considerable disruptions to airlines , trains , shipping , and communications . No serious damage was reported in Okinawa , but the nearby <unk> and another Japanese fishing vessel with a total of 26 crew went missing . 
 On November 15 , residents in Taiwan were urged to take precautions to minimize casualties . Prior to the storm 's arrival , the USS Duncan , the USS Kitty Hawk , and two other aircraft carriers sought refuge in the Taiwan Strait . Despite attempts to escape the storm , large swells exceeding 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) battered the vessels , causing them to pitch up to 59 degrees . At times , the waves crashed onto the deck of the USS Kitty Hawk . According to crewmen , waves up to 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) struck Taipei , leaving water marks on many buildings . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the typhoon , the Pacific Air Forces were on standby to deliver supplies to Guam , but were delayed by inoperable airstrips . Guam Memorial Hospital was damaged , but other civilian and military installations , including the Navy 's hospital , were able to handle injured persons . On November 12 , Manuel Guerrero made an urgent appeal to the Government of the United States requesting that aid be rushed to the territory . Additionally , he instituted an island @-@ wide curfew between 8 : 00 p.m. and 6 : 00 a.m. local time to limit looting . At schools , teachers were called in to guard supplies and equipment . The Federal Emergency Management Agency , under orders from United States President John F. Kennedy , declared Guam a major disaster area later that day , allowing residents to receive federal aid . Additionally , 15 United States Air Force communications technicians were deployed from Manila , Philippines carrying three plane @-@ loads of communication supplies . Guerrero estimated that it would take four months to complete repairs to utilities . It was also estimated that schools on the island would be closed for six months . 
 Initially , residents across Guam were critical of the delayed response by the U.S. government ; no aid had arrived within two days of the storm , but unsafe conditions at airports had prevented aircraft from landing . With the majority of homes destroyed across Guam , structures that remained standing were used as temporary shelter for those left homeless . Similarly , damaged military installations at Anderson Air Force Base were made available to all civilians . By November 14 , the USS Daniel I. Sultan arrived in Guam with 1 @,@ 100 troops to provide emergency power . A U.S. Air Force AC @-@ 130 landed on the island that day carrying the first package of relief supplies . About 400 troops and 80 public works employees were sent from Hawaii on November 14 . The Red Cross and civil defense offices were placed in charge of coordinating recovery efforts . Water distribution centers were set up across the island to provide residents with clean drinking water . 
 On November 15 , a massive evacuation of residents began to remove survivors from unsafe conditions . Two flights to California took place on the first day of evacuation , carrying a total of 154 people . Thousands of residents were also brought to Wake Island for shelter . Military Air Transport Service planes from the United States mainland , Japan , the Philippines , and Hawaii were called in for the operation . On November 16 , residents were warned of a possible typhoid epidemic and urged to get inoculations for the disease . Over a three @-@ day span , roughly 30 @,@ 000 people were given preventative shots for the disease . In contrast to their previous ban on alien workers , the Government of Guam requested 1 @,@ 500 carpenters , masons , and other building workers from the Philippines . By November 21 , the Navy Supply Depot planned to have enough supplies for the entire populous shipped until replenishment arrived . In order to shelter homeless , the United States Navy set up tent villages across the island . Military kitchens were also established to provide food . Due to continued rains in the wake of the typhoon , many were unable to get a full meal for Thanksgiving . 
 On November 21 , insurance payments for losses were expected to exceed $ 12 million . On January 1 , 1963 , a $ 2 million relief fund was authorized by President Kennedy . Another $ 5 @.@ 4 million in relief funds were provided by President Lyndon B. Johnson on February 15 , 1964 . The United States Congress provided Guam with $ 60 million , including $ 45 million through federal loans , mainly to help rebuild the territory and promote expansion of the economy . Additionally , the storm brought about the end of military security on the island , which in turn aided economic growth . Within five years of this decision , Japanese tourism to the island dramatically increased , prompting a major increase in the number of hotels . In the long term , Typhoon Karen , along with other destructive storms , shaped the development of the island 's infrastructure . It led to higher quality buildings and more efficient utilities that could withstand powerful typhoons . Since Karen , most buildings on the island have been constructed with concrete and steel . 
 On April 29 , 1963 , less than half a year after Karen , Typhoon Olive caused extensive damage in Guam and the Mariana Islands . With many residents living in tents , and debris from the storm still scattered about , severe damage was anticipated . Schools , churches , and other structures were opened as shelters in order to protect those without homes . Ultimately , Guam was spared the worst of the storm though much of Saipan was devastated . The island was again devastated in 1976 by Typhoon Pamela which buffeted the island with destructive winds for 36 hours . Though weaker than Karen , the longer lasting impact of Pamela was regarded as more destructive . 
 Due to the severity of damage caused by the typhoon in Guam , the name Karen was retired and replaced with Kim . 
 = Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy = 
 Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy ( Norwegian : Brønnøysund lufthavn , Brønnøy ; IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is a regional airport located at the town of Brønnøysund , in the municipality of Brønnøy , Nordland county , Norway . The airport is owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor and serves the southern part of Helgeland . It has a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ by @-@ 30 @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 937 ft × 98 ft ) runway numbered 04 – 22 and is served by Widerøe , which operates their Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft to Oslo , Trondheim , Bodø , Bergen and other airports in Helgeland . The airport also serves offshore helicopter flights by CHC Helikopter Service to Norne and temporary oil rigs in the Norwegian Sea . In 2014 , the airport served 117 @,@ 471 passengers , making it the second @-@ busiest regional airport in Norway , after Florø Airport . 
 Brønnøysund received seaplane services in 1935 , at first operated by Norwegian Air Lines and later by Widerøe . Plans for short take @-@ off and landing airports in Northern Norway were launched in 1965 ; construction started in 1967 and Brønnøysund Airport opened along with three nearby airports on 1 June 1968 . Originally served using Twin Otter aircraft , Widerøe replaced them with Dash 7 aircraft in 1982 and Dash 8 aircraft in 1992 . Offshore helicopter traffic started in 1983 . The runway was originally 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 625 ft ) ; it was extended to 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) in 1987 and to the current length in 1999 . A new control tower opened in 2000 and a new terminal in 2008 . There have been two major accidents connected with the airport : Widerøe Flight 710 in 1988 and Helikopter Service Flight 451 in 1997 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first aircraft to land in Brønnøysund was a Hansa @-@ Brandenburg seaplane of the Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service on 23 July 1922 . It was piloted by Hjalmar Riiser @-@ Larsen and Finn Lützow @-@ Holm , en route from Horten to Kirkenes . The following thirteen years Brønnøysund only saw occasional landings , when Norwegian Air Lines started a service from Bergen to Tromsø on 7 June 1935 , which included a stop at the harbor in Brønnøysund . Passengers and mail would be rowed out to the waiting aircraft . The first season the route was flown using a single @-@ engine Junkers W 34 . The aircraft turned out to be too small and a larger Junkers Ju 52 was introduced the following season . Flights were dependent on good weather and were only operated during the summer . The route was taken over by Widerøe in 1938 . All civilian flights were terminated during World War II , although the town would see occasional military landings . 
 Seaplane routes resumed in 1947 using the Junkers Ju 52 . Construction of primary airports in Norway started in the 1950s based on building joint military and civilian airport with funding from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) . The alliance considered constructing an airport at Søndre Herøy in Herøy , an archipelago near <unk> , but funding was never allocated to the project . 
 No primary airports had been built in Helgeland by the mid @-@ 1960s . The coastal parts of the region , such as at Brønnøysund , were without highways and railways . Although Widerøe operated a seaplane route , it remained a summer @-@ only service . Travel time to Sandnessjøen , where the closest hospital was located , took five hours . A committee , led by Erik Himle and later Preben Munthe , was appointed in 1962 to consider additional airports in Norway . The Sud Aviation Caravelle jet aircraft was about to be phased into use on the main domestic routes by Scandinavian Airlines System and the committee recommended in 1964 that nine new airports be built which could serve jetliners , including an airport in <unk> . 
 Widerøe came with an alternative proposal and suggested that a network of smaller airports be built instead , which could be served using short take @-@ off and landing ( STOL ) aircraft . Smaller airports could be built and operated at lower costs than larger airports , but both airports and airlines would need subsidies to operate . Håkon Kyllingmark was appointed Minister of Transport and Communications in 1965 and was a proponent of the STOLport proposal . The political rationale was that , despite that the total operating costs would rise , that it would provide better services to rural areas and thus keep up their population . The regional airports were built in groups , and the first four were built in Namsos and Helgeland . 
 Planning started in 1966 and construction commenced the following year . Brønnøysund Airport cost NOK 2 @.@ 7 million plus costs for expropriation and navigational aids . NOK 1 @.@ 9 million was covered by the state , while the rest was covered by Brønnøy Municipality . The runway was originally 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 625 ft ) and was the only asphalted area in Brønnøysund . The airport was originally operated by the municipality , except the tower , which was operated by the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration . Brønnøysund was one of very few regional airport to receive a restaurant . The airport opened on 30 May 1968 , along with Mo i Rana Airport , <unk> , Namsos Airport , Høknesøra and Sandnessjøen Airport , Stokka . Widerøe commenced flights to Bodø and Trondheim with their de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otters the following day . 
 The first year of operation saw 6 @,@ 157 passengers , dropping to 5 @,@ 543 in 1969 . Originally there were two southbound and two northbound flights per day in the summer and one per direction during winter . In 1969 this increased to two flights per direction all year . Trønderfly started an air ambulance service in the early 1970s . Widerøe introduced the de Havilland Canada Dash 7 in 1982 , resulting in the terminal being expanded . Offshore helicopter services began the following year . The runway was expanded to 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) in 1987 . 
 NATO showed interest in upgrading Brønnøysund Airport in 1991 . Specifically they intended to spend NOK 125 million in expanding the runway to 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) and building a fuel depot . The airport was planned used as a relief military airbase without any permanently stationed aircraft . The plans were canceled in 1993 following cut @-@ backs in NATO . Widerøe introduced Dash 8 aircraft in 1992 , gradually replacing the Dash 7 . In 1996 , Brønnøysund and 25 other regional airports were taken over by the state and the Civil Aviation Administration ( later renamed Avinor ) . The runway was extended to 1 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 937 ft ) in 1999 ; 1 @,@ 440 meters ( 4 @,@ 724 ft ) including the safety zone at each end . While allowing for a direct service to Oslo , the service was terminated the following year . The same year a new control tower was opened and the old tower taken over by a motorcycle club . 
 Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . This put a large strain on the terminal capacity and the terminal had to be expanded . Makeshift solutions were used , such as plywood boards to allocate people through the security check . In late 2004 , the airport started planning an all @-@ new terminal building , as the old terminal was deemed both too small and out of date . Construction of the NOK @-@ 115 @-@ million terminal started on 24 October 2006 . As the first airport in the world , Brønnøysund received SCAT @-@ I , a satellite @-@ based landing system , on 29 October 2007 . The new terminal opened on 26 May 2008 , which allowed the a restaurant to open at the airport , all vehicles to be stored indoors and included a new helicopter terminal . Thon Hotel Torghatten opened in October 2009 and an airport surveillance radar was installed in 2010 , making Brønnøysund the first regional airport in Norway to have one . 
 Widerøe reintroduced direct flights to Oslo on 10 May 2010 . Statoil started using scheduled services instead of their previous charter flights on 2 January 2011 . This caused Widerøe to increase the number of direct flights to Oslo to three per day on 1 April 2011 . Widerøe introduced irregular charter flights to Manchester in April 2012 , largely targeting English tourists traveling on holidays and Norwegian football patriots . 
 Avinor is working on plans to close the airports in Sandnessjøen , Mo i Rana and Mosjøen and replace them with a primary airport . Brønnøysund has stated that they wish to keep their airport and not be part of a central airport for the region . There have also been launched proposals by local politicians to extend the runway at Brønnøysund to 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) . This proposal was later dismissed by the municipal council , who instead wanted a shorter extension to allow landing of Dash 8 Q400 aircraft . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The airport is located 2 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of the town center of Brønnøysund . It consists of a combined passenger terminal and works building and includes a café . There is a separate helicopter terminal . The runway , numbered 04 – 22 , is 1 @,@ 200 by 30 meters ( 3 @,@ 937 ft × 98 ft ) ; when including the safety zones at each end the total length is 1 @,@ 440 meters ( 4 @,@ 724 ft ) . Brønnøysund Airport lacks an instrument landing system and instead uses the satellite @-@ based SCAT @-@ I. It is the only regional airport in Norway which has an airport surveillance radar installed . The airport had 117 @,@ 471 passengers , 10 @,@ 494 aircraft movements and 39 tonnes of cargo in 2014 . 
 Taxis , paid parking and car rental is available at the airport . Driving time to the town center is about five to seven minutes . There is a bus service operated by Torghatten Trafikkselskap form the airport to the town center ; onwards connection is available to several areas in Helgeland and <unk> . Ferry and fast ferry services are also operated from the town center to nearby islands . The 44 @-@ room Thon Hotel Torghatten is located next to the airport . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Widerøe is the only airline operating scheduled flights out of Brønnøysund , serving it with their Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft . The services to Bodø and Trondheim are subsidized through public service obligations with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . 
 CHC Helikopter Service operates flights to the offshore oil platform at Norne on contract with Statoil . The oil company flies an average 55 people to the airport with various scheduled services and onwards to the oil field . In addition , the helicopter operator flies to various temporary oil rigs . It has two Sikorsky S @-@ 92 helicopters stationed at Brønnøysund . In 2011 , there were 17 @,@ 229 offshore helicopter passengers which traveled through Brønnøysund Airport . 
 The Norwegian Air Ambulance operates both a helicopter and fixed @-@ wing air ambulance service out of Brønnøysund Airport . Aircraft operations are subcontracted to Lufttransport , which operates an AgustaWestland <unk> helicopter and a Beech King Air fixed @-@ wing aircraft . Both are manned by medical personnel from Helgeland Hospital Trust . In 2011 , the helicopter flew 465 missions and the fixed @-@ wing aircraft 1022 missions . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 Widerøe Flight 710 took place on 6 May 1988 when a Dash 7 crashed into nearby Torghatten mountain during a landing approach , killing all 36 aboard . It remains the worst accident involving a Dash 7 and is the fourth @-@ worst accident on Norwegian soil . 
 Helikopter Service Flight 451 took place on 8 September 1997 , when a Eurocopter Super Puma en route to Norne crashed into the Norwegian Sea 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) northwest of the airport , killing all 12 people on board . 
 = 1981 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1981 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1981 , and lasted until November 30 , 1981 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The 1981 season was high in activity with 18 tropical depressions and twelve storms forming during the year . Nine of these systems made landfall . Cindy , Harvey , and Irene neither affected land directly nor indirectly . 
 Hurricane Dennis caused millions of dollars in damage in Dade County , Florida and produced the highest rainfall totals of any tropical cyclone this season . Tropical Depression Eight caused the most damage , due to flooding in Texas at the end of August , and led to most fatalities of any tropical cyclone this season ( five ) . Tropical Depressions Two and Eight caused a majority of the damage and fatalities this season , with both affecting Louisiana and Texas . Katrina was the only named storm with associated fatalities . 
 = = Seasonal activity = = 
 The 1981 season was high in activity with eighteen tropical depressions and twelve storms forming that year . The season began early , as Tropical Storm Arlene formed on May 6 . Arlene made landfall in Cuba , being absorbed by a low later . Tropical Depression Two moved out of the Gulf of Mexico into eastern Texas on June 5 , producing localized rainfall amounts of 12 inches ( 300 mm ) and numerous tornadoes over Louisiana before recurving across the Southeast United States . Tropical Storm Bret formed as a subtropical low in the open Atlantic Ocean , and made landfall in the Delmarva Peninsula . 
 Tropical Depression Four formed in the Gulf of Mexico on July 25 , moving into Mexico the next day , and causing heavy rains in west Texas , Oklahoma , and Arkansas when its remnants moved into the United States . Tropical Storm Cindy formed on August 2 in the open Atlantic and became an extratropical cyclone on August 5 . Hurricane Dennis formed on August 7 near South America . Dennis degenerated into a depression while making landfall in the Leeward Islands , but regained storm strength while over Cuba . Dennis moved near the southeast United States coastline from Florida to Virginia , briefly becoming a hurricane . Dennis weakened into a tropical storm and was declared an extratropical cyclone on August 22 . 
 Tropical Depression Seven formed in mid @-@ August and tracked through the Windward Islands before dissipating in the eastern Caribbean Sea . Tropical Depression Eight led to a significant flooding event between San Antonio and Houston on August 30 and August 31 while recurving through Texas into Louisiana . Hurricane Emily formed on September 1 southeast of Bermuda . Emily made a cyclonic loop as a tropical storm . Emily strengthened into a hurricane out in the North Atlantic Ocean and by September 12 , was no longer identifiable . Hurricane Floyd was a Category 3 hurricane that grazed Bermuda , but no damage was reported . Hurricane Gert formed September 8 , strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane , and followed the same track as Floyd , dissipating near the Azores . Hurricane Harvey became the strongest storm of the season , reaching Category 4 strength . Harvey never affected land , but ships reported tropical storm @-@ force winds . Tropical Depression Thirteen brought gusts of tropical storm force to Bermuda in mid @-@ to @-@ late September . Hurricane Irene also stayed out at sea , reaching Category 3 strength and was extratropical in early October . The extratropical Irene made landfall in France . 
 Tropical Depression Fifteen was small and well @-@ organized as it crossed the tropical Atlantic before weakening as it moved through the northeast Caribbean and southwest North Atlantic during late September and early October . Tropical Storm Jose was a short @-@ lived storm forming out in the open Atlantic in late October . Jose never affected land and dissipated on November 1 near the Azores . Hurricane Katrina formed in the Caribbean Sea , and made landfall in Cuba after reaching hurricane strength . Katrina was the only named storm with fatalities . The final storm of the season , Subtropical Storm Three , formed in the Atlantic Ocean on November 12 and moved north , making landfall in Nova Scotia and becoming extratropical soon after . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 100 , which is classified as " near normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Arlene = = = 
 Arlene was a very unusual tropical storm in 1981 . It formed on May 6 , well before the beginning of the normal hurricane season . It developed out of a disturbance that moved from the Pacific Ocean across Central America into the Caribbean Sea . As the disturbance tracked northeast across the western Caribbean , it became a tropical depression , then on May 7 reached tropical storm strength near the Cayman Islands . Arlene struck eastern Cuba on the night of May 7 , and the passage over land weakened it to a depression . It restrengthened briefly over the southeastern Bahamas , but weakened again and was absorbed by another system . Reported damage was minimal . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the Bay of Campeche near Veracruz , Mexico , on June 3 . The system moved north @-@ northwest , lured by a cyclone over the southern Plains . Tropical Depression Two made landfall along the upper Texas coast on June 5 , spreading up to 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of rainfall northeast of the point of landfall . A total of nine tornadoes stuck the western Gulf coast , with eight touching down in Louisiana . Three people died ; two due to flooding and one from an associated tornado . The depression quickly recurved through the Mississippi Valley , and deepened as it moved off the coast of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states into the western subtropical Atlantic on June 7 . At least US $ 4 million in damage was caused by this depression . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bret = = = 
 Bret formed out of a subtropical low roughly 150 miles ( 240 km ) off the coast of North Carolina . The storm moved west @-@ northwest , striking land in southern Maryland on July 1 . Bret weakened significantly just before landfall , and reported winds were below gale force . Rainfall amounts were light , with a narrow area of over one inch of rain reported near its track and within the central Appalachians . The highest rainfall amount reported was 4 @.@ 48 inches ( 114 mm ) at Big Meadows , Virginia . No significant damage was reported , but one fatality was reported at Nags Head , North Carolina due to riptides . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four = = = 
 A tropical disturbance moved across the Caribbean sea between July 20 and July 24 before moving across the Yucatán peninsula . After emerging into the south @-@ central Gulf of Mexico , the disturbance organized into a tropical depression early on July 25 . The depression moved west @-@ northwest into northeast Mexico on July 26 before its surface circulation dissipated . Heavy rains fell across western Texas , Oklahoma , and Arkansas when the remains of this system interacted with a stationary front across the southern Plains between July 28 and July 30 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cindy = = = 
 A subtropical depression that developed along a cold front organized into Tropical Storm Cindy on August 2 , in the open Atlantic midway between Bermuda and Nova Scotia . Cindy tracked east @-@ northeast until it became extratropical on August 5 as it moved over colder water . The storm never affected land and caused no known damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Dennis = = = 
 Dennis began as Cape Verde @-@ type hurricanes typically do . A tropical wave leaving the coast of Africa on August 5 developed into Tropical Storm Dennis on August 7 near Cape Verde . Unlike most such storms , Dennis degenerated to a tropical wave before reaching the Windward Islands on August 12 . This wave crossed the Caribbean , passing over Jamaica before reaching the southwestern coast of Cuba on August 15 . 
 Once near Cuba , the wave began rapid organization , restrengthening into a tropical storm . It crossed Cuba , then moved into southern Florida . Over Florida , steering currents weakened and the storm stalled . On August 19 , Tropical Storm Dennis reemerged over water , skimming the coasts of the Carolinas before accelerating out to sea . Dennis reached hurricane strength before becoming extratropical on August 22 . 
 Most damage associated with Dennis was from the heavy rainfall caused by its slow passage over Florida , although two tornadoes were also reported within Florida . The highest amount registered was near Homestead , Florida , where 25 @.@ 56 inches ( 649 mm ) of rain was measured . Agriculture damage in Dade County , Florida was estimated at $ 15 million ( 1981 USD ) . Coastal areas of the Carolinas were also affected by heavy rainfall , with spots seeing over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) , as well as minor beach erosion . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seven = = = 
 This system developed across the tropical Atlantic ocean on August 18 , moving westward through the Windward islands into the eastern Caribbean Sea before dissipating on August 21 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eight = = = 
 This tropical depression formed in the Bay of Campeche on August 26 and moved slowly northwest , moving ashore northeast Mexico on August 29 and into the United States on August 30 . As an ill @-@ defined surface low , a large thunderstorm complex formed near its center that day , unleashing heavy rainfall in a band 50 miles ( 80 km ) wide which stretched along a path 200 miles ( 320 km ) long from Seguin , Texas to north of Houston , Texas . The highest rainfall amount reported was from Pine Springs in Fayette County , Texas , where 21 inches ( 530 mm ) fell in the 24 ‑ hour period ending on the morning of August 31 . Five died in the town of Shiner , Texas due to the flood . Downtown <unk> flooded to a depth of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . Significant flooding occurred along the Lavaca , Guadalupe , and Colorado rivers in Texas . The cyclone spawned 14 tornadoes as well , including one at Scholes Field in Galveston , Texas which produced winds as high as 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) at 7 : 15 pm on August 31 . 
 Its surface circulation remained ill @-@ defined as it produced another round of heavy rainfall across northwest Louisiana on September 1 . A large mesoscale convective system moved in from Oklahoma and northeast Texas , dissipating what was left of this tropical depression by September 2 . Paid losses by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) totaled nearly US $ 21 million ( 1981 dollars ) , with total damages exceeding US $ 26 million ( 1981 dollars ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Emily = = = 
 On September 1 , a subtropical storm became Tropical Storm Emily southwest of Bermuda . Emily moved northeast , crossing the island the next day , but measured winds were below tropical storm force . The storm continued generally northeast and strengthened into a hurricane . Hurricane Emily weakened over the north Atlantic and was no longer identifiable as a weather system by September 12 . Hurricane Emily caused beach erosion across the East Coast of the United States , but no other damage was reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Floyd = = = 
 Floyd was first tracked as a tropical depression on September 3 when it organized east of the Leeward Islands . As the depression moved northwest , it caused heavy rain . The highest rainfall reported was 5 @.@ 7 inches ( 140 mm ) at Antigua . It strengthened into a tropical storm , then reached hurricane strength on September 7 . 
 Floyd turned to the northeast , and passed just southeast of Bermuda as a weakening hurricane . As a tropical storm , Floyd moved east across the Atlantic until losing its identity on September 12 . 
 No damages are associated with Floyd . Although Bermuda was directly affected , the island experienced the weaker half of the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Gert = = = 
 A tropical wave exited western Africa on September 1 , gradually developing a concentrated area of convection . Early on September 7 , it was estimated that Tropical Depression Eleven about 400 mi ( 640 km ) east of the Leeward Islands , based on satellite imagery . The next day , data from the Hurricane Hunters indicated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Gert . The newly upgraded storm passed between the islands of Dominica and Guadeloupe and continued to intensify , making landfall on southeastern Puerto Rico with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) late September 8 . After emerging into the Atlantic , Gert weakened while passing off the north coast of the Dominican Republic . It restrengthened while turning northward near the Bahamas , becoming a hurricane on September 10 . Midday on September 11 , Gert attained its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 988 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) . The hurricane turned northeastward and weakened over cooler waters , passing about 100 mi ( 160 km ) north of Bermuda on September 12 as a tropical storm . On September 14 , Gert weakened further to tropical depression status , dissipating the next day . 
 While passing through the Leeward Islands , Gert dropped moderate rainfall of 5 @.@ 85 inches ( 148 @.@ 5 mm ) on St. Thomas . Winds gusted to 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on the island . In Puerto Rico , rainfall peaked at 6 @.@ 02 inches ( 153 mm ) in the Puerto Rican municipality of Maricao . Gale warnings were issued for the Turks and Caicos Islands and later the southeastern Bahamas , and light rainfall occurred in the region , reaching 3 @.@ 20 inches ( 81 @.@ 28 mm ) on the island of San Salvador . Winds were light in Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Harvey = = = 
 Harvey formed in the central Atlantic , reaching hurricane strength only a few hours after first becoming a named system on September 12 . From its initial position several hundred miles east of the Leeward Islands , Harvey moved northwest . Its path began curving more to the north , and was considered a threat to Bermuda until the continuing curve took Harvey away from the island . Harvey 's track became more easterly , and the storm weakened and became extratropical as it approached the Azores . Harvey caused no reported damage , although several ships reported experiencing tropical storm force winds . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Thirteen = = = 
 The thirteenth tropical depression developed 275 mi ( 443 km ) southwest of Bermuda on September 22 , and was initially expected to intensify into a tropical storm . Although it failed to further intensify , Tropical Depression Thirteen brought squalls to Bermuda with winds gusts of tropical storm force as it passed west of the island on September 23 . Moving northward , the system merged with a developing extratropical cyclone south of Nova Scotia on September 24 . 
 = = = Hurricane Irene = = = 
 Irene became a named storm midway between the Windward Islands and Cape Verde on September 23 , and its track mimicked that of Hurricane Harvey . The storm tracked northwest , becoming a hurricane on September 25 . Its track then began curving to the east , eventually resulting in motion to the northeast . 
 The storm weakened and became extratropical in early October . The remaining extratropical storm moved over France on October 3 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fifteen = = = 
 This tropical depression formed southwest of the Cape Verde Islands on September 27 , and tracked through the deep tropics before weakening as it moved over the Leeward Islands late on September 30 . Heavy rains occurred at Guadeloupe as the system passed by the island . The depression then recurved to the south and east of Bermuda late on October 3 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Jose = = = 
 Jose was a weak and short @-@ lived tropical storm that formed far from land on October 29 . It moved generally northeast before becoming subtropical and then dissipating on November 1 near the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Katrina = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on November 3 in the western Caribbean Sea about 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of the Cayman Islands . The depression moved north , reaching tropical storm strength as it moved through the Caymans . Katrina continued to strengthen , reaching hurricane strength half a day before landfall in Cuba . A weakening Katrina moved across eastern Cuba on November 6 . After emerging over water , the storm accelerated northeast through the Bahamas . Katrina 's circulation fell apart , and the storm merged with a front on November 8 . 
 Hurricane Katrina is reported to have killed two and caused widespread flood damage in Cuba 's Camagüey province . Katrina was the only named storm responsible for fatalities in 1981 . 
 = = = Subtropical Storm Three = = = 
 A frontal low over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream organized into an subtropical storm on November 12 while 400 miles ( 640 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida . After moving northeastward , it turned to the northwest , threatening the northeastern United States as an intensifying subtropical storm that was gradually developing tropical characteristics . A high pressure system turned it to the northeast , and after peaking at 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) it became extratropical near Nova Scotia on November 17 . The storm produced significant beach erosion and coastal flooding . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1981 . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 1987 season . It was the first use for all of these names since the post @-@ 1978 naming change , except for Arlene , Cindy and Irene which had been previously used in 1959 , 1963 , 1967 , and 1971 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Due to lack of major damage from the storms , the WMO did not retire any names in 1981 . They were used again in 1987 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = Günther Lützow = 
 Günther Lützow ( 4 September 1912 – 24 April 1945 ) was a German Luftwaffe aviator and fighter ace credited with 110 enemy aircraft shot down in over 300 combat missions . Apart from five victories during the Spanish Civil War , most of his claimed victories were over the Eastern Front in World War II . He also claimed 20 victories over the Western Front , including two victories — one of which was a four @-@ engined bomber — flying the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter . 
 Born in Kiel , Lützow volunteered for military service in the Reichswehr of the Weimar Republic in 1931 . In parallel , he was accepted for flight training with the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule , a covert military @-@ training organization , and at the Lipetsk fighter @-@ pilot school . Following flight training , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader " Richthofen " ( Fighter Wing " Richthofen " ) in 1934 . In 1937 , he volunteered for service with the Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War where he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) in Jagdgruppe 88 ( J / 88 — 88th Fighter Group ) . From April to September 1937 , he claimed five aerial victories . For his service in Spain he was awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds , Germany 's highest decoration of the Spanish Civil War . 
 After an assignment as fighter pilot instructor , he was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) in Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) following the outbreak of World War II . He led the Gruppe through the Battle of France and claimed his first victory of World War II on 14 May 1940 . Lützow became Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 3 on 21 August 1940 . After 15 aerial victories during the Battle of Britain , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 18 September 1940 . Lützow commanded JG 3 in the aerial battles of Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union . There , after his 42nd aerial victory , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 20 July 1941 . Three months later , following his 92nd aerial victory of the war , Lützow was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords on 11 October 1941 . On 24 October , he claimed his 100th victory of the war , becoming the second fighter pilot after Werner Mölders to do so . From September to November 1941 , he also served as acting commander of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) , replacing Friedrich Beckh , who had been injured in combat , until the position was filled by Karl @-@ Gottfried Nordmann . After being instructed not to fly operations , he ignored the order , adding two more victories before being posted on 11 August 1942 to the staff of General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) Adolf Galland , serving as " Inspector of Day Fighters , East " . 
 In July 1943 , Lützow was tasked with commanding fighter operations in Italy . From September 1943 to March 1944 , he led the 1 . Jagd Division ( 1st Fighter Division ) , commanding all day- and night @-@ fighter operations in northwestern Germany , the Netherlands and Belgium . Lützow 's role in the " Fighter Pilots Revolt " was considered mutiny by Hermann Göring , who exiled Lützow to Italy . In April 1945 , he joined Galland 's Jagdverband 44 ( JV 44 — 44th Fighter Detachment ) . He was reported missing in action flying the Me 262 on 24 April 1945 while attempting to intercept a U.S. Army Air Forces B @-@ 26 Marauder raid near Donauwörth . His body was never recovered . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Lützow was born on 4 September 1912 in Kiel , at the time the capital of the Province of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , a province of the Kingdom of Prussia . He was the third of five children of Friedrich Lützow , a naval officer , and his wife Hildegard , née Kinzel . He had an older brother , Werner , an older sister , Liselotte ( Elisabeth Charlotte ) , a younger sister , Hildegard , and a younger brother , Joachim . The family at the time lived at the <unk> 23 on the west bank of the Kieler <unk> . This was close to the German Imperial Naval Academy where his father attended a two @-@ year Admiralty Staff training course . Following the outbreak of World War I , his father was posted to the staff of the Führer der <unk> ( Commander of Submarines ) Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Hermann Bauer , and the family had to move to Wilhelmshaven . 
 Lützow graduated with his Abitur ( university @-@ preparatory high school diploma ) on 31 March 1931 from the <unk> , a boarding school for academically gifted students . Unlike his brothers , who both pursued a naval career , Lützow joined the Reichswehr ( Army of the Weimar Republic ) following his graduation from school . This decision had been influenced by his mother 's youngest brother , Eberhard Kinzel , at the time an officer in the Reichswehr and later General der Infanterie ( General of the Infantry ) in the Heer ( German Army ) . 
 On 7 April 1931 Lützow began his pilot training at the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ( DVS — German Air Transport School ) at Schleißheim . The DVS was headed by Karl Bolle , a World War I fighter pilot , and his flight instructor was Wilhelm <unk> , another World War I fighter pilot . He and 29 other trainees were part of <unk> 31 ( camaraderie of 1931 ) , abbreviated " K 31 " . Among the members of " K 31 " were future Luftwaffe staff officers Bernd von Brauchitsch , Wolfgang Falck , Günther <unk> and Hannes Trautloft . Lützow graduated from the DVS on 19 February 1932 . In late September 1931 , Lützow and three other students made a cross @-@ country flight from Schleißheim to Berlin . The flight was made in two 2 @-@ seater Klemm Kl 26 training aircraft . Lützow , as the best air navigation student of his class , flew in the navigator 's position . In the Luftstreitkräfte of World War I , the pilot was called " Emil " and the navigator was called " Franz " . From that point on , Lützow was nicknamed " Franz " or the diminutive " <unk> " ( little Franz ) . From " K 31 " , Lützow and nine others were recommended for <unk> ( special training ) at the Lipetsk fighter @-@ pilot school . 
 Following his return from flight training , Lützow joined 5 . ( <unk> ) Infanterie @-@ Regiment ( 5th ( Prussian ) Infantry Regiment ) , at first in Greifswald ( 15 October 1932 – 31 January 1933 ) as a <unk> ( officer candidate ) . There he completed his basic training . From 1 February to 31 March 1933 , he served with 5 . ( <unk> ) Infanterie @-@ Regiment in Stettin . He then attended the Kriegsschule ( war school ) in Dresden and was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 October 1934 . In 1935 , he officially transferred to the newly formed Luftwaffe , at first serving as a fighter pilot instructor at Schleißheim ( 8 March 1935 – 31 March 1936 ) followed by a posting to II . Gruppe ( 2nd group ) of Sturzkampfgeschwader 162 ( StG 162 — 162nd Diver Bomber Wing ) at Lübeck @-@ Blankensee ( 1 April – 3 November 1936 ) . In parallel , from 1 May to 1 November 1936 , Lützow held the position of <unk> ( squadron officer ) with 4 . Staffel ( 4th squadron ) of Jagdgeschwader 132 " Richthofen " ( JG 132 — 132nd Fighter Wing ) at Jüterbog @-@ Damm . 
 = = Spanish Civil War = = 
 During the Spanish Civil War , Lützow volunteered for service with the Condor Legion , a unit composed of volunteers from the Luftwaffe and from the Heer which served with the Nationalists . On 19 March 1937 , he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 2 . Staffel ( 2nd squadron ) of Jagdgruppe 88 ( J / 88 — 88th Fighter Group ) . 
 From March to September 1937 , Lützow , now an Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) , claimed five victories , including the first ever recorded claim by a Messerschmitt Bf 109 pilot . Flying a Bf 109 B , he shot down an Polikarpov I @-@ 15 , a Soviet built biplane fighter aircraft , on 6 April 1937 . On 26 April 1937 , air elements of the Condor Legion targeted and bombed Guernica , an attack which has been characterised as a war crime by <unk> and <unk> , but Lützow did not participate in the attack as he was on home leave from 8 – 29 April 1937 . After he returned , Lützow claimed three more I @-@ 15s shot down , one on 22 May , another on 28 May , and his last on 18 August 1937 . His final aerial victory in Spain was over a Polikarpov I @-@ 16 , a monoplane fighter aircraft , which he shot down on 22 August 1937 . 
 On 16 October 1937 , Lützow was assigned to the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( RLM — Ministry of Aviation ) Sonderstab W. ( special staff " W " ) under the command of and named after General Helmuth <unk> . Sonderstab W. was responsible for collecting and analyzing the tactical lessons of the Spanish Civil War . Lützow wrote up his report , <unk> <unk> 1937 / 1938 , Jüterbog @-@ Damm , 5 . Staffel ( field report winter training 1937 / 1938 , Jüterbog @-@ Damm , 5th squadron ) documenting his Spanish experiences and tactical proposals . His report referred to the finger @-@ four formation as the clearly superior tactical formation for contemporary fighter operations . Lützow 's comrade Werner Mölders solved the problem of manoeuvring a finger @-@ four formation months later by introducing what is still known today as the " crossover turn " or " tac turn " . At RLM , Lützow received his promotion to Hauptmann ( captain ) on 20 November 1937 . For his achievements in Spain , Lützow was honored with the Spanish Medalla de la Campaña and Medalla Militar and the German Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( Spanienkreuz in Gold mit Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 6 June 1939 . 
 On 12 February 1938 , Lützow met his future wife Gisela von <unk> , the oldest daughter of military historian Kurt von <unk> , at a carnival party held at the Jagdfliegerschule 1 ( fighter pilot school ) at Werneuchen . On 19 July 1938 the two were officially engaged , and they married on 11 March 1939 at the Holy Trinity Church in Berlin . They had a son , Hans @-@ Ulrich , born 29 January 1940 , and a daughter , Carola , born 31 August 1942 . On 1 November 1938 , Lützow became a head flight instructor at Jagdfliegerschule 1 at Werneuchen , replacing Johannes Janke . At the time Jagdfliegerschule 1 , was under the command of Theo Osterkamp , a World War I fighter pilot . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday 1 September 1939 , when German forces invaded Poland . Lützow did not participate in this campaign . He was tasked with providing fighter protection for Berlin . From the Jagdfliegerschule in Werneuchen , he detached two squadrons and placed them under the command of Jagdgruppe 20 based at Strausberg . At the end of October 1939 , a change in command of I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) was announced . The former commander Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Otto @-@ Heinrich von <unk> was transferred to the Jagdfliegerschule in Werneuchen . Lützow joined I. Gruppe on 1 November 1939 , officially taking over command as Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) two days later . 
 = = = Battle of France = = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , the Wehrmacht began its offensive Operation Case Yellow ( Fall Gelb ) , the invasion of France and the neutral Low Countries . I. Gruppe of JG 3 participated in the offensive as a subordinated unit of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 — 77th Fighter Wing ) . During the Battle of France , JG 77 was under control of I. Fliegerkorps ( 1st Air Corps ) , which formed the right wing of Luftflotte 3 ( 3rd Air Fleet ) in Belgium and the Netherlands . 
 On 14 May 1940 , Lützow claimed his first two aerial victories of World War II . Flying out of <unk> , his flight was tasked with providing fighter cover in the area northwest of Dinant . At 8 : 00 pm , the flight encountered 15 to 20 Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk fighter aircraft . Without loss , I. Gruppe claimed seven <unk> shot down , including two claimed by Lützow . The next day , he claimed another P @-@ 36 southeast of Charleroi , his third victory of the war . On 19 May in combat north of Arras , he claimed a Hawker Hurricane fighter aircraft . Lützow claimed his fifth and sixth victory of the war on 31 May 1940 , shooting down two Morane @-@ Saulnier M.S.406 fighter aircraft south of Amiens . This was followed by another P @-@ 36 on 3 June . On 6 June , he claimed a Bristol Blenheim light bomber followed by another Blenheim shot down on 8 June . This latter Blenheim was shot down when Lützow was returning from a Junkers Ju 87 dive bomber escort mission . The Blenheim IV was flying alone unescorted and Lützow set it on fire . The bomber exploded in midair near Abbeville . 
 On 23 June 1940 , I. Gruppe was moved to a forward airfield at <unk> in preparation for missions over the Channel Coast , but the following day , all Bf 109s were sent to Wiesbaden , via Brussels , for a thorough maintenance check . The overhaul detachment arrived in Wiesbaden in the late afternoon and the pilots were sent on home leave . The cease @-@ fire of the Armistice of 22 June 1940 went into effect on 25 June 1940 , ending the Battle of France . During the French campaign , Lützow flew 64 combat missions and claimed nine victories . Under his leadership , I. Gruppe was one of the most successful units in this campaign . It was credited with 88 aerial victories for the loss of six pilots killed and ten Bf 109s destroyed . 
 By 3 July 1940 , the majority of the Bf 109s had returned to <unk> from maintenance overhaul . At the time , Lützow had 45 pilots and 33 Bf 109 Es for disposition , 28 of the aircraft being operational . I. Gruppe flew its first missions over the Channel Coast on the evening of 5 July 1940 . In the following days flight operations were impeded by a period of bad weather . On 1 August 1940 , I. Gruppe was moved to <unk> , the Geschwaderstab ( headquarters unit ) and the other two Gruppen were moved to airfields in the vicinity of Boulogne . In preparations for actions against Great Britain , JG 3 was put under the control of Luftflotte 2 ( 2nd Air Fleet ) , thus placing it under the command of Jagdfliegerführer 2 Oberst ( Colonel ) Osterkamp . 
 On 1 August 1940 , Adolf Hitler had issued Führer Directive no . 17 ( Weisung Nr. 17 ) ; the strategic objective of which was to engage and defeat the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) so as to achieve air superiority in preparation for Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) , the proposed amphibious invasion of Great Britain . Reichsmarschall ( Marshal of the Realm ) Hermann Göring , in his role as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Luftwaffe ordered an attack on RAF Fighter Command 's ground organization , code named Adlertag ( Operation Eagle Attack ) . On 13 August , 485 bomber and approximately 1 @,@ 000 fighter sorties were flown , targeting British airfields in southern England . Lützow claimed his first aerial victory in the Battle of Britain on 16 August 1940 , shooting down a Supermarine Spitfire over Kent . 
 = = = Wing commander of JG 3 = = = 
 At the height of the Battle of Britain on 21 August 1940 , it was announced that Lützow was to be appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 3 . He officially took command of JG 3 on 25 August and was promoted to Major ( major ) on 30 August 1940 . On 25 August , command of I. Gruppe was handed over to Oberleutnant Lothar Keller who led the Gruppe until the new Gruppenkommandeur Hauptmann Hans von Hahn arrived at the end of August . Lützow 's former adjutant with I. Gruppe , Friedrich @-@ Franz von <unk> , joined him at the Geschwaderstab and continued to serve as his adjutant . Under Lützow 's command , the Geschwaderstab was based on the Channel Coast until 16 February 1941 , at first in <unk> , then in August 1940 it was moved to <unk> @-@ au @-@ Bois and at the end of September to <unk> . Lützow , as Geschwaderkommodore , claimed eight victories during the Battle of Britain , his 11th – 18th of the war . 
 On 26 August 1940 , Lützow claimed a pair of Boulton Paul Defiant fighters from No. 264 Squadron off the north Kent coast . On 27 August 1940 , Lützow , and other Geschwaderkommodore , were summoned to a meeting held by Jagdfliegerführer 2 , Generalmajor ( Major General ) Kurt @-@ Bertram von Döring in Wissant . This meeting was also attended by Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Albert Kesselring , and the commanding general of the II . Fliegerkorps Generaloberst ( Colonel General ) Bruno Loerzer . The subject of the meeting was the perceived lack of fighter protection provided for the bomber arm by the Jagdwaffe ( fighter force ) . The bomber crews had demanded the fighter escorts fly closer to the bombers , within visual proximity , increasing perceived security of the bomber crews . The generals accused the <unk> of being overly interested in accumulating aerial victories and awards at the expense of exposing the bombers to enemy attacks . Lützow argued that a fighter aircraft , such as the Bf 109 , required speed and space to combat the fast and more agile RAF fighter aircraft . The discussion ended with a compromise , some of the fighters were ordered to fly close and at the same speed as the bombers , while other fighters were to fly 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 – 6 @,@ 600 feet ) above the main bomber force , clearing the airspace of enemy fighters in the direction the bomber force was flying . 
 In September 1940 , Lützow claimed three Hurricanes , one each on 7 , 9 and 15 September . In addition to the 15 aerial victories he had claimed since the start of the war , he was credited with three ground victories and one barrage balloon destroyed . Subsequently , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernes Kreuzes ) on 18 September 1940 . The presentation was made by Göring at the headquarters of the Befehlshaber der <unk> in den <unk> ( Supreme Commander of the Wehrmacht in the Netherlands ) , General der Flieger ( General of the Flyers ) Friedrich Christiansen , at Wassenaar near The Hague on 19 September . That day , both Lützow and Wolfgang <unk> , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) , were so honored . Lützow was credited with three further victories against the RAF , two P @-@ 36s shot down on 5 October , and a Spitfire on 5 November 1940 . These were his last victories claimed over the Western Front until 1945 , taking his World War II score to 18 . 
 In spring 1941 , Geschwaderstab of JG 3 was transferred to Mannheim @-@ Sandhofen for a period of rest and conversion to the new Bf 109 F @-@ 2 . On 4 May 1941 , the Geschwaderstab was sent back into combat along the Channel Coast . On 7 May 1941 , Lützow 's Bf 109 F @-@ 2 ( Werknummer 8117 — factory number ) suffered minor damage in combat when his tail surfaces were shot up . Operating from Saint @-@ Pol @-@ <unk> until 8 June , the Geschwaderstab flew missions over southern England and the English Channel without filing any claims or sustaining any losses . 
 = = = War against the Soviet Union = = = 
 In preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union , the Geschwaderstab began heading east on 8 June 1941 . They stopped for several days at Breslau @-@ <unk> , the present day Wrocław – Copernicus Airport in Poland . On 18 June , the Geschwaderstab relocated to <unk> , from where on 22 June 1941 , Lützow led JG 3 in combat against the Soviet Union . At the start of the campaign , JG 3 was subordinated to the V. Fliegerkorps ( 5th Air Corps ) , under command of General der Flieger Robert Ritter von Greim , which was part of Luftflotte 4 ( 4th Air Fleet ) , under command of Generaloberst Alexander Löhr . These air elements supported Generalfeldmarschall Gerd von Rundstedt 's Heeresgruppe Süd ( Army Group South ) , with the objective of capturing the Ukraine and its capital Kiev . 
 Lützow claimed nine aerial victories in his first week on the Eastern Front . The first victory , an I @-@ 18 fighter , a variant of the Polikarpov I @-@ 16 , was achieved on the opening day of Barbarossa . On the second day of Barbarossa , he accounted for two Tupolev SB @-@ 2 bombers . On 24 June , he filed a claim for a Polikarpov I @-@ 153 biplane fighter destroyed . Two days later , he destroyed three aircraft , two SB @-@ 2 bombers and a Petlyakov Pe @-@ 2 ground attack aircraft . On 27 June , he shot down an Ilyushin DB @-@ 3 bomber followed by another Pe @-@ 2 on the following day , his last victory of June 1941 . Following a DB @-@ 3 bomber claimed on 7 July , Lützow was credited with four aerial victories on 10 July , consisting of one Vultee V @-@ 11 attack aircraft and three I @-@ <unk> . The next day he claimed an II @-@ 16 . On 15 July he shot down two further I @-@ 16s and another DB @-@ 3 taking his total to 36 World War II victories . 
 On 16 July 1941 , Lützow claimed three further victories — a SB @-@ 2 , an I @-@ 16 and a DB @-@ 3 — and another DB @-@ 3 the next day . On 20 July , he claimed his 42nd aerial victory of the war , two V @-@ 11s . On the same day he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) , and was the 27th member of the Wehrmacht so honored . 
 Major Friedrich Beckh , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) at the time , was wounded in combat on 16 September . During Beckh 's convalescence , Lützow temporarily commanded both JG 51 and JG 3 until 21 December when Beckh returned . On 23 September , Lützow suffered combat damage to his radiator and had to make a forced landing behind Soviet lines near <unk> . He managed to return to the German lines unhurt . In October he claimed 29 victories , including five bombers shot down on 8 October . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) on 11 October 1941 at which point he had accumulated 92 aerial victories since 1 September 1939 . The presentation was made on 12 October 1941 by Hitler at the Führer Headquarter Wolfsschanze ( Wolf 's Lair ) in Rastenburg ( now Kętrzyn in Poland ) . 
 On 24 October 1941 , Lützow became the second fighter pilot , after Mölders , to amass 100 aerial victories in World War II . This event was also mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht , a propaganda radio report , on 25 October 1941 . Fearing his loss in combat , Lützow was then grounded , an order he did not always obey . In early November , he led Stab JG 3 back to Germany to rest and re @-@ equip . During this period , Lützow participated in the honor guard for Generaloberst Ernst Udet . Udet had committed suicide on 17 November 1941 and on 1 December JG 3 received the honorary name " Udet " . In May 1942 Lützow and JG 3 commenced operations near Kharkov before moving into the Crimea and operating around Stalingrad . Lützow added one victory when he claimed a Polikarpov I @-@ 16 fighter on 21 May 1942 for his 107th kill . On 11 August , Lützow handed over command of JG 3 to Hauptmann Wolf @-@ Dietrich Wilcke . 
 According to Braatz , sometime in June 1942 ( most likely in <unk> ) , Lützow was visited by two men from the SS . They were of lower rank . After Lützow asked them how he could be of assistance to them they responded by requesting as many of his men as possible to form up execution squads to liquidate Jews , Soviet Political Officers and other " scum " . Lützow was furious and ordered the entire Geschwader in full dress uniform to assemble and before the Jagdgeschwader he explained what the SS had requested and how he considered this act to be barbaric and criminal . He threatened to resign from command and take off his uniform if a single soldier volunteered . Braatz speculated whether this act got Lützow into trouble with the SS and the NSDAP . 
 = = = Luftwaffe commander = = = 
 In August 1942 , Lützow was posted to the staff of General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) Adolf Galland as Inspector of Day Fighters , Eastern Area . Braatz argues that Galland 's decision to appoint Lützow to this position may have been motivated by a desire to get him out of the " line of fire " from the SS and NSDAP . On 1 April 1943 , Lützow was promoted to Oberst ( colonel ) . 
 In July 1943 , Lützow became Inspector of Day Fighters , Italian Front , based in Naples . From September 1943 to March 1944 , he commanded the 1 . Jagd @-@ Division ( 1st Fighter Division ) in Defense of the Reich at Döberitz , where he assumed command for day- and night @-@ fighter operations in northwestern Germany , the Netherlands and Belgium . 1 . Jagd @-@ Division was under control of 1 . Jagd @-@ Korps ( 1st Fighter Corps ) commanded by Generalmajor Joseph Schmid . Lützow was relieved of this command on 16 March 1944 due to personal differences with Schmid . Following his dismissal , he was given command of the 4 . Flieger @-@ <unk> ( 4th Flyers Training Division ) . 
 = = = Dismissal and death = = = 
 Lützow became known as a central figure and spokesman behind the Fighter Pilots ' Mutiny which escalated in a meeting with Göring on 22 January 1945 . This was an attempt to reinstate Galland who had been dismissed for outspokenness regarding the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( Luftwaffe high command ) , and had been replaced by Oberst Gordon Gollob as General der Jagdflieger . The meeting was held at the Haus der Flieger in Berlin and was attended by a number of high @-@ ranking fighter pilot leaders which included Lützow , Hermann Graf , Gerhard Michalski , Helmut <unk> , Kurt Bühligen , Erich Leie and Herbert Ihlefeld , and their antagonist Göring supported by his staff Brauchitsch and Karl Koller . The fighter pilots , with Lützow taking the lead as spokesman , criticized Göring and made him personally responsible for the decisions taken which effectively had led to the lost air war over Europe . This behavior , the fact that someone dared to criticize Göring in his leadership abilities , was regarded as mutiny by Göring , who relieved him of command and had him posted to Italy to take over Jagdfliegerführer <unk> ( Fighter Leader Northern Italy ) from Oberst Eduard Neumann . Göring exiled Lützow from Germany by placing him under " <unk> " ( lit . " Ban from the Reich " ) . He was not allowed to inform his secretary in Jüterbog nor his wife back home , he immediately had to leave Germany . 
 In early April 1945 , Lützow joined Galland 's Jagdverband 44 ( JV 44 — 44th Fighter Detachment ) at Munich @-@ Riem . JV 44 was equipped with the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter , an aircraft which was heavily armed and faster than any Allied fighter . Galland hoped that the Me 262 would compensate for the numerical superiority of the Allies . Lützow had been released from his position as fighter leader in Italy and Galland appointed him as his adjutant . Lützow was credited with two aerial victories flying the Me 262 . 
 Lützow was posted missing in action following combat on 24 April 1945 while attempting to intercept an attack by United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) Martin B @-@ 26 Marauder medium bombers near Donauwörth . According to <unk> , an examination of U.S. records by Mr. Hirst indicates that Lützow 's Me 262 crashed near Schrobenhausen . The USAAF flew three attacks against the oil terminals at Schrobenhausen , south of Neuburg an der Donau , that day . On their second mission , 22 B @-@ 26 bombers escorted by 16 Republic P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt fighter aircraft , were just beginning their bomb run at 3 : 25 pm , when they came under attack by four Me 262s . Two P @-@ 47s came diving down from their top cover position to fend off the attacking jets . In this account , one Me 262 pilot noticed that he was about to come under attack and attempted to dive away . Unable to recover from this dive , the American pilots observed the Me 262 crashing into a small hill . This Me 262 may have been piloted by Lützow . 
 That day , Lützow had led a flight of six Me 262s of JV 44 against a force of 256 medium bombers of the 322nd and 344th Bombardment Group ( 344th BG ) . Lützow 's flight included Hauptmann Walter Krupinski and Oberleutnant Klaus Neumann . Two of the Me 262s had to abort the mission due to engine problems . The remaining four , of which at least Lützow 's and Neumann 's Me 262s were armed with the <unk> air @-@ to @-@ air rockets , attacked elements of 344th BG . Following the first attack , at least three B @-@ 26 Marauder bombers were seen trailing smoke , when the Me 262s came under attack by P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt fighter aircraft of the 365th Fighter Group . Blue Flight leader Captain Jerry G. Mast and his wingman , Second Lieutenant Byron Smith , went into full power dives to drive the attacking Me 262s away . Following the dive , Smith got separated from Mast and pursued an Me 262 . Mast and Second Lieutenant William H. Myers then jointly went after another Me 262 which went into an even steeper dive . The Me 262 was seen crashing into the ground and exploding . In Forsyth 's account , the Me 262 chased by Mast and Myers was Lützow 's and had been flying furthest to the south . 
 On 28 April 2015 , the Augsburger Allgemeine , a German regional daily newspaper , published an article stating that according to Erich <unk> , Lützow attempted an emergency landing at <unk> / <unk> and crashed into the Danube . <unk> made his claim based on reports made by eye @-@ witnesses who saw a low flying Me 262 crashing into the Danube that day . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Lützow was credited with 110 enemy aircraft shot down in 310 combat missions . He claimed five victories in Spain , and 105 during World War II . The majority of his World War II victories were claimed over the Eastern Front , although 20 were claimed over the Western Front , two of which were achieved while flying the Me 262 jet fighter . These included one four @-@ engined bomber . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Lützow an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This along with the * ( asterisk ) indicates conflicting information regarding the date or type of the aerial victory . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Spanish Medalla de la Campaña 
 Spanish Medalla Militar 
 Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( 6 July 1939 ) 
 Wound Badge in Black 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold with Pennant " 300 " 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge in Gold with Diamonds 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 26 May 1940 ) 
 1st Class ( 3 June 1940 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 18 September 1940 as Major and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 3 
 27th Oak Leaves on 20 July 1941 as Major and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 3 
 4th Swords on 11 October 1941 as Major and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 3 
 Mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 = Imperator torosus = 
 Imperator torosus , commonly known as the brawny bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . It is native to southern Europe east to the Caucasus and Israel . It is generally associated with deciduous trees such as hornbeam , oak and beech in warm , dry locales . Although generally rare in Europe , it appears to be relatively common in Hungary . Appearing in summer and autumn on chalky soils , the stocky fruit bodies have an ochre cap up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) across , yellow pores on the cap underside , and a wine @-@ red to brown or blackish stipe up to 6 – 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) long by 3 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide . The pale yellow flesh changes to different colours when broken or bruised depending on age ; younger mushrooms become reddish , and older ones additionally take on bluish tones . 
 Elias Magnus Fries and Christopher Theodor <unk> first described this species as Boletus torosus in 1835 , a name by which it was known for many years . Modern molecular phylogenetics shows that it is only distantly related to Boletus edulis — the type species of Boletus — and it was duly placed in the new genus Imperator in 2015 . Eating raw mushrooms of this species leads to vomiting and diarrhea . Gastrointestinal symptoms have also occurred after eating cooked specimens , though some people have eaten it without ill @-@ effects . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Swiss mycologist Louis Secretan described the brawny bolete as Boletus pachypus in his 1833 work Mycographie Suisse . Many of his names have been rejected for nomenclatural purposes because Secretan had a narrow species concept , dividing many taxa into multiple species that were not supported by other authorities , and his works did not use binomial nomenclature consistently . Swedish mycologists Elias Magnus Fries and Christopher Theodor <unk> described Boletus torosus in 1835 based on Secretan 's B. pachypus — distinct from the B. pachypus described by Fries himself . Fries reported in his 1838 book Epicrisis Systematis Mycologici seu Synopsis <unk> that he had not actually observed the species , and he did not designate a type specimen or illustration . The specific epithet torosus , which derives from Latin , means " muscular " . In the United Kingdom , it is known commonly as the " brawny bolete " . The German name <unk> @-@ <unk> means " oxen bolete " and the French bolet <unk> is " strong bolete " . 
 French naturalist Lucien Quélet transferred the species to the now @-@ obsolete genus Dictyopus in 1886 , which resulted in the synonym Dictyopus torosus . Boletus <unk> , first described by Henri Romagnesi in 1948 as Boletus purpureus var. <unk> and classified as a species in 1976 , was considered by Italian mycologist Carlo Luciano Alessio to be synonymous with B. torosus . Others , however , regard this fungus a distinct species . In 2013 Italian mycologists Valerio Bertolini and Giampaolo Simonini observed that the brevity of the original species description meant that some subsequent papers used B. torosus for specimens that aligned more closely with descriptions of Boletus <unk> or B. luteocupreus ( both now placed in the genus Imperator ) . They did note that Swiss and French authors had adhered to a more detailed description by Quélet , and that this was the only description faithful to the original description with a grey cap and yellow pores that slowly turn red . They concluded the original description must have been based on specimens growing near the French @-@ Swiss border and hence selected a neotype specimen from this region . 
 Within the large genus Boletus , the brawny bolete was classified in the section Luridi , which included species producing medium to large fruit bodies with thick , swollen stipes , and minute pores . In 1996 , Czech mycologist Jiří <unk> further subdivided the section Luridi , defining and naming the subsection <unk> — for B. torosus — to contain boletes that strongly bruised blue @-@ black with handling . 
 In a molecular analysis of Boletaceae phylogeny , the brawny bolete was most closely related to Boletus luteocupreus ; these two species formed a clade that was sister to B. luridus . Genetic analysis published in 2013 showed that B. torosus and many ( but not all ) red @-@ pored boletes were part of a dupainii clade ( named for B. dupainii ) , well @-@ removed from the core group of Boletus edulis ( the type species of genus Boletus ) and relatives within the Boletineae . This indicated that the brawny bolete and its relatives needed to be placed in a new genus . It was made the type species of the new genus Imperator , becoming Imperator torosus , in 2015 . 
