 = = Track listing = = 
 = Diocletianic Persecution = 
 The Diocletianic or Great Persecution was the last and most severe persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire . In 303 , the Emperors Diocletian , Maximian , Galerius , and Constantius issued a series of edicts rescinding the legal rights of Christians and demanding that they comply with traditional Roman religious practices . Later edicts targeted the clergy and ordered all inhabitants to sacrifice to the Roman gods ( a policy known as universal sacrifice ) . The persecution varied in intensity across the empire — weakest in Gaul and Britain , where only the first edict was applied , and strongest in the Eastern provinces . <unk> laws were nullified by different emperors at different times , but Constantine and Licinius 's Edict of Milan ( 313 ) has traditionally marked the end of the persecution . 
 Christians had always been subject to local discrimination in the empire , but early emperors were either too reluctant to issue general laws against them or , at least in the 3rd century ( see Crisis of the Third Century ) , too caught up with more immediate issues to do so . It was not until the 250s , under the reigns of Decius and Valerian , that such laws were passed . Under this legislation , Christians were compelled to sacrifice to Roman gods or face imprisonment and execution . When Gallienus acceded in 260 , he issued the first imperial edict regarding tolerance toward Christians , leading to nearly 40 years of peaceful coexistence . Diocletian 's accession in 284 did not mark an immediate reversal of disregard to Christianity , but it did herald a gradual shift in official attitudes toward religious minorities . In the first 15 years of his rule , Diocletian purged the army of Christians , condemned Manicheans to death , and surrounded himself with public opponents of Christianity . Diocletian 's preference for autocratic government , combined with his self @-@ image as a restorer of past Roman glory , presaged the most pervasive persecution in Roman history . In the winter of 302 , Galerius urged Diocletian to begin a general persecution of the Christians . Diocletian was wary , and asked the oracle of Apollo for guidance . The oracle 's reply was read as an endorsement of Galerius 's position , and a general persecution was called on February 24 , 303 . 
 <unk> policies varied in intensity across the empire . Where Galerius and Diocletian were avid persecutors , Constantius was unenthusiastic . Later persecutory edicts , including the calls for universal sacrifice , were not applied in his domain . His son , Constantine , on taking the imperial office in 306 , restored Christians to full legal equality and returned property that had been confiscated during the persecution . In Italy in 306 , the usurper Maxentius ousted Maximian 's successor Severus , promising full religious toleration . Galerius ended the persecution in the East in 311 , but it was resumed in Egypt , Palestine , and Asia Minor by his successor , Maximinus . Constantine and Licinius , Severus 's successor , signed the Edict of Milan in 313 , which offered a more comprehensive acceptance of Christianity than Galerius 's edict had provided . Licinius ousted Maximinus in 313 , bringing an end to persecution in the East . 
 The persecution failed to check the rise of the church . By 324 , Constantine was sole ruler of the empire , and Christianity had become his favored religion . Although the persecution resulted in death , torture , imprisonment , or dislocation for many Christians , the majority of the empire 's Christians avoided punishment . The persecution did , however , cause many churches to split between those who had complied with imperial authority ( the <unk> ) , and those who had remained " pure " . Certain schisms , like those of the Donatists in North Africa and the <unk> in Egypt , persisted long after the persecutions . The Donatists would not be reconciled to the Church until after 411 . In the centuries that followed , some historians consider that Christians created a " cult of the martyrs " , and exaggerated the barbarity of the persecutory era . These accounts were criticized during the Enlightenment and afterwards , most notably by Edward Gibbon . Modern historians , such as G. E. M. de Ste . Croix , have attempted to determine whether Christian sources exaggerated the scope of the Diocletianic persecution . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Prior persecutions = = = 
 From its first appearance to its legalization under Constantine , for the first two centuries of its existence , Christianity and its practitioners were unpopular with the people at large . Christians were always suspect , members of a " secret society " whose members communicated with a private code and who shied away from the public sphere . It was popular hostility — the anger of the crowd — which drove the earliest persecutions , not official action . In Lyon in 177 , it was only the intervention of civil authorities that stopped a pagan mob from dragging Christians from their houses and beating them to death . The governor of Bithynia – Pontus , Pliny , was sent long lists of denunciations by anonymous citizens , which Emperor Trajan advised him to ignore . 
 To the followers of the traditional cults , Christians were odd creatures : not quite Roman , but not quite barbarian either . Their practices were deeply threatening to traditional mores . Christians rejected public festivals , refused to take part in the imperial cult , avoided public office , and publicly criticized ancient traditions . Conversions tore families apart : Justin Martyr tells of a pagan husband who denounced his Christian wife , and Tertullian tells of children disinherited for becoming Christians . Traditional Roman religion was inextricably interwoven into the fabric of Roman society and state , but Christians refused to observe its practices . In the words of Tacitus , Christians showed " hatred of the human race " ( odium generis humani ) . Among the more credulous , Christians were thought to use black magic in pursuit of revolutionary aims , and to practice incest and cannibalism . 
 Nonetheless , for the first two centuries of the Christian era , no emperor issued general laws against the faith or its Church . These persecutions were carried out under the authority of local government officials . At Bithynia – Pontus in 111 , it was the imperial governor , Pliny ; at Smyrna ( İzmir ) in 156 and <unk> near Carthage in 180 , it was the proconsul ; at Lyon in 177 , it was the provincial governor . When Emperor Nero executed Christians for their alleged involvement in the fire of 64 , it was a purely local affair ; it did not spread beyond the city limits of Rome . These early persecutions were certainly violent , but they were sporadic , brief and limited in extent . They were of limited threat to Christianity as a whole . The very capriciousness of official action , however , made the threat of state coercion loom large in the Christian imagination . 
 In the 3rd century , the pattern changed . Emperors became more active and government officials began to actively pursue Christians , rather than merely to respond to the will of the crowd . Christianity , too , changed . No longer were its practitioners merely " the lower orders fomenting discontent " ; some Christians were now rich , or from the upper classes . Origen , writing at about 248 , tells of " the multitude of people coming in to the faith , even rich men and persons in positions of honour , and ladies of high refinement and birth . " Official reaction grew firmer . In 202 , according to the Historia Augusta , a 4th @-@ century history of dubious reliability , Septimius Severus ( r . 193 – 211 ) issued a general rescript forbidding conversion to either Judaism or Christianity . Maximin ( r . 235 – 38 ) targeted Christian leaders . Decius ( r . 249 – 51 ) , demanding a show of support for the faith , proclaimed that all inhabitants of the empire must sacrifice to the gods , eat sacrificial meat , and testify to these acts . Christians were obstinate in their non @-@ compliance . Church leaders , like Fabian , bishop of Rome , and Babylas , bishop of Antioch , were arrested , tried and executed , as were certain members of the Christian laity , like <unk> of Smyrna . The Christian theologian Origen was tortured during the persecution and died about a year after from the resulting injuries . 
 The Decian persecution was a grave blow to the Church . At Carthage , there was mass apostasy ( renunciation of the faith ) . At Smyrna , the bishop , Euctemon , sacrificed and encouraged others to do the same . Because the Church was largely urban , it should have been easy to identify , isolate and destroy the Church hierarchy . This did not happen . In June 251 , Decius died in battle , leaving his persecution incomplete . His persecutions were not followed up for another six years , allowing some Church functions to resume . Valerian , Decius 's friend , took up the imperial mantle in 253 . Though he was at first thought of as " exceptionally friendly " towards the Christians , his actions soon showed otherwise . In July 257 , he issued a new persecutory edict . As punishment for following the Christian faith , Christians were to face exile or condemnation to the mines . In August 258 , he issued a second edict , making the punishment death . This persecution also stalled in June 260 , when Valerian was captured in battle . His son , Gallienus ( r . 260 – 68 ) , ended the persecution and inaugurated nearly 40 years of freedom from official sanctions , praised by Eusebius as the " little peace of the Church " . The peace would be undisturbed , save for occasional , isolated persecutions , until Diocletian became emperor . 
 = = = Persecution and Tetrarchic ideology = = = 
 Diocletian , acclaimed emperor on November 20 , 284 , was a religious conservative , faithful to the traditional Roman cult . Unlike Aurelian ( r . 270 – 75 ) , Diocletian did not foster any new cult of his own . He preferred older gods , Olympian gods . Nonetheless , Diocletian did wish to inspire a general religious revival . As the panegyrist to Maximian declared : " You have heaped the gods with altars and statues , temples and offerings , which you dedicated with your own name and your own image , whose sanctity is increased by the example you set , of veneration for the gods . Surely , men will now understand what power resides in the gods , when you worship them so fervently . " As part of his plans for revival , Diocletian invested in religious construction . One quarter of all inscriptions referring to temple repairs in North Africa between 276 and 295 date to Diocletian 's reign . Diocletian associated himself with the head of the Roman pantheon , Jupiter ; his co @-@ emperor , Maximian , associated himself with Hercules . This connection between god and emperor helped to legitimize the emperors ' claims to power and tied imperial government closer to the traditional cult . 
 Diocletian did not insist on exclusive worship of Jupiter and Hercules , which would have been a drastic change in the pagan tradition . For example , Elagabalus had tried fostering his own god and no others , and had failed dramatically . Diocletian built temples for Isis and Sarapis at Rome and a temple to Sol in Italy . He did , however favor gods who provided for the safety of the whole empire , instead of the local deities of the provinces . In Africa , Diocletian 's revival focused on Jupiter , Hercules , Mercury , Apollo and the Imperial Cult . The cult of Saturn , the Romanized Baal @-@ hamon , was neglected . In imperial iconography , too , Jupiter and Hercules were pervasive . The same pattern of favoritism affected Egypt as well . Native Egyptian deities saw no revival , nor was the sacred hieroglyphic script used . Unity in worship was central to Diocletian 's religious policies . 
 Diocletian , like Augustus and Trajan before him , styled himself a " restorer " . He urged the public to see his reign and his governing system , the Tetrarchy ( rule by four emperors ) , as a renewal of traditional Roman values and , after the anarchic third century , a return to the " Golden Age of Rome " . As such , he reinforced the long @-@ standing Roman preference for ancient customs and Imperial opposition to independent societies . The Diocletianic regime 's activist stance , however , and Diocletian 's belief in the power of central government to effect major change in morals and society made him unusual . Most earlier emperors tended to be quite cautious in their administrative policies , preferring to work within existing structures rather than overhauling them . Diocletian , by contrast , was willing to reform every aspect of public life to satisfy his goals . Under his rule , coinage , taxation , architecture , law and history were all radically reconstructed to reflect his authoritarian and traditionalist ideology . The reformation of the empire 's " moral fabric " — and the elimination of religious minorities — was simply one step in that process . 
 The unique position of the Christians and Jews of the empire became increasingly apparent . The Jews had earned imperial toleration on account of the great antiquity of their faith . They had been exempted from Decius 's persecution and continued to enjoy freedom from persecution under Tetrarchic government . Because their faith was new and unfamiliar and not typically identified with Judaism by this time , Christians had no such excuse . Moreover , Christians had been distancing themselves from their Jewish heritage for their entire history . 
 Persecution was not the only outlet of the Tetrarchy 's moral fervor . In 295 , either Diocletian or his Caesar ( subordinate emperor ) , Galerius , issued an edict from Damascus proscribing incestuous marriages and affirming the supremacy of Roman law over local law . Its preamble insists that it is every emperor 's duty to enforce the sacred precepts of Roman law , for " the immortal gods themselves will favour and be at peace with the Roman name ... if we have seen to it that all subject to our rule entirely lead a pious , religious , peaceable and chaste life in every respect " . These principles , if given their full extension , would logically require Roman emperors to enforce conformity in religion . 
 = = = Public support = = = 
 Christian communities grew quickly in many parts of the empire ( and especially in the East ) after 260 , when Gallienus brought peace to the Church . The data to calculate the figures are nearly non @-@ existent , but the historian and sociologist Keith Hopkins has given crude and tentative estimates for Christian population in the 3rd century . Hopkins estimates that the Christian community grew from a population of 1 @.@ 1 million in 250 to a population of 6 million by 300 , about 10 % of the empire 's total population . Christians even expanded into the countryside , where they had never been numerous before . Churches in the later 3rd century were no longer as inconspicuous as they had been in the first and second . Large churches were prominent in certain major cities throughout the empire . The church in Nicomedia even sat on a hill overlooking the imperial palace . These new churches probably represented not only absolute growth in Christian population , but also the increasing affluence of the Christian community . In some areas where Christians were influential , such as North Africa and Egypt , traditional deities were losing credibility . 
 It is unknown how much support there was for persecution within the aristocracy . After Gallienus 's peace , Christians reached high ranks in Roman government . Diocletian appointed several Christians to those positions himself , and his wife and daughter may have been sympathetic to the church . There were many individuals willing to be martyrs , and many provincials willing to ignore any persecutory edicts from the emperors as well . Even Constantius was known to have disapproved of persecutory policies . The lower classes demonstrated little of the enthusiasm they had shown for earlier persecutions . They no longer believed the slanderous accusations that were popular in the 1st and 2nd centuries . Perhaps , as the historian Timothy Barnes has suggested , the long @-@ established Church had become another accepted part of their lives . 
 Within the highest ranks of the imperial administration , however , there were men who were ideologically opposed to the toleration of Christians , like the philosopher Porphyry of Tyre , and <unk> Hierocles , governor of Bithynia . To E.R. Dodds , the works of these men demonstrated " the alliance of pagan intellectuals with the Establishment " . Hierocles thought Christian beliefs absurd . If Christians applied their principles consistently , he argued , they would pray to Apollonius of Tyana instead of Jesus . Hierocles considered that Apollonius 's miracles had been far more impressive and Apollonius never had the temerity to call himself " God " . He saw the scriptures were full of " lies and contradictions " and Peter and Paul had peddled falsehoods . In the early 4th century , an unidentified philosopher published a pamphlet attacking the Christians . This philosopher , who might have been a pupil of the Neoplatonist Iamblichus , dined repeatedly at the imperial court . Diocletian himself was surrounded by an anti @-@ Christian clique . 
 Porphyry was somewhat restrained in his criticism of Christianity , at least in his early works , On the Return of the Soul and Philosophy from Oracles . He had few complaints about Jesus , whom he praised as a saintly individual , a " humble " man . Christ 's followers , however , he damned as " arrogant " . Around 290 , Porphyry wrote a fifteen @-@ volume work entitled Against the Christians . In the work , Porphyry expressed his shock at the rapid expansion of Christianity . He also revised his earlier opinions of Jesus , questioning Jesus ' exclusion of the rich from the Kingdom of Heaven , and his permissiveness in regards to the demons residing in pigs ' bodies . Like Hierocles , he unfavorably compared Jesus to Apollonius of Tyana . Porphyry held that Christians blasphemed by worshiping a human being rather than the Supreme God , and behaved <unk> in forsaking the traditional Roman cult . " To what sort of penalties might we not justly subject people , " Porphyry asked , " who are fugitives from their fathers ' customs ? " 
 Pagan priests , too , were interested in suppressing any threat to traditional religion . The Christian <unk> , writing during Diocletian 's reign , attributes financial concerns to <unk> of pagan services : 
 The augurs , the dream interpreters , the soothsayers , the prophets , and the <unk> , ever vain ... fearing that their own arts be brought to nought , and that they may extort but scanty contributions from the devotees , now few and infrequent , cry aloud , ' The gods are neglected , and in the temples there is now a very thin attendance . Former ceremonies are exposed to derision , and the time @-@ honoured rites of institutions once sacred have sunk before the superstitions of new <unk> 
 They believed their ceremonies were hindered by the presence of Christians , who were thought to cloud the sight of oracles and stall the gods ' recognition of their sacrifices . 
 = = Early persecutions = = 
 = = = Christians in the army = = = 
 At the conclusion of the Persian wars in 299 , co @-@ emperors Diocletian and Galerius traveled from Persia to Syrian Antioch ( Antakya ) . The Christian rhetor Lactantius records that , at Antioch some time in 299 , the emperors were engaged in sacrifice and divination in an attempt to predict the future . The haruspices , diviners of omens from sacrificed animals , were unable to read the sacrificed animals and failed to do so after repeated trials . The master <unk> eventually declared that this failure was the result of interruptions in the process caused by profane men . Certain Christians in the imperial household had been observed making the sign of the cross during the ceremonies and were alleged to have disrupted the haruspices ' divination . Diocletian , enraged by this turn of events , declared that all members of the court must make a sacrifice themselves . Diocletian and Galerius also sent letters to the military command , demanding that the entire army perform the sacrifices or else face discharge . Since there are no reports of bloodshed in Lactantius 's narrative , Christians in the imperial household must have survived the event . 
 Eusebius of Caesarea , a contemporary ecclesiastical historian , tells a similar story : commanders were told to give their troops the choice of sacrifice or loss of rank . These terms were strong — a soldier would lose his career in the military , his state pension and his personal savings — but not fatal . According to Eusebius , the purge was broadly successful , but Eusebius is confused about the technicalities of the event and his characterization of the overall size of the apostasy is ambiguous . Eusebius also attributes the initiative for the purge to Galerius , rather than Diocletian . 
 Modern scholar Peter Davies surmises that Eusebius is referring to the same event as Lactantius , but that he heard of the event through public rumors and knew nothing of the privileged discussion at the emperor 's private religion ceremony that Lactantius had access to . Since it was Galerius 's army that would have been purged — Diocletian had left his in Egypt to quell continuing unrest — Antiochenes would understandably have believed Galerius to be its instigator . The historian David Woods argues instead that Eusebius and Lactantius are referring to completely different events . Eusebius , according to Woods , describes the beginnings of the army purge in Palestine , while Lactantius describes events at court . Woods asserts that the relevant passage in Eusebius 's Chronicon was corrupted in the translation to Latin and that Eusebius 's text originally located the beginnings of the army persecution at a fort in <unk> ( El @-@ Lejjun , Jordan ) . 
 Eusebius , Lactantius , and Constantine each allege that Galerius was the prime impetus for the military purge , and its prime beneficiary . Diocletian , for all his religious conservatism , still had tendencies towards religious tolerance . Galerius , by contrast , was a devoted and passionate pagan . According to Christian sources , he was consistently the main advocate of such persecution . He was also eager to exploit this position to his own political advantage . As the lowest @-@ ranking emperor , Galerius was always listed last in imperial documents . Until the end of the Persian war in 299 , he had not even had a major palace . Lactantius states that Galerius hungered for a higher position in the imperial hierarchy . Galerius 's mother , <unk> , was bitterly anti @-@ Christian , for she had been a pagan priestess in Dacia , and loathed the Christians for avoiding her festivals . Newly prestigious and influential after his victories in the Persian war , Galerius might have wished to compensate for a previous humiliation at Antioch , when Diocletian had forced him to walk at the front of the imperial caravan , rather than inside it . His resentment fed his discontent with official policies of tolerance ; from 302 on , he probably urged Diocletian to enact a general law against the Christians . Since Diocletian was already surrounded by an anti @-@ Christian clique of counsellors , these suggestions must have carried great force . 
 = = = Manichean persecution = = = 
 Affairs quieted after the initial persecution . Diocletian remained in Antioch for the following three years . He visited Egypt once , over the winter of 301 – 302 , where he began the grain dole in Alexandria . In Egypt , some Manicheans , followers of the prophet Mani , were denounced in the presence of the proconsul of Africa . On March 31 , 302 , in a rescript from Alexandria , Diocletian , after consultation with the proconsul for Egypt , ordered that the leading Manicheans be burnt alive along with their scriptures . This was the first time an Imperial persecution ever called for the destruction of sacred literature . Low @-@ status Manicheans were to be executed ; high @-@ status Manicheans were to be sent to work in the quarries of <unk> ( Marmara Island ) or the mines of Phaeno . All Manichean property was to be seized and deposited in the imperial treasury . 
 Diocletian found much to be offended by in Manichean religion . His championing of traditional Roman cults impelled him to use the language of religious fervor . The proconsul of Africa forwarded Diocletian an anxious inquiry on the <unk> . In late March 302 , Diocletian responded : the Manicheans " have set up new and hitherto unheard of sects in opposition to the older creeds so that they might cast out the doctrines vouchsafed to us in the past by divine favour , for the benefit of their own depraved doctrine " . He continued : " .. our fear is that with the passage of time , they will endeavour ... to infect ... our whole empire ... as with the poison of a malignant serpent " . " Ancient religion ought not to be criticized by a new @-@ fangled one " , he wrote . The Christians of the empire were vulnerable to the same line of thinking . 
 = = = Diocletian and Galerius , 302 – 303 = = = 
 Diocletian was in Antioch in the autumn of 302 , when the next instance of persecution occurred . The deacon Romanus visited a court while preliminary sacrifices were taking place and interrupted the ceremonies , denouncing the act in a loud voice . He was arrested and sentenced to be set aflame , but Diocletian overruled the decision , and decided that Romanus should have his tongue removed instead . Romanus would be executed on November 18 , 303 . The boldness of this Christian displeased Diocletian , and he left the city and made for Nicomedia to spend the winter , accompanied by Galerius . 
 Throughout these years the moral and religious didacticism of the emperors was reaching a fevered pitch ; now , at the behest of an oracle , it was to hit its peak . According to Lactantius , Diocletian and Galerius entered into an argument over what imperial policy towards Christians should be while at Nicomedia in 302 . Diocletian argued that forbidding Christians from the bureaucracy and military would be sufficient to appease the gods , while Galerius pushed for their extermination . The two men sought to resolve their dispute by sending a messenger to consult the oracle of Apollo at Didyma . Porphyry may also have been present at this meeting . Upon returning , the messenger told the court that " the just on earth " hindered Apollo 's ability to speak . These " just " , Diocletian was informed by members of the court , could only refer to the Christians of the empire . At the behest of his court , Diocletian acceded to demands for a universal persecution . 
 = = Great Persecution = = 
 = = = First edict = = = 
 On February 23 , 303 , Diocletian ordered that the newly built Christian church at Nicomedia be razed , its scriptures burned , and its treasures seized . February 23 was the feast of the Terminalia , for Terminus , the god of boundaries . It was the day they would terminate Christianity . The next day , Diocletian 's first " Edict against the Christians " was published . The key targets of this piece of legislation were , as they had been during Valerian 's persecution , Christian property and senior clerics . The edict prohibited Christians from assembling for worship , and ordered the destruction of their scriptures , liturgical books , and places of worship across the empire . But Christians tried to retain the scriptures as far as possible , though " it appears that giving them up ... was not regarded as a sin " in the East ; some of them must have been successfully saved , which is evident from the findings of " early biblical papyri " . They might give apocryphal works , or refused to surrender their scriptures despite it must be paid with their lives , and there were cases where the scriptures were not destructed . Christians were also deprived of the right to petition the courts , making them potential subjects for judicial torture ; Christians could not respond to actions brought against them in court ; Christian senators , equestrians , decurions , veterans , and soldiers were deprived of their ranks ; and imperial freedmen were re @-@ enslaved . 
 Diocletian requested that the edict be pursued " without bloodshed " , against Galerius 's demands that all those refusing to sacrifice be burned alive . In spite of Diocletian 's request , local judges often enforced executions during the persecution , as capital punishment was among their discretionary powers . Galerius 's recommendation — burning alive — became a common method of executing Christians in the East . After the edict was posted in Nicomedia , a man named <unk> tore it down and ripped it up , shouting " Here are your Gothic and Sarmatian triumphs ! " He was arrested for treason , tortured , and burned alive soon after , becoming the edict 's first martyr . The provisions of the edict were known and enforced in Palestine by March or April ( just before Easter ) , and was in use by local officials in North Africa by May or June . The earliest martyr at Caesarea was executed on June 7 ; the edict was in force at Cirta from May 19 . The first edict was the sole legally binding edict in the West ; in Gaul and Britain , however , Constantius did not actually impose this edict . In the East , however , progressively harsher legislation was devised . 
 = = = Second , third , and fourth edicts = = = 
 In the summer of 303 , following a series of rebellions in Melitene ( Malatya , Turkey ) and Syria , a second edict was published , ordering the arrest and imprisonment of all bishops and priests . In the judgment of historian Roger Rees , there was no logical necessity for this second edict ; that Diocletian issued one indicates that he was either unaware the first edict was being carried out , or that he felt it was not working as quickly as he needed it to . Following the publication of the second edict , prisons began to fill — the underdeveloped prison system of the time could not handle the deacons , lectors , priests , bishops , and exorcists forced upon them . Eusebius writes that the edict netted so many priests that ordinary criminals were crowded out , and had to be released . 
 In anticipation of the upcoming twentieth anniversary of his reign on November 20 , 303 , Diocletian declared a general amnesty in a third edict . Any imprisoned clergyman could now be freed , so long as he agreed to make a sacrifice to the gods . Diocletian may have been searching for some good publicity with this legislation . He may also have sought to fracture the Christian community by publicizing the fact that its clergy had apostatized . The demand to sacrifice was unacceptable to many of the imprisoned , but wardens often managed to obtain at least nominal compliance . Some of the clergy sacrificed willingly ; others did so on pain of torture . Wardens were eager to be rid of the clergy in their midst . Eusebius , in his Martyrs of Palestine , records the case of a clergy who , after being brought to an altar , had his hands seized and made to complete a sacrificial offering . The clergyman was told that his act of sacrifice had been recognized and was summarily dismissed . Others were told they had sacrificed even when they had done nothing . 
 In 304 , the fourth edict ordered all persons , men , women , and children , to gather in a public space and offer a collective sacrifice . If they refused , they were to be executed . The precise date of the edict is unknown , but it was probably issued in either January or February 304 , and was being applied in the Balkans in March . The edict was in use in Thessalonica ( Thessaloniki , Greece ) in April 304 , and in Palestine soon after . This last edict was not enforced at all in the domains of Maximian and Constantius . In the East , it remained applicable until the issue of the Edict of Milan by Constantine and Licinius in 313 . 
 = = = <unk> , instability , and renewed toleration , 305 – 311 = = = 
 Diocletian and Maximian resigned on May 1 , 305 . Constantius and Galerius became Augusti ( senior emperors ) , while two new emperors , Severus and Maximinus , became Caesars ( junior emperors ) . According to Lactantius , Galerius had forced Diocletian 's hand in the matter , and secured the appointment of loyal friends to the imperial office . In this " Second Tetrarchy " , it seems that only the Eastern emperors , Galerius and Maximinus , continued with the persecution . As they left office , Diocletian and Maximian probably imagined Christianity to be in its last throes . Churches had been destroyed , the Church leadership and hierarchy had been snapped , and the army and civil service had been purged . Eusebius declares that apostates from the faith were " countless " ( <unk> ) in number . At first , the new Tetrarchy seemed even more vigorous than the first . Maximinus in particular was eager to persecute . In 306 and 309 , he published his own edicts demanding universal sacrifice . Eusebius accuses Galerius of pressing on with the persecution as well . 
 In the West , however , the loose ends of the Diocletianic settlement were about to bring the whole Tetrarchic tapestry down . Constantine , son of Constantius , and Maxentius , son of Maximian , had been overlooked in the Diocletianic succession , offending the parents and angering the sons . Constantine , against Galerius 's will , succeeded his father on July 25 , 306 . He immediately ended any ongoing persecutions and offered Christians full restitution of what they had lost under the persecution . This declaration gave Constantine the opportunity to portray himself as a possible liberator of oppressed Christians everywhere . Maxentius , meanwhile , had seized power in Rome on October 28 , 306 , and soon brought toleration to all Christians within his realm . Galerius made two attempts to unseat Maxentius , but failed both times . During the first campaign against Maxentius , Severus was captured , imprisoned , and executed . 
 = = = The Peace of Galerius and the Edict of Milan , 311 – 313 = = = 
 In the East , the persecution was officially discontinued on April 30 , 311 , although martyrdoms in Gaza continued until May 4 . Galerius , now on his deathbed , issued a proclamation to end hostilities , and give Christians the rights to exist freely under the law , and to peaceable assembly . Persecution was everywhere at an end . Lactantius preserves the Latin text of this pronouncement , describing it as an edict . Eusebius provides a Greek translation of the pronouncement . His version includes imperial titles and an address to provincials , suggesting that the proclamation is , in fact , an imperial letter . The document seems only to have been promulgated in Galerius 's provinces . 
 Among all the other arrangements that we are always making for the benefit and utility of the state , we have heretofore wished to repair all things in accordance with the laws and public discipline of the Romans , and to ensure that even the Christians , who abandoned the practice of their ancestors , should return to good sense . Indeed , for some reason or other , such self @-@ indulgence assailed and idiocy possessed those Christians , that they did not follow the practices of the ancients , which their own ancestors had , perhaps , instituted , but according to their own will and as it pleased them , they made laws for themselves that they observed , and gathered various peoples in diverse areas . Then when our order was issued stating that they should return themselves to the practices of the ancients , many were subjected to peril , and many were even killed . Many more persevered in their way of life , and we saw that they neither offered proper worship and cult to the gods , or to the god of the Christians . Considering the observation of our own mild clemency and eternal custom , by which we are accustomed to grant clemency to all people , we have decided to extend our most speedy indulgence to these people as well , so that Christians may once more establish their own meeting places , so long as they do not act in a disorderly way . We are about to send another letter to our officials detailing the conditions they ought to observe . Consequently , in accord with our indulgence , they ought to pray to their god for our health and the safety of the state , so that the state may be kept safe on all sides , and they may be able to live safely and securely in their own homes . 
 Galerius 's words reinforce the Tetrarchy 's theological basis for the persecution ; the acts did nothing more than attempt to enforce traditional civic and religious practices , even if the edicts themselves were thoroughly nontraditional . Galerius does nothing to violate the spirit of the persecution — Christians are still admonished for their nonconformity and foolish practices — Galerius never admits that he did anything wrong . The admission that the Christians ' god might exist is made only grudgingly . Certain early 20th @-@ century historians have declared that Galerius 's edict definitively nullified the old " legal formula " non <unk> esse <unk> , made Christianity a religio <unk> , " on a par with Judaism " , and secured Christians ' property , among other things . 
 Not all have been so enthusiastic . The 17th @-@ century ecclesiastical historian Tillemont called the edict " insignificant " ; likewise , the late 20th @-@ century historian Timothy Barnes cautioned that the " novelty or importance of [ Galerius ' ] measure should not be overestimated " . Barnes notes that Galerius 's legislation only brought to the East rights Christians already possessed in Italy and Africa . In Gaul , Spain , and Britain , moreover , Christians already had far more than Galerius was offering to Eastern Christians . Other late 20th @-@ century historians , like Graeme Clark and David S. Potter , assert that , for all its hedging , Galerius 's issuance of the edict was a landmark event in the histories of Christianity and the Roman empire . 
 Galerius 's law was not effective for long in Maximinus 's district . Within seven months of Galerius 's proclamation , Maximinus resumed persecution . Persecution would continue in Maximinus 's district until 313 , soon before his death . At a meeting between Licinius and Constantine in Milan in February 313 , the two emperors drafted the terms of a universal peace . The terms of this peace were posted by the victorious Licinius at Nicomedia on June 13 , 313 . Later ages have taken to calling the document the " Edict of Milan " . 
 We thought it fit to commend these things most fully to your care that you may know that we have given to those Christians free and unrestricted opportunity of religious worship . When you see that this has been granted to them by us , your Worship will know that we have also conceded to other religions the right of open and free observance of their worship for the sake of the peace of our times , that each one may have the free opportunity to worship as he pleases ; this regulation is made that we may not seem to detract from any dignity or any religion . 
 = = Regional variation = = 
 The enforcement of the persecutory edicts was inconsistent . Since the Tetrarchs were more or less sovereign in their own realms , they had a good deal of control over persecutory policy . In Constantius 's realm ( Britain and Gaul ) the persecution was , at most , only lightly enforced ; in Maximian 's realm ( Italy , Spain , and Africa ) , it was firmly enforced ; and in the East , under Diocletian ( Asia Minor , Syria , Palestine and Egypt ) and Galerius ( Greece and the Balkans ) , its provisions were pursued with more fervor than anywhere else . For the Eastern provinces , Peter Davies tabulated the total number of martyrdoms for an article in the Journal of Theological Studies . Davies argued that the figures , although reliant on collections of acta that are incomplete and only partially reliable , point to a heavier persecution under Diocletian than under Galerius . The historian Simon Corcoran , in a passage on the origins of the early persecution edicts , criticized Davies ' over @-@ reliance on these " dubious martyr acts " and dismissed his conclusions . 
 = = = Britain and Gaul = = = 
 The sources are inconsistent regarding the extent of the persecution in Constantius 's domain , though all portray it as quite limited . Lactantius states that the destruction of church buildings was the worst thing that came to pass . Eusebius explicitly denies that any churches were destroyed in both his Ecclesiastical History and his Life of Constantine , but lists Gaul as an area suffering from the effects of the persecution in his Martyrs of Palestine . A group of bishops declared that " Gaul was immune " ( <unk> est Gallia ) from the persecutions under Constantius . The death of Saint Alban , the first British Christian martyr , was once dated to this era , but most now assign it to the reign of Septimius Severus . The second , third and fourth edicts seem not to have been enforced in the West at all . It is possible that Constantius 's relatively tolerant policies were the result of Tetrarchic jealousies ; the persecution , after all , had been the project of the Eastern emperors , not the Western ones . After Constantine succeeded his father in 306 , he urged the recovery of Church property lost in the persecution , and legislated full freedom for all Christians in his domain . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 While the persecution under Constantius was relatively light , there is no doubt about the force of the persecution in Maximian 's domain . Its effects are recorded at Rome , Sicily , Spain , and in Africa — indeed , Maximian encouraged particularly strict enforcement of the edict in Africa . Africa 's political elite were insistent that the persecution be fulfilled , and Africa 's Christians , especially in Numidia , were equally insistent on resisting them . For the Numidians , to hand over scriptures was an act of terrible apostasy . Africa had long been home to the Church of the Martyrs — in Africa , martyrs held more religious authority than the clergy — and harbored a particularly intransigent , fanatical , and legalistic variety of Christianity . It was Africa that gave the West most of its martyrdoms . 
 Africa had produced martyrs even in the years immediately prior to the Great Persecution . In 298 , Maximilian , a soldier in Tebessa , had been tried for refusing to follow military discipline ; in Mauretania , again in 298 , the soldier Marcellus refused his army bonus and took off his uniform in public . Once persecutions began , public authorities were eager to assert their authority . <unk> , proconsul of Africa , expanded on the edict , deciding that , in addition to the destruction the Christians ' scriptures and churches , the government should compel Christians to sacrifice to the gods . Governor Valerius Florus enforced the same policy in Numidia during the summer or autumn of 303 , when he called for " days of incense burning " ; Christians would sacrifice or they would lose their lives . In addition to those already listed , African martyrs also include Saturninus and the Martyrs of <unk> , another group martyred on February 12 , 304 in Carthage , and the martyrs of <unk> ( Mila , Algeria ) . 
 The persecution in Africa also encouraged the development of <unk> , a schismatic movement that forbade any compromise with Roman government or traditor bishops ( those who had handed scriptures over to secular authorities ) . One of the key moments in the break with the mainline Church occurred in Carthage in 304 . The Christians from <unk> had been brought to the city and imprisoned . Friends and relatives of the prisoners came to visit , but encountered resistance from a local mob . The group was harassed , beaten , and whipped ; the food they had brought for their imprisoned friends was scattered on the ground . The mob had been sent by <unk> , the bishop of the city , and Caecilian , his deacon , for reasons that remain obscure . In 311 , Caecilian was elected bishop of Carthage . His opponents charged that his <unk> made him unworthy of the office , and declared itself for another candidate , Majorinus . Many others in Africa , including the <unk> , also supported Majorinus against Caecilian . Majorinus 's successor Donatus would give the dissident movement its name . By the time Constantine took over the province , the African church was deeply divided . The Donatists would not be reconciled to the Catholic Church until after 411 . 
 = = = Italy and Spain = = = 
 Maximian probably seized the Christian property in Rome quite easily — Roman cemeteries were noticeable , and Christian meeting places could have been easily found out . Senior churchmen would have been similarly prominent . The bishop of the city , Marcellinus , seems not to have ever been imprisoned , however , a fact which has led some to believe Maximian did not enforce the order to arrest clergy in the city . Others assert that Marcellinus was a traditor . Marcellinus appears in the 4th @-@ century Church 's <unk> <unk> but not its <unk> , or calendar of feasts , where all Marcellinus 's predecessors from Fabian had been listed — a " glaring " absence , in the opinion of historian John Curran . Within forty years , Donatists began spreading rumors that Marcellinus had been a traditor , and that he had even sacrificed to the pagan gods . The tale was soon embroidered in the 5th @-@ century forgery , the ' Council of <unk> ' , and the vita <unk> of the Liber Pontificalis . The latter work states that the bishop had indeed apostatized , but redeemed himself through martyrdom a few days afterward . 
 What followed Marcellinus 's act of <unk> , if it ever actually happened , is unclear . There appears to have been a break in the episcopal succession , however . Marcellinus seems to have died on October 25 , 304 , and ( if he had apostatized ) was probably expelled from the church in early 303 , but his successor , Marcellus , was not consecrated until either November or December 306 . In the meantime , two factions diverged in the Roman church , separating the lapsed , Christians who had complied with the edicts to ensure their own safety , and the <unk> , those who would brook no compromise with secular authority . These two groups clashed in street fights and riots , eventually leading to murders . Marcellus , a <unk> , purged all mention of Marcellinus from church records , and removed his name from the official list of bishops . Marcellus himself was banished from the city , and died in exile on January 16 , 308 . 
 Maxentius , meanwhile , took advantage of Galerius 's unpopularity in Italy ( Galerius had introduced taxation for the city and countryside of Rome for the first time in the history of the empire ) to declare himself emperor . On October 28 , 306 , Maxentius convinced the Praetorian Guard to support him , mutiny , and invest him with the purple robes of the emperor . Soon after his acclamation , Maxentius declared an end to persecution , and toleration for all Christians in his realm . The news traveled to Africa , where in later years a Christian of Cirta could still recall the precise date when " peace " was ushered in . Maxentius did not permit the restitution of confiscated property , however . 
 On April 18 , 308 , Maxentius allowed the Christians to hold another election for the city 's bishop , which Eusebius won . Eusebius was a moderate , however , in a still @-@ divided church . Heraclius , head of the <unk> faction , opposed readmission of the lapsed . Rioting followed , and Maxentius exiled the combative pair from the city , leaving Eusebius to die in Sicily on October 21 . The office was vacant for almost three years , until Maxentius permitted another election . Miltiades was elected on July 2 , 311 , as Maxentius prepared to face Constantine in battle . Maxentius , facing increasingly strong domestic opposition to his rule , now agreed to the restitution of Christian property . Miltiades sent two deacons with letters from Maxentius to the prefect of Rome , the head of the city , responsible for publishing imperial edicts within the city , to ensure compliance . African Christians were still recovering lost property as late as 312 . 
 Outside Rome , there are fewer sure details of the progress and effects of the persecution in Italy ; there are not many deaths securely attested for the region . The Acta <unk> records the martyrdom of <unk> in Catania , Sicily , a Christian who dared to carry the holy gospels around , refusing to surrender them . <unk> was arrested on April 29 , 304 , tried , and martyred on August 12 , 304 . In Spain the bishop <unk> of <unk> would later declare himself a confessor . After 305 , the year when Diocletian and Maximian abdicated and Constantius became Augustus , there were no more active persecutions in the West . Eusebius declares that the persecution lasted " less than two years " . 
 After a brief military standoff , Constantine confronted and defeated Maxentius , killing him at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge outside Rome on October 28 , 312 . He entered the city the next day , but declined to take part in the traditional ascent up the Capitoline Hill to the Temple of Jupiter . Constantine 's army had advanced on Rome under a Christian sign . It had become , officially at least , a Christian army . Constantine 's apparent conversion was visible elsewhere , too . Bishops dined at Constantine 's table , and many Christian building projects began soon after his victory . On November 9 , 312 , the old headquarters of the Imperial Horse Guard were razed to make way for the Lateran Basilica . Under Constantine 's rule , Christianity became the prime focus of official patronage . 
 = = = Nicomedia = = = 
 Before the end of February 303 , a fire destroyed part of the imperial palace . Galerius convinced Diocletian that the culprits were Christian conspirators who had plotted with palace eunuchs . An investigation into the act was commissioned , but no responsible party was found . Executions followed . The palace eunuchs Dorotheus and <unk> were eliminated . One individual , a Peter , was stripped , raised high , and scourged . Salt and vinegar were poured in his wounds , and he was slowly boiled over an open flame . The executions continued until at least April 24 , 303 , when six individuals , including the bishop Anthimus , were decapitated . The persecution intensified . Now presbyters and other clergymen could be arrested without having even been accused of a crime , and condemned to death . A second fire appeared sixteen days after the first . Galerius left the city , declaring it unsafe . Diocletian would soon follow . Lactantius blamed Galerius 's allies for setting the fire ; Constantine , in a later reminiscence , would attribute the fire to " lightning from heaven " . 
 Lactantius , still living in Nicomedia , saw the beginnings of the apocalypse in Diocletian 's persecution . Lactantius 's writings during the persecution exhibit both bitterness and Christian triumphalism . His eschatology runs directly counter to Tetrarchic claims to " renewal " . Diocletian asserted that he had instituted a new era of security and peace ; Lactantius saw the beginning of a cosmic revolution . 
 = = = Palestine and Syria = = = 
 = = = = Before Galerius 's edict of toleration = = = = 
 Palestine is the only region for which an extended local perspective of the persecution exists , in the form of Eusebius 's Martyrs of Palestine . Eusebius was resident in Caesarea , the capital of Roman Palestine , for the duration of the persecution , although he also traveled to Phoenicia and Egypt , and perhaps Arabia as well . Eusebius 's account is imperfect . It focuses on martyrs that were his personal friends before the persecutions began , and includes martyrdoms that took place outside of Palestine . His coverage is uneven . He provides only bare generalities at the bloody end of the persecutions , for example . Eusebius recognizes some of his faults . At the outset of his account of the general persecution in the Ecclesiastical History , Eusebius laments the incompleteness of his reportage : " how could one number the multitude of martyrs in each province , and especially those in Africa and Mauretania , and in Thebaid and Egypt ? " 
 Since no one below the status of governor held the legal power to enforce capital punishment , most recalcitrant Christians would have been sent to Caesarea to await punishment . The first martyr , Procopius , was sent to Caesarea from Scythopolis ( Beit She 'an , Israel ) , where he had been a reader and an exorcist . He was brought before the governor on June 7 , 303 , and asked to sacrifice to the gods , and to pour a libation for the emperors . Procopius responded by quoting Homer : " the lordship of many is not a good thing ; let there be one ruler , one king " . The governor beheaded the man at once . 
 Further martyrdoms followed in the months thereafter , increasing in the next spring , when the new governor , Urbanus , published the fourth edict . Eusebius probably does not list a complete account of all those executed under the fourth edict — he alludes in passing to others imprisoned with Thecla of Gaza , for example , though he does not name them . 
 The bulk of Eusebius 's account deals with Maximinus . Maximinus took up the office of emperor in Nicomedia on May 1 , 305 , and immediately thereafter left the city for Caesarea , hurrying , Lactantius alleges , so as to oppress and trample the diocese of <unk> . Initially , Maximinus governed only Egypt and the Levant . He issued his own persecutory edict in the spring of 306 , ordering general sacrifice . The edict of 304 had been difficult to enforce , since the Imperial government had no record of city @-@ dwelling subjects who held no agricultural land . Galerius solved this problem in 306 by running another census . This contained the names of all urban heads of household and the number of their dependents ( past censuses had only listed persons paying tax on land , such as landowners and tenants ) . Using lists drawn up by the civil service , Maximinus ordered his heralds to call all men , women , and children down to the temples . There , after tribunes called everyone by name , everyone sacrificed . 
 At some point after the publication of Maximinus 's first edict , perhaps in 307 , Maximinus changed the penalty for transgressions . Instead of receiving the death penalty , Christians would now be mutilated and condemned to labor in state @-@ owned mines . Since Egyptian mines were overstaffed , mostly due to the influx of Christian prisoners , Egyptian penitents were increasingly sent to the copper mines at Phaeno in Palestine and Cilicia in Asia Minor . At <unk> ( <unk> , Israel ) in the spring of 308 , 97 Christian confessors were received by Firmilianus from the porphyry mines in the Thebaid . Firmilianus cut the tendons on their left feet , blinded their right eyes , and sent them to the mines of Palestine . On another occasion , 130 others received the same punishment . Some were sent to Phaeno , and some to Cilicia . 
 Eusebius characterizes Urbanus as a man who enjoyed some variety in his punishments . One day , shortly after Easter 307 , he ordered the virgin Theodosia from Tyre ( <unk> , Lebanon ) thrown to the sea for conversing with Christians attending trial and refusing sacrifice ; the Christians in court , meanwhile , he sent to Phaeno . On a single day , November 2 , 307 , Urbanus sentenced a man named Domninus to be burned alive , three youths to fight as gladiators , and a priest to be exposed to a beast . On the same day , he ordered some young men to be castrated , sent three virgins to brothels , and imprisoned a number of others , including Pamphilus of Caesarea , a priest , scholar , and defender of the theologian Origen . Soon after , and for unknown reasons , Urbanus was stripped of his rank , imprisoned , tried , and executed , all in one day of expedited proceedings . His replacement , Firmilianus , was a veteran soldier and one of Maximinus 's trusted confidants . 
 Eusebius notes that this event marked the beginning of a temporary respite from persecution . Although the precise dating of this respite is not specifically noted by Eusebius , the text of the Martyrs records no Palestinian martyrs between July 25 , 308 and November 13 , 309 . The political climate probably impinged on persecutory policy here : This was the period of the conference of Carnuntum , which met in November 308 . Maximinus probably spent the next few months in discussion with Galerius over his role in the imperial government , and did not have the time to deal with the Christians . 
 In the autumn of 309 , Maximinus resumed persecution by issuing letters to provincial governors and his praetorian prefect , the highest authority in judicial proceedings after the emperor , demanding that Christians conform to pagan customs . His new legislation called for another general sacrifice , coupled with a general offering of libations . It was even more systematic than the first , allowing no exceptions for infants or servants . <unk> ( curatores ) , strategoi , <unk> , and <unk> , who kept the records , saw to it that there were no evasions . Maximinus introduced some innovations to the process , making him the only known persecuting emperor to have done so . This edict now required food sold in the marketplaces to be covered in libation . Maximinus sent sentries to stand guard at bathhouses and city gates to ensure that all customers sacrificed . He issued copies of the fictitious Acts of Pilate to encourage popular hatred of Christ . Prostitutes confessed , under judicial torture , to having engaged in debaucheries with Christians . Bishops were reassigned to work as stable boys for the Imperial horse guard or keepers of the Imperial camels . 
 Maximinus also worked for a revival of pagan religion . He appointed high priests for each province , men who were to wear white robes and supervise daily worship of the gods . Maximinus also demanded that vigorous restoration work be done on decaying temples within his domain . 
 The next few months saw the worst extremes of the persecution . On December 13 , 309 , Firmilianus condemned some Egyptians arrested at Ascalon ( Ashkelon , Israel ) on their way to visit the confessors in Cilicia . Three were beheaded ; the rest lost their left feet and right eyes . On January 10 , 310 , Peter and the bishop Asclepius from the dualist Christian sect <unk> , both from <unk> , near ( Eleutheropolis , Israel ) , were burned alive . On February 16 , Pamphilus and his six companions were executed . In the aftermath , four more members of Pamphilus 's household were martyred for their displays of sympathy for the condemned . The last martyrs before Galerius 's edict of toleration were executed on March 5 and 7 . Then the executions stopped . Eusebius does not explain this sudden halt , but it coincides with the replacement of Firmilianus with <unk> , a man appointed at some time before Galerius 's death . The replacement is only attested to via epigraphic remains , like stone inscriptions ; Eusebius does not mention <unk> anywhere in his writings . 
 = = = = After Galerius 's edict of toleration = = = = 
 After Galerius 's death , Maximinus seized Asia Minor . Even after Galerius 's edict of toleration in 311 , Maximinus continued to persecute . His name is absent from the list of emperors publishing Galerius 's edict of toleration , perhaps through later suppression . Eusebius states that Maximinus complied with its provisions only reluctantly . Maximinus told his praetorian prefect Sabinus to write to provincial governors , requesting that they and their subordinates ignore " that letter " ( Galerius 's edict ) . Christians were to be free from molestation , and their mere Christianity would not leave them open to criminal charges . Unlike Galerius 's edict , however , Maximinus 's letter made no provisions for Christian assembly , nor did he suggest that Christians build more churches . 
 Maximinus issued orders in Autumn 311 forbidding Christians to congregate in cemeteries . After issuing these orders , he was approached by embassies from cities within his domain , demanding he begin a general persecution . Lactantius and Eusebius state that these petitions were not voluntary , but had been made at Maximinus 's behest . Maximinus began persecuting Church leaders before the end of 311 . Peter of Alexandria was beheaded on November 26 , 311 . Lucian of Antioch was executed in Nicomedia on January 7 , 312 . According to Eusebius , many Egyptian bishops suffered the same fate . According to Lactantius , Maximinus ordered confessors to have " their eyes gouged out , their hands cut off , their feet amputated , their noses or ears severed " . Antioch asked Maximinus if it could forbid Christians from living in the city . In response , Maximinus issued a rescript encouraging every city to expel its Christians . This rescript was published in Sardis on April 6 , 312 , and in Tyre by May or June . There are three surviving copies of Maximinus 's rescript , in Tyre , <unk> ( <unk> , Turkey ) , and <unk> . They are all essentially identical . To address a complaint from Lycia and Pamphylia about the " detestable pursuits of the atheists [ Christians ] " , Maximinus promised the provincials whatever they wanted — perhaps an exemption from the poll tax . 
 When Maximinus received notice that Constantine had succeeded in his campaign against Maxentius , he issued a new letter restoring Christians their former liberties . The text of this letter , which is preserved in Eusebius 's Historia Ecclesiastica , however , suggests that the initiative was Maximinus 's alone , and not that of Constantine or Licinius . It is also the only passage in the ancient sources providing Maximinus 's rationale for his actions , without the hostility of Lactantius and Eusebius . Maximinus states that he supported Diocletian and Galerius 's early legislation but , upon being made Caesar , came to realize the drain such policies would have on his labor force , and began to employ persuasion without coercion . He goes on to assert that he resisted petitions from <unk> to forbid Christians from their city ( an event Eusebius does not otherwise record ) , and that when he accepted the demands of deputations from other cities he was only following imperial custom . Maximinus concludes his letter by referencing the letter he wrote after Galerius 's edict , asking that his subordinates be lenient . He does not refer to his early letters , which encouraged avid persecution . 
 In the early spring of 313 , as Licinius advanced against Maximinus , the latter resorted to savagery in his dealings with his own citizens , and his Christians in particular . In May 313 , Maximinus issued one more edict of toleration , hoping to persuade Licinius to stop advancing , and win more public support . For the first time , Maximinus issued a law which offered comprehensive toleration and the means to effectively secure it . As in his earlier letter , Maximinus is apologetic but one @-@ sided . Maximinus absolves himself for all the failings of his policy , locating fault with local judges and enforcers instead . He frames the new universal toleration as a means of removing all ambiguity and extortion . Maximinus then declares full freedom of religious practice , encourages Christians to rebuild their churches , and pledges to restore Christian property lost in the persecution . The edict changed little : Licinius defeated Maximinus at the Battle of Adrianople on April 30 , 313 ; the now @-@ powerless Maximinus committed suicide at Tarsus in the summer of 313 . On June 13 , Licinius published the Edict of Milan in Nicomedia . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 In Eusebius ' Martyrs of Palestine , Egypt is covered only in passing . When Eusebius remarks on the region , however , he writes of tens , twenties , even hundreds of Christians put to death on a single day , which would seem to make Egypt the region that suffered the most during the persecutions . According to one report that Barnes calls " plausible , if unverifiable " , 660 Christians were killed in Alexandria alone between 303 and 311 . In Egypt , Peter of Alexandria fled his namesake city early on in the persecution , leaving the Church leaderless . Meletius , bishop of <unk> ( Asyut ) , took up the job in his place . Meletius performed ordinations without Peter 's permission , which caused some bishops to complain to Peter . Meletius soon refused to treat Peter as any kind of authority , and expanded his operations into Alexandria . According to Epiphanius of Salamis , the Church split into two sections : the " Catholic Church " , under Peter , and , after Peter 's execution , Alexander ; and the " Church of the Martyrs " under Meletius . When the two groups found themselves imprisoned together in Alexandria during the persecution , Peter of Alexandria drew up a curtain in the middle of their cell . He then said : " There are some who are of my view , let them come over on my side , and those of <unk> 's view , stay with <unk> . " Thus divided , the two sects went on with their affairs , purposely ignoring each other 's existence . The schism continued to grow throughout the persecution , even with its leaders in jail , and would persist long after the deaths of both Peter and Meletius . Fifty @-@ one bishoprics are attested for Egypt in 325 ; fifteen are only known otherwise as seats of the schismatic Church . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Diocletianic persecution was ultimately unsuccessful . As one modern historian has put it , it was simply " too little and too late " . Christians were never purged systematically in any part of the empire , and Christian evasion continually undermined the edicts ' enforcement . Some bribed their way to freedom . The Christian <unk> escaped on a technicality : To avoid sacrificing in court , he gave his brother power of attorney , and had him do it instead . Many simply fled . Eusebius , in his Vita Constantini , declared that " once more the fields and woods received the worshippers of God " . To contemporary theologians , there was no sin in this behavior . Lactantius held that Christ himself had encouraged it , and Bishop Peter of Alexandria quoted Matthew 10 : 23 ( " when they persecute you in this city , flee ye into another " ) in support of the tactic . 
 The pagan crowd was more sympathetic to the Christians ' sufferings than they had been in the past . Lactantius , Eusebius and Constantine write of revulsion at the excesses of the persecutors — Constantine of executioners " wearied out , and disgusted at the cruelties " they had committed . The fortitude of the martyrs in the face of death had earned the faith respectability in the past , though it may have won few converts . The thought of martyrdom , however , sustained Christians under trial and in prison , hardening their faith . Packaged with the promise of eternal life , martyrdom proved attractive for the growing segment of the pagan population which was , to quote Dodds , " in love with death " . To use Tertullian 's famous phrase , the blood of the martyrs was the seed of the Church . 
 By 324 , Constantine , the Christian convert , ruled the entire empire alone . Christianity became the greatest beneficiary of imperial largesse . The persecutors had been routed . As the historian J. <unk> has written : " The final result of the Great Persecution provided a testimonial to the truth of Christianity which it could have won in no other way . " After Constantine , the Christianization of the Roman empire would continue apace . Under Theodosius I ( r . 378 – 95 ) , Christianity became the state religion . By the 5th century , Christianity was the empire 's predominant faith , and filled the same role paganism had at the end of the 3rd century . Because of the persecution , however , a number of Christian communities were riven between those who had complied with imperial authorities ( <unk> ) and those who had refused . In Africa , the Donatists , who protested the election of the alleged traditor Caecilian to the bishopric of Carthage , continued to resist the authority of the central Church until after 411 . The <unk> in Egypt left the Egyptian Church similarly divided . 
 In future generations , both Christians and pagans would look back on Diocletian as , in the words of theologian Henry Chadwick , " the embodiment of irrational ferocity " . To medieval Christians , Diocletian was the most loathsome of all Roman emperors . From the 4th century on , Christians would describe the " Great " persecution of Diocletian 's reign as a bloodbath . The Liber Pontificalis , a collection of biographies of the popes , alleges 17 @,@ 000 martyrs within a single thirty @-@ day period . In the 4th century , Christians created a " cult of martyrs " in homage to the fallen . <unk> portrayed a persecution far more extensive than the real one had been , and the Christians responsible for this cult were loose with the facts . Their " heroic age " of martyrs , or " Era of Martyrs " , was held to begin with Diocletian 's accession to the emperorship in 284 , rather than 303 , when persecutions actually began ; they fabricated a large number of martyrs ' tales ( indeed , most surviving martyrs ' tales are forgeries ) , exaggerated the facts in others , and embroidered true accounts with miraculous details . Of the surviving martyrs ' acts , only those of Agnes , Sebastian , Felix and <unk> , and Marcellinus and Peter are even remotely historical . These traditional accounts were first questioned in the Enlightenment , when Henry Dodwell , Voltaire , and , most famously , Edward Gibbon questioned traditional accounts of the Christian martyrs . 
 In the final chapter of the first volume of his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire ( 1776 ) , Gibbon claims that Christians had greatly exaggerated the scale of the persecutions they suffered : 
 After the church had triumphed over all her enemies , the interest as well as vanity of the captives prompted them to magnify the merit of their respective suffering . A convenient distance of time and place gave an ample scope to the progress of fiction ; and the frequent instances which might be alleged of holy martyrs , whose wounds had been instantly healed , whose strength had been renewed , and whose lost members had miraculously been restored , were extremely convenient for the purpose of removing every difficulty , and of silencing every objection . The most extravagant legends , as they conduced to the honour of the church , were applauded by the incredulous multitude , countenanced by the power of the clergy , and attested by the suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical history . 
 Throughout his history , Gibbon implies that the early Church undermined traditional Roman virtues , and thereby impaired the health of civil society . When Gibbon sought to reduce the numbers of the martyrs in his History , he was perceived as intending to diminish the Church and deny sacred history . He was attacked for his suspected irreligion in print . The contemporary classical scholar Richard Porson mocked Gibbon , writing that his humanity never slept , " unless when women are ravished , or the Christians persecuted " . 
 Later historians , however , took Gibbon 's emphases even further . As Marxist historian G.E.M. de Ste . Croix put it in 1954 , " The so @-@ called Great Persecution has been exaggerated in the Christian tradition to an extent which even Gibbon did not fully appreciate . " In 1972 , the ecclesiastical Protestant historian Hermann <unk> was embarrassed to admit to his colleagues that his sympathies lay with the Christians rather than their persecutors . <unk> Frend guesses that 3 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 500 Christians were killed in the persecution . Although the number of <unk> true martyrs ' tales has fallen , and estimates of the total casualty rate have been reduced , some modern writers are less skeptical than Gibbon of the severity of the persecution . As the author Stephen Williams wrote in 1985 , " even allowing a margin for invention , what remains is terrible enough . Unlike Gibbon , we live in an age which has experienced similar things , and knows how unsound is that civilised smile of incredulity at such reports . Things can be , have been , every bit as bad as our worst imaginings . " 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 = Advance Wars : Dual Strike = 
 Advance Wars : Dual Strike , known in Japan as Famicom Wars DS ( <unk> , <unk> Wōzu Dī Esu ) , is a turn @-@ based tactics video game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . It is the third installment in the Advance Wars series ( first on DS media ) and was released in Japan on June 23 , 2005 , in North America on August 22 , 2005 , in Europe on September 30 , 2005 , and in Australia on March 22 , 2006 . It was released on the European Wii U Virtual Console on March 3 , 2016 . The game is preceded by Advance Wars 2 : Black Hole Rising and Advance Wars and succeeded by Advance Wars : Days of Ruin . Advance Wars is the international title of the Wars video game series , which dates back to the Family Computer game Famicom Wars in 1988 . 
 The storyline is a continuation of the previous series and is set in the new location of Omega Land . Black Hole has returned under the leadership of a new commander who seeks to give himself eternal life by draining the energy of Omega Land . The Allied Nations struggle to overcome this threat and are eventually joined by several former Black Hole commanding officers in an effort to save the land . 
 Advance Wars : Dual Strike was well @-@ received , receiving an aggregate score of 90 % and at both Game Rankings and Metacritic . It also won several awards , including " Best Strategy Game for the DS " from IGN in 2005 . It sold more than 35 @,@ 000 copies in its first ten weeks in Japan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player 's objective in Dual Strike is to defeat the enemy army with their own army . Except in some campaign missions with special objectives , there are two ways to defeat an opponent : destroy all of the enemy 's units or capture their headquarters . The battle system is turn @-@ based tactics . Two to four armies , each headed by one or two commanding officers ( COs ) , take turns building and commanding units on grid @-@ based maps . Every turn , units , which consist of ground , sea and air units , can move across the different types of terrain and attack enemy units or perform other actions , such as submerging a submarine or resupplying friendly units . Many factors can affect the battle , such as fog of war , a phenomenon that prevents players from seeing enemy units other than those in the visual range of their units ; various weather conditions which change the terrain effects of the entire map ; and CO powers . 
 = = = COs and CO powers = = = 
 All of the COs from the previous two games in the series , aside from Sturm , return in Dual Strike . In addition , nine new COs make an appearance ; two for Orange Star , one each for Blue Moon , Yellow Comet , and Green Earth , and four for Black Hole , resulting in a total of 27 COs . 
 The namesake of Dual Strike is the ability to use two COs in a battle to command a single army . By using two COs , the weaknesses of each CO can effectively be covered by switching COs mid @-@ battle . In addition , when using two COs , a new CO power named " Tag Power , " or " Dual Strike , " can be used . It allows players to use both COs ' Super CO powers consecutively in the same turn , and effectively allows the player to have two turns . 
 Finally , COs in Dual Strike gain experience and can be promoted after each victorious battle in the War Room or Campaign . Higher ranked COs have access to different skills to tune and enhance their fighting styles . Abilities vary in type and benefit ; some improve attack or defense , others increase the benefits of certain units or terrain types , while others affect the player 's money flow . The star ranked skills must be unlocked by completing the Campaign modes . Each CO can use a maximum of four skills at once . Abilities can be changed around as many times as needed , but cannot be changed during a mission . 
 = = = Dual Front = = = 
 The DS 's two screens provide new ways of presenting a round of battle in Dual Strike . The bottom screen is where the main battle takes place , while the top screen is used to display the terrain and unit intelligence . However , in some missions , the top screen shows a second front . The second front is a second battle that is waged simultaneously with the battle on the lower screen , which is integral to some missions . The player can change the top screen back to the intel screen and vice versa , and units in the first front can be sent to the second . Units sent to the second front cannot , however , be sent back to the first front . 
 When battling on two fronts , one CO on each team takes control of one front . The CO on the second front can either be controlled by a computer or by the player . If the battle on the second front ends before the battle on the first front , the winning CO will join their teammate on the first front or other advantages will be given to the victor . Any remaining units on the second front are then added to the victor 's CO power meter . 
 = = = New units and properties = = = 
 There are seven new units . Three units operate on land : the <unk> , a Green Earth @-@ developed tank that is the most powerful direct attack unit but has severely limited ammunition for its main cannon and a small movement range ; the <unk> , an indirect @-@ fire vehicle which can only travel on pipelines or bases , but has a large movement and firing range ; and the Oozium , a gelatinous blob which can only move one space per turn , but it can destroy any enemy it comes into contact with instantly . 
 There are two new naval units : the " Black Boat " , which can repair and resupply any allied unit next to it , while capable of transporting two infantry / mech units ; and the aircraft carrier , which can house two air units and is armed with surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . In addition , the cruiser 's missiles are now able to damage all naval units , making it more versatile . 
 A new air unit , the stealth fighter , has the ability to use stealth and turn invisible to all but adjacent enemy units . Similar to the submarine , the stealth bomber uses more fuel when stealth is activated ; however , it can only be attacked by certain units . The other new air unit is the Black Bomb , which can self @-@ destruct , damaging units around it . 
 Other new features include the Com Tower , a new property that , when captured , increases the firepower of all allied units . However , it provides no funds and cannot perform repairs . Black Crystals heal Black Hole units surrounding them . The Black Obelisk , which has the approximate look of a Black Cannon , also functions like a Black Crystal . The Rain weather effect now triggers Fog of War . Lastly , a new weather effect called the Sandstorm decreases both visibility and the attack range of all indirect fire units . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The 28 missions ( including an integrated tutorial and several secret lab missions unlocked by capturing a certain property in another mission ) in Campaign mode that make up the game 's storyline are objective @-@ based , with most requiring the player to capture an enemy property . Some missions in Dual Strike 's campaign make use of the Dual Fronts system . 
 Upon completing a mission , the player is awarded a rank , from C ( lowest ) to S ( highest ) . The ranks are based on three categories : Power , Technique , and Speed . Power is determined by the number of enemy units destroyed in one turn , Technique by how many of the player 's units are destroyed , and Speed by how fast the mission is completed . All three categories are rated on a scale from 0 – 100 , and added together to form a numerical ranking from 0 – 300 , in addition to the letter ranking . These are converted to points and are added to the player 's overall points , which can be used to purchase War Room and Versus maps and COs . Bonus points can also be earned by destroying certain items , such as Oozium or Black Obelisks in certain missions . 
 Hard Campaign can be unlocked , which is a more difficult version of the standard campaign . All unlocked COs can be used in Hard Campaign , including those unavailable in Normal Campaign . Three save slots are available for Campaign Mode . 
 = = = New modes = = = 
 Several new modes were added to the modes from Black Hole Rising and the original Advance Wars in Dual Strike . In addition to the old War Room , Versus , and Link modes , two new modes , named Survival and Combat , have been added . 
 The new Survival mode is a nonstop war of attrition . Depending on the mode , players are either given limited money , turns , or time to complete a series of maps . However , victory often can be achieved by reaching preset requirements instead of satisfying the normal victory conditions . The ranking received depends on the amount of the given resource remaining at the end of the maps . 
 Combat , the other new mode , is an entirely new real @-@ time rendition of the game . While the victory conditions for Combat are identical to any other battle , where the goal is to capture the opponent 's HQ or defeat all enemies , players do not take turns . Instead , players fight in real time , controlling one of four different types of units , Mech , Recon , Tank , and Artillery , at a time with the touchpad . Each has strengths and weaknesses when graded in the four categories of firepower , rate of fire , movement speed , and capture speed , and their respective strengths and weaknesses resemble those of the units in the main game . Players must fight through six levels , each on a different map against a different CO . Units are bought before the first game of each set and must last through all six levels , as extra units cannot be purchased and can only be gained when a factory is captured . Multiplayer for this mode is supported , unlike Survival . Up to eight players on up to four teams can battle . Computer @-@ controlled units , which take on a gray color , may also be added into a match . A demo of Dual Strike , containing the Combat mode , can be sent wirelessly to other DS units . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Dual Strike fields extensive multiplayer modes that come in two forms : Versus mode and Link mode . In Versus mode , only one DS system is used , and the single DS is passed from player to player . These matches can be set up with any combination of human players and computer @-@ controlled armies . Link mode is the same game as Versus mode gameplay @-@ wise , but each player have a separate console and a copy of Dual Strike . Two to eight people can participate in wireless multiplayer games . Maps created by players by the Map Editor can also be traded wirelessly to other players . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dual Strike stars two new characters : Jake , and Rachel , Jake 's advisor . These are the primary protagonists of Dual Strike and members of the Orange Star Army , and are accompanied by several other new protagonists , including Sasha , Grimm , and Javier , members of the Blue Moon , Yellow Comet , and Green Earth Armies respectively . 
 The Black Hole Army has returned under a new commander , Von Bolt . He is accompanied by his Bolt Guard : <unk> , <unk> , and Kindle , along with Hawke and Lash from the original Black Hole Army . Using Lash 's new Black Obelisks , Von Bolt is draining Omega Land of its energy to give him eternal life , and is also starting to use this power to produce a bio @-@ weapon named Oozium 238 , a strange slime @-@ based monster that devours anything in its path . However , Hawke notices the energy draining ( which also is turning Omega Land into a desert ) and questions its use . After uncovering Von Bolt 's plot , Hawke is betrayed and Von Bolt attempts to swarm Hawke and Lash with Oozium 238 . After the Allied Nations ’ COs save Hawke and Lash , the COs , along with Hawke and Lash , begin to turn the tide against the Black Hole Army . Both Hawke and Lash provide valuable intelligence of the Black Hole weaponry and its plans for Omega Land . 
 With this information , the Allied Nations slowly corner the Black Hole Army , leading to a battle in the middle of the Crimson Sea . After destroying the last Black Obelisk , the Allied Nations proceed to the final battle where they fight Von Bolt and a giant <unk> known as the Grand Bolt . After destroying the Grand Bolt , Hawke ( or Jake , based on the player 's decision ) destroys Von Bolt 's life support chair , supposedly causing both Hawke and Von Bolt to die in the aftermath . With the Black Obelisks gone , Omega Land begins returning to normal . However , Hawke is revealed to have stolen Von Bolt 's chair and escaped , leaving Von Bolt either dead or barely alive . With the power in Von Bolt 's chair Hawke revives all the land . 
 = = Development = = 
 On October 7 , 2004 , Dual Strike was first announced under the title Advance Wars : DS as a first @-@ party DS release in a Nintendo press release and it was to be released in the year following the DS 's release . In March , the Japanese release date was revealed to be June 23 , 2005 , under the title Famicom Wars DS . The American release date was also set to October 9 , 2005 . In May , the game was showcased at the 2005 Electronic Entertainment Expo , when the official title was also announced . The final American release date for Dual Strike was set to August 22 , 2005 and the European release date was set for September 30 , 2005 . 
 Advance Wars : Dual Strike was developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo . The executive producer was Satoru Iwata , the CEO of Nintendo . The producer was Tohru <unk> and the game was directed by Makoto <unk> . 
 Wireless play was originally planned for the game . However , wireless was not part of the Electronic Entertainment Expo build and Nintendo was therefore unable to demonstrate its capabilities . By the final release build of the game , local wireless , but not Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi , was implemented and supported two to four players in Normal Battle mode , two players in DS Battle , and up to 8 players in Combat mode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Advance Wars : Dual Strike received critical acclaim , gaining an aggregate score of 90 % and at both Game Rankings and Metacritic . 1UP.com commented that the game " is a much greater step forward in the series than its predecessor , Advance Wars : Black Hole Rising " and that the game was greatly enhanced by the addition of a second screen . While the game had drawbacks , including the dialogue , the lack of depth in the Combat mode , and the unbalanced COs , it was also cited as " the standard against which other strategy games , handheld or otherwise , should be judged . " 
 IGN praised the game for being " a fantastic single player game ... enhanced further with multiplayer focus for single and multiple cart users . " Though IGN thought the game " doesn 't offer anything entirely new or unique , " the game contains " some of the most engrossing turn @-@ based action on the Nintendo DS system . " 
 In general , the game was generally found to be extremely similar to previous games , which had both drawbacks and benefits . GameSpot commented that the visuals were all felt " recycled " but the game had great depth and addictive regardless . Game Informer considered the game " the first must @-@ have title for the system " while the innovations improved an already solid core gameplay . Similarly , EuroGamer commented that the game correctly ported the game to DS without losing the essence of the GBA game . The " variety and depth " did not cause a loss of the " unique and enjoyable " aspects of the game . 
 Advance Wars : Dual Strike was the 301st best @-@ selling game of 2005 in Japan , selling around 35 @,@ 000 copies in its first ten weeks . 
 The game was awarded the Editor 's Choice Award by both IGN and GameSpot . GameSpy also awarded the game " Game of the Month " in August 2005 . It also won Best Strategy Game for the DS and was a runner @-@ up for the Best Strategy Game on any platform in 2005 . 
 = Delaware Route 36 = 
 Delaware Route 36 ( DE 36 ) is a state highway in Sussex County , Delaware . It runs in a generally northeast – southwest direction from DE 404 in Scotts Corner to Slaughter Beach , a town along the Delaware Bay . The road runs through the northern portion of Sussex County , passing through rural areas along Greenwood and Milford . The route intersects DE 16 and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Greenwood and US 113 , DE 1 Business ( DE 1 Bus . ) , and DE 1 in Milford . DE 36 was built as a state highway in stages during the 1920s and 1930s . The road was designated by 1938 from DE 16 east of Greenwood to Fort Saulsbury ( present @-@ day Slaughter Beach ) and was extended west to DE 404 by 1994 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 36 begins at an intersection with DE 404 in Scotts Corner , heading the northeast on two @-@ lane undivided Scotts Store Road . The road runs through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes , coming to an intersection with DE 16 . At this point , DE 16 turns east to become concurrent with DE 36 on Hickman Road . The road enters Greenwood and becomes Market Street , passing several homes along with a few businesses . The highway crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line before it intersects US 13 on the eastern edge of Greenwood . Past this intersection , DE 16 / DE 36 leaves Greenwood and becomes Beach Highway , crossing the Nanticoke River . 
 In Saint Johnstown , DE 36 splits from DE 16 by turning to the northeast onto Shawnee Road . The road heads through agricultural areas with some woods and homes . Farther northeast , the road reaches the city of Milford . Upon reaching Milford , the route runs through residential areas and intersects US 113 . Past this intersection , DE 36 becomes Lakeview Avenue and passes to the west of <unk> Milford Memorial hospital . The road forms the eastern border of Silver Lake , a lake along the Mispillion River , and crosses Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . After this , DE 36 continues to the east on Causey Avenue past homes and businesses . In the downtown area of Milford , the route turns north onto Walnut Street briefly before it heads east on Southeast Front Street . The route passes through the residential eastern part of Milford where it intersects DE 1 Bus . 
 DE 36 leaves Milford and heads to the northeast on Cedar Beach Road , entering a mix of farmland , woodland , and homes . The road turns to the east , running a short distance to the south of the Mispillion River as it comes to a diamond interchange with the DE 1 bypass of Milford . Past this interchange , the route continues to the northeast . DE 36 winds east through a mix of farmland and marshland and comes to a drawbridge over the Cedar Creek in Slaughter Beach . The DE 36 designation ends here , but the road continues past the drawbridge into Slaughter Beach where it becomes Bay Avenue and turns south to run along the Delaware Bay . 
 DE 36 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 9 @,@ 886 vehicles at the eastern edge of Greenwood to a low of 871 vehicles at the eastern terminus . None of DE 36 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , a section of present @-@ day DE 36 southwest of Milford was completed as a state highway while a portion leading further northeast into Milford was under contract as one ; the remainder of the route existed as an unimproved county road . The portion leading into Milford was completed four years later , in addition to the segment of the road through Greenwood . A year later , the state highway was under proposal between Greenwood and southwest of Milford . The state highway between Greenwood and Milford was finished in 1929 . All of current DE 36 was completed by 1931 except for the easternmost part of the road . DE 36 was designated to follow its current alignment between DE 16 east of Greenwood and Fort Saulsbury ( now Slaughter Beach ) by 1938 , with the entire route paved except for the part near Fort Saulsbury . The unpaved portion was paved a year later . DE 36 was extended westward to its current terminus at DE 404 by 1994 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = Carsten Borchgrevink = 
 Carsten Egeberg Borchgrevink ( 1 December 1864 – 21 April 1934 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norwegian polar explorer and a pioneer of modern Antarctic travel . He was the precursor of Robert Falcon Scott , Ernest Shackleton , Roald Amundsen and other more famous names associated with the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration . In 1898 – 1900 he led the British @-@ financed Southern Cross Expedition , which established a new Farthest South record at 78 ° 50'S . 
 Borchgrevink began his exploring career in 1894 by joining a Norwegian whaling expedition , during which he became one of the first persons to set foot on the Antarctic mainland . This achievement helped him to obtain backing for his Southern Cross Expedition , which became the first to overwinter on the Antarctic mainland , and the first to visit the Great Ice Barrier since the expedition of Sir James Ross nearly sixty years previously . However , the expedition 's successes , including the Farthest South , were received with only moderate interest by the public and by the British geographical establishment , whose attention was by then focused on Scott 's upcoming National Antarctic Expedition . Some of Borchgrevink 's colleagues were critical of his leadership , and his own accounts of the expedition were regarded as journalistic and unreliable . 
 After the Southern Cross Expedition , Borchgrevink was one of three scientists sent to the Caribbean in 1902 by the National Geographic Society , to report on the aftermath of the Mount Pelée disaster . Thereafter he settled in Oslo , leading a life mainly away from public attention . His pioneering work was subsequently recognised and honoured by several countries , and in 1912 he received a handsome tribute from Roald Amundsen , conqueror of the South Pole . In 1930 , Britain 's Royal Geographical Society finally acknowledged Borchgrevink 's contribution to polar exploration and awarded him its Patron 's Medal . The Society acknowledged in its citation that justice had not previously been done to the work of the Southern Cross Expedition . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carsten Borchgrevink was born in Oslo , the son of a Norwegian lawyer , Henrik Christian Borchgrevink , and an English mother Annie , née Ridley . The family lived in the Uranienborg neighbourhood , where Roald Amundsen , an occasional childhood playmate , also grew up . Borchgrevink was educated at Gjertsen College , Oslo , and later ( 1885 – 88 ) at the Royal Saxon Academy of Forestry at <unk> , Saxony , in Germany . 
 According to the historian Roland Huntford , Borchgrevink was of a restless nature , with a passion for adventure which took him , after his forestry training , to Australia . For four years he worked with government surveying teams in Queensland and New South Wales before settling in the small town of <unk> , where he became a teacher in languages and natural sciences at <unk> Academy . His initial interest in polar exploration developed from reading press reports about the work of local scientists on the first Australian Antarctic Exploration Committee . This organisation , founded in 1886 , was investigating the possibility of establishing permanent scientific research stations in the Antarctic regions . These plans were not realised ; it was a revival of interest in commercial whaling in the early 1890s that gave Borchgrevink the opportunity , in 1894 , to sign up for a Norwegian expedition to Antarctica . 
 = = Whaling voyage = = 
 The expedition that Borchgrevink joined was organised by Henryk Bull , a Norwegian businessman and entrepreneur who , like Borchgrevink , had settled in Australia in the late 1880s . Bull planned to make a sealing and whaling voyage into Antarctic waters ; after failing to interest Melbourne 's learned societies in a cost @-@ sharing venture of a commercial – scientific nature , he returned to Norway to organise his expedition there . He met Svend Foyn , the 84 @-@ year @-@ old " father of modern whaling " and inventor of the harpoon gun . With Foyn 's help he acquired the whaler Kap Nor ( " North Cape " ) , which he renamed Antarctic . Bull hired an experienced whaling captain , Leonard Kristensen , and with a crew and a small scientific team left Norway in September 1893 . When Borchgrevink learned that Antarctic was due to visit Melbourne in September 1894 , he hurried there hoping to find a vacancy . He was fortunate ; William Speirs Bruce , later an Antarctic expedition leader in his own right , had intended to join Bull 's expedition as a natural scientist but could not reach the ship before it left Norway . This created an opening for Borchgrevink , who met Bull in Melbourne and persuaded him to take him on as a deck @-@ hand and part @-@ time scientist . 
 During the following months , Antarctic 's sealing activities around the sub @-@ Antarctic islands were successful , but whales proved difficult to find . Bull and Kristensen decided to take the ship further south , to areas where the presence of whales had been reported by earlier expeditions . The ship penetrated a belt of pack ice and sailed into the Ross Sea , but whales were still elusive . On 17 January 1895 a landing was made at Possession Island , where Sir James Clark Ross had planted the British flag in 1841 . Bull and Borchgrevink left a message in a canister there , to prove their presence there . On the island Borchgrevink found a lichen , the first plant life discovered south of the Antarctic Circle . On 24 January the ship reached the vicinity of Cape Adare , at the northern extremity of the Victoria Land coastline of the Antarctic mainland . Ross 's 1841 expedition been unable to land here , but as Antarctic neared the cape , conditions were calm enough for a boat to be lowered . A party including Bull , Kristensen , Borchgrevink and others then headed for a shingled foreshore below the cape . Exactly who went ashore first became a matter of dispute , with both Kristensen and Borchgrevink contending for the honour along with a 17 @-@ year @-@ old New Zealand seaman , Alexander von Tunzelmann , who said that he had " leapt out to hold the boat steady " . The party claimed this as the first landing on the Antarctic mainland , although they may have been preceded by the Anglo @-@ American sealing captain John Davis , on the Antarctic Peninsula on 7 February 1821 , or by other whaling expeditions . 
 While ashore at Cape Adare , Borchgrevink collected further specimens of rocks and lichens , the latter of which would prove of great interest to the scientific community , which had doubted the ability of vegetation to survive so far south . He also made a careful study of the foreshore , assessing its potential as a site where a future expedition might land and establish winter quarters . When Antarctic reached Melbourne , Bull and Borchgrevink left the ship . Each hoped to raise funds for a further Antarctic expedition , but their efforts were unsuccessful . An animosity developed between them , possibly because of their differing accounts of the voyage on the Antarctic ; each emphasised his own role without fully acknowledging that of the other . 
 = = Making plans = = 
 = = = International Geographical Congress 1895 = = = 
 To promote his developing ideas for an expedition that would overwinter on the Antarctic continent at Cape Adare , Borchgrevink hurried to London , where the Royal Geographical Society was hosting the Sixth International Geographical Congress . On 1 August 1895 he addressed the conference , giving an account of the Cape Adare foreshore as a location where a scientific expedition might establish itself for the Antarctic winter . He described the site as " a safe situation for houses , tents and provisions " , and said there were indications that in this place " the unbound forces of the Antarctic Circle do not display the full severity of their powers " . He also suggested that the interior of the continent might be accessible from the foreshore by an easy route — a " gentle slope " . He ended his speech by declaring his willingness to lead an expedition there himself . Hugh Robert Mill , the Royal Geographical Society 's librarian , who was present at the Congress , reported reactions to the speech : " His blunt manner and abrupt speech stirred the academic discussions with a fresh breeze of realism . Nobody liked Borchgrevink very much at that time , but he had a dynamic quality and a set purpose to get out again to the unknown South that struck some of us as <unk> well for exploration " . The Congress did not , however , endorse Borchgrevink 's ideas . Instead , it passed a general resolution in support of Antarctic exploration , to the effect that " the various scientific societies throughout the world should urge , in whatever way seems to them most effective , that this work be undertaken before the close of the century " . 
 = = = Seeking support = = = 
 For the next two years Borchgrevink travelled in Europe and in Australia , seeking support and backing for his expedition ideas without success . One of those with whom he sought to join forces was William Speirs Bruce , who was planning his own Antarctic expedition . Their joint plans foundered when Borchgrevink , who had severed relations with Henryk Bull , learned that Bruce was in discussions with him ; " I regret therefore that we cannot collaborate " , wrote Borchgrevink to Bruce . He also discovered that the Royal Geographical Society had been harbouring its own plans for an Antarctic expedition since 1893 . Under the influence of its president , Sir Clements Markham , this RGS project was envisaged not only as a scientific endeavour , but as an attempt to relive the former glories of Royal Naval polar exploration . This vision would eventually develop into the National Antarctic Expedition with the Discovery , under Captain Scott , and it was this that attracted the interest of the learned societies rather than Borchgrevink 's more modest proposals . Markham was fiercely opposed to private ventures that might divert financial support from his project , and Borchgrevink found himself starved of practical help : " It was up a steep hill " , he wrote , " that I had to roll my Antarctic boulder . " 
 = = = Sir George Newnes = = = 
 During his search for backers , Borchgrevink met Sir George Newnes , a leading British magazine publisher and cinema pioneer whose portfolio included the Westminster Gazette , Tit @-@ Bits , Country Life and the Strand Magazine . It was not unusual for publishers to support exploration — Newnes 's great rival Alfred Harmsworth ( later Lord Northcliffe ) had recently financed Frederick Jackson 's expedition to Franz Josef Land , and had pledged financial backing to the National Antarctic Expedition . Newnes was sufficiently impressed by Borchgrevink to offer the full costs of his proposed expedition — around £ 40 @,@ 000 , ( at least £ 3 million in 2008 values ) . This generosity infuriated Sir Clements Markham and the geographical establishment , who saw Borchgrevink as a penniless Norwegian nobody who had secured British money which they believed ought to have been theirs . Markham maintained an attitude of hostility and contempt towards Borchgrevink , and chastised Mill for attending the launch of his expedition . 
 Newnes stipulated that the expedition should sail under a British flag , and should be styled the " British Antarctic Expedition " . In the event , of the total party of 29 , only two were British , with one Australian and the rest Norwegian . Despite this , Borchgrevink took steps to emphasise the expedition 's British character , flying the personal flag of the Duke of York and taking 500 bamboo poles with miniature Union Jacks for , as he put it , " purpose of survey and extension of the British Empire " . 
 = = Southern Cross Expedition = = 
 = = = Winter in Antarctica = = = 
 With funding assured , Borchgrevink purchased the whaling ship Pollux , renamed her Southern Cross , and had her fitted out for Antarctic service . Southern Cross sailed from London on 22 August 1898 , and after a three @-@ week pause in Hobart , Tasmania , reached Cape Adare on 17 February 1899 . Here , on the site which Borchgrevink had described to the Congress , the expedition set up the first ever shore base on the Antarctic continent — in the midst of a penguin colony . It was named " Camp Ridley " in honour of Borchgrevink 's mother . On 2 March the ship departed for New Zealand to winter there , leaving a shore party of 10 with their provisions , equipment and 70 dogs . These were the first dogs brought to the Antarctic ; likewise , the expedition pioneered the use there of the Primus stove , invented in Sweden six years earlier . 
 Louis Bernacchi , the party 's Australian physicist , was later to write : " In many respects , Borchgrevink was not a good leader " . Borchgrevink was evidently no autocrat but , Bernacchi said , without the framework of an accepted hierarchy a state of " democratic anarchy " prevailed , with " dirt , disorder and inactivity the order of the day " . Furthermore , as winter developed , Borchgrevink 's hopes that Cape Adare would escape the worst Antarctic weather proved false ; in fact he had chosen a site which was particularly exposed to the freezing winds blown northwards from the inland ice . As time progressed , tempers wore thin ; the party became irritable and boredom set in . There were accidents : a candle left burning caused extensive fire damage , and on another occasion several members of the party were almost asphyxiated by fumes from the stove . Borchgrevink did attempt to establish a routine , and scientific work was carried on throughout , but as he wrote himself , referring to the general lack of fellowship : " The silence roars in one 's ears " . Further lowering the group 's spirits , their zoologist , Nicolai Hanson , fell ill , failed to respond to treatment and died on 14 October 1899 . 
 When the southern winter ended and sledging activity became possible , Borchgrevink 's assumptions about an easy route to the interior were shattered ; the glaciated mountain ranges adjoining Cape Adare precluded any travel inland , restricting exploration to the immediate area around the cape . However , Borchgrevink 's basic expedition plan — to overwinter on the Antarctic continent and carry out scientific observations there — had been achieved . When Southern Cross returned at the end of January 1900 , Borchgrevink decided to abandon the camp , although there were sufficient fuel and provisions left to last another year . Instead of returning home directly , Southern Cross sailed south until it reached the Great Ice Barrier , discovered by Sir James Clark Ross during his 1839 – 43 voyage and later renamed the Ross Ice Shelf in his honour . No one had visited the Barrier since then , and Ross had been unable to effect a landing . Borchgrevink discovered an inlet in the Barrier edge ; in later years this would be named the " Bay of Whales " by Shackleton . Here , on 16 February 1900 , Borchgrevink , William Colbeck and the Sami dog @-@ handler Per Savio made the first landing on the Barrier and , with dogs and sledges , travelled 10 miles ( 16 km ) south to set a new Farthest South record at 78 ° 50'S . Southern Cross visited other Ross Sea islands before turning for home , reaching New Zealand on 1 April 1900 . Borchgrevink then took a steamer to England , arriving early in June . 
 = = = Return and reception = = = 
 The reception afforded to the expedition on its return to England was lukewarm . Public interest and attention was fixed on the forthcoming national expedition of which Robert Falcon Scott had just been appointed commander , rather than on a venture which was considered British only in name . In spite of the Southern Cross Expedition 's achievements there was still resentment in geographical circles — harboured especially by Sir Clements Markham — about Borchgrevink 's acceptance of Newnes 's gift . Also , Bruce complained that Borchgrevink had appropriated plans that he had developed but been forced to abandon . Borchgrevink 's credibility was not helped by the boastful tone sounded in various articles which were published in Newnes 's magazines , nor by the journalistic style of his rapidly written expedition account , First on the Antarctic Continent , the English edition of which appeared in 1901 . 
 In hailing his expedition as a great success , Borchgrevink spoke of " another <unk> " , an abundance of fish , seals and birds , and of " quartz , in which metals are to be seen " . In his book he listed the expedition 's main achievements : proof that an expedition could live on Victoria Land over winter ; a year 's continuous magnetic and meteorological observations ; an estimate of the current position of the South Magnetic Pole ; discoveries of new species of insects and shallow @-@ water fauna ; coastal mapping and the discovery of new islands ; the first landing on Ross Island and , finally , the scaling of the Great Ice Barrier and the sledging to 78 ° 50'S , " the furthest south ever reached by man " . Other commentators have observed that the choice of the winter site at Cape Adare had ruled out any serious geographical exploration of the Antarctic interior . The scientific results of the expedition were less than had been anticipated , due in part to the loss of some of Nicolai Hanson 's natural history notes ; Borchgrevink may have been responsible for this loss ; He would later be involved in a dispute with Hanson 's former employers , London 's Natural History Museum , over these missing notes and other specimens collected by Hanson . 
 During the years following his return Borchgrevink was honoured by the American Geographical Society , and was made a Knight of St Olaf by King Oscar II of Norway and Sweden . Later he received honours from Denmark and Austria , but in England his work was for many years largely disregarded , despite Mill 's acknowledgement of " a dashing piece of pioneer work , useful in training men for later service " . The historian David Crane suggests that if Borchgrevink had been a British naval officer , England would have taken his achievements more seriously . 
 = = Post @-@ expedition life = = 
 = = = Mount Pelée disaster = = = 
 In summer 1902 Borchgrevink was one of three geographers invited by the National Geographic Society ( NGS ) to report on the after @-@ effects of the catastrophic eruptions of Mount Pelée , on the French @-@ Caribbean island of Martinique . These eruptions , in May 1902 , had destroyed the town of Saint @-@ Pierre , with enormous loss of life . Borchgrevink visited the island in June , when the main volcanic activity had subsided , and found the mountain " perfectly quiet " , and the islanders recovered from their panic . However , he did not think that Saint @-@ Pierre would ever be inhabited again . He reported a narrow escape when , at the foot of the mountain , a jet of steam came out of the ground over which he and his party had just passed : " If it had struck any one of us we would have been scalded to death " . He later presented his report to the NGS in Washington . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On his return from Washington , Borchgrevink virtually retired into private life . On 7 September 1896 , he had married an English bride , Constance Prior Standen , with whom he settled in <unk> , in Oslo , where two sons and two daughters were born . Borchgrevink devoted himself mainly to sporting and literary activities , producing a book entitled The Game of Norway . On two occasions he apparently considered returning to the Antarctic ; in August 1902 he stated his intention to lead a new Antarctic expedition for the NGS , but nothing came of this , and a later venture , announced in Berlin in 1909 , was likewise stillborn . 
 Although he remained out of the limelight , Borchgrevink retained his interest in Antarctic matters , visiting Captain Scott shortly before the Terra Nova sailed on Scott 's last Antarctic expedition in June 1910 . When news of Scott 's fate reached the outside world , Borchgrevink paid tribute : " He was the first in the field with a finely organised expedition and the first who did systematic work on the great south polar continent " . In a letter of condolence to John Scott Keltie , the Royal Geographical Society 's secretary , Borchgrevink said of Scott : " He was a man ! " 
 In Norway differing assessments of Borchgrevink were made by the country 's polar elite : Roald Amundsen was a long @-@ time friend and supporter , whereas Fridtjof Nansen , according to Scott , spoke of him as a " tremendous fraud " . When Amundsen returned from his South Pole conquest in 1912 he paid full tribute to Borchgrevink 's pioneering work : " We must acknowledge that in ascending the Barrier , Borchgrevink opened the way to the south and threw aside the greatest obstacle to the expeditions that followed " . 
 During his later years Borchgrevink lived quietly . In 1929 , the Parliament of Norway awarded him a pension of 3 @,@ 000 Norwegian kroner . In 1930 came belated recognition from London — the Royal Geographical Society awarded him its Patron 's Medal , proclaiming that the magnitude of the difficulties overcome by Borchgrevink had initially been underestimated : " It was only after the work of Scott 's Northern Party ... that we were able to realise the improbability that any explorer could do more in the Cape Adare district than Mr Borchgrevink had accomplished . It appeared , then , that justice had not been done at the time to the pioneer work of the Southern Cross expedition , which had been carried out under the British flag and at the expense of a British benefactor . " 
 = = Death and commemoration = = 
 Carsten Borchgrevink died in Oslo on 21 April 1934 . Despite what one biographer describes as his obsessive desire to be first , and his limited formal scientific training , he has been acknowledged as a pioneer in Antarctic work and as a forerunner of later , more elaborate expeditions . A number of geographical features in Antarctica commemorate his name , including the Borchgrevink Coast of Victoria Land , between Cape Adare and Cape Washington , the Borchgrevink Glacier in Victoria Land , and the <unk> glacier in Queen Maud Land . His name is also carried by the small Antarctic fish <unk> <unk> . His expedition 's accommodation hut remains at Cape Adare , under the care of The New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust which acts as guardian to this hut and to those of Scott and Shackleton elsewhere on the continent . The Borchgrevink hut was designated by the Trust as Antarctic Specially Protected Area ( <unk> ) No. 159 in 2002 . In June 2005 the Trust adopted a management plan for its future maintenance and accessibility . 
 = Reginald Miles = 
 Brigadier Reginald Miles , CBE , DSO & Bar , MC ( 10 December 1892 – 20 October 1943 ) was a professional soldier who served in the New Zealand Military Forces during the First and Second World Wars . 
 Miles was a New Zealand entrant into the Australian Royal Military College , Duntroon , from which he graduated in 1914 . He served as an artillery officer in the First World War and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his actions during the Spring Offensive . He remained in the military after the war , holding artillery commands for the next several years . When the Second World War broke out , Miles was the Quartermaster General of the New Zealand Military Forces . In 1940 , he was seconded to the 2nd New Zealand Division as its commander of artillery . He saw action during the Battle of Greece and later during Operation Crusader in North Africa . Captured during fighting near Tobruk in late 1941 , he was held in a prisoner of war camp in Italy but escaped in April 1943 with five other officers , including fellow New Zealander James Hargest . By October , Miles had made his way to Spain where , overcome with depression , he committed suicide . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reginald Miles was born in <unk> , near Christchurch , on 10 December 1892 to William and Mary Miles , who were farmers . Educated at Rangiora High School , he was commissioned in the school cadets in 1910 . He was one of the limited number of officer cadets from New Zealand who , in 1911 , enrolled in the Royal Military College in Duntroon , Australia , as part of the college 's first intake following its establishment . 
 = = First World War = = 
 A highly rated student , Miles was in the final year of his cadetship at Duntroon when the First World War broke out . He immediately volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) and was posted to the Canterbury Infantry Battalion . He took ill before the NZEF left New Zealand for the Middle East and was discharged . On recovery , he re @-@ enlisted in the NZEF and this time was posted to a howitzer battery in the New Zealand Field Artillery . He embarked for Egypt in December 1914 with a draft of reinforcements for the NZEF . He held the rank of captain during the Gallipoli Campaign and was badly wounded in July 1915 . After he recovered , he returned to the front shortly before the evacuation from Gallipoli in December 1915 . He was briefly the adjutant of 1st Field Artillery Brigade but later transferred to 15th Battery . He served on the Western Front with this unit and participated in the Battle of the Somme . As a result of his gallantry in action he was awarded the Military Cross in December 1916 . In May 1917 he was promoted to major and appointed commander of a howitzer battery . 
 In July 1918 , Miles was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , having originally been recommended for the Victoria Cross , for his actions during the German Spring Offensive . His battery had come under threat from an advance by the enemy . He rounded up nearby infantry to reinforce his position , which had nearly exhausted its ammunition , and manned a fire trench . He then undertook a reconnaissance ahead of his position but was wounded by sniper fire . The citation for the DSO read : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . He fought his battery until the enemy were within 500 yards , and his ammunition exhausted , at the same time rallying infantry stragglers and manning a fire trench , then made a reconnaissance into a wood sending back valuable information . He was finally wounded by rifle fire at close range . 
 After recuperating from his wounds , Miles returned to active service in July as brigade major of the Field Artillery of the New Zealand Division . He was mentioned in despatches in November 1918 . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 After his return to New Zealand , Miles served as commander of Wellington Harbour 's defences . In 1924 he was posted to England to attend Staff College , Camberley , after which he undertook specialist artillery courses . He returned to New Zealand in 1926 and , after serving at Army Headquarters in Wellington , was posted to Auckland to command artillery units . While in Auckland , he was awarded the King George V Silver Jubilee Medal . In 1937 , he was promoted to colonel and appointed commander of the Northern Military District . The following year he was sent to England to attend the Imperial Defence College . He was then attached to the War Office for three months before returning to New Zealand in 1939 . In September 1939 , he was appointed Quartermaster General of the New Zealand Military Forces . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 In January 1940 , Miles was promoted to brigadier and seconded to the newly raised 2nd New Zealand Division as its Commander , Royal Artillery . His command consisted of three field regiments , one for each brigade of the division , as well as an anti @-@ tank regiment . In March 1940 , he was dispatched to Egypt , where the first elements of the division had arrived , but was then sent to England , where he would spend the rest of the year . Here he commanded a portion of the division that had been diverted there while in transit . An initial attempt to join the main part of the division in the Middle East in October 1940 was foiled when the ship he was travelling on was bombed and forced to return to England . 
 = = = Greece = = = 
 Miles served throughout the Greece campaign and played a key role in the organisation of the withdrawal of the division as it retreated ahead of the advancing Germans . His artillery allowed the New Zealand infantry to defend against attacks in daylight and then withdraw at night . The artillery was particularly vital in covering the undefended high ground on the flanks of 6th Infantry Brigade as it manned a holding position at Thermopylae . Miles was mentioned in despatches for his work during this <unk> and was also awarded the Greek Cross of Valour . He briefly took command of all New Zealand forces on Crete , to where the bulk of the division had been evacuated from Greece , but after a few days went on to Egypt and missed the subsequent Battle of Crete . Some of his artillery units had also left Crete , albeit without much of their equipment , prior to the fighting . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 After convalescing , Miles re @-@ joined the 2nd New Zealand Division in North Africa , where it was reforming after the losses incurred in Greece and on Crete . He then participated in Operation Crusader . During this campaign , aimed at lifting the besieged port of Tobruk , the 2nd New Zealand Division was involved in heavy fighting around Sidi Rezegh , where Miles deployed artillery in support of the 6th Infantry Brigade . Having established a corridor to Tobruk , the commander of the division , Major General Bernard Freyberg , was becoming concerned that they would be unable to hold it open . On 30 November , he entrusted Miles with getting permission from Lieutenant General Alfred Godwin @-@ Austen , the corps commander , to withdraw into or alongside Tobruk . Tentative permission was granted but only if Sidi Rezegh could not be held . However , the same day the 6th Brigade was overrun by elements of the 15th Panzer Division . 
 Miles advised Freyberg , still unaware of the fate of 6th Brigade due to poor communications , of Godwin @-@ Austen 's instructions on his return to the 2nd New Zealand Division 's headquarters early on 1 December . Later that day , the 6th Field Regiment was overrun by German forces advancing to Belhamed . Miles , concerned about his artillery given the uncertainty surrounding the status of the 6th Brigade , was present on an inspection of the battle zone and he moved about , rifle in hand , encouraging his men , and directing them to fire their guns over open sights . Eventually , he was wounded and taken prisoner . This action was the most costly day of the war for the divisional artillery , with 275 casualties , including 96 prisoners of war , Miles among them . 
 = = = Prisoner of War = = = 
 Together with Brigadier James Hargest , the commander of the New Zealand 5th Infantry Brigade and captured around the same time , Miles arrived in the Italian prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp <unk> PG 12 in 1942 . The camp was a medieval castle near Florence , where he found himself amongst other captured high @-@ ranking personnel such as Lieutenant General Sir Philip Neame , General Sir Richard O 'Connor and Air Marshal Owen Tudor Boyd . Miles settled into camp routine and became a gardener , and was actively involved in escape attempts . Together with Hargest , he escaped through a tunnel that he helped to build and made his way to Switzerland in April 1943 . Neame received a coded letter announcing their success a fortnight later . 
 Miles was one of only three men ( Hargest was one of the others ) known to British Military Intelligence to have escaped from an Italian prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp and make their way to another country prior to the armistice with Italy . In Switzerland , Miles and Hargest split up and travelled independently . As Hargest wrote in his book Farewell Campo 12 , " I was over in Lucerne when Miles rang up to say he was off , and to suggest I should follow him later " . Having travelled as far as the Spanish frontier on 20 October 1943 , exhausted and depressed , Miles shot himself . He was buried with military honours , and escorted to his final resting place in the Figueras Municipal Cemetery by members of the British Consulate and a party of Spanish officers . Shortly before his death , his appointment as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire was confirmed . 
 Miles was posthumously awarded a bar to his DSO for his efforts in escaping from Italy . The citation for the bar , published in the New Zealand Gazette on 21 September 1944 , read : 
 " Escape from Camp 12 , P.M. 3200 , Italy ( General 's Camp ) . This camp was extremely well guarded and in consequence it was decided that the only possible method of escape would be by way of a tunnel . On the 18th September , 1942 , tunnelling began . All officers and other ranks worked , with the exception of one officer who was awaiting repatriation . The entrance to the tunnel was through a sealed up chapel which all soil was placed . The work , which consisted of a 3 foot by 3 foot tunnel , 40 feet long with a 10 foot shaft at the entrance and a 7 foot shaft at the exit , was completed by the end of February 1943 . At 2100 hours on the 29th March , 1943 , Brigadiers Miles and Hargest , in company with four other officers , escaped through the tunnel . The four other officers were subsequently recaptured . Brigadiers Miles and Hargest dressed as workmen and having walked to Florence station , caught a train to Milan where they went to the North station . They caught a train to Como and walked towards Chiasso . 2 kilometres from Chiasso they left the main road and proceeded across country until they reached a knoll south of Chiasso where the frontier lay along the opposite slope of a valley below them . The frontier consisted of heavy cyclone netting 12 foot high interlaced with brambles and with small bells near the top . They cut the wire with pliers at ground level without making much noise and came on to Swiss territory at 220 hours on the 30th March , 1943 . They gave themselves up to the police at Mendrisio and were released in Berne on the 2nd April , 1943 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Miles was survived by his four daughters from his marriage to Aimée Zita Donnelly , who he had married in Egypt in 1916 , and his second wife , Rosalind Georgette Bisset @-@ Smith , who he had wed in 1940 following the death of his first wife a few years previously . His second marriage did not result in any children . His only son was a lieutenant in the Fleet Air Arm ; he also served in the Second World War and was killed travelling aboard HMS Glorious when the ship was attacked and sunk by the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau off Norway on 8 June 1940 . 
 = = = Medals = = = 
 Miles ' medals were held by the family , which had managed to collect them after some had been lost . On 13 August 2009 , they were donated to the National Army Museum at Waiouru , New Zealand , in a presentation ceremony attended by the New Zealand Chief of Army , Major General Rhys Jones . 
 = George T. Reynolds = 
 George Thomas Reynolds ( May 27 , 1917 – April 19 , 2005 ) was an American physicist best known for his accomplishments in particle physics , biophysics and environmental science . 
 Reynolds received his PhD in physics from Princeton in 1943 , writing a thesis of the propagation of shock waves . During World War II , he joined the United States Navy , and served with the Manhattan Project . He worked with George Kistiakowsky on the design of the explosive lenses required by the implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . He was involved in the investigation of the Port Chicago disaster , served with Project Alberta on Tinian , and was part of the Manhattan Project team sent to Hiroshima and Nagasaki to inspect the bomb damage . 
 After the war , Reynolds began a long academic career at Princeton University . He was director of the Princeton 's High Energy Physics Program from 1948 until 1970 , when he became the first director of Princeton 's new Center for Environmental Studies . He combined his interest in the sea and science by working during the summers at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole , Massachusetts , where he studied marine bioluminescence . He also worked at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Thomas Reynolds was born in Trenton , New Jersey on May 27 , 1917 , the son of George W. Reynolds , a <unk> for the Pennsylvania Railroad , and his wife Laura , a secretary with the New Jersey Department of Geology . He attended Franklin Junior High School in Highland Park , New Jersey , until year 10 , and then New Brunswick High School . 
 He received a bachelor 's degree in physics from Rutgers University in 1939 . He then entered Princeton University , where was awarded a master of science degree in 1942 . He earned his PhD in 1943 under the supervision of Walker <unk> , writing his thesis " Studies in the production , propagation , and interactions of shock waves " . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 World War II was raging at this time , and someone with a doctorate in such a topic area was highly sought after by the wartime Manhattan Project , but Reynolds turned down an offer to join it . An avid surf fisherman and sailor , he aspired to join the United States Navy . He attempted to enlist , but was turned down because he wore glasses . He then lobbied the Navy , which waived this requirement . He was then commissioned as an ensign in 1943 , and married Virginia Rendall , a librarian , while he waited for his first assignment . 
 Instead of the seafaring assignment he hoped for , Reynolds was sent to the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory to assist George Kistiakowsky in the design of the explosive lenses required by the implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . In April 1944 , Kistiakowsky named Reynolds as one of eleven men that he would like to have working for him at Los Alamos . 
 Reynolds was one of the naval officers who was sent to investigate the Port Chicago disaster , in which an ammunition ship had blown up in the harbor . He was tasked with estimating the size of the explosion , based upon observations of the damage . His estimate was 1 @,@ 550 tons of TNT ( 6 @,@ 500 GJ ) ± 50 tons of TNT ( 210 GJ ) tons . A bill of lading was subsequently found for 1 @,@ 540 tons , confirming his estimate . 
 Reynolds was one of several researchers who determined that an atomic bomb would do maximum damage if detonated in the air rather than at ground level . 
 He later served with Project Alberta , the part of the Manhattan Project for operations in the field . He served on Tinian , where the worked with the X @-@ Unit Section , which was responsible for the Fat Man bomb 's firing unit . He flew a number of practice missions , but not the bombing of Hiroshima or Nagasaki . After the fighting ended , he was part of the Manhattan Project team sent to Hiroshima and Nagasaki to inspect the bomb damage . 
 = = Princeton = = 
 After the war , Reynolds accepted an offer of an assistant professorship at Princeton University . He would spend the rest of his career there , being promoted to associate professor in 1951 , and then to professor in 1959 . John Archibald Wheeler interested him in cosmic rays . <unk> was director of the Princeton 's High Energy Physics Program from 1948 to 1970 . He initially recruited Ronald Rau from Caltech and Joseph <unk> from the University of California . <unk> eventually became a professor and division head at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory , while Rau went on to become Chairman of the Physics Department at the Brookhaven National Laboratory . Reynolds later hired Sam <unk> , Giorgio Salvini , Riccardo Giacconi , Val Fitch and Jim Cronin . His reputation for spotting and hiring talent was assured when Giacconi , Fitch and Cronin won Nobel Prizes . 
 For his cosmic ray research , Reynolds attempted to grow large organic crystal scintillators to use as ionized particle detectors . <unk> are luminescent materials that , when struck by an incoming particle , absorb its energy and scintillate – emit light . They are used in many areas of scientific research . He was frustrated by cracks in the crystals , and attempted to get around the problem by dissolving them in liquid . To the surprise of many , the liquid was just as effective as crystal scintillators . Today , liquid scintillators are in widespread use in nuclear , biological and medical research . He also developed automated X @-@ ray detectors for collecting data on protein structures . 
 Interest in environmental issues increased in the late 1960s , and in 1970 , Princeton established Princeton 's Center for Environmental Studies . Reynolds was appointed as its first director . Under his leadership , it investigated a number of unusual inter @-@ disciplinary topics , such as energy conservation in buildings , indoor air quality , the relationship between nuclear power and nuclear weapons , and the decision @-@ making process in environmental issues 
 Although most of his career was at Princeton , he spent some time in England , where was a Churchill Fellow at Cambridge University in 1973 and 1974 . He was later a visiting Senior Research Fellow at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Oxford University , and a visiting professor at Oxford Research Unit of the Open University , from 1981 to 1982 , and a Royal Society Guest Research Fellow at Oxford University in 1985 . 
 Reynolds became the Class of 1909 Professor of Physics in 1978 , and Professor Emeritus 1987 . For 31 years he combined his interest in the sea and science by working during the summer at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole , Massachusetts , where he studied marine bioluminescence . He also worked at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . 
 Reynolds died from cancer at his home in Skillman , New Jersey on April 19 , 2005 . He was survived by his wife , Virginia , and his four sons , G. Thomas , Richard , Robert and David . 
 = Battles of Lexington and Concord = 
 The Battles of Lexington and Concord were the first military engagements of the American Revolutionary War . The battles were fought on April 19 , 1775 , in Middlesex County , Province of Massachusetts Bay , within the towns of Lexington , Concord , Lincoln , Menotomy ( present @-@ day Arlington ) , and Cambridge , near Boston . The battles marked the outbreak of open armed conflict between the Kingdom of Great Britain and thirteen of its colonies on the mainland of British America . 
 In late 1774 the Suffolk Resolves were adopted to resist the enforcement of the alterations made to the Massachusetts colonial government by the British parliament following the Boston Tea Party . The colonial assembly responded by forming an illegal Patriot provisional government known as the Massachusetts Provincial Congress and calling for local militias to train for possible hostilities . The rebel government exercised effective control of the colony outside of British @-@ controlled Boston . In response , the British government in February 1775 declared Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion . 
 About 700 British Army regulars in Boston , under Lieutenant Colonel Francis Smith , were given secret orders to capture and destroy rebel military supplies reportedly stored by the Massachusetts militia at Concord . Through effective intelligence gathering , Patriot colonials had received word weeks before the expedition that their supplies might be at risk and had moved most of them to other locations . They also received details about British plans on the night before the battle and were able to rapidly notify the area militias of the British expedition . 
 The first shots were fired just as the sun was rising at Lexington . The militia were outnumbered and fell back , and the regulars proceeded on to Concord , where they broke apart into companies to search for the supplies . At the North Bridge in Concord , approximately 400 militiamen engaged 100 regulars from three companies of the King 's troops at about 11 : 00 am , resulting in casualties on both sides . The outnumbered regulars fell back from the bridge and rejoined the main body of British forces in Concord . 
 The British forces began their return march to Boston after completing their search for military supplies , and more militiamen continued to arrive from neighboring towns . Gunfire erupted again between the two sides and continued throughout the day as the regulars marched back towards Boston . Upon returning to Lexington , Lt. Col. Smith 's expedition was rescued by reinforcements under Brigadier General Hugh Percy , a future duke of Northumberland known as Earl Percy . The combined force , now of about 1 @,@ 700 men , marched back to Boston under heavy fire in a tactical withdrawal and eventually reached the safety of Charlestown . The accumulated militias blockaded the narrow land accesses to Charlestown and Boston , starting the Siege of Boston . 
 Ralph Waldo Emerson , in his " Concord Hymn " , described the first shot fired by the Patriots at the North Bridge as the " shot heard round the world " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The British Army 's infantry , nicknamed " redcoats " and sometimes " devils " by the colonists , had occupied Boston since 1768 and had been augmented by naval forces and marines to enforce what the colonists called The Intolerable Acts , which had been passed by the British Parliament to punish the Province of Massachusetts Bay for the Boston Tea Party and other acts of defiance . General Thomas Gage , the military governor of Massachusetts and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the roughly 3 @,@ 000 British military forces garrisoned in Boston , had no control over Massachusetts outside of Boston , where implementation of the Acts had increased tensions between the Patriot Whig majority and the pro @-@ British Tory minority . Gage 's plan was to avoid conflict by removing military supplies from Whig militias using small , secret , and rapid strikes . This struggle for supplies led to one British success and several rebel successes in a series of nearly bloodless conflicts known as the Powder Alarms . Gage considered himself to be a friend of liberty and attempted to separate his duties as Governor of the colony and as General of an occupying force . Edmund Burke described Gage 's conflicted relationship with Massachusetts by saying in Parliament , " An Englishman is the unfittest person on Earth to argue another Englishman into slavery . " 
 The colonists had been forming militias since the 17th century , initially for local defense against Indian attacks . These forces also saw action in the French and Indian War between 1754 and 1763 when they fought alongside British regulars . Under provincial law , all towns were obligated to form militia companies composed of all males 16 years of age and older ( there were exemptions for some categories ) , and to assure that the members were properly armed . The militias were formally under the jurisdiction of the provincial government , but New England militia companies elected their own officers . When Gage effectively dissolved the provincial government under the terms of the Massachusetts Government Act , these existing connections were employed by the colonists under the Massachusetts Provincial Congress for the purpose of resistance to the military threat from Britain . 
 = = = British government preparations = = = 
 A February 1775 address to King George III , by both houses of Parliament , declared that a state of rebellion existed : 
 We ... find that a part of your Majesty ' s subjects , in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay , have proceeded so far to resist the authority of the supreme Legislature , that a rebellion at this time actually exists within the said Province ; and we see , with the utmost concern , that they have been countenanced and encouraged by unlawful combinations and engagements entered into by your Majesty 's subjects in several of the other Colonies , to the injury and oppression of many of their innocent fellow @-@ subjects , resident within the Kingdom of Great Britain , and the rest of your Majesty ' s Dominions .... 
 We ... shall ... pay attention and regard to any real grievances ... laid before us ; and whenever any of the Colonies shall make a proper application to us , we shall be ready to afford them every just and reasonable indulgence . At the same time we ... beseech your Majesty that you will ... enforce due obedience to the laws and authority of the supreme Legislature ; and ... it is our fixed resolution , at the hazard of our lives and properties , to stand by your Majesty against all rebellious attempts in the maintenance of the just rights of your Majesty , and the two Houses of Parliament . 
 On April 14 , 1775 , Gage received instructions from Secretary of State William Legge , Earl of Dartmouth , to disarm the rebels and to imprison the rebellion 's leaders , but Dartmouth gave Gage considerable discretion in his commands . Gage 's decision to act promptly may have been influenced by information he received on April 15 , from a spy within the Provincial Congress , telling him that although the Congress was still divided on the need for armed resistance , delegates were being sent to the other New England colonies to see if they would cooperate in raising a New England army of 18 @,@ 000 colonial soldiers . 
 On the morning of April 18 , Gage ordered a mounted patrol of about 20 men under the command of Major Mitchell of the 5th Regiment of Foot into the surrounding country to intercept messengers who might be out on horseback . This patrol behaved differently from patrols sent out from Boston in the past , staying out after dark and asking travelers about the location of Samuel Adams and John Hancock . This had the unintended effect of alarming many residents and increasing their preparedness . The Lexington militia in particular began to muster early that evening , hours before receiving any word from Boston . A well @-@ known story alleges that after nightfall one farmer , Josiah Nelson , mistook the British patrol for the colonists and asked them , " Have you heard anything about when the regulars are coming out ? " upon which he was slashed on his scalp with a sword . However , the story of this incident was not published until over a century later , which suggests that it may be little more than a family myth . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Francis Smith received orders from Gage on the afternoon of April 18 with instructions that he was not to read them until his troops were underway . He was to proceed from Boston " with utmost expedition and secrecy to Concord , where you will seize and destroy ... all Military stores ... But you will take care that the soldiers do not plunder the inhabitants or hurt private property . " Gage used his discretion and did not issue written orders for the arrest of rebel leaders , as he feared doing so might spark an uprising . 
 = = = American preparations = = = 
 On March 30 , 1775 , the Massachusetts Provincial Congress issued the following resolution : 
 Whenever the army under command of General Gage , or any part thereof to the number of five hundred , shall march out of the town of Boston , with artillery and baggage , it ought to be deemed a design to carry into execution by force the late acts of Parliament , the attempting of which , by the resolve of the late honourable Continental Congress , ought to be opposed ; and therefore the military force of the Province ought to be assembled , and an army of observation immediately formed , to act solely on the defensive so long as it can be justified on the principles of reason and self @-@ preservation . 
 The rebellion 's leaders — with the exception of Paul Revere and Joseph Warren — had all left Boston by April 8 . They had received word of Dartmouth 's secret instructions to General Gage from sources in London well before they reached Gage himself . Adams and Hancock had fled Boston to the home of one of Hancock 's relatives in Lexington , where they thought they would be safe from the immediate threat of arrest . 
 The Massachusetts militias had indeed been gathering a stock of weapons , powder , and supplies at Concord and much further west in Worcester . An expedition from Boston to Concord was widely anticipated . After a large contingent of regulars alarmed the countryside by an expedition from Boston to Watertown on March 30 , The Pennsylvania Journal , a newspaper in Philadelphia , reported , " It was supposed they were going to Concord , where the Provincial Congress is now sitting . A quantity of provisions and warlike stores are lodged there .... It is ... said they are intending to go out again soon . " 
 On April 8 , Paul Revere rode to Concord to warn the inhabitants that the British appeared to be planning an expedition . The townspeople decided to remove the stores and distribute them among other towns nearby . 
 The colonists were also aware that April 19 would be the date of the expedition , despite Gage 's efforts to keep the details hidden from all the British rank and file and even from the officers who would command the mission . There is reasonable speculation , although not proven , that the confidential source of this intelligence was Margaret Gage , General Gage 's New Jersey @-@ born wife , who had sympathies with the Colonial cause and a friendly relationship with Warren . 
 Between 9 and 10 pm on the night of April 18 , 1775 , Joseph Warren told Revere and William Dawes that the British troops were about to embark in boats from Boston bound for Cambridge and the road to Lexington and Concord . Warren 's intelligence suggested that the most likely objectives of the regulars ' movements later that night would be the capture of Adams and Hancock . They did not worry about the possibility of regulars marching to Concord , since the supplies at Concord were safe , but they did think their leaders in Lexington were unaware of the potential danger that night . Revere and Dawes were sent out to warn them and to alert colonial militias in nearby towns . 
 = = = Militia forces assemble = = = 
 Dawes covered the southern land route by horseback across Boston Neck and over the Great Bridge to Lexington . Revere first gave instructions to send a signal to Charlestown using lanterns hung in the steeple of Boston 's Old North Church . He then traveled the northern water route , crossing the mouth of the Charles River by rowboat , slipping past the British warship HMS Somerset at anchor . Crossings were banned at that hour , but Revere safely landed in Charlestown and rode west to Lexington , warning almost every house along the route . Additional riders were sent north from Charlestown . 
 After they arrived in Lexington , Revere , Dawes , Hancock , and Adams discussed the situation with the militia assembling there . They believed that the forces leaving the city were too large for the sole task of arresting two men and that Concord was the main target . The Lexington men dispatched riders to the surrounding towns , and Revere and Dawes continued along the road to Concord accompanied by Samuel Prescott . In Lincoln , they ran into the British patrol led by Major Mitchell . Revere was captured , Dawes was thrown from his horse , and only Prescott escaped to reach Concord . Additional riders were sent out from Concord . 
 The ride of Revere , Dawes , and Prescott triggered a flexible system of " alarm and muster " that had been carefully developed months before , in reaction to the colonists ' impotent response to the Powder Alarm . This system was an improved version of an old notification network for use in times of emergency . The colonists had periodically used it during the early years of Indian wars in the colony , before it fell into disuse in the French and Indian War . In addition to other express riders delivering messages , bells , drums , alarm guns , bonfires and a trumpet were used for rapid communication from town to town , notifying the rebels in dozens of eastern Massachusetts villages that they should muster their militias because over 500 regulars were leaving Boston . This system was so effective that people in towns 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Boston were aware of the army 's movements while they were still unloading boats in Cambridge . These early warnings played a crucial role in assembling a sufficient number of colonial militia to inflict heavy damage on the British regulars later in the day . Adams and Hancock were eventually moved to safety , first to what is now Burlington and later to Billerica . 
 = = = British forces advance = = = 
 Around dusk , General Gage called a meeting of his senior officers at the Province House . He informed them that instructions from Lord Dartmouth had arrived , ordering him to take action against the colonials . He also told them that the senior colonel of his regiments , Lieutenant Colonel Smith , would command , with Major John Pitcairn as his executive officer . The meeting adjourned around 8 : 30 pm , after which Earl Percy mingled with town folk on Boston Common . According to one account , the discussion among people there turned to the unusual movement of the British soldiers in the town . When Percy questioned one man further , the man replied , " Well , the regulars will miss their aim . " 
 " What aim ? " asked Percy . " Why , the cannon at Concord " was the reply . Upon hearing this , Percy quickly returned to Province House and relayed this information to General Gage . Stunned , Gage issued orders to prevent messengers from getting out of Boston , but these were too late to prevent Dawes and Revere from leaving . 
 The British regulars , around 700 infantry , were drawn from 11 of Gage 's 13 occupying infantry regiments . Major Pitcairn commanded ten elite light infantry companies , and Lieutenant Colonel Benjamin Bernard commanded 11 grenadier companies , under the overall command of Lieutenant Colonel Smith . 
 Of the troops assigned to the expedition , 350 were from grenadier companies drawn from the 4th ( King 's Own ) , 5th , 10th , 18th ( Royal Irish ) , 23rd , 38th , 43rd , 47th , 52nd and 59th Regiments of Foot , and the 1st Battalion of His Majesty 's Marine Forces . Protecting the grenadier companies were about 320 light infantry from the 4th , 5th , 10th , 23rd , 38th , 43rd , 47th , 52nd , and 59th Regiments , and the 1st Battalion of the Marines . Each company had its own lieutenant , but the majority of the captains commanding them were volunteers attached to them at the last minute , drawn from all the regiments stationed in Boston . This lack of familiarity between commander and company would cause problems during the battle . 
 The British began to awaken their troops at 9 pm on the night of April 18 and assembled them on the water 's edge on the western end of Boston Common by 10 pm . Colonel Smith was late in arriving , and there was no organized boat @-@ loading operation , resulting in confusion at the staging area . The boats used were naval barges that were packed so tightly that there was no room to sit down . When they disembarked near Phipps Farm in Cambridge , it was into waist @-@ deep water at midnight . After a lengthy halt to unload their gear , the regulars began their 17 miles ( 27 km ) march to Concord at about 2 am . During the wait they were provided with extra ammunition , cold salt pork , and hard sea biscuits . They did not carry knapsacks , since they would not be encamped . They carried their haversacks ( food bags ) , canteens , muskets , and accoutrements , and marched off in wet , muddy shoes and soggy uniforms . As they marched through Menotomy , sounds of the colonial alarms throughout the countryside caused the few officers who were aware of their mission to realize they had lost the element of surprise . 
 At about 3 am , Colonel Smith sent Major Pitcairn ahead with six companies of light infantry under orders to quick march to Concord . At about 4 am Smith made the wise but belated decision to send a messenger back to Boston asking for reinforcements . 
 = = The Battles = = 
 = = = Lexington = = = 
 Though often styled a battle , in reality the engagement at Lexington was a minor brush or skirmish . As the regulars ' advance guard under Pitcairn entered Lexington at sunrise on April 19 , 1775 , about 80 Lexington militiamen emerged from Buckman Tavern and stood in ranks on the village common watching them , and between 40 and 100 spectators watched from along the side of the road . Their leader was Captain John Parker , a veteran of the French and Indian War , who was suffering from tuberculosis and was at times difficult to hear . Of the militiamen who lined up , nine had the surname Harrington , seven Munroe ( including the company 's orderly sergeant , William Munroe ) , four Parker , three Tidd , three Locke , and three Reed ; fully one quarter of them were related to Captain Parker in some way . This group of militiamen was part of Lexington 's " training band " , a way of organizing local militias dating back to the Puritans , and not what was styled a minuteman company . 
 After having waited most of the night with no sign of any British troops ( and wondering if Paul Revere 's warning was true ) , at about 4 : 15 AM , Parker got his confirmation . Thaddeus Bowman , the last scout that Parker had sent out , rode up at a gallop and told him that they were not only coming , but coming in force and they were close . Captain Parker was clearly aware that he was outmatched in the confrontation and was not prepared to sacrifice his men for no purpose . He knew that most of the colonists ' powder and military supplies at Concord had already been hidden . No war had been declared . ( The Declaration of Independence was a year in the future ) . He also knew the British had gone on such expeditions before in Massachusetts , found nothing , and marched back to Boston . 
 Parker had every reason to expect that to occur again . The Regulars would march to Concord , find nothing , and return to Boston , tired but empty @-@ handed . He positioned his company carefully . He placed them in parade @-@ ground formation , on Lexington Common . They were in plain sight ( not hiding behind walls ) , but not blocking the road to Concord . They made a show of political and military determination , but no effort to prevent the march of the Regulars . Many years later , one of the participants recalled Parker 's words as being what is now engraved in stone at the site of the battle : " Stand your ground ; don 't fire unless fired upon , but if they mean to have a war , let it begin here . " According to Parker 's sworn deposition taken after the battle : 
 " I ... ordered our Militia to meet on the Common in said Lexington to consult what to do , and concluded not to be discovered , nor meddle or make with said Regular Troops ( if they should approach ) unless they should insult or molest us ; and , upon their sudden Approach , I immediately ordered our Militia to disperse , and not to fire : — Immediately said Troops made their appearance and rushed furiously , fired upon , and killed eight of our Party without receiving any Provocation therefor from us . " 
 Rather than turn left towards Concord , Marine Lieutenant Jesse Adair , at the head of the advance guard , decided on his own to protect the flank of the British column by first turning right and then leading the companies onto the Common itself , in a confused effort to surround and disarm the militia . Major Pitcairn arrived from the rear of the advance force and led his three companies to the left and halted them . The remaining companies under Colonel Smith lay further down the road toward Boston . 
 = = = = First shot = = = = 
 A British officer ( probably Pitcairn , but accounts are uncertain , as it may also have been Lieutenant William Sutherland ) then rode forward , waving his sword , and called out for the assembled militia to disperse , and may also have ordered them to " lay down your arms , you damned rebels ! " Captain Parker told his men instead to disperse and go home , but , because of the confusion , the yelling all around , and due to the raspiness of Parker 's tubercular voice , some did not hear him , some left very slowly , and none laid down their arms . Both Parker and Pitcairn ordered their men to hold fire , but a shot was fired from an unknown source . 
 " [ A ] t 5 o ’ clock we arrived [ in Lexington ] , and saw a number of people , I believe between 200 and 300 , formed in a common in the middle of town ; we still continued advancing , keeping prepared against an attack through without intending to attack them ; but on our coming near them they fired on us two shots , upon which our men without any orders , rushed upon them , fired and put them to flight ; several of them were killed , we could not tell how many , because they were behind walls and into the woods . We had a man of the 10th light Infantry wounded , nobody else was hurt . We then formed on the Common , but with some difficulty , the men were so wild they could hear no orders ; we waited a considerable time there , and at length proceeded our way to Concord . " 
 According to one member of Parker 's militia , none of the Americans had discharged their muskets as they faced the oncoming British troops . The British did suffer one casualty , a slight wound , the particulars of which were corroborated by a deposition made by Corporal John Munroe . Munroe stated that : 
 " After the first fire of the regulars , I thought , and so stated to Ebenezer Munroe ... who stood next to me on the left , that they had fired nothing but powder ; but on the second firing , Munroe stated they had fired something more than powder , for he had received a wound in his arm ; and now , said he , to use his own words , ' I 'll give them the guts of my gun . ' We then both took aim at the main body of British troops the smoke preventing our seeing anything but the heads of some of their horses and discharged our pieces . " 
 Some witnesses among the regulars reported the first shot was fired by a colonial onlooker from behind a hedge or around the corner of a tavern . Some observers reported a mounted British officer firing first . Both sides generally agreed that the initial shot did not come from the men on the ground immediately facing each other . Speculation arose later in Lexington that a man named Solomon Brown fired the first shot from inside the tavern or from behind a wall , but this has been discredited . Some witnesses ( on each side ) claimed that someone on the other side fired first ; however , many more witnesses claimed to not know . Yet another theory is that the first shot was one fired by the British , that killed Asahel Porter , their prisoner who was running away ( he had been told to walk away and he would be let go , though he panicked and began to run ) . Historian David Hackett Fischer has proposed that there may actually have been multiple near @-@ simultaneous shots . Historian Mark Urban claims the British surged forward with bayonets ready in an undisciplined way , provoking a few scattered shots from the militia . In response the British troops , without orders , fired a devastating volley . This lack of discipline among the British troops had a key role in the escalation of violence . 
 Witnesses at the scene described several intermittent shots fired from both sides before the lines of regulars began to fire volleys without receiving orders to do so . A few of the militiamen believed at first that the regulars were only firing powder with no ball , but when they realized the truth , few if any of the militia managed to load and return fire . The rest ran for their lives . 
 " We Nathaniel Mulliken , Philip Russell , [ and 32 other men ... ] do testify and declare , that on the nineteenth in the morning , being informed that ... a body of regulars were marching from Boston towards Concord ... About five o ’ clock in the morning , hearing our drum beat , we proceeded towards the parade , and soon found that a large body of troops were marching towards us , some of our company were coming to the parade , and others had reached it , at which time , the company began to disperse , whilst our backs were turned on the troops , we were fired on by them , and a number of our men were instantly killed and wounded , not a gun was fired by any person in our company on the regulars to our knowledge before they fired on us , and continued firing until we had all made our escape . " 
 The regulars then charged forward with bayonets . Captain Parker 's cousin Jonas was run through . Eight Lexington men were killed , and ten were wounded ; only one British soldier of the 10th Regiment of Foot was wounded . The eight colonists killed were John Brown , Samuel Hadley , Caleb Harrington , Jonathon Harrington , Robert Munroe , Isaac Muzzey , Asahel Porter , and Jonas Parker . Jonathon Harrington , fatally wounded by a British musket ball , managed to crawl back to his home , and died on his own doorstep . One wounded man , Prince Estabrook , was a black slave who was serving in the militia . 
 The companies under Pitcairn 's command got beyond their officers ' control in part because they were unaware of the actual purpose of the day 's mission . They fired in different directions and prepared to enter private homes . Colonel Smith , who was just arriving with the remainder of the regulars , heard the musket fire and rode forward from the grenadier column to see the action . He quickly found a drummer and ordered him to beat assembly . The grenadiers arrived shortly thereafter , and once order was restored among the soldiers , the light infantry were permitted to fire a victory volley , after which the column was reformed and marched on toward Concord . 
 = = = Concord = = = 
 In response to the raised alarm , the militiamen of Concord and Lincoln had mustered in Concord . They received reports of firing at Lexington , and were not sure whether to wait until they could be reinforced by troops from towns nearby , or to stay and defend the town , or to move east and greet the British Army from superior terrain . A column of militia marched down the road toward Lexington to meet the British , traveling about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) until they met the approaching column of regulars . As the regulars numbered about 700 and the militia at this time only numbered about 250 , the militia column turned around and marched back into Concord , preceding the regulars by a distance of about 500 yards ( 457 m ) . The militia retreated to a ridge overlooking the town , and their officers discussed what to do next . Caution prevailed , and Colonel James Barrett withdrew from the town of Concord and led the men across the North Bridge to a hill about a mile north of town , where they could continue to watch the troop movements of the British and the activities in the center of town . This step proved fortuitous , as the ranks of the militia continued to grow as minuteman companies arriving from the western towns joined them there . 
 = = = = The search for militia supplies = = = = 
 When the British troops arrived in the village of Concord , Lt. Col. Smith divided them to carry out Gage 's orders . The 10th Regiment 's company of grenadiers secured South Bridge under Captain Mundy Pole , while seven companies of light infantry under Captain Parsons , numbering about 100 , secured the North Bridge , where they were visible across the cleared fields to the assembling militia companies . Captain Parsons took four companies from the 5th , 23rd , 38th and 52nd Regiments up the road 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) beyond the North Bridge to search Barrett 's Farm , where intelligence indicated supplies would be found . Two companies from the 4th and 10th Regiments were stationed to guard their return route , and one company from the 43rd remained guarding the bridge itself . These companies , which were under the relatively inexperienced command of Captain Walter Laurie , were aware that they were significantly outnumbered by the 400 @-@ plus militiamen . The concerned Captain Laurie sent a messenger to Lt. Col. Smith requesting reinforcements . 
 Using detailed information provided by Loyalist spies , the grenadier companies searched the small town for military supplies . When they arrived at Ephraim Jones 's tavern , by the jail on the South Bridge road , they found the door barred shut , and Jones refused them entry . According to reports provided by local Loyalists , Pitcairn knew cannon had been buried on the property . Jones was ordered at gunpoint to show where the guns were buried . These turned out to be three massive pieces , firing 24 @-@ pound shot , that were much too heavy to use defensively , but very effective against fortifications , with sufficient range to bombard the city of Boston from other parts of nearby mainland . The grenadiers smashed the trunnions of these three guns so they could not be mounted . They also burned some gun carriages found in the village meetinghouse , and when the fire spread to the meetinghouse itself , local resident Martha Moulton persuaded the soldiers to help in a bucket brigade to save the building . Nearly a hundred barrels of flour and salted food were thrown into the millpond , as were 550 pounds of musket balls . Of the damage done , only that done to the cannon was significant . All of the shot and much of the food was recovered after the British left . During the search , the regulars were generally scrupulous in their treatment of the locals , including paying for food and drink consumed . This excessive politeness was used to advantage by the locals , who were able to misdirect searches from several smaller caches of militia supplies . 
 Barrett 's Farm had been an arsenal weeks before , but few weapons remained now , and according to family legend , these were quickly buried in furrows to look like a crop had been planted . The troops sent there did not find any supplies of consequence . 
 = = = = The North Bridge = = = = 
 Colonel Barrett 's troops , upon seeing smoke rising from the village square as the British burned cannon carriages , and seeing only a few light infantry companies directly below them , decided to march back toward the town from their vantage point on <unk> Hill to a lower , closer flat hilltop about 300 yards ( 274 m ) from the North Bridge . As the militia advanced , the two British companies from the 4th and 10th Regiments that held the position near the road retreated to the bridge and yielded the hill to Barrett 's men . 
 Five full companies of Minutemen and five more of militia from Acton , Concord , Bedford and Lincoln occupied this hill as more groups of men streamed in , totaling at least 400 against Captain Laurie 's light infantry companies , a force totaling 90 – 95 men . Barrett ordered the Massachusetts men to form one long line two abreast on the highway leading down to the bridge , and then he called for another consultation . While overlooking North Bridge from the top of the hill , Barrett , Lt. Col. John Robinson of Westford and the other Captains discussed possible courses of action . Captain Isaac Davis of Acton , whose troops had arrived late , declared his willingness to defend a town not their own by saying , " I 'm not afraid to go , and I haven 't a man that 's afraid to go . " 
 Barrett told the men to load their weapons but not to fire unless fired upon , and then ordered them to advance . Laurie ordered the British companies guarding the bridge to retreat across it . One officer then tried to pull up the loose planks of the bridge to impede the colonial advance , but Major Buttrick began to yell at the regulars to stop harming the bridge . The Minutemen and militia from Concord , Acton and a handful of Westford Minutemen , advanced in column formation , two by two , led by Major Buttrick , Lt. Col. Robinson , then Capt. Davis , on the light infantry , keeping to the road , since it was surrounded by the spring floodwaters of the Concord River . 
 Captain Laurie then made a poor tactical decision . Since his summons for help had not produced any results , he ordered his men to form positions for " street firing " behind the bridge in a column running perpendicular to the river . This formation was appropriate for sending a large volume of fire into a narrow alley between the buildings of a city , but not for an open path behind a bridge . Confusion reigned as regulars retreating over the bridge tried to form up in the street @-@ firing position of the other troops . Lieutenant Sutherland , who was in the rear of the formation , saw Laurie 's mistake and ordered flankers to be sent out . But as he was from a company different from the men under his command , only three soldiers obeyed him . The remainder tried as best they could in the confusion to follow the orders of the superior officer . 
 A shot rang out . It was likely a warning shot fired by a panicked , exhausted British soldier from the 43rd , according to Captain Laurie 's report to his commander after the fight . Two other regulars then fired immediately after that , shots splashing in the river , and then the narrow group up front , possibly thinking the order to fire had been given , fired a ragged volley before Laurie could stop them . 
 Two of the Acton Minutemen , Private Abner Hosmer and Captain Isaac Davis , who were at the head of the line marching to the bridge , were hit and killed instantly . Rev. Dr. Ripley recalled : 
 The Americans commenced their march in double file … In a minute or two , the Americans being in quick motion and within ten or fifteen rods of the bridge , a single gun was fired by a British soldier , which marked the way , passing under Col. Robinson ’ s arm and slightly wounding the side of Luther Blanchard , a fifer , in the Acton Company . 
 Four more men were wounded . Major Buttrick then yelled to the militia , " Fire , for God 's sake , fellow soldiers , fire ! " At this point the lines were separated by the Concord River and the bridge , and were only 50 yards ( 46 m ) apart . The few front rows of colonists , bound by the road and blocked from forming a line of fire , managed to fire over each other 's heads and shoulders at the regulars massed across the bridge . Four of the eight British officers and sergeants , who were leading from the front of their troops , were wounded by the volley of musket fire . At least three privates ( Thomas Smith , Patrick Gray , and James Hall , all from the 4th ) were killed or mortally wounded , and nine were wounded . In 1824 , Reverend and Minuteman Joseph Thaxter wrote : 
 I was an eyewitness to the following facts . The people of Westford and Acton , some few of Concord , were the first who faced the British at Concord bridge . The British had placed about ninety men as a guard at the North Bridge ; we had then no certain information that any had been killed at Lexington , we saw the British making destruction in the town of Concord ; it was proposed to advance to the bridge ; on this Colonel Robinson , of Westford , together with Major Buttrick , took the lead ; strict orders were given not to fire , unless the British fired first ; when they advanced about halfway on the causeway the British fired one gun , a second , a third , and then the whole body ; they killed Colonel Davis , of Acton , and a Mr. Hosmer . Our people then fired over one another ’ s heads , being in a long column , two and two ; they killed two and wounded eleven . Lieutenant Hawkstone , said to be the greatest beauty of the British army , had his cheeks so badly wounded that it disfigured him much , of which he bitterly complained . On this , the British fled , and assembled on the hill , the north side of Concord , and dressed their wounded , and then began their retreat . As they descended the hill near the road that comes out from Bedford they were pursued ; Colonel Bridge , with a few men from Bedford and Chelmsford , came up , and killed several men . 
 The regulars found themselves trapped in a situation where they were both outnumbered and outmaneuvered . Lacking effective leadership and terrified at the superior numbers of the enemy , with their spirit broken , and likely not having experienced combat before , they abandoned their wounded , and fled to the safety of the approaching grenadier companies coming from the town center , isolating Captain Parsons and the companies searching for arms at Barrett 's Farm . 
 = = = = After the fight = = = = 
 The colonists were stunned by their success . No one had actually believed either side would shoot to kill the other . Some advanced ; many more retreated ; and some went home to see to the safety of their homes and families . Colonel Barrett eventually began to recover control . He moved some of the militia back to the hilltop 300 yards ( 274 m ) away and sent Major Buttrick with others across the bridge to a defensive position on a hill behind a stone wall . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Smith heard the exchange of fire from his position in the town moments after he received the request for reinforcements from Laurie . He quickly assembled two companies of grenadiers to lead toward the North Bridge himself . As these troops marched , they met the shattered remnants of the three light infantry companies running towards them . Smith was concerned about the four companies that had been at Barrett 's , since their route to town was now unprotected . When he saw the Minutemen in the distance behind their wall , he halted his two companies and moved forward with only his officers to take a closer look . One of the Minutemen behind that wall observed , " If we had fired , I believe we could have killed almost every officer there was in the front , but we had no orders to fire and there wasn 't a gun fired . " During a tense standoff lasting about 10 minutes , a mentally ill local man named Elias Brown wandered through both sides selling hard cider . 
 At this point , the detachment of regulars sent to Barrett 's farm marched back from their fruitless search of that area . They passed through the now mostly @-@ deserted battlefield , and saw dead and wounded comrades lying on the bridge . There was one who looked to them as if he had been scalped , which angered and shocked the British soldiers . They crossed the bridge and returned to the town by 11 : 30 AM , under the watchful eyes of the colonists , who continued to maintain defensive positions . The regulars continued to search for and destroy colonial military supplies in the town , ate lunch , reassembled for marching , and left Concord after noon . This delay in departure gave colonial militiamen from outlying towns additional time to reach the road back to Boston . 
 = = = Return march = = = 
 = = = = Concord to Lexington = = = = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Smith , concerned about the safety of his men , sent flankers to follow a ridge and protect his forces from the roughly 1 @,@ 000 colonials now in the field as the British marched east out of Concord . This ridge ended near Meriam 's Corner , a crossroads about a mile ( 2 km ) outside the village of Concord , where the main road came to a bridge across a small stream . To cross the narrow bridge , the British had to pull the flankers back into the main column and close ranks to a mere three soldiers abreast . Colonial militia companies arriving from the north and east had converged at this point , and presented a clear numerical advantage over the regulars . The British were now witnessing once again what General Gage had hoped to avoid by dispatching the expedition in secrecy and in the dark of night : the ability of the colonial militiamen to rise and converge by the thousands when British forces ventured out of Boston . As the last of the British column marched over the narrow bridge , the British rear guard wheeled and fired a volley at the colonial militiamen , who had been firing irregularly and ineffectively from a distance but now had closed to within musket range . The colonists returned fire , this time with deadly effect . Two regulars were killed and perhaps six wounded , with no colonial casualties . Smith sent out his flanking troops again after crossing the small bridge . 
 On Brooks Hill ( also known as Hardy 's Hill ) about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) past Meriam 's Corner , nearly 500 militiamen had assembled to the south of the road , awaiting opportunity to fire down upon the British column on the road below . Smith 's leading forces charged up the hill to drive them off , but the colonists did not withdraw , inflicting significant casualties on the attackers . Smith withdrew his men from Brooks Hill , and the column continued on to another small bridge into Lincoln , at Brooks Tavern , where more militia companies intensified the attack from the north side of the road . 
 The regulars soon reached a point in the road now referred to as the " Bloody Angle " where the road rises and curves sharply to the left through a lightly @-@ wooded area . At this place , the militia company from Woburn had positioned themselves on the southeast side of the bend in the road in a rocky , lightly @-@ wooded field . Additional militia flowing parallel to the road from the engagement at Meriam 's Corner positioned themselves on the northwest side of the road , catching the British in a crossfire , while other militia companies on the road closed from behind to attack . Some 500 yards ( 460 m ) further along , the road took another sharp curve , this time to the right , and again the British column was caught by another large force of militiamen firing from both sides . In passing through these two sharp curves , the British force lost thirty soldiers killed or wounded , and four colonial militia were also killed , including Captain Jonathan Wilson Bedford , Captain Nathan Wyman of Billerica , Lt. John Bacon of Natick , and Daniel Thompson of Woburn . The British soldiers escaped by breaking into a trot , a pace that the colonials could not maintain through the woods and swampy terrain . Colonial forces on the road itself behind the British were too densely packed and disorganized to mount more than a harassing attack from the rear . 
 As militia forces from other towns continued to arrive , the colonial forces had risen to about 2 @,@ 000 men . The road now straightened to the east , with cleared fields and orchards along the sides . Lt. Col. Smith sent out flankers again , who succeeded in trapping some militia from behind and inflicting casualties . British casualties were also mounting from these engagements and from persistent long @-@ range fire from the militiamen , and the exhausted British were running out of ammunition . 
 When the British column neared the boundary between Lincoln and Lexington , it encountered another ambush from a hill overlooking the road , set by Captain John Parker 's Lexington militiamen , including some of them bandaged up from the encounter in Lexington earlier in the day . At this point , Lt. Col. Smith was wounded in the thigh and knocked from his horse . Major John Pitcairn assumed effective command of the column and sent light infantry companies up the hill to clear the militia forces . 
 The light infantry cleared two additional hills as the column continued east — " The Bluff " and " Fiske Hill " — and took still more casualties from ambushes set by fresh militia companies joining the battle . In one of the musket volleys from the colonial soldiers , Major Pitcairn 's horse bolted in fright , throwing Pitcairn to the ground and injuring his arm . Now both principal leaders of the expedition were injured or unhorsed , and their men were tired , thirsty , and exhausting their ammunition . A few surrendered or were captured ; some now broke formation and ran forward toward Lexington . In the words of one British officer , " we began to run rather than retreat in order . ... We attempted to stop the men and form them two deep , but to no purpose , the confusion increased rather than lessened . ... the officers got to the front and presented their bayonets , and told the men if they advanced they should die . Upon this , they began to form up under heavy fire . " 
 Only one British officer remained uninjured among the three companies at the head of the British column as it approach Lexington Center . He understood the column 's perilous situation : " There were very few men had any ammunition left , and so fatigued that we could not keep flanking parties out , so that we must soon have laid down our arms , or been picked off by the Rebels at their pleasure — nearer to — and we were not able to keep them off . " He then heard cheering further ahead . A full brigade , about 1 @,@ 000 men with artillery under the command of Earl Percy , had arrived to rescue them . It was about 2 : 30 PM , and the British column had now been on the march since 2 o 'clock in the morning . Westford Minuteman , Rev. Joseph Thaxter , wrote of his account : 
 We pursued them and killed some ; when they got to Lexington , they were so close pursued and fatigued , that they must have soon surrendered , had not Lord Percy met them with a large reinforcement and two field @-@ pieces . They fired them , but the balls went high over our heads . But no cannon ever did more execution , such stories of their effects had been spread by the tories through our troops , that from this time more wont back than pursed . We pursued to Charlestown Common , and then retired to Cambridge . When the army collected at Cambridge , Colonel Prescott with his regiment of minute men , and John Robinson , his Lieutenant Colonel , were prompt at being at their post . 
 In their accounts afterward , British officers and soldiers alike noted their frustration that the colonial militiamen fired at them from behind trees and stone walls , rather than confronting them in large , linear formations in the style of European warfare . This image of the individual colonial farmer , musket in hand and fighting under his own command , has also been fostered in American myth : " Chasing the red @-@ coats down the lane / Then crossing the fields to emerge again / Under the trees at the turn of the road , / And only pausing to fire and load . " To the contrary , beginning at the North Bridge and throughout the British retreat , the colonial militias repeatedly operated as coordinated companies , even when dispersed to take advantage of cover . Reflecting on the British experience that day , Earl Percy understood the significance of the American tactics : 
 During the whole affair the Rebels attacked us in a very scattered , irregular manner , but with perseverance & resolution , nor did they ever dare to form into any regular body . Indeed , they knew too well what was proper , to do so . Whoever looks upon them as an irregular mob , will find himself much mistaken . They have men amongst them who know very well what they are about , having been employed as Rangers against the Indians & Canadians , & this country being much covered with wood , and hilly , is very advantageous for their method of fighting . 
 = = = = Percy 's rescue = = = = 
 General Gage had anticipated that Lt. Col. Smith 's expedition might require reinforcement , so Gage drafted orders for reinforcing units to assemble in Boston at 4 AM . But in his obsession for secrecy , Gage had sent only one copy of the orders to the adjutant of the 1st Brigade , whose servant then left the envelope on a table . Also at about 4 AM , the British column was within three miles of Lexington , and Lt. Col. Smith now had clear indication that all element of surprise had been lost and that alarm was spreading throughout the countryside . So he sent a rider back to Boston with a request for reinforcements . At about 5 AM , the rider reached Boston , and the 1st Brigade was ordered to assemble : the line infantry companies of the 4th , 23rd , and 47th Regiments , and a battalion of Royal Marines , under the command of Earl Percy . Unfortunately for the British , once again only one copy of the orders were sent to each commander , and the order for the Royal Marines was delivered to the desk of Major John Pitcairn , who was already on the Lexington Common with Smith 's column at that hour . After these delays , Percy 's brigade , about 1 @,@ 000 strong , left Boston at about 8 : 45 AM , headed toward Lexington . Along the way , the story is told , they marched to the tune of " Yankee Doodle " to taunt the inhabitants of the area . By the Battle of Bunker Hill less than two months later , the song would become a popular anthem for the colonial forces . 
 Percy took the land route across Boston Neck and over the Great Bridge , which some quick @-@ thinking colonists had stripped of its planking to delay the British . His men then came upon an absent @-@ minded tutor at Harvard College and asked him which road would take them to Lexington . The Harvard man , apparently oblivious to the reality of what was happening around him , showed him the proper road without thinking . ( He was later compelled to leave the country for inadvertently supporting the enemy . ) Percy 's troops arrived in Lexington at about 2 : 00 PM . They could hear gunfire in the distance as they set up their cannon and deployed lines of regulars on high ground with commanding views of the town . Colonel Smith 's men approached like a fleeing mob with the full complement of colonial militia in close formation pursuing them . Percy ordered his artillery to open fire at extreme range , dispersing the colonial militiamen . Smith 's men collapsed with exhaustion once they reached the safety of Percy 's lines . 
 Against the advice of his Master of Ordnance , Percy had left Boston without spare ammunition for his men or for the two artillery pieces they brought with them , thinking the extra wagons would slow him down . Each man in Percy 's brigade had only 36 rounds , and each artillery piece was supplied with only a few rounds carried in side @-@ boxes . After Percy had left the city , Gage directed two ammunition wagons guarded by one officer and thirteen men to follow . This convoy was intercepted by a small party of older , veteran militiamen still on the " alarm list , " who could not join their militia companies because they were well over 60 years of age . These men rose up in ambush and demanded the surrender of the wagons , but the regulars ignored them and drove their horses on . The old men opened fire , shot the lead horses , killed two sergeants , and wounded the officer . The British survivors ran , and six of them threw their weapons into a pond before they surrendered . 
 = = = = Lexington to Menotomy = = = = 
 Percy assumed control of the combined forces of about 1 @,@ 700 men and let them rest , eat , drink , and have their wounds tended at field headquarters ( Munroe Tavern ) before resuming the march . They set out from Lexington at about 3 : 30 PM , in a formation that emphasized defense along the sides and rear of the column . Wounded regulars rode on the cannon and were forced to hop off when they were fired at by gatherings of militia . Percy 's men were often surrounded , but they had the tactical advantage of interior lines . Percy could shift his units more easily to where they were needed , while the colonial militia were required to move around the outside of his formation . Percy placed Smith 's men in the middle of the column , while the 23rd Regiment 's line companies made up the column 's rear guard . Because of information provided by Smith and Pitcairn about how the Americans were attacking , Percy ordered the rear guard to be rotated every mile or so , to allow some of his troops to rest briefly . Flanking companies were sent to both sides of the road , and a powerful force of Marines acted as the vanguard to clear the road ahead . 
 During the respite at Lexington , Brigadier General William Heath arrived and took command of the militia . Earlier in the day , he had traveled first to Watertown to discuss tactics with Joseph Warren , who had left Boston that morning , and other members of the Massachusetts Committee of Safety . Heath and Warren reacted to Percy 's artillery and flankers by ordering the militiamen to avoid close formations that would attract cannon fire . Instead , they surrounded Percy 's marching square with a moving ring of skirmishers at a distance to inflict maximum casualties at minimum risk . 
 A few mounted militiamen on the road would dismount , fire muskets at the approaching regulars , then remount and gallop ahead to repeat the tactic . Unmounted militia would often fire from long range , in the hope of hitting somebody in the main column of soldiers on the road and surviving , since both British and colonials used muskets with an effective combat range of about 50 yards ( 46 m ) . Infantry units would apply pressure to the sides of the British column . When it moved out of range , those units would move around and forward to re @-@ engage the column further down the road . Heath sent messengers out to intercept arriving militia units , directing them to appropriate places along the road to engage the regulars . Some towns sent supply wagons to assist in feeding and rearming the militia . Heath and Warren did lead skirmishers in small actions into battle themselves , but it was the presence of effective leadership that probably had the greatest impact on the success of these tactics . Percy wrote of the colonial tactics , " The rebels attacked us in a very scattered , irregular manner , but with perseverance and resolution , nor did they ever dare to form into any regular body . Indeed , they knew too well what was proper , to do so . Whoever looks upon them as an irregular mob , will find himself very much mistaken . " 
 The fighting grew more intense as Percy 's forces crossed from Lexington into Menotomy . Fresh militia poured gunfire into the British ranks from a distance , and individual homeowners began to fight from their own property . Some homes were also used as sniper positions , turning the situation into a soldier 's nightmare : house @-@ to @-@ house fighting . Jason Russell pleaded for his friends to fight alongside him to defend his house by saying , " An Englishman 's home is his castle . " He stayed and was killed in his doorway . His friends , depending on which account is to be believed , either hid in the cellar , or died in the house from bullets and bayonets after shooting at the soldiers who followed them in . The Jason Russell House still stands and contains bullet holes from this fight . A militia unit that attempted an ambush from Russell 's orchard was caught by flankers , and eleven men were killed , some allegedly after they had surrendered . 
 Percy lost control of his men , and British soldiers began to commit atrocities to repay for the supposed scalping at the North Bridge and for their own casualties at the hands of a distant , often unseen enemy . Based on the word of Pitcairn and other wounded officers from Smith 's command , Percy had learned that the Minutemen were using stone walls , trees and buildings in these more thickly settled towns closer to Boston to hide behind and shoot at the column . He ordered the flank companies to clear the colonial militiamen out of such places . 
 Many of the junior officers in the flank parties had difficulty stopping their exhausted , enraged men from killing everyone they found inside these buildings . For example , two innocent drunks who refused to hide in the basement of a tavern in Menotomy were killed only because they were suspected of being involved with the day 's events . Although many of the accounts of ransacking and burnings were exaggerated later by the colonists for propaganda value ( and to get financial compensation from the colonial government ) , it is certainly true that taverns along the road were ransacked and the liquor stolen by the troops , who in some cases became drunk themselves . One church 's communion silver was stolen but was later recovered after it was sold in Boston . Aged Menotomy resident Samuel Whittemore killed three regulars before he was attacked by a British contingent and left for dead . ( He recovered from his wounds and later died in 1793 at age 98 . ) All told , far more blood was shed in Menotomy and Cambridge than elsewhere that day . The colonists lost 25 men killed and nine wounded there , and the British lost 40 killed and 80 wounded , with the 47th Foot and the Marines suffering the highest casualties . Each was about half the day 's fatalities . 
 = = = = Menotomy to Charlestown = = = = 
 The British troops crossed the Menotomy River ( today known as Alewife Brook ) into Cambridge , and the fight grew more intense . Fresh militia arrived in close array instead of in a scattered formation , and Percy used his two artillery pieces and flankers at a crossroads called Watson 's Corner to inflict heavy damage on them . 
 Earlier in the day , Heath had ordered the Great Bridge to be dismantled . Percy 's brigade was about to approach the broken @-@ down bridge and a riverbank filled with militia when Percy directed his troops down a narrow track ( now Beech Street , near present @-@ day Porter Square ) and onto the road to Charlestown . The militia ( now numbering about 4 @,@ 000 ) were unprepared for this movement , and the circle of fire was broken . An American force moved to occupy Prospect Hill ( in modern @-@ day Somerville ) , which dominated the road , but Percy moved his cannon to the front and dispersed them with his last rounds of ammunition . 
 A large militia force arrived from Salem and Marblehead . They might have cut off Percy 's route to Charlestown , but these men halted on nearby Winter Hill and allowed the British to escape . Some accused the commander of this force , Colonel Timothy Pickering , of permitting the troops to pass because he still hoped to avoid war by preventing a total defeat of the regulars . Pickering later claimed that he had stopped on Heath 's orders , but Heath denied this . It was nearly dark when Pitcairn 's Marines defended a final attack on Percy 's rear as they entered Charlestown . The regulars took up strong positions on the hills of Charlestown . Some of them had been without sleep for two days and had marched 40 miles ( 64 km ) in 21 hours , eight hours of which had been spent under fire . But now they held high ground protected by heavy guns from HMS Somerset . Gage quickly sent over line companies of two fresh regiments — the 10th and 64th — to occupy the high ground in Charlestown and build fortifications . Although they were begun , the fortifications were never completed and would later be a starting point for the militia works built two months later in June before the Battle of Bunker Hill . General Heath studied the position of the British Army and decided to withdraw the militia to Cambridge . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the morning , Boston was surrounded by a huge militia army , numbering over 15 @,@ 000 , which had marched from throughout New England . Unlike the Powder Alarm , the rumors of spilled blood were true , and the Revolutionary War had begun . 
 Now under the leadership of General Artemas Ward , who arrived on the 20th and replaced Brigadier General William Heath , they formed a siege line extending from Chelsea , around the peninsulas of Boston and Charlestown , to Roxbury , effectively surrounding Boston on three sides . In the days immediately following , the size of the colonial forces grew , as militias from New Hampshire , Rhode Island , and Connecticut arrived on the scene . The Second Continental Congress adopted these men into the beginnings of the Continental Army . Even now , after open warfare had started , Gage still refused to impose martial law in Boston . He persuaded the town 's selectmen to surrender all private weapons in return for promising that any inhabitant could leave town . 
 The battle was not a major one in terms of tactics or casualties . However , in terms of supporting the British political strategy behind the Intolerable Acts and the military strategy behind the Powder Alarms , the battle was a significant failure because the expedition contributed to the fighting it was intended to prevent , and because few weapons were actually seized . 
 The battle was followed by a war for British political opinion . Within four days of the battle , the Massachusetts Provincial Congress had collected scores of sworn testimonies from militiamen and from British prisoners . When word leaked out a week after the battle that Gage was sending his official description of events to London , the Provincial Congress sent a packet of these detailed depositions , signed by over 100 participants in the events , on a faster ship . The documents were presented to a sympathetic official and printed by the London newspapers two weeks before Gage 's report arrived . Gage 's official report was too vague on particulars to influence anyone 's opinion . George Germain , no friend of the colonists , wrote , " the Bostonians are in the right to make the King 's troops the aggressors and claim a victory . " Politicians in London tended to blame Gage for the conflict instead of their own policies and instructions . The British troops in Boston variously blamed General Gage and Colonel Smith for the failures at Lexington and Concord . 
 The day after the battle , John Adams left his home in Braintree to ride along the battlefields . He became convinced that " the Die was cast , the Rubicon crossed . " Thomas Paine in Philadelphia had previously thought of the argument between the colonies and the Home Country as " a kind of law @-@ suit " , but after news of the battle reached him , he " rejected the hardened , sullen @-@ tempered Pharaoh of England forever . " George Washington received the news at Mount Vernon and wrote to a friend , " the once @-@ happy and peaceful plains of America are either to be drenched in blood or inhabited by slaves . Sad alternative ! But can a virtuous man hesitate in his choice ? " A group of hunters on the frontier named their campsite Lexington when they heard news of the battle in June . It eventually became the city of Lexington , Kentucky . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 It was important to the early American government that an image of British fault and American innocence be maintained for this first battle of the war . The history of Patriot preparations , intelligence , warning signals , and uncertainty about the first shot was rarely discussed in the public sphere for decades . The story of the wounded British soldier at the North Bridge , hors de combat , struck down on the head by a Minuteman using a hatchet , the purported " scalping " , was strongly suppressed . <unk> mentioning some of these activities were not published and were returned to the participants ( this notably happened to Paul Revere ) . Paintings portrayed the Lexington fight as an unjustified slaughter . 
 The issue of which side was to blame grew during the early nineteenth century . For example , older participants ' testimony in later life about Lexington and Concord differed greatly from their depositions taken under oath in 1775 . All now said the British fired first at Lexington , whereas fifty or so years before , they weren 't sure . All now said they fired back , but in 1775 , they said few were able to . The " Battle " took on an almost mythical quality in the American consciousness . Legend became more important than truth . A complete shift occurred , and the Patriots were portrayed as actively fighting for their cause , rather than as suffering innocents . Paintings of the Lexington skirmish began to portray the militia standing and fighting back in defiance . 
 Ralph Waldo Emerson immortalized the events at the North Bridge in his 1837 " Concord Hymn " . The " Concord Hymn " became important because it commemorated the beginning of the American Revolution , and that for much of the 19th century it was a means by which Americans learned about the Revolution , helping to forge the identity of the nation . 
 After 1860 , several generations of schoolchildren memorized Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's poem " Paul Revere 's Ride " . Historically it is inaccurate ( for example , Paul Revere never made it to Concord ) , but it captures the idea that an individual can change the course of history . 
 In the 20th century , popular and historical opinion varied about the events of the historic day , often reflecting the political mood of the time . Isolationist anti @-@ war sentiments before the World Wars bred skepticism about the nature of Paul Revere 's contribution ( if any ) to the efforts to rouse the militia . Anglophilia in the United States after the turn of the twentieth century led to more balanced approaches to the history of the battle . During World War I , a film about Paul Revere 's ride was seized under the Espionage Act of 1917 for promoting discord between the United States and Britain . 
 During the Cold War , Revere was used not only as a patriotic symbol , but also as a capitalist one . In 1961 , novelist Howard Fast published April Morning , an account of the battle from a fictional 15 @-@ year @-@ old 's perspective , and reading of the book has been frequently assigned in American secondary schools . A film version was produced for television in 1987 , starring Chad Lowe and Tommy Lee Jones . In the 1990s , parallels were drawn between American tactics in the Vietnam War and those of the British Army at Lexington and Concord . 
 The site of the battle in Lexington is now known as the Lexington Battle Green , has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and is a National Historic Landmark . Several memorials commemorating the battle have been established there . 
 The lands surrounding the North Bridge in Concord , as well as approximately 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the road along with surrounding lands and period buildings between Meriam 's Corner and western Lexington are part of Minuteman National Historical Park . There are walking trails with interpretive displays along routes that the colonists might have used that skirted the road , and the Park Service often has personnel ( usually dressed in period dress ) offering descriptions of the area and explanations of the events of the day . A bronze bas relief of Major Buttrick , designed by Daniel Chester French and executed by Edmond Thomas Quinn in 1915 , is in the park , along with French 's Minute Man statue . 
 Four current units of the Massachusetts National Guard units ( 181st Infantry , 182nd Infantry , 101st Engineer Battalion , and 125th Quartermaster Company ) are derived from American units that participated in the Battles of Lexington and Concord . There are only thirty current units of the U.S. Army with colonial roots . 
 Several ships of the United States Navy , including two World War II aircraft carriers , were named in honor of the Battle of Lexington . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 Patriots ' Day is celebrated annually in honor of the battle in Massachusetts , Maine , and by the Wisconsin public schools , on the third Monday in April . Re @-@ enactments of Paul Revere 's ride are staged , as are the battle on the Lexington Green , and ceremonies and firings are held at the North Bridge . 
 = = = Centennial commemoration = = = 
 On April 19 , 1875 , President Ulysses S. Grant and members of his cabinet joined 50 @,@ 000 people to mark the 100th anniversary of the battles . The sculpture by Daniel Chester French , The Minute Man , located at the North Bridge , was unveiled on that day . A formal ball took place in the evening at the Agricultural Hall in Concord . 
 = = = Sesquicentennial commemoration = = = 
 In April 1925 the United States Post Office issued three stamps commemorating the 150th anniversary of the Battles at Lexington and Concord . The Lexington — Concord commemorative stamps were the first of many commemoratives issued to honor the 150th anniversaries of events that surrounded America 's War of Independence . The three stamps were first placed on sale in Washington , D.C. and in five Massachusetts cities and towns that played major roles in the Lexington and Concord story : Lexington , Concord , Boston , Cambridge , and Concord Junction ( as West Concord was then known ) . This is not to say that other locations were not involved in the battles . 
 = = = Bicentennial commemoration = = = 
 The Town of Concord invited 700 prominent U.S. citizens and leaders from the worlds of government , the military , the diplomatic corps , the arts , sciences , and humanities to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the battles . On April 19 , 1975 , as a crowd estimated at 110 @,@ 000 gathered to view a parade and celebrate the Bicentennial in Concord , President Gerald Ford delivered a major speech near the North Bridge , which was televised to the nation . 
 Freedom was nourished in American soil because the principles of the Declaration of Independence flourished in our land . These principles , when enunciated 200 years ago , were a dream , not a reality . Today , they are real . Equality has matured in America . Our inalienable rights have become even more sacred . There is no government in our land without consent of the governed . Many other lands have freely accepted the principles of liberty and freedom in the Declaration of Independence and fashioned their own independent republics . It is these principles , freely taken and freely shared , that have revolutionized the world . The volley fired here at Concord two centuries ago , ' the shot heard round the world ' , still echoes today on this anniversary . 
 President Ford laid a wreath at the base of The Minute Man statue and then respectfully observed as Sir Peter Ramsbotham , the British Ambassador to the United States , laid a wreath at the grave of British soldiers killed in the battle . 
 = Acacia pycnantha = 
 Acacia pycnantha , commonly known as the golden wattle , is a tree of the family Fabaceae native to southeastern Australia . It grows to a height of 8 m ( 26 ft ) and has phyllodes ( flattened leaf stalks ) instead of true leaves . Sickle @-@ shaped , these are between 9 and 15 cm ( 3 1 ⁄ 2 and 6 in ) long , and 1 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) wide . The profuse fragrant , golden flowers appear in late winter and spring , followed by long seed pods . Plants are cross @-@ pollinated by several species of honeyeater and thornbill , which visit nectaries on the phyllodes and brush against flowers , transferring pollen between them . An understorey plant in eucalyptus forest , it is found from southern New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory , through Victoria and into southeastern South Australia . 
 Explorer Thomas Mitchell collected the type specimen , from which George Bentham wrote the species description in 1842 . No subspecies are recognised . The bark of A. pycnantha produces more tannin than any other wattle species , resulting in its commercial cultivation for production of this compound . It has been widely grown as an ornamental garden plant and for cut flower production , but has become a weed in South Africa , Tanzania , Italy , Portugal , Sardinia , India , Indonesia , New Zealand , as well as Western Australia , Tasmania and New South Wales . Acacia pycnantha was made the official floral emblem of Australia in 1988 , and has been featured on the country 's postal stamps . 
 = = Description = = 
 Acacia pycnantha generally grows as a small tree to between 3 and 8 m ( 10 and 30 ft ) in height , though trees of up to 12 m ( 40 ft ) high have been reported in Morocco . The bark is generally dark brown to grey — smooth in younger plants though it can be furrowed and rough in older plants . <unk> may be bare and smooth or covered with a white bloom . The mature trees do not have true leaves but have phyllodes — flat and widened leaf stems — that hang down from the branches . Shiny and dark green , these are between 9 and 15 cm ( 3 1 ⁄ 2 and 6 in ) long , 1 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) wide and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) to oblanceolate in shape . New growth has a bronze coloration . Field observations at Hale Conservation Park show the bulk of new growth to take place over spring and summer from October to January . 
 Floral buds are produced year @-@ round on the tips of new growth , but only those initiated between November and May go on to flower several months later . Flowering usually takes place from July to November ( late winter to early summer ) in the golden wattle 's native range ; because the later buds develop faster , flowering peaks over July and August . The bright yellow inflorescences occur in groups of 40 to 80 on 2 @.@ 5 – 9 cm ( 1 – 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) -long racemes that arise from axillary buds . Each inflorescence is a ball @-@ like structure that is covered by 40 to 100 small flowers that have five tiny petals ( <unk> ) and long erect stamens , which give the flower head a fluffy appearance . 
 Developing after flowering has finished , the seed pods are flattish , straight or slightly curved , 5 – 14 cm ( 2 – 5 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and 5 – 8 mm wide . They are initially bright green , maturing to dark brown and have slight constrictions between the seeds , which are arranged in a line in the pod . The oblong seeds themselves are 5 @.@ 5 to 6 mm long , black and shiny , with a clavate ( club @-@ shaped ) aril . They are released in December and January , when the pods are fully ripe . 
 Species similar in appearance include mountain hickory wattle ( A. <unk> ) , coast golden wattle ( A. leiophylla ) and golden wreath wattle ( A. saligna ) . Acacia <unk> has grey @-@ green phyllodes , fewer flowers in its flower heads , and broader ( 1 @.@ 25 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 in ) -wide ) seed pods . A. leiophylla has paler phyllodes . A. saligna has longer , narrower phyllodes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Acacia pycnantha was first formally described by botanist George Bentham in the London Journal of Botany in 1842 . The type specimen was collected by the explorer Thomas Mitchell in present @-@ day northern Victoria between Pyramid Hill and the Loddon River . Bentham thought it was related to A. leiophylla , which he described in the same paper . The specific epithet pycnantha is derived from the Greek words <unk> ( dense ) and <unk> ( flowers ) , a reference to the dense cluster of flowers that make up the globular inflorescences . Queensland botanist Les Pedley reclassified the species as <unk> <unk> in 2003 , when he proposed placing almost all Australian members of the genus into the new genus <unk> . However , this name is treated as a synonym of its original name . 
 Johann Georg Christian Lehmann described Acacia petiolaris in 1851 from a plant grown at Hamburg Botanic Gardens from seed said to be from the Swan River Colony ( Perth ) . Carl Meissner described A. <unk> from material from Port Lincoln in 1855 . Bentham classified both as A. pycnantha in his 1864 Flora Australiensis , though he did categorise a possible subspecies angustifolia based on material from Spencer Gulf with narrower phyllodes and fewer inflorescences . However , no subspecies are currently recognised , though an informal classification distinguishes wetland and dryland forms , the latter with narrower phyllodes . 
 In 1921 Joseph Maiden described Acacia <unk> from the northern and western slopes of Mount Jerrabomberra near Queanbeyan in New South Wales . He felt it was similar to , but distinct from , A. pycnantha and was uncertain whether it warranted species rank . His colleague Richard Hind Cambage grew seedlings and reported they had much longer internodes than those of A. pycnantha , and that the phyllodes appeared to have three nectaries rather than the single one of the latter species . It is now regarded as a synonym of A. pycnantha . 
 Common names recorded include golden wattle , green wattle , black wattle , and broad @-@ leaved wattle . At Ebenezer Mission in the <unk> country of north @-@ western Victoria the aborigines referred to it as witch . 
 Hybrids of the species are known in nature and cultivation . In the <unk> forest near Bendigo in Victoria , putative hybrids with <unk> wattle ( Acacia <unk> ) have been identified ; these resemble hakea wattle ( Acacia <unk> ) . Garden hybrids with Queensland silver wattle ( Acacia <unk> ) raised in Europe have been given the names Acacia x <unk> and Acacia x <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Golden wattle occurs in south @-@ eastern Australia from South Australia 's southern Eyre Peninsula and Flinders Ranges across Victoria and northwards into inland areas of southern New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory . It is found in the understorey of open eucalypt forests on dry , shallow soils . 
 The species has become naturalised beyond its original range in Australia . In New South Wales it is especially prevalent around Sydney and the Central Coast region . In Tasmania it has spread in the east of the state and become weedy in bushland near Hobart . In Western Australia , it is found in the Darling Range and western wheatbelt as well as Esperance and Kalgoorlie . 
 Outside Australia it has become naturalised in South Africa , Tanzania , Italy , Portugal , Sardinia , India , Indonesia and New Zealand . It is present in California as a garden escapee , but is not considered to be naturalised there . In South Africa , where it had been introduced between 1858 and 1865 for dune stabilization and tannin production , it had spread along waterways into forest , mountain and lowland fynbos , and borderline areas between fynbos and <unk> . The gall @-@ forming wasp <unk> <unk> has been introduced in South Africa for biological control and has reduced the capacity of trees to reproduce throughout their range . The eggs are laid by adult wasps into buds of flower heads in the summer , before hatching in May and June when the larvae induce the formation of the grape @-@ like galls and prevent flower development . The galls can be so heavy that branches break under their weight . In addition , the introduction in 2001 of the acacia seed weevil <unk> compactus has also proved effective . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Though plants are usually killed by a severe fire , mature specimens are able to resprout . Seeds are able to persist in the soil for more than five years , germinating after fire . 
 Like other wattles , Acacia pycnantha fixes nitrogen from the atmosphere . It hosts bacteria known as rhizobia that form root nodules , where they make nitrogen available in organic form and thus help the plant grow in poor soils . A field study across Australia and South Africa found that the microbes are genetically diverse , belonging to various strains of the species <unk> japonicum and genus Burkholderia in both countries . It is unclear whether the golden wattle was accompanied by the bacteria to the African continent or encountered new populations there . 
 Self @-@ incompatible , Acacia pycnantha cannot fertilise itself and requires cross @-@ pollination between plants to set seed . Birds facilitate this and field experiments keeping birds away from flowers greatly reduces seed production . <unk> are located on phyllodes ; those near open flowers become active , producing nectar that birds feed upon just before or during flowering . While feeding , birds brush against the flower heads and dislodge pollen and often visit multiple trees . Several species of honeyeater , including the white @-@ naped , yellow @-@ faced , New Holland , and occasionally white @-@ plumed and crescent honeyeaters , and Eastern <unk> have been observed foraging . Other bird species include the silvereye , striated , buff @-@ rumped and brown thornbills . As well as eating nectar , birds often pick off insects on the foliage . <unk> , native bees , ants and flies also visit nectaries , but generally do not come into contact with the flowers during this activity . The presence of Acacia pycnantha is positively correlated with numbers of swift parrots overwintering in box – ironbark forest in central Victoria , though it is not clear whether the parrots are feeding on them or some other factor is at play . 
 The wood serves as food for larvae of the jewel beetle species <unk> assimilis , A. <unk> and A. <unk> . The larvae of a number of butterfly species feed on the foliage including the fiery jewel , <unk> blue , <unk> blue and wattle blue . <unk> wasps form galls in the flowerheads , disrupting seed set and <unk> <unk> , a psyllid , sucks sap from the leaves . Acacia pycnantha is a host to rust fungus species in the genus <unk> that affect the phyllodes and branches . These include <unk> simplex that forms pustules and U. <unk> that causes large swollen brown to black galls that eventually lead to the death of the host plant . Two fungal species have been isolated from leaf spots on Acacia pycnantha : <unk> <unk> , which is found on a wide range of plant hosts , and <unk> lutea . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Golden wattle has been grown in temperate regions around the world for the tannin in its bark , as it provides the highest yield of all wattles . Trees can be harvested for tannin from seven to ten years of age . Commercial use of its timber is limited by the small size of trees , but it has high value as a fuel wood . The scented flowers have been used for perfume making , and honey production in humid areas . However , the pollen is too dry to be collected by bees in dry climates . In southern Europe , it is one of several species grown for the cut @-@ flower trade and sold as " mimosa " . Like many other species of wattle , Acacia pycnantha exudes gum when stressed . Eaten by indigenous Australians , the gum has been investigated as a possible alternative to gum arabic , commonly used in the food industry . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Golden wattle is cultivated in Australia and was introduced to the northern hemisphere in the mid @-@ 1800s . Although it has a relatively short lifespan of 15 to 30 years , it is widely grown for its bright yellow , fragrant flowers . As well as being an ornamental plant , it has been used as a windbreak or in controlling erosion . Trees are sometimes planted with the taller sugar gum ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) to make a two @-@ layered windbreak . One form widely cultivated was originally collected on Mount Arapiles in western Victoria . It is <unk> , with fragrant flowers appearing from April to July . The species has a degree of frost tolerance and is adaptable to a wide range of soil conditions , but it prefers good drainage . It tolerates heavy soils in dry climates , as well as mild soil salinity . It can suffer yellowing ( chlorosis ) in limestone @-@ based ( alkaline ) soils . Highly drought @-@ tolerant , it needs 370 – 550 mm ( 10 – 20 in ) winter rainfall for cultivation . It is vulnerable to gall attack in cultivation . Propagation is from seed which has been pre @-@ soaked in hot water to soften the hard seed coating . 
 = = Symbolic and cultural references = = 
 Although wattles , and in particular the golden wattle , have been the informal floral emblem of Australia for many years , it was not until Australia 's bicentenary in 1988 that the golden wattle was formally adopted as the floral emblem of Australia . This was proclaimed by Governor @-@ General Sir Ninian Stephen in the Government gazette published on 1 September . The day was marked by a ceremony at the Australian National Botanic Gardens which included the planting of a golden wattle by Hazel Hawke , the Prime Minister 's wife . In 1992 , 1 September was formally declared " National Wattle Day " . 
 The Australian Coat of Arms includes a wreath of wattle ; this does not , however , accurately represent a golden wattle . Similarly , the green and gold colours used by Australian international sporting teams were inspired by the colours of wattles in general , rather than the golden wattle specifically . 
 The species was depicted on a stamp captioned " wattle " as part of a 1959 – 60 Australian stamp set featuring Australian native flowers . In 1970 , a 5c stamp labelled " Golden Wattle " was issued to complement an earlier set depicting the floral emblems of Australia . To mark Australia Day in 1990 , a <unk> stamp labelled " Acacia pycnantha " was issued . Another stamp labelled " Golden Wattle " , with a value of <unk> , was issued in 2014 . 
 = Secret Santa ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Secret Santa " is the eighth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 66th overall episode of the series . The episode was written by series ' creator Tina Fey and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on December 10 , 2009 . The episode featured appearances by actors Cheyenne Jackson as Danny Baker , Julianne Moore as Nancy Donovan , and Larry Wilcox playing himself . 
 The episode centered on a gift @-@ giving contest between Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) jealousy over new TGS with Tracy Jordan cast member Danny Baker 's ( Jackson ) singing skills , and the writers — Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — coming up with a fake religion to get out of NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) " Secret Santa " scheme . 
 Critical reception of the episode was generally less than favorable . According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Secret Santa " was watched by 7 @.@ 54 million households during its original broadcast . The night the episode premiered , it was immediately preceded by an episode of The Office with the same title . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack and Liz decide to exchange gifts for Christmas . Meanwhile , Jack reconnects with a friend from high school , Nancy Donovan ( Julianne Moore ) , and ponders the possibility of romance as Nancy 's marriage is falling apart . When Liz ends up buying an expensive necktie that Jack already owns , they agree to spend zero dollars on their gifts . Jack gets Liz a program from her performance of The Crucible framed in wood from her high school stage — and does not reimburse his office assistant , Jonathan ( Maulik Pancholy ) for fuel costs . In return , Liz calls in a bomb threat to Penn Station , keeping Nancy in New York , and finally Jack arranges for Liz to fulfill her dream of meeting Larry Wilcox as Officer Jon Baker from the show CHiPs . 
 TGS producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) learns that the new actor on the show , Danny , is a talented singer . Despite Danny 's lack of interest in singing on the show , Pete gives him the Christmas solo as revenge for Jenna not chipping in to tip the cleaning ladies , which is a yearly source of frustration for Pete . Jenna is outraged when she hears Danny was assigned the solo , and tries to get Subhas the janitor to punch Danny in the throat . But when the agreeable Danny learns of Jenna 's hurt feelings , he arranges for them to perform a duet , in which he sings off @-@ key to make Jenna look good . 
 Meanwhile , Kenneth is throwing his rule @-@ filled " Secret Santa Fun Swap " , much to the writers ' chagrin . Frank , Toofer , and Lutz proclaim they are strict adherents of " <unk> , " a religion they make up on the spot , and have Kenneth give them things they claim to need for " <unk> , " the <unk> Holiday of Mouth Pleasures ( such as meat @-@ lover 's pizza and having their teeth <unk> by a blonde virgin ) . Their famous holiday song is , " Oh , <unk> of <unk> , you bring me such pizza . <unk> . " When Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tells Kenneth that they made up their religion , he goes into shock at the idea that all religions are made up by man . His faith is restored when the three are arrested for the bomb threat Liz called in , using their phone . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Secret Santa " was written by series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . The director of this episode was Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , a long @-@ time television director who worked with Fey on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . This was Fey 's nineteenth writing credit , and McCarthy @-@ Miller 's ninth directed episode . " Secret Santa " originally aired on NBC as the eighth episode of the show 's fourth season , and the 66th overall episode of the series , in the United States on December 10 , 2009 . It was filmed on November 5 and November 20 , 2009 . 
 In November 2009 , it was announced that actress Julianne Moore would guest star on 30 Rock as a love interest for Alec Baldwin 's character , Jack Donaghy . Moore would later guest star in the episodes " Winter Madness " , " Lee Marvin vs. Derek Jeter " , " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " , and " I Do Do " . In an interview with USA Today in October 2009 , Fey said that Jack would find more enduring love in the upcoming season . " As we move into the back half of the season , we 'd like to get [ Jack ] into a real adult relationship with some hurdles . " In the same interview , Baldwin noted , " Fifty @-@ year @-@ old Jack running around still using women like a drug is not where I 'd like him to end up . " Actor Larry Wilcox made a cameo in this episode , though , he was in character playing Officer Jon Baker from his old days in the drama show CHiPs , as Liz Lemon had a teen crush on Wilcox . In one scene of this episode , Liz says " shark farts " , and when asked about it in an April 2010 interview , Fey revealed that the term " was one that we ad @-@ libbed that we ended up leaving in . The studio asked us not to leave it in , but we left it in . " 
 This was actor Cheyenne Jackson 's second appearance as Danny on 30 Rock . He made his debut in the November 12 , 2009 , episode " The Problem Solvers " . Fey had seen Jackson in the Broadway musicals Xanadu and Damn Yankees , the latter that starred Jane Krakowski , who plays Jenna Maroney on the show . According to Jackson in a November 2009 interview , Fey set up a meeting to interest him in a role on the program . In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , it was revealed that it was Krakowski who brought Jackson to the attention of the 30 Rock producers . In the episode , Danny sang off @-@ key during a duet with Jenna , in order to keep her happy . In regards of his off @-@ pitch performance , Jackson said in an interview , " It 's actually harder than you might think . I worked on it a lot to make it sound real and to make it sound believable . But I got some good , funny feedback from it , so I 'm glad it worked out . " 
 One filmed scene from " Secret Santa " was cut out from the airing . Instead , the scene was featured on 30 Rock 's season four DVD as part of the deleted scenes in the Bonus feature . In the scene , Liz goes to <unk> , a men 's dress apparel retailer . She is there to buy a gift for Jack for Christmas but is shocked at the prices . She then sees a red neck tie and purchases it . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Jack tells Liz about YouFace , " an up @-@ and @-@ coming social @-@ networking site " , similar to that of MySpace and Facebook . Jack promises actor Larry Wilcox an appearance on the reality show Dancing with the Stars , if he visits Liz , until she tells him that the show airs on ABC . Liz revealed that she played John Proctor " in a gender @-@ blind " high school production of The Crucible . In one scene of " Secret Santa " , Kenneth has multiple arrangements of multicultural holiday decorations in his desk page , which includes a portrait of U.S. President Barack Obama " for the Muslims . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Secret Santa " was watched by 7 @.@ 54 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 3 @.@ 5 rating / 9 share in the 18 – 49 demographic , the season high in the 18 – 49 rating . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . ABC had an all @-@ repeat evening on December 10 , 2009 , which helped increase numbers for the other networks . The night this episode broadcast , it was immediately preceded by an episode of The Office — another NBC program — with the same title . 
 Critical reception of the episode was not entirely favorable . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club noted a general decline in the show 's quality in the fourth season , and after a return to form in its previous episode , " Dealbreakers Talk Show # 0001 " , he found " Secret Santa " disappointing , and gave it a grade B − . " It was cute and nicely plotted " , he wrote " but it felt a little rote and familiar . " IGN contributor Robert Canning was more positively inclined . He appreciated Julianne Moore 's appearance , but he found that some of the story lines , " though sprinkled with funny moments , were more successful as sweet tales made for the holiday . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad was glad to see Cheyenne Jackson 's Danny back on 30 Rock , and noted that the plots concerning Jack and Nancy and Kenneth and the TGS writers , respectively , were " home runs " . He liked that Tina Fey 's character Liz " was more of a supporting player " in " Secret Santa " . Sassone also enjoyed Moore 's appearance on the show , commenting that she was " wicked good " as Jack 's new love interest . Entertainment Weekly 's Margaret Lyons wrote that this episode " had some awesome Liz / Jack moments , a nice little storyline for Pete and Danny , and the invention of a whole new pizza @-@ loving religion . " 
 Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , found that television Christmas episodes generally tended to bring " an awkward shift in tone : All of a sudden , everyone 's being nice to each other . " She also complained about the invented holiday , which she found to be an overused cliché of Christmas programming : " See also : ' <unk> ' or ' <unk> . ' " Also , television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger found that the episode compared unfavorably with the preceding one , but still enjoyed the showcasing of several minor characters , and the " tender holiday spirit " . What he appreciated most of all , however , was the Alec Baldwin – Julianne Moore angle . Mark Graham of New York magazine opined that the three plots in " Secret Santa " could not be considered as " A @-@ material " for 30 Rock . Michael Anthony for TV Guide worried about the kiss between Jack and Nancy , as Nancy is married , and experiencing marital troubles . " The Nancy kiss kind of troubles me ; is Jack going to become the ' other woman ? ' " 
 = Russian gay propaganda law = 
 The Russian federal law " for the Purpose of Protecting Children from Information Advocating for a Denial of Traditional Family Values " , also known in English @-@ language media as the gay propaganda law and the anti @-@ gay law , is a bill that was unanimously approved by the State Duma on 11 June 2013 ( with just one MP abstaining — Ilya Ponomarev ) , and was signed into law by President Vladimir Putin on 30 June 2013 . 
 The Russian government 's stated purpose for the law is to protect children from being exposed to content recognizing homosexuality as being a norm in society , under the argument that it contradicts traditional family values . The statute amended the country 's child protection law and the Code of the Russian Federation on Administrative Offenses , to make the distribution of " propaganda of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships " among minors , an offense punishable by fines . This definition includes materials that " raises interest in " such relationships , cause minors to " form non @-@ traditional sexual predispositions " , or " [ present ] distorted ideas about the equal social value of traditional and non @-@ traditional sexual relationships . " Businesses and organizations can also be forced to temporarily cease operations if convicted under the law , and foreigners may be arrested and detained for up to 15 days then deported , or fined up to 5 @,@ 000 rubles and deported . 
 Supported by a number of far right @-@ wing groups and a majority of Russians surveyed , the passing of the law was met with criticism , primarily from the democratic world , the international community and global media . The statute was criticized for its broad and ambiguous wording ( including the aforementioned " raises interest in " and " among minors " ) , which many critics characterized as being an effective ban on publicly promoting the rights and culture of the LGBT community . The law was also criticized for leading to an increase and justification of homophobic violence , while the implications of the laws in relation to the then @-@ upcoming Winter Olympics being hosted by Sochi were also cause for concern , as the Olympic Charter contains language explicitly barring various forms of discrimination . 
 However , some felt that critics had overreacted to the law , noting that unlike some countries with stricter anti @-@ LGBT legislation , it did not criminalize same @-@ sex relationships , sexual activity , or being associated with pro @-@ LGBT organizations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Despite the fact that the cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg have been well known for their thriving LGBT communities , there has been growing opposition towards gay rights among politicians since 2006 . The city of Moscow has actively refused to authorize gay pride parades , and former Moscow mayor Yuri Luzhkov supported the city 's refusal to authorize the first two Moscow Pride events , describing them as " satanic " and blaming western groups for spreading " this kind of enlightenment " in the country . Fair Russia member of parliament Alexander Chuev was also opposed to gay rights and attempted to introduce a similar " propaganda " law in 2007 . In response , prominent LGBT rights activist and Moscow Pride founder Nikolay Alexeyev disclosed on the television talk show К <unk> ! that Chuev had been publicly involved in same @-@ sex relationships prior to his time in office . 
 In 2010 , Russia was fined by the European Court of Human Rights under allegations by Alexeyev that cities were discriminating against gays by refusing to approve pride parades . Although claiming a risk of violence , the court interpreted the decisions as being in support of groups which oppose such demonstrations . In March 2012 , a Russian judge blocked the establishment of a Pride House in Sochi for the 2014 Winter Olympics , ruling that it would " undermine the security of Russian society " , and that it contradicted with public morality and policies " in the area of family motherhood and childhood protection . " In August 2012 , Moscow upheld a ruling blocking Nikolay Alexeyev 's requests for 100 years ' worth of permission to hold Moscow Pride annually , citing the possibility of public disorder . 
 The bill " On Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and Development " introduced laws which prohibited the distribution of " harmful " material among minors . This includes content which " may elicit fear , horror , or panic in children " among minors , pornography , along with materials which glorify violence , unlawful activities , substance abuse , or self @-@ harm . An amendment to the law passed in 2012 instituted a mandatory content rating system for material distributed through an " information and telecommunication network " ( covering television and the internet ) , and established a blacklist for censoring websites which contain child pornography or content glorifying drug abuse and suicide . 
 The 2013 amendment , which added " propaganda of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships " as a class of harmful content under the law was , according to the Government of Russia , intended to protect children from being exposed to content that portrays homosexuality as being a " behavioural norm " . Emphasis was placed upon a goal to protect " traditional " family values ; bill author Yelena <unk> ( the chair of the Duma 's Committee on Family , Women , and Children , who has been described by some as a " moral crusader " ) , argued that " traditional " relations between a man and a woman required special protection under Russian law . The amendment also expanded upon similar laws enacted by several Russian regions , including Ryazan , Arkhangelsk ( who repealed its law shortly after the passing of the federal version ) , and Saint Petersburg . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Article 1 of the bill amended On Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and Development with a provision classifying " propaganda of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships " as a class of materials that must not be distributed among minors . The term is defined as materials that are " [ aimed ] at causing minors to form non @-@ traditional sexual predispositions , notions of attractiveness of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships , distorted ideas about the equal social value of traditional and non @-@ traditional sexual relationships , or imposing information about non @-@ traditional sexual relationships which raises interest in such relationships insofar as these acts do not amount to a criminal offence . " Article 2 makes similar amendments to " On basic guarantees for the rights of the child in the Russian Federation " , commanding the government to protect children from such material . 
 Article 3 of the bill amended the Code of the Russian Federation on Administrative Offenses with Article 6 @.@ 21 , which prescribes penalties for violations of the propaganda ban : Russian citizens found guilty can receive fines of up to 5 @,@ 000 rubles , and public officials can receive fines of up to 50 @,@ 000 rubles . Organizations or businesses can be fined up to 1 million rubles and be forced to cease operations for up to 90 days . Foreigners may be arrested and detained for up to 15 days then deported , or fined up to 5 @,@ 000 rubles and deported . The fines for individuals are much higher if the offense was committed using mass media or internet . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 According to a survey conducted in June 2013 by the All @-@ Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion ( also known as VTsIOM ) , at least 90 percent of Russians surveyed were in favour of the law . Over 100 conservative groups worldwide signed a petition in support for the law , with Larry Jacobs , manager of the World Congress of Families , supporting its aim to " prohibit advocacy aimed at involving minors in a lifestyle that would imperil their physical and moral health . " President of Russia Vladimir Putin answered to early objections to the then @-@ proposed bill in April 2013 by stating that " I want everyone to understand that in Russia there are no infringements on sexual minorities ' rights . They 're people , just like everyone else , and they enjoy full rights and freedoms " . He went on to say that he fully intended to sign the bill because the Russian people demanded it . As he put it , " Can you imagine an organization promoting pedophilia in Russia ? I think people in many Russian regions would have started to take up arms .... The same is true for sexual minorities : I can hardly imagine same @-@ sex marriages being allowed in Chechnya . Can you imagine it ? It would have resulted in human casualties . " Putin also mentioned that he was concerned about Russia 's low birth rate , as same @-@ sex relationships do not produce children . In August 2013 , Russian Sports Minister Vitaly Mutko also defended the law , equating it to protecting children from content that glorifies alcohol abuse or drug addiction . He also argued that the controversy over the law and its effects was " invented " by the Western media . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 The passing of the law was met with major international backlash , especially from the Western world , as critics considered it an attempt to effectively ban the promotion of LGBT rights and culture in the country . Article 19 disputed the claimed intent of the law , and felt that many of the terms used within were too ambiguous , such as the aforementioned " non @-@ traditional sexual relationships " , and " raises interest in " . The organization argued that it " feasibly could apply to any information regarding sexual orientation or gender identity that does not fit with what the State considers as in @-@ line with ' tradition ' . " The use of the term " among minors " was also criticized , as it was unclear whether it refers to being in the presence of minors , or any place where minors could be present , arguing that " predicting the presence of children in any space , on @-@ line or off @-@ line , is quite impossible and is a variable that the proponent of any expression will rarely be in absolute control of . " 
 LGBT rights activists , human rights activists , and other critics stated that the broad and vague wording of the law , which was characterized as a ban on " gay propaganda " by the media , made it a crime to publicly make statements or distribute materials in support of LGBT rights , hold pride parades or similar demonstrations , state that gay relationships are equal to heterosexual relationships , or according to Human Rights Campaign ( HRC ) president Chad Griffin , even display LGBT symbols such as the rainbow flag or kiss a same @-@ sex partner in public . The first arrest made under the law involved a person who publicly protested with a sign containing a pro @-@ LGBT message . 
 The legislation was also alleged to lead to an increase in homophobic violence in Russia by groups opposed to the LGBT rights movement ; Russian LGBT Network chairman Igor <unk> argued that the law " [ has ] essentially legalised violence against LGBT people , because these groups of hooligans justify their actions with these laws , " supported by their belief that gays and lesbians are " not valued as a social group " by the federal government . Reports surfaced of activity by groups such as ' Occupy <unk> ' and ' Parents of Russia ' , who lured alleged " paedophiles " into " dates " where they were tortured and humiliated . In August 2013 , it was reported that a gay teenager was kidnapped , tortured , and killed by a group of Russian Neo @-@ Nazis . Violence also increased during pro @-@ gay demonstrations ; on 29 July 2013 , a gay pride demonstration at Saint Petersburg 's Field of Mars resulted in a violent clash between activists , protesters , and police . 
 In January 2014 , a letter , co @-@ written by chemist Sir Harry Kroto and actor Sir Ian McKellen and co @-@ signed by 27 Nobel laureates from the fields of science and the arts , was sent to <unk> Putin urging him to repeal the propaganda law as it " inhibits the freedom of local and foreign LGBT communities . " In February 2014 , the activist group Queer Nation announced a planned protest in New York City outside the Russian consulate on 6 February 2014 , timed to coincide with the opening ceremonies of the 2014 Winter Olympics . The same day , gay rights group All Out similarly coordinated worldwide protests in London , New York City , Paris , and Rio de Janeiro . On 8 February 2014 , a flash mob was held in Cambridge , England featuring same @-@ sex couples embracing and hugging , as part of a video project known as " From Russia With Love " . 
 Writing for The Guardian , Marc Bennetts argued that criticism of the law by foreign outlets had ties to anti @-@ Russian sentiment ; describing their response as being " both hysterical and hypocritical " , he acknowledged that countries had been inconsistent on their treatment of other countries for their stances on LGBT rights . He noted that Russia 's laws did not ban LGBT relationships as a whole , and did not go as far as those in other countries , such as India — which had recently reinstated a ban on same @-@ sex sexual activity , and Nigeria , which criminalized same @-@ sex marriage with sentences of up to 14 years ' imprisonment , and membership in pro @-@ gay groups with up to 10 years ' imprisonment . In conclusion , he stated that " in reality , there is little the west can do to influence Russia , on gay rights or anything else . But to stand even a chance , criticism needs to be measured , accurate and , above all , consistent . There are enough reasons to disapprove of Putin 's authoritarian regime without resorting to hyperbole and falsehoods . " 
 = = = Protests = = = 
 A number of protests were held against the law , both locally and internationally . Activists demonstrated outside New York City 's Lincoln Center at the opening night of the Metropolitan Opera on 23 September 2013 , which was set to feature Tchaikovsky 's opera Eugene Onegin . The protests targeted Tchaikovsky 's own homosexuality , and the involvement of two Russians in the production ; soprano Anna Netrebko and conductor Valery Gergiev , as they were identified as vocal supporters of Putin 's government . 
 On 12 October 2013 , the day following National Coming Out Day , a protest organized by at least 15 activists was held in Saint Petersburg . The protest site was occupied by a large number of demonstrators , some of whom were dressed as Russian Orthodox priests and Cossacks . In total , 67 protestors were arrested for creating a public disturbance . 
 Activists also called for a boycott of <unk> vodka , who had prominently branded itself as a Russian vodka ( going as far as to dub itself " [ the ] Mother of All <unk> from The Motherland of Vodka " in an ad campaign ) . However , its Luxembourg @-@ based parent company , <unk> , responded to the boycott effort , noting that the company was not technically Russian , did not support the government 's opinion on homosexuality , and described itself as a " fervent supporter and friend " of LGBT people . 
 = = Prosecutions and other effects = = 
 The first arrest made under the propaganda law occurred just hours after it was passed : 24 @-@ year @-@ old activist Dmitry Isakov was arrested in Kazan for publicly holding a sign reading " Freedom to the Gays and Lesbians of Russia . Down With Fascists and <unk> " , and ultimately fined 4 @,@ 000 rubles ( US $ 115 ) . Isakov had performed a similar protest in the same location the previous day as a " test " run , but was later caught in an altercation with police officers who targeted his pro @-@ gay activism , and arrested him for swearing . He would be released without charge , but pledged to return there the next day to show that he would " not be cowed by such pressure . " Isakov also claimed that he had been fired from his job at a bank as a result of the conviction . 
 In December 2013 , Nikolay Alexeyev and Yaroslav Yevtushenko were fined 4 @,@ 000 rubles ( US $ 115 ) for picketing outside a children 's library in Arkhangelsk with banners reading , " Gays aren 't made , they 're born ! " Their appeal was denied . Alexeyev later criticized Western media outlets for its " biased " coverage of his conviction . 
 In January 2014 , Alexander <unk> , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Khabarovsk newspaper <unk> <unk> , was fined 50 @,@ 000 rubles ( US $ 1 @,@ 400 ) for publishing a news story discussing the teacher Alexander <unk> , who had been fired for self @-@ admittedly holding " rainbow flash mobs " in Khabarovsk with his students , and was subsequently attacked by right @-@ wing extremist groups because of his sexuality . The fine centred around a quote in the article by the teacher , who stated that his very existence was " effective proof that homosexuality is normal . " 
 Elena Klimova has been charged under the law multiple times for operating Children @-@ 404 — an online support group for LGBT youth on the social networking services <unk> and Facebook . The first of these charges was overturned in February 2014 , after a court ruled in consultation with a mental health professional that the group " helps teenagers exploring their sexuality to deal with difficult emotional issues and other problems that they may encounter " , and that these activities did not constitute " propaganda of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships " as defined under the law . In January 2015 , Klimova was sent to court for the same charges . They were overturned on appeal , only for the same court to convict <unk> and issue a fine of 50 @,@ 000 rubles in July 2015 , pending an appeal . 
 In May 2014 , it was revealed that in accordance with the propaganda law , the computer game The Sims 4 — a new instalment in a life simulation game franchise that has historically allowed characters to participate in same @-@ sex relationships , had been given a " 18 + " rating , allowing its sale to adults only . In contrast , the pan @-@ European ratings board PEGI has historically given The Sims games a " 12 " rating , while the German rating board USK had given The Sims 3 an even lower " 6 + " rating . 
 In November 2014 , one day after current Apple Inc . CEO Tim Cook publicly announced that he was proud of being gay , it was reported that an iPhone @-@ shaped memorial honoring Apple founder Steve Jobs had been removed from a Saint Petersburg university campus by its installer , the West European Financial Union [ <unk> ] , which issued a press release citing the law and noting that the memorial was in an area frequented by minors . However , the reports were later found to be a hoax , and the monument had actually been removed for maintenance . In September 2015 , Apple became the subject of an investigation by officials in Kirov for implementing emoji on its operating systems which depict same @-@ sex relationships , over whether they may constitute a promotion of non @-@ traditional sexual relationships to minors . <unk> later ruled that by themselves , emoji depicting same @-@ sex couples did not constitute a violation of the propaganda law , as whether they have a positive or negative connotation depends on their actual context and usage . 
 = = = Effects on sports = = = 
 The 2013 World Championships in Athletics , held at Moscow 's Luzhniki Stadium in August 2013 , were overshadowed by comments and protests over the law by athletes . After winning a silver medal at the event , U.S. runner Nick <unk> stated that " whether you 're gay , straight , black , white , we all deserve the same rights . If there 's anything I can do to champion the cause and further it , I will , shy of getting arrested . " Swedish athletes Emma Green Tregaro and Moa <unk> painted her fingernails in rainbow colors as a symbolic protest . However , Tregaro was forced to re @-@ paint them after they were deemed a political gesture that violated the rules of the IAAF . In response , she re @-@ painted them red as a symbol of love . Russian pole vaulter Yelena Isinbaeva criticized Tregaro 's gesture as being disrespectful to the host country , stating in a press conference that " we have our law which everyone has to respect . When we go to different countries , we try to follow their rules . We are not trying to set our rules over there . We are just trying to be respectful . " After Isinbaeva 's remarks were characterized as being homophobic , she argued that her choice of words had been misinterpreted by the media , and that she was against the discrimination of gays . 
 The implications of the law on Russia 's hosting of two major international sporting events ; the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi ( where seven LGBT athletes , all female , were expected to compete ) and the 2018 FIFA World Cup , were called into question . In the case of the World Cup , FIFA had recently established an anti @-@ discrimination task force , and was also facing criticism for awarding the 2022 World Cup to the country of Qatar , where homosexuality is illegal ; in August 2013 , FIFA requested information from the Russian government on the law and its potential effects on the association football tournament . In the case of the Winter Olympics , critics considered the law to be inconsistent with the Olympic Charter , which states that " [ discrimination ] on grounds of race , religion , politics , gender or otherwise is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic Movement . " In August 2013 , the International Olympic Committee " received assurances from the highest level of government in Russia that the legislation will not affect those attending or taking part in the Games " , and also received word that the government would abide by the Olympic Charter . The IOC also confirmed that it would enforce Rule 50 of the Olympic Charter , which forbids political protest , against athletes who make displays of support for the LGBT community at the Games . Vladimir Putin also made similar assurances prior to the Games , but warned LGBT attendees that they would still be subject to the law . 
 Athletes and supporters used the Olympics as leverage for further campaigns against the propaganda law . A number of athletes came out as lesbian , gay , or bisexual to spread awareness of the situation in Russia , including Australian snowboarder Belle Brockhoff , Canadian speed skater Anastasia <unk> , gold medal figure skater Brian Boitano , and Finnish swimmer Ari @-@ Pekka <unk> . There were also calls to boycott the Games , drawing comparisons to the Summer Olympics of 1980 in Moscow , the last time the Olympics were held on what is now Russian soil . A campaign known as Principle 6 was established in collaboration between a group of Olympic athletes , the organizations All Out and Athlete Ally , and clothing maker American Apparel , selling merchandise ( such as clothing ) with a quotation from the Olympic Charter to support pro @-@ LGBT organizations . Toronto advertising copywriter Brahm Finkelstein also began to market a rainbow @-@ coloured <unk> doll set known as " Pride Dolls " , designed by Italian artist Danilo Santino , to benefit the Gay and Lesbian International Sport Association , organizers of the World <unk> . 
 Action was leveraged directly against Olympic sponsors and partners as well ; in late @-@ August 2013 , the Human Rights Campaign sent letters to the ten Worldwide Olympic Partner companies , urging them to show opposition towards anti @-@ LGBT laws , denounce homophobic violence , ask the IOC to obtain written commitments for the safety of LGBT athletes and attendees , and oppose future Olympic bids from countries that outlaw support for LGBT equality . In February 2014 , prior to the games , a group of 40 human rights organizations ( including Athlete Ally , Freedom House , Human Rights Campaign , Human Rights Watch and Russian LGBT network among others ) also sent a joint letter to the Worldwide Olympic Partners , urging them to use their prominence to support the rights of LGBT athletes under the Olympic Charter , and pressure the IOC to show greater scrutiny towards the human rights abuses of future host countries . On 3 February 2014 , USOC sponsor AT & T issued a statement in support of LGBT rights at the Games , becoming the first major Olympic advertiser to condemn the laws . Several major non @-@ sponsors also made pro @-@ LGBT statements to coincide with the opening of the Games ; Google placed a quotation from the Olympic Charter and an Olympic @-@ themed logo in the colours of the rainbow flag on its home page worldwide , while Channel 4 ( who serves as the official British broadcaster of the Paralympics ) adopted a rainbow @-@ coloured logo and broadcast a " celebratory " , pro @-@ LGBT advert entitled " Gay Mountain " on 7 February 2014 , alongside an interview with former rugby union player and anti @-@ homophobia activist Ben Cohen . As part of its Dispatches series , Channel 4 had also broadcast a documentary during the week of the Opening Ceremony entitled Hunted , which documented the violence and abuse against LGBT people in Russia in the wake of the law . 
 = Roland ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Roland " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on May 6 , 1994 . It was written by Chris Ruppenthal and directed by David Nutter . The episode featured guest appearances by Željko Ivanek , James Sloyan and Kerry <unk> . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Roland " earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 9 , being watched by 7 @.@ 4 million households in its initial broadcast ; and received mixed reviews from critics , although Ivanek 's guest role was met with acclaim . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When Mulder and Scully investigate a series of murders at an aerospace testing facility , they find that a mentally handicapped janitor may be responsible — and that he is being telepathically controlled by one of the facility 's former researchers . 
 " Roland " was the first of two episodes of The X @-@ Files written by Chris Ruppenthal , who would go on to write the second season episode " 3 " , which was heavily rewritten by series regulars Glen Morgan and James Wong . " Roland " contains the series ' first mention of Fox Mulder 's father Bill , although the character would not actually make an appearance until the second season episode " Colony " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a research lab in Colson , Washington , intellectually disabled janitor Roland Fuller is scolded by scientist Dr. Keats for forgetting how to use the facility 's keycard locks . Keats walks in on his colleagues , Frank Nollette and Ronald Surnow , as they argue over a prototype jet engine they are developing . Nollette wants to push testing of the engine to break mach 15 , but Surnow is unwilling to risk damaging the prototype . After Keats and Nollette angrily leave , Surnow enters the facility 's wind tunnel to make adjustments . However , Roland activates the tunnel 's turbines , sending Surnow flying to his death . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are brought in to investigate Surnow 's death . Scully notes that another member of the research team , Arthur Grable , had mysteriously died several months earlier , and believes it to be a case of industrial espionage . Mulder examines the handwriting on the team 's whiteboard and concludes that it has been written by at least four different people , leading him to suspect that a fourth individual was present . Keats and Nollette both inform the agents that Roland Fuller was the only one left in the facility at the time of Surnow 's death , but do not believe him to be capable of murder . 
 Nevertheless , Mulder and Scully visit the care home where Roland lives . When they gently ask him about the night of the murder , he tells them he had not seen anything out of the ordinary . He also inadvertently reveals his mathematical prowess by rapidly counting the star designs visible on Scully 's blouse ; however , his handwriting does not match the fourth sample taken from the whiteboard . The discussion ends when Roland experiences a violent vision and has what seems to be a fit . Later that night , Roland has another vision in which he sees someone killing Keats . He appears at the lab and murders Keats by submerging his head in a tank of liquid nitrogen . Keats ' frozen body is left to shatter as Roland begins typing at one of the computers . 
 The next day , the agents notice that the computer had been used for five hours after Keats ' death . Attempting to open the file that was being worked on , Mulder realizes that the number Roland had written on an art project the previous day is the computer 's password . The file turns out to be the work of Arthur Grable , a scientist who had supposedly died several months earlier , and has been worked on constantly since his death . 
 Looking into Grable 's death , the agents find that it was he who had hired Roland . They begin to think that Grable faked his death and is killing his former colleagues , using Roland as a patsy . Grable 's body was never brought to the morgue , nor was a funeral ever held . However , Nollette brings the agents to a <unk> facility where Grable 's remains are being stored . When a photo of Grable is found , the agents discover that he is Roland 's identical twin brother . Speaking to Roland again , Mulder becomes convinced that the janitor is being periodically controlled by Grable . 
 Meanwhile , Nollette sneaks into the cryogenic facility and tampers with Grable 's storage unit , thawing his remains . Roland returns to the lab and is in the process of pushing the prototype engine to mach 15 when Nollette enters . Nollette admits to stealing Grable 's work and prepares to shoot Roland , but is distracted by some equations . Roland strikes him with a computer keyboard and drags him into the wind tunnel . The agents arrive in time to convince Roland not to kill Nollette . At the same time , the rising temperatures in the storage unit kill Grable . Roland is removed from the care home , to be taken to a psychiatric institute for testing . However , as he leaves he stops to comb his hair in a style reminiscent of his brother , raising the question of whether he is actually free of Grable 's control . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Roland " was the first of two episodes of The X @-@ Files written by Chris Ruppenthal . He would return to write the second season episode " 3 " , which was heavily rewritten by series regulars Glen Morgan and James Wong . Željko Ivanek , who plays the episode 's title character , was the first actor to read for the part . Series creator Chris Carter felt that Ivanek 's audition " just blew [ him ] away " , deciding almost immediately to cast him . Garry Davey , who portrays scientist Dr. Keats , also appeared in several other episodes of the series , and was also at one time the artistic director of the William Davis Centre for Actors Study , working alongside William B. Davis , who plays the series ' villain The Smoking Man . Art director Graeme <unk> spent time scouting universities and research facilities in Vancouver to aid in creating the right look for the episode 's laboratory and wind tunnel sets . 
 " Roland " contains the series ' first mention of Fox Mulder 's father Bill , although the character would not actually make an appearance until the second season episode " Colony " . In the original draft of the script for " Roland " , however , Mulder 's mention of his father was instead meant to be his sister , Samantha . The scene depicting the aftermath of the Dr. Keats ' murder — with the scattered pieces of his shattered frozen body marked off with multiple chalk outlines — has been described as " truly inspired " . Chris Carter noted that " any shock and horror was eliminated by the laugh you got when you saw those little pieces on the floor " , also commenting that the actual murder takes place off @-@ screen , and is only heard . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Roland " premiered on the Fox network on May 6 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on March 2 , 1995 . This episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 9 , with a 14 share , meaning that in the US , roughly 7 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 7 @.@ 4 million households . 
 Director David Nutter felt that casting Željko Ivanek was the key to creating the episode , feeling that " Roland " was " probably the weakest script from start to finish " that the director had seen , but that once Ivanek had been cast , it became " important to push that as much as possible , to help outweigh the frailties in the script " . Chris Carter has also praised Ivanek 's involvement with the episode , calling the actor 's portrayal " just an amazing performance . This guy , <unk> , should have won an award for this " . Glen Morgan , a regular writer for the series , felt that the episode " wasn 't completely effective " , but also added that it offered a " softer " outlook compared to the series ' other episodes so far , feeling that it was important to include several " episodes that demonstrate the paranormal isn 't always horrifying " . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Roland " was rated a B + , with guest star Željko Ivanek 's portrayal of the eponymous Roland being called " astonishing ( and convincing ) " , and the episode 's " excellent death scenes " noted as highlights . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , had mixed feelings about the episode , feeling that its plot was too similar to the previous episode " Born Again " , though rating Ivanek 's acting as " authentic " and " <unk> " ; ultimately calling the episode " well @-@ built enough to be enjoyable despite its familiarity " . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , felt negatively about the episode , again finding it too similar to other episodes of the season , finding it to be " nothing incredibly exciting " , noting that it " follows pretty much the same template as many of the other episodes " . 
 = M @-@ 79 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 79 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the central portion of Lower Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan . The western terminus is about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Hastings at the junction with M @-@ 37 and the eastern terminus is in downtown Charlotte at the junction with M @-@ 50 and Business Loop Interstate 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) . It passes through Quimby and Nashville , where there is a junction with M @-@ 66 . The entire highway is undivided surface road . It has no direct access with Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) , although a sign for the highway is located on southbound I @-@ 69 at exit 61 . 
 The highway was first designated in 1919 between Hastings and Battle Creek . It was later moved to run to Charlotte . A section of M @-@ 79 was designated as M @-@ 214 in the 1930s . M @-@ 214 would later be decommissioned as a highway designation and the M @-@ 79 designation was reapplied to the roadway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 79 starts south of Hastings at a three @-@ way intersection with M @-@ 37 in Hastings Township . The trunkline runs east and parallel to a section of the Thornapple River through wooded terrain that is interspersed with farm fields . South of Thornapple Lake , M @-@ 79 angles southeasterly moving from Quimby Road to Scott Road running parallel to the Thornapple River again into the community of Nashville . M @-@ 79 meets M @-@ 66 and turns south along the latter highway 's route along Main and Durkee streets through the community . South of town in Maple Grove Township , M @-@ 79 separates from M @-@ 66 and turns east along Lawrence Road . Outside of Charlotte , M @-@ 79 curves southeast to transition to Lawrence Avenue through town . The eastern terminus is at an intersection with Cochran Avenue , which carries BL I @-@ 69 and M @-@ 50 . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 79 was formed as a state trunkline by July 1 , 1919 along part of its present routing . At the time , it ran between Hastings and Nashville as it does today . From Nashville , the trunkline turned south and west to end at the contemporary M @-@ 17 in Battle Creek . By 1927 , the southernmost section of M @-@ 79 was truncated when M @-@ 78 was extended to Battle Creek . In late 1930 , the southernmost section is shortened once again as a new M @-@ 14 designation replaced M @-@ 79 south of Nashville . An eastward extension of M @-@ 79 at the same time carries the highway designation to Vermontville . 
 M @-@ 79 was extended easterly to Charlotte in 1934 at the same time that the section of the trunkline between Nashville and Vermontville was redesignated M @-@ 214 . M @-@ 79 was rerouted along Assyria and Lawrence roads at the time to connect the sections of M @-@ 79 on either side of M @-@ 214 . By 1941 , M @-@ 214 was shortened to a 3 @-@ mile ( 5 km ) connector route in downtown Nashville running between M @-@ 79 and M @-@ 66 . In 1953 , M @-@ 79 replaced M @-@ 214 and the latter designation was retired from the highway system . The last section of gravel roadway in Eaton County was paved by 1960 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = USS President ( 1800 ) = 
 USS President was a wooden @-@ hulled , three @-@ masted heavy frigate of the United States Navy , nominally rated at 44 guns . George Washington named her to reflect a principle of the United States Constitution . She was launched in April 1800 from a shipyard in New York City . President was one of the original six frigates whose construction the Naval Act of 1794 had authorized , and she was the last to be completed . Joshua Humphreys designed these frigates to be the young Navy 's capital ships , and so President and her sisters were larger and more heavily armed and built than standard frigates of the period . Forman Cheeseman , and later Christian Bergh were in charge of her construction . Her first duties with the newly formed United States Navy were to provide protection for American merchant shipping during the Quasi War with France and to engage in a punitive expedition against the Barbary pirates in the First Barbary War . 
 On 16 May 1811 , President was at the center of the Little Belt Affair ; her crew mistakenly identified HMS Little Belt as HMS Guerriere , which had impressed an American seaman . The ships exchanged cannon fire for several minutes . Subsequent U.S. and Royal Navy investigations placed responsibility for the attack on each other without a resolution . The incident contributed to tensions between the U.S. and Great Britain that led to the War of 1812 . 
 During the war , President made several extended cruises , patrolling as far away as the English Channel and Norway ; she captured the armed schooner HMS Highflyer and numerous merchant ships . In January 1815 , after having been blockaded in New York for a year by the Royal Navy , President attempted to run the blockade , and was chased by a blockading squadron . During the chase , she was engaged and crippled by the frigate HMS Endymion off the coast of the city . The British squadron captured President soon after , and the Royal Navy took her into service as HMS President until she was broken up in 1818 . President 's design was copied and used to build the next HMS President in 1829 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 During the 1790s , American merchant vessels began to fall prey to Barbary Pirates in the Mediterranean , most notably from Algiers . Congress 's response was the Naval Act of 1794 . The Act provided funds for the construction of six frigates ; however , it included a clause stating that construction of the ships would cease if the United States agreed to peace terms with Algiers . 
 Joshua Humphreys ' design was long on keel and narrow of beam ( width ) to allow for mounting very heavy guns . The design incorporated a diagonal scantling ( rib ) scheme to limit hogging ( warping ) ; the ships were given extremely heavy planking . This gave the hull greater strength than those of more lightly built frigates . Humphreys developed his design after realizing that the fledgling United States Navy could not match the navies of the European states for size . He therefore designed his frigates to be able to overpower other frigates , but with the speed to escape from a ship of the line . 
 George Washington named President in order to reflect a principle of the United States Constitution . In March 1796 , before President 's keel could be laid down , a peace accord was announced between the United States and Algiers . Construction was suspended in accordance with the Naval Act of 1794 . At the onset of the Quasi @-@ War with France in 1798 , funds were approved to complete her construction , and her keel was laid at a shipyard in New York City . Her original naval constructor was Forman Cheeseman and the superintendent was Captain Silas Talbot . 
 Based on experience Humphreys gained during construction of President 's sister ships , Constitution and United States , he instructed Cheeseman to make alterations to the frigate 's design . These included raising the gun deck by 2 in ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) and moving the main mast 2 ft ( 61 cm ) further rearward . President was built to a length of 175 ft ( 53 m ) between perpendiculars and a beam of 44 @.@ 4 ft ( 13 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 Although construction was begun at New York in the shipyard of Foreman Cheesman , work on her was discontinued in 1796 . Construction resumed in 1798 , under Christian Bergh and naval constructor William Doughty . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 President 's nominal rating was that of a 44 @-@ gun ship . However , she usually carried over 50 guns . President was originally armed with a battery of 55 guns : thirty @-@ two 24 @-@ pounder ( 10 @.@ 9 kg ) cannon , twenty @-@ two 42 @-@ pounder ( 19 kg ) carronades , and one 18 @-@ pounder ( 8 kg ) long gun . 
 During her Royal Navy service as HMS President , she was initially rated at 50 guns , although she was at this stage armed with 60 guns — thirty 24 @-@ pounders ( 10 @.@ 9 kg ) on the upper deck , twenty @-@ eight 42 @-@ pounder ( 19 kg ) carronades on the spar deck , plus two more 24 @-@ pounder guns on the forecastle . In February 1817 , she was again re @-@ rated , this time to 60 guns . 
 Unlike modern Navy vessels , ships of this era had no permanent battery of guns . Guns were portable and were often exchanged between ships as situations warranted . Each commanding officer modified his vessel 's armaments to his liking , taking into consideration factors such as the overall tonnage of cargo , complement of personnel aboard , and planned routes to be sailed . Consequently , a vessel 's armament would change often during its career ; records of the changes were not generally kept . 
 = = Quasi and First Barbary Wars = = 
 President launched on 10 April 1800 — the last of the original six frigates to do so . After her fitting out , she departed for Guadeloupe on 5 August with Captain Thomas Truxtun in command . She conducted routine patrols during the latter part of the Quasi @-@ War and made several recaptures of American merchant ships . Nevertheless , her service in this period was uneventful . She returned to the United States in March , after a peace treaty with France was ratified on 3 February 1801 . During the Quasi @-@ War , the United States paid tribute to the Barbary States to ensure that they would not seize or harass American merchant ships . In 1801 Yusuf Karamanli of Tripoli , dissatisfied with the amount of tribute in comparison to that paid to Algiers , demanded an immediate payment of $ 250 @,@ 000 . Thomas Jefferson responded by sending a squadron of warships to protect American merchant ships in the Mediterranean and to pursue peace with the Barbary States . 
 In May , Commodore Richard Dale selected President as his flagship for the assignment in the Mediterranean . Dale 's orders were to present a show of force off Algiers , Tripoli , and Tunis and maintain peace with promises of tribute . Dale was authorized to commence hostilities at his discretion if any Barbary State had declared war by the time of his arrival . Dale 's squadron consisted of President , Philadelphia , Essex , and Enterprise . The squadron arrived at Gibraltar on 1 July ; President and Enterprise quickly continued to Algiers , where their presence convinced the regent to withdraw threats he had made against American merchant ships . President and Enterprise subsequently made appearances at Tunis and Tripoli before President arrived at Malta on 16 August to replenish drinking water supplies . 
 Blockading the harbor of Tripoli on 24 August , President captured a Greek vessel with Tripolitan soldiers aboard . Dale negotiated an exchange of prisoners that resulted in the release of several Americans held captive in Tripoli . President arrived at Gibraltar on 3 September . Near Mahón in early December , President struck a large rock while traveling at 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . The impact brought Dale on deck and he successfully navigated President out of danger . An inspection revealed that the impact had twisted off a short section of her keel . President remained in the Mediterranean until March 1802 ; she departed for the United States and arrived on 14 April . 
 Although President remained in the United States , operations against the Barbary States continued . A second squadron assembled under the command of Richard Valentine Morris in Chesapeake . Morris ' poor performance resulted in his recall and subsequent dismissal from the Navy in 1803 . A third squadron assembled under the command of Edward Preble in Constitution ; by July 1804 , they had fought the Battle of Tripoli Harbor . 
 = = = Second Barbary patrol = = = 
 In April 1804 , President Jefferson decided to reinforce Preble 's squadron . President , Congress , Constellation , and Essex prepared to sail as soon as possible under the direction of Commodore Samuel Barron . Barron selected President as his flagship , but she required a new bowsprit and repairs to her masts and rigging . Some two months passed before the squadron was ready to sail . They departed in late June and arrived at Gibraltar on 12 August . 
 President left Gibraltar on 16 August with Constellation ; the frigates paused at Malta before arriving off Tripoli on 10 September , joining Constitution , Argus , and Vixen . Sighting three ships running the blockade of Tripoli , the squadron moved in to capture them ; during the pursuit , a sudden change in wind direction caused President to collide with Constitution . The collision caused serious damage to Constitution 's stern , bow , and figurehead . Two of the captured ships were sent to Malta with Constitution ; President sailed to Syracuse , Sicily , arriving on 27 August . 
 When Barron arrived in the Mediterranean , his seniority of rank over Preble entitled him to assume the duties of commodore . However , soon after replacing Preble , Barron went ashore at Syracuse in poor health and became bedridden . Under command of Captain George Cox , President began routine blockade duties of Tripoli during the winter months of 1804 – 05 . In late April 1805 , Constitution captured three ships off Tripoli . President escorted them to port at Malta before rejoining Constitution . 
 Barron 's fragile health necessitated his resignation ; he passed command to John Rodgers in late May 1805 . Barron ordered Cox to command Essex , and turned President over to his brother , James Barron , on 29 May . On 3 June , after the Battle of <unk> , the U.S signed a peace treaty with Tripoli . President sailed for the United States on 13 July , carrying the ailing Barron and many sailors released from captivity in Tripoli . 
 = = Little Belt Affair = = 
 In 1807 , the Chesapeake @-@ Leopard Affair heightened tensions between the United States and Britain . In preparation for further hostilities , Congress began authorizing naval appropriations , and President recommissioned in 1809 under the command of Commodore John Rodgers . She made routine and uneventful patrols , mainly along the United States ' eastern seaboard , until 1 May 1811 , when the British frigate HMS Guerriere stopped the American brig Spitfire 18 mi ( 29 km ) from New York and impressed a crewman . 
 Rodgers received orders to pursue Guerriere , and President sailed immediately from Fort Severn on 10 May . On 16 May , approximately 40 miles ( 64 km ) northeast of Cape Henry , a lookout spotted a sail on the horizon . Closing to investigate , Rodgers determined the sail belonged to a warship , and raised signal flags to identify his ship . The unidentified ship , later learned to be HMS Little Belt — a 20 @-@ gun sixth rate — hoisted signal flags in return , but the hoist was not understood by President 's crew . Little Belt sailed southward and Rodgers , believing the ship to be Guerriere , pursued . 
 Darkness set in before the ships were within hailing distance , and Rodgers hailed twice , only to have the same question returned to him : " What ship is that ? " According to Rodgers , immediately after the exchange of hails , Little Belt fired a shot that tore through President 's rigging . Rodgers returned fire . Little Belt promptly answered with three guns , and then a whole broadside . Rodgers ordered his gun crews to fire at will ; several accurate broadsides heavily damaged Little Belt in return . After five minutes of firing , President 's crew realized their adversary was much smaller than a frigate and Rodgers ordered a cease fire . However , Little Belt fired again and President answered with more broadsides . After Little Belt became silent , President stood off and waited overnight . At dawn it was obvious that Little Belt was greatly damaged from the fight ; Rodgers sent a boat over from President to offer assistance in repairing the damage . Her Captain , Arthur Bingham , acknowledged the damage ; declining any help , he sailed to Halifax , Nova Scotia . President had one sailor slightly wounded in the exchange , while Little Belt suffered 31 killed or wounded . 
 Upon President 's return to port , the U.S. Navy launched an investigation into the incident . Gathering testimony from President 's officers and crewmen , they determined that Little Belt had fired the first shot in the encounter . In the Royal Navy investigation , Captain Bingham insisted that President had fired the first shot and continued firing for 45 minutes , rather than the five minutes Rodgers claimed . In all subsequent reports , both captains continually insisted that the other ship had fired the first shot . Reaching a stalemate , the American and British governments quietly dropped the matter . 
 = = War of 1812 = = 
 The United States declared war against Britain on 18 June 1812 . Three days later , within an hour of receiving official word of the declaration , Commodore Rodgers sailed from New York City . The commodore sailed aboard President , leading a squadron consisting of United States , Congress , Hornet , and Argus on a 70 @-@ day North Atlantic cruise . A passing American merchant ship informed Rodgers about a fleet of British merchantmen en route to Britain from Jamaica . Rodgers and his squadron sailed in pursuit , and on 23 June they encountered what was later learned to be HMS Belvidera . President pursued the ship , and in what is recorded as the first shot of the War of 1812 , Rodgers himself aimed and fired a <unk> at Belvidera , striking her rudder and penetrating the gun room . Upon President 's fourth shot at Belvidera , a cannon one deck below Rodgers burst , killing or wounding 16 sailors and throwing Rodgers to the deck with enough force to break his leg . 
 The ensuing confusion allowed Belvidera to fire her stern chasers , killing six more men aboard President . Rodgers kept up the pursuit , using his bow chasers to severely damage Belvidera 's rigging , but his two broadsides had little effect . The crew of Belvidera quickly made repairs to the rigging . They cut loose her anchors and boats and pumped drinking water overboard to lighten her load , thereby increasing her speed . Belvidera soon gained enough speed to distance herself from President , and Rodgers abandoned the pursuit . Belvidera sailed to Halifax to deliver the news that war had been declared . 
 President and her squadron returned to the pursuit of the Jamaican fleet , and on 1 July began to follow the trail of coconut shells and orange peels the Jamaicans had left behind them . President sailed to within one day 's journey of the English Channel , but never sighted the convoy . Rodgers called off the pursuit on 13 July . During their return trip to Boston , Rodgers ' squadron captured seven merchant ships and recaptured one American vessel . 
 After some refitting , President , still under Rodgers ' command , sailed on 8 October with Congress , United States , and Argus . On 12 October , United States and Argus parted from the squadron for their own patrols . On 10 October , President chased HMS Nymphe , but failed to overtake her . On 17 October President captured the British packet ship Swallow , which carried a large amount of currency on board . On 31 October , President and Congress began pursuit of HMS Galatea , which was escorting two merchant ships . The chase lasted about three hours , and in that time Congress captured the merchant ship Argo . Meanwhile , President kept after Galatea and drew very close , but lost sight of her in the night . Congress and President remained together , but did not find any ships to capture during November . Returning to the United States , they passed north of Bermuda and proceeded toward the Virginia capes ; they arrived in Boston on 31 December , having taken nine prizes . President and Congress found themselves blockaded there by the Royal Navy until April 1813 . 
 On 30 April , President and Congress sailed through the blockade on their third cruise of the war . On 2 May , they pursued HMS Curlew , but she outran them and escaped . President parted company with Congress on 8 May , and Rodgers set a course along the Gulf Stream to search for merchant ships to capture . By June , not having come across a single ship , President turned north ; she put into North Bergen , Norway , on 27 June to replenish her drinking water . Sailing soon after , President captured two British merchant ships , which helped to replenish her stores . On 10 June President captured the outward @-@ bound Falmouth packet Duke of Montrose , Captain Aaron <unk> Blewett , which managed to throw her mails overboard before President could send a prize crew aboard . President made a cartel of Duke of Montrose , putting all of President 's prisoners on board and then sending her into Falmouth under the command of an American officer . When Duke of Montrose arrived at Falmouth the British Government abrogated the cartel on the grounds that they had advised the American Government that the British would not recognize agreements entered into on the high seas . 
 Around the same time , two Royal Navy ships came into view . President set all sails to escape , and outran them in a chase lasting 80 hours . Rodgers reported that his decision to flee the ships was based on identifying them as a ship of the line and a frigate . Royal Navy records later revealed that the vessels were actually the 32 @-@ gun frigate Alexandria and the 16 @-@ gun fireship Spitfire . 
 Spending a few days near the Irish Channel , President captured several more merchant ships . She then set a course for the United States . In late September , she encountered HMS Highflyer along the east coast of the United States . Rodgers used his signal flags to trick Highflyer into believing that President was HMS Tenedos . Lieut . George Hutchinson , Highflyer 's captain , came aboard President only to discover he had walked into a trap ; President captured Highflyer without a shot being fired . President 's long cruise netted her 11 merchant ships , in addition to Highflyer . 
 On 4 December , President sailed from Providence , Rhode Island . On the 25th , she encountered two frigates in the dark , one of which fired at her . Rodgers believed the ships to be British , but they were two French frigates , Méduse and Nymphe . Afterward , Rodgers headed toward Barbados for an eight @-@ week cruise in the West Indies , reportedly making three small captures . Returning to New York City on 18 February 1814 , President encountered HMS Loire , which turned to escape once the latter 's crew realized President was a 44 @-@ gun frigate . President remained in New York for the duration of 1814 due to the harbor 's blockade by a British squadron consisting of HMS Endymion , Majestic , Pomone , and Tenedos . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 The Treaty of Ghent , ending hostilities between the United States and Britain , was signed on 24 December 1814 . However , the United States did not ratify the treaty until 18 February 1815 . The war carried on in the interim . 
 Stephen Decatur assumed command of President in December 1814 , planning a cruise to the West Indies to prey on British shipping . In mid @-@ January 1815 , a snowy gale with strong winds forced the British blockading squadron away from New York Harbor , giving Decatur the opportunity to put to sea . On the evening of 14 January , President headed out of the harbor but ran aground , the result of harbor pilots incorrectly marking a safe passage . Stranded on the sand bar , President lifted and dropped with the incoming tide . Within two hours her hull had been damaged , her timbers twisted , and masts sprung . Damage to her keel caused the ship to hog and sag . Decatur was finally able to float President off the bar and , assessing the damage , he decided to return to New York for repairs ; however , the wind direction was not favorable and President was forced to head out to sea . 
 Unaware of the exact location of the blockading squadron , Decatur set a course to avoid them and seek a safe port , but approximately two hours later the squadron 's sails were spotted on the horizon . President changed course to outrun them , but the damage she suffered the night before had significantly reduced her speed . Attempting to gain speed , Decatur ordered expendable cargo thrown overboard ; by late afternoon of 15 January , HMS Endymion under Captain Henry Hope came alongside and proceeded to fire broadsides . Decatur planned to bring President in close to Endymion , whereby President 's crew could board and capture the opposing ship and sail her to New York . ( President would be scuttled to prevent her capture ) . 
 Making several attempts to close on Endymion , Decatur discovered that President 's damage limited her maneuverability , allowing Endymion to anticipate , and draw away from , positions favorable for boarding . Faced with this new dilemma , Decatur ordered bar and chain shot fired to disable Endymion 's sails and rigging , the idea being to shake his pursuer and allow President to proceed to a safe port without being followed . At noon , Endymion , being the much better sailer , was close @-@ hauled , outpacing her squadron and leaving them behind . At 2 pm , she gained on President and took position on the American ship 's quarter , shooting into President as she tried to escape . Endymion was able to rake President three times and did considerable damage to her ; by contrast , President primarily directed her fire at Endymion 's rigging in order to slow her down during the two @-@ hour engagement . 
 Finally at 7 : 58 pm , President ceased fire and hoisted a light in her rigging , indicating that she had surrendered . Endymion ceased firing on the defeated American ship but did not board to take possession of her prize , due to a lack of undamaged boats . Endymion 's <unk> had been damaged in the engagement and while she hove to for repairs , Commodore Stephen Decatur took advantage of the situation and , despite having struck , made off to escape at 8 @.@ 30 pm ; Endymion , hastily completed repairs and resumed the chase at 8 @.@ 52 pm . 
 President drew away while her crew made hurried repairs of their own . Within two hours , one of her lookouts spotted the remainder of the enemy squadron drawing near . President continued her escape attempt , but by nightfall HMS Pomone and Tenedos had caught up and began firing broadsides . Realizing his situation , Decatur surrendered President again , just before midnight . 
 = = As HMS President = = 
 Now in possession of the Royal Navy , President and her crew were ordered to proceed to Bermuda with Endymion . During the journey , they encountered a dangerous gale . The storm destroyed President 's masts and strained Endymion 's timbers so badly that all the upper @-@ deck guns were thrown overboard to prevent her from sinking . Decatur and his crew were briefly held prisoner in Bermuda . Upon the prisoners ' return to the United States , a U.S. Navy court martial board acquitted Decatur , his officers , and his men of any wrongdoing in the surrender of President . 
 President and Endymion continued to England , arriving at Spithead on 28 March . President was commissioned into the Royal Navy under the name HMS President . Her initial rating was set at 50 guns , although she was at this stage armed with 60 guns — thirty 24 @-@ pounders ( 10 @.@ 9 kg ) on the upper deck , twenty @-@ eight 42 @-@ pounder ( 19 kg ) carronades on the spar deck , plus two more 24 @-@ pounder guns on the forecastle . In February 1817 she was again re @-@ rated , this time to 60 guns . 
 In March 1818 she was considered for refitting . A drydock inspection revealed that the majority of her timber was defective or rotten and she was broken up at Portsmouth in June . President 's design was copied and used to build HMS President in 1829 , although this was reportedly more of a political maneuver than a testament to the design . The Royal Navy wished to retain the name and likeness of the American ship on their register as a reminder to the United States and other nations of the capture . 
 = Joseph Tydings = 
 Joseph Davies Tydings ( born May 4 , 1928 ) is a former Democratic member of the United States Senate , representing the state of Maryland from 1965 to 1971 . 
 Born in North Carolina , Tydings moved to Maryland as a youth after he was adopted by Millard Tydings , U.S. Senator from Maryland . After serving in the military , he obtained his law degree and entered into practice . He served in the Maryland House of Delegates from 1955 to 1961 , and as United States Attorney from 1961 until his resignation in 1963 to run for Senate . 
 Tydings won election to the Senate in 1964 . However , his controversial stances on gun control and crime in the District of Columbia cost him re @-@ election in 1970 . He made another attempt at his old seat in 1976 , but was defeated in the Democratic primary election by Paul Sarbanes . He later served as a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Maryland , College Park and the University System of Maryland , and continues to practice law . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tydings was born in Asheville , North Carolina , but attended the public schools of Aberdeen , Maryland . He was adopted as a child by his stepfather , Millard Tydings , who also was a Maryland Senator . His maternal grandfather was Joseph E. Davies , who served as U.S. Ambassador to Belgium , Luxembourg , and the Soviet Union . Tydings went on to graduate from the <unk> School in 1946 , the University of Maryland , College Park in 1950 where he became a brother of Alpha Phi Omega , and the University of Maryland School of Law in 1953 . 
 Following the Second World War , Tydings served as a corporal in the Sixth Constabulary Regiment of the United States Army 's European occupation . After his service , he was admitted to the bar in 1952 and was elected to the Maryland House of Delegates in 1955 from Harford County , Maryland . 
 Tydings served as a delegate until 1961 , when he was appointed United States Attorney for Maryland by President John F. Kennedy , a close friend . As U.S. Attorney , Tydings oversaw the prosecution of several people in the savings and loan business . In 1963 , Tydings served as the United States representative at the Interpol Conference in Helsinki , Finland , and at the International Penal Conference in Bellagio , Italy . 
 = = 1964 United States Senate election = = 
 In the 1964 elections , Tydings was frequently mentioned as a potential candidate to compete for the United States Senate seat of Republican J. Glenn Beall , Sr. While initially hesitant , Tydings resigned as U.S. Attorney on November 21 , 1963 to test his political support across the state . On January 14 , 1964 , Tydings officially declared his candidacy , stating he was challenging the " old guard " of the Maryland Democratic Party political machine . He also said he would work to bring a " new era of leadership into Maryland " . 
 During the primary election in May 1964 , Tydings faced Maryland Comptroller Louis L. Goldstein , who had won the endorsement of both J. Millard Tawes , Governor of Maryland , and Daniel Brewster , the other U.S. Senator from Maryland . Despite the support of the party leaders , Goldstein was trounced by Tydings in the primary , losing by nearly a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . 
 Having secured his party 's nomination , Tydings moved forward to face Beall in the general election . The final election results gave Tydings nearly 63 % of 1 @,@ 081 @,@ 042 votes cast . His large margin of victory was due at least in part to the landslide win by fellow Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson for President in the same election , which likely increased voter turnout . 
 Upon his election , Tydings began to lay out his legislative agenda for his upcoming term , which included water conservation , pollution and air purity , and mass transportation . He also expressed interest in serving on the Senate Committee on the District of Columbia . Tydings was permitted to serve on the committee , and was eventually appointed chairman in 1969 . 
 = = Bid for re @-@ election = = 
 Leading up to the elections of 1970 , Tydings faced criticism from both parties for his actions as senator . In July 1970 , syndicated columnist Marquis Childs noted that Tydings ' problems on the left stemmed from his support of a crime bill for the District of Columbia , which was perceived as repressive against African Americans . There was also criticism directed at the bill for writing into law the practices of preventive detention and no knock warrants . 
 Tydings ' difficulties with the right stemmed from his sponsorship of the Firearms Registration and Licensing Act , which would have required the registration of firearms . An avid hunter himself , his efforts agitated the gun lobby and the NRA . One Maryland activist group , Citizens Against Tydings , was formed solely because of Tydings ' gun registration platform . Further complicating his relations with the right were the efforts by the American Security Council Foundation , which graded him as a " zero " on national security issues and spent over $ 150 @,@ 000 to campaign against his bid for re @-@ election . 
 In the Democratic primary , Tydings was challenged by perennial candidate and Dixiecrat George P. Mahoney and two others . After a divisive campaign , Tydings beat Mahoney by 53 % to 37 % . 
 For the general election , Tydings ' opponent was freshman Congressman J. Glenn Beall , Jr. from Western Maryland , the son of J. Glenn Beall , Sr. , whom Tydings had defeated in 1964 . Beall 's campaign strategy " leaned heavily on his affable , noncontroversial personality " and avoided turning the campaign negative . As a result of Tydings ' unpopularity and Beall 's campaign strategy , Tydings was defeated 51 % to 48 % . 
 In a review of the election , The Washington Post noted one of Tydings ' major problems was identifying with his constituents . Despite the 3 @-@ 1 advantage of registered Democrats versus Republicans in the state , Tydings had been labeled as an " <unk> " by many Marylanders , and Vice President Spiro Agnew , formerly the Governor of Maryland , had called Tydings " radical " while campaigning for Beall . Tydings was also wealthy , and was seen as having an " aloof " disposition . 
 = = Return to politics = = 
 Tydings resumed his legal career after he lost his Senate seat , entering into practice with a Washington law firm that included Giant Food President Joseph <unk> . After several years out of politics , he began traveling the state in 1975 to gauge his chances for winning a rematch versus Beall , who was coming up for re @-@ election in 1976 . On January 10 , 1976 , Tydings announced his candidacy to retake the seat , which he argued was taken unfairly in 1970 due to an undisclosed $ 180 @,@ 000 gift to the Beall campaign . 
 In the primary , Tydings faced a strong challenge from Congressman Paul Sarbanes , who had entered the race several months earlier . This head start gave Sarbanes a considerable organizational and monetary advantage , and he had already secured influential endorsements . To fend off Sarbanes , Tydings hoped his name recognition and charisma on television would compensate for Sarbanes ' other advantages . He also worked to <unk> himself as more fiscally conservative than Sarbanes , since both candidates were seen as liberal . 
 For the primary election , Tydings needed a large margin of victory from precincts in the Washington , D.C. suburbs of Prince George 's and Montgomery Counties , where he was most popular . However , despite Tydings winning both counties , Sarbanes performed well in the rest of the state and defeated Tydings by over 100 @,@ 000 votes , 61 % to 39 % . Sarbanes had managed to outspend Tydings two @-@ to @-@ one during the campaign . After defeating Tydings , Sarbanes won the general election and served as senator until 2007 . 
 = = Post @-@ Senate career = = 
 After defeat , Tydings returned to his law career at <unk> 's firm . He also worked as a partner in the law firm of Finley , Kumble , Wagner , <unk> , Manley , Myerson & Casey , which collapsed in 1987 . Later , Tydings worked at Anderson Kill <unk> & Oshinsky from 1988 until his departure with <unk> Oshinsky in 1996 to join Dickstein Shapiro in Washington , D.C. As of 2008 , he is a senior counsel at Dickstein Shapiro . 
 In academics , Tydings was a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Maryland from 1974 to 1984 , serving as chairman from 1982 to 1984 ; it became University of Maryland , College Park in 1988 . In 1977 , Tydings called for the Board of Regents of the University of Maryland to divest its endowment from companies doing business with the apartheid regime in South Africa . He later served as a member of Board of Regents of the University System of Maryland from 2000 to 2005 . In September 2008 , he was appointed by Maryland Governor Martin O 'Malley to the board of the University of Maryland Medical System . As of 2016 , he resides in Harford County , Maryland . 
 = Characters of Shakespear 's Plays = 
 Characters of Shakespear 's Plays is an 1817 book of criticism of Shakespeare 's plays , written by early nineteenth century English essayist and literary critic William Hazlitt . Composed in reaction to the neoclassical approach to Shakespeare 's plays typified by Dr. Johnson , it was among the first English @-@ language studies of Shakespeare 's plays to follow the manner of German critic A. W. Schlegel , and , with the work of Coleridge , paved the way for the increased appreciation of Shakespeare 's genius that was characteristic of later nineteenth century criticism . It was also the first book to cover all of Shakespeare 's plays , intended as a guide for the general reader . 
 Then becoming known as a theatre critic , Hazlitt had been focusing increasingly on drama as literature , contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to various journals , including the prestigious Edinburgh Review . This was the first of his book @-@ length literary studies . The plays , the thirty @-@ five that Hazlitt considered genuine , are covered in thirty @-@ two chapters , with new material added to passages reworked from periodical articles and reviews . A Preface establishes his main theme of the uniqueness of Shakespeare 's characters and looks back at earlier Shakespearean criticism . Two concluding chapters on " Doubtful Plays of Shakespear " and the " Poems and Sonnets " round out the book . 
 The centre of attention is in large part on the characters , described often with a personal slant and using memorable expressions ( " It is we who are Hamlet " ) , and incorporating psychological insights that were to become highly influential in later criticism . Though at first less influential , Hazlitt 's comments on the plays ' dramatic structure and poetry , and on the central themes and general mood of each play , laid the groundwork for later critics ' more elaborate interpretations . Frequently expressing the view that stage presentation could not do justice to Shakespeare 's plays , Hazlitt nevertheless also found certain plays eminently <unk> , and he frequently voices admiration for the performances of certain actors , particularly Edmund Kean . 
 At first highly acclaimed — it made an immediate and powerful impact on the poet John Keats among others — then brutally criticised , Hazlitt 's book lost much of its influence in the author 's lifetime , only to reenter the mainstream of Shakespearean criticism in the late nineteenth century . The first edition sold out quickly ; sales of the second , in mid @-@ 1818 , were at first brisk , but they ceased entirely in the wake of harshly antagonistic , personally directed , politically motivated reviews in the Tory literary magazines of the day . Although some interest continued to be shown in Hazlitt 's work as an essayist , it was not until the end of the nineteenth century , long after Hazlitt 's death , that significant interest was again shown in his interpretations of Shakespeare . In the twentieth century , the influential critic A.C. Bradley and a few others began to take seriously the book 's interpretations of many of Shakespeare 's characters . But then Hazlitt along with Bradley was censured for displaying faults of the " character " school of Shakespearean criticism , primarily that of discussing dramatic characters as though they were real people , and again Hazlitt 's contributions to Shakespearean criticism were deprecated . 
 A revival of interest in Hazlitt as a thinker began in the middle of the twentieth century . As it gained momentum , his thoughts on Shakespeare 's plays as a whole , particularly the tragedies ; his discussions of certain characters , such as Shylock , Falstaff , Imogen , Caliban , and Iago ; and his ideas about the nature of drama and poetry in general , as expressed for example in the essay on Coriolanus , gained renewed appreciation and influenced other Shakespearean criticism . 
 Hazlitt 's ideas about many of the plays have now come to be valued as thought @-@ provoking alternatives to those of his contemporary Coleridge , and Characters of Shakespear 's Plays is now viewed as a major study of Shakespeare 's plays , placing Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as one of the three most notable Shakespearean critics of the Romantic period . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 26 January 1814 , Edmund Kean debuted as Shylock in Shakespeare 's Merchant of Venice at London 's Drury Lane theatre . William Hazlitt , drama critic for the Morning Chronicle since the previous September , was in the audience . He wrote a stunning review , followed by several others applauding ( but sometimes censuring ) Kean 's performances in other Shakespearean tragedies , including King Richard II , King Richard III , Hamlet , Macbeth , Romeo and Juliet , and , what Hazlitt considered the best of Kean 's performances , Othello . ( These were written for the Morning Chronicle , the Champion , and the Examiner ; he was to continue as principal drama critic for the last of these for three years . ) Kean was hitherto unknown in London . Hazlitt , having recently begun a career as a theatrical reviewer , was no better known than the subject of his reviews . These notices quickly brought both Kean and Hazlitt before the public eye . 
 In the course of his preparing for a drama review , Hazlitt was in the habit of reading or rereading the play he was soon to see , and his reviews came to include extensive commentary on the plays themselves , turning rapidly from dramatic criticism to literary criticism . With Shakespeare in particular , this led to considerations of the ways in which the actors — again , particularly his favourite Kean — communicated the message of the plays . But he also noted ways in which no actor 's interpretation could live up to the dramatist 's conception . 
 As his musings developed along these lines , Hazlitt continued to contribute miscellaneous articles to various periodicals . In February 1816 , he reviewed August Wilhelm Schlegel 's Lectures on Dramatic Literature for the Edinburgh Review . The German critic Schlegel showed an appreciation for Shakespeare of a kind that no one in Hazlitt 's country had yet demonstrated , and Hazlitt , sympathising with many of Schlegel 's ideas , felt there was a place for a whole book that would provide appreciative criticism of all of Shakespeare 's plays . Such a book would provide liberal quotations from the text , and focus on the characters and various qualities particular to each play ; and he felt that he could write it . His writing career was now moving in this direction ( he had been contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to the Examiner and elsewhere during this period ) , he needed the money to support his family , and his growing reputation as a drama critic enabled him to have his name appear on the title page ( as a reviewer for periodicals , his contributions were anonymous , as was customary at the time ) . 
 Thus , Characters of Shakespear 's Plays was born . Considerable material that he had already worked up in his drama reviews was incorporated into the book . One essay , on A Midsummer Night 's Dream , was taken entire from a contribution to " The Round Table " series in the Examiner , first published on 26 November 1815 , with a concluding paragraph tacked on from a drama review , also published in the Examiner , on 21 January 1816 . There was material from other essays . Most of " Shakespear 's Exact Discrimination of Nearly Similar Characters " ( the Examiner , 12 May 1816 ) made its way into the chapters on King Henry IV , King Henry VI , and Othello . Portions of " Shakespear 's Female Characters " ( the Examiner , 28 July 1816 ) found a place in the chapters on Cymbeline and Othello . Hazlitt filled out the rest of what he needed to make a complete book in 1816 and possibly early 1817 . 
 At this time , unhappy with the way his collection The Round Table , issued in the same year , was being promoted by its publisher , he began to promote his new book himself , partly by word of mouth and also by getting a friend to publish the chapter on Hamlet in The Times and requesting Francis Jeffrey , editor of the Edinburgh Review , to notice it in that periodical . He had already had it printed privately ( instead of offering it directly to a publisher ) by his friend the printer Carew Henry Reynell , who purchased the copyright for £ 100 . As a publicity tactic , copies were circulated privately . Finally , Hazlitt got the book published , by Rowland Hunter and the brothers Charles and James Ollier in collaboration , who brought it out on 9 July 1817 . It was extremely successful , this first edition selling out in six weeks . A second edition was issued by Taylor and Hessey in 1818 , and later that year an unlicensed edition was brought out in Boston by Wells and Lilly . No further editions appeared in Hazlitt 's lifetime . 
 = = Essays = = 
 Characters of Shakespear 's Plays consists primarily of Hazlitt 's impressions of and thoughts about all of William Shakespeare 's plays he believed to be genuine . It was the first book of the kind that anyone had yet written . His main focus is on the characters that appear in the plays , but he also comments on the plays ' dramatic structure and poetry , referring frequently to commentary by earlier critics , as well as the manner in which the characters were acted on stage . The essays on the plays themselves ( there is a " Preface " as well as an essay on " Doubtful Plays of Shakespear " and one on the " Poems and Sonnets " ) number thirty @-@ two , but with two of the essays encompassing five of the plays , the plays discussed amount to thirty @-@ five in number . Though each essay constitutes a chapter in a book , in style and length they resemble those of Hazlitt 's miscellaneous collection The Round Table ( published also in 1817 , a collaboration with Leigh Hunt ) , which followed the model for periodical essays established a century earlier in The Spectator . 
 Though Hazlitt could find much to appreciate in the comedies , tragedy was to him inherently more important , and he weights the tragedies much more heavily . In this he differed from Johnson , who thought Shakespeare best at comedy . The greatest of the plays were tragedies — particularly Macbeth , Othello , King Lear , and Hamlet — and Hazlitt 's comments on tragedy are often integrated with his ideas about the significance of poetry and imaginative literature in general . As he expressed it at the end of " Lear " , tragedy describes the strongest passions , and " the greatest strength of genius is shewn here in describing the strongest passions : for the power of the imagination , in works of invention , must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions , which are the subject of them . " 
 = = = Preface = = = 
 In the " Preface " Hazlitt establishes his focus on " characters " by quoting Pope 's comment that " every single character in Shakespear , is as much an individual , as those in life itself " . After reviewing various other critics of Shakespeare , Hazlitt focuses on two of the most important , including the influential Dr. Johnson . Hazlitt found the Shakespearean criticism of Johnson , the premier literary critic of the previous era , troubling in several ways . He insufficiently valued the tragedies ; he missed the essence of much of the poetry ; and he " reduced everything to the common standard of conventional propriety [ ... ] the most exquisite refinement or sublimity produced an effect on his mind , only as they could be translated into the language of measured prose " . Johnson also believed that every character in Shakespeare represents a " type " or " species " , whereas Hazlitt , siding with Pope , emphasised the individuality of Shakespeare 's characters , while discussing them more comprehensively than anyone had yet done . 
 Rather than an English critic , it was the German August Wilhelm Schlegel , whose lectures on the drama had recently been translated into English , whom Hazlitt believed to be the greatest critic of Shakespeare 's plays . Hazlitt here includes long extracts from Schlegel on Shakespeare , differing with him principally with respect to what he called a " mysticism " that appears in Schlegel 's interpretations . He shared with Schlegel an enthusiasm for Shakespeare that he found lacking in Dr. Johnson . " An <unk> enthusiasm " , he remarks , " is more <unk> with respect to Shakespear than the want of it ; for our admiration cannot easily surpass his genius . " 
 = = = Cymbeline = = = 
 As one of his favourites , Hazlitt places Cymbeline first in his discussions of Shakespeare 's plays , according it extensive treatment . This includes his personal impressions of individual characters — as the book 's title would lead us to expect — but also the kind of broader consideration for which he would not be credited for at least a century and a half . 
 The play 's " greatest charm is the character of Imogen " , writes Hazlitt . He observes how , in justifying her actions , " she relies little on her personal charms " or a prudish " affected antipathy to vice " but rather " on her merit , and her merit is in the depth of her love , her truth and constancy . " Shakespeare 's presentation is full and rounded . We see her beauty as observed by others ( as by the villain <unk> ) , but more often we see her from the inside , and are touched when , after endless nights of crying herself awake over the loss of Posthumus , she is outraged to learn ( as she is falsely informed ) that " ' Some Jay of Italy [ ... ] hath betrayed him . ' " And we witness a moment in the development of her character , as her resolve to disguise herself to seek out Posthumus grows firmer . " Of all Shakespear 's women she is perhaps the most tender and most artless . " 
 Hazlitt broadens the scope of these reflections into a consideration of " Shakespear 's heroines " in general , writing , " No one ever hit the true perfection of the female character , the sense of weakness leaning on the strength of its affections for support , so well as Shakespear " . ( Here Hazlitt incorporates material from his essay " Shakespear 's Female Characters " , published in the Examiner on 28 July 1816 . ) 
 Hazlitt comments to a lesser degree on other characters , such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ; more often he shows how the characters relate to each other and to the structure of the play . These three , for example , " are a fine relief to the intrigues and artificial refinements of the court from which they are banished . " 
 The character of <unk> , " the conceited , booby lord " , is discussed as an occasion for noting how Shakespeare depicted what is most contradictory in human nature . <unk> , " with all the absurdity of his person and manners , is not without shrewdness in his observations . " And again Hazlitt steps back and points out how Shakespeare set one character off against the other and presented characters of similar types but with slight modifications of their otherwise similar traits to convey a certain impression about human nature . Hazlitt observes : 
 [ A ] s it happens in most of the author 's works , there is not only the utmost keeping in each separate character ; but in the casting of the different parts , and their relation to one another , there is an affinity and harmony , like what we may observe in the gradations of colour in a picture . The striking and powerful contrasts in which Shakespear abounds could not escape observation ; but the use he makes of the principle of analogy to reconcile the greatest diversities of character and to maintain a continuity of feeling throughout , has not been sufficiently attended to . 
 As he does with character , Hazlitt observes patterns he discovers in the plot . He will have nothing of criticising it in terms of the classical " unities " . The plot must be taken on its own terms . If the action is long @-@ drawn @-@ out , " the interest becomes more aerial and refined from the principle of perspective introduced into the subject by the imaginary changes of scene , as well as by the length of time it occupies . " 
 Regarding Shakespeare 's weaving together of the story 's threads , Hazlitt marvels at the " ease and conscious unconcern " with which " [ t ] he most straggling and seemingly casual incidents are contrived [ and ] in such a manner as to lead at last to the most complete developement of the catastrophe . " Again , he broadens the discussion and argues against the view of Dr. Johnson " that Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding @-@ up of his plots . We think the contrary is true ; and we might cite in proof of this remark not only the present play , but the conclusion of Lear , of Romeo and Juliet , of Macbeth , of Othello , even of Hamlet , and of other plays of less moment , in which the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural means . " 
 Beyond plot , beyond individual characters , Hazlitt rounds out his discussion by noting the prevailing mood , the " tender gloom [ that ] overspreads the whole " play . He sees the parallel yet subtly contrasting lines of the story playing against each other " unconsciously " in the mind of the reader as of the author , working by " the force of natural association , a particular train of thought suggesting different inflections of the same predominant feeling , melting into , and strengthening one another , like chords in music . " Thus , far more than simply commenting on particular characters , Hazlitt elucidates the character of the play as a whole . 
 = = = Coriolanus = = = 
 Hazlitt 's focus in the essay on Coriolanus is less on the various characters of Shakespeare 's tragedy than on the fundamental moral and political principles behind their actions . For Hazlitt , this play showed in action the concepts behind political writings of his own day , such as Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France and Thomas Paine 's Rights of Man . The character of Coriolanus is a type of the aristocratic hero , though presented as a well @-@ rounded individual , with a " pride " consisting of " inflexible sternness of will " , a " love of reputation " and " glory " , and a " contempt of popular opinion " . Hazlitt also comments on the characters of Coriolanus 's mother and wife , and he points out the substantial fidelity of this play to its source in Thomas North 's translation of Plutarch 's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans , extracting long passages from the life of Coriolanus . 
 His primary focus , however , is on Shakespeare 's dramatisation of " the arguments for and against aristocracy or democracy , on the privileges of the few and the claims of many " . Shakespeare shows the weaknesses of both the nobles and the people , but , thought Hazlitt , he was biased somewhat in favour of the nobility , leading him to gloss over their defects more so than those of the common people . 
 But Hazlitt goes further , to develop an idea that only much later was seen to have radical implications for literary theory : he claims that it is of the very nature of poetry to glorify the aristocrat , the solitary hero , and the monarch , while being much less suited to represent , in ways that capture the imagination , the social problems of the common people . Poetic " imagination naturally falls in with the language of power . The imagination is an exaggerating and exclusive faculty : it takes from one thing to add to another : it accumulates circumstances together to give the greatest possible effect to a favourite object . " On the other hand , the language that would be used to argue the cause of the people relies more on " the understanding " , which " is a dividing and measuring faculty : it judges of things not according to their immediate impression on the mind , but according to their relations to one another . [ ... ] Poetry [ on the other hand ] is right @-@ royal . It puts the individual for the species , the one above the infinite many , might before right . " 
 " So we feel some concern for the poor citizens of Rome when they meet together to compare their wants and grievances , till Coriolanus comes in and with blows and big words drives this set of ' poor rats , ' this rascal scum , to their homes and beggary before him . There is nothing <unk> in a multitude of miserable rogues not wishing to be starved [ ... ] but when a single man comes forward to brave their cries and to make them submit to the last indignities , from mere pride and self @-@ will , our admiration of his prowess is immediately converted into contempt for their <unk> . " The key for Hazlitt is the innate human " love of power " . This love of power is not necessarily expressed by a will to dominate others physically ; but there is at least the tendency to side with power in the imagination , to be swayed and carried away emotionally by the power of poetic language . Hazlitt 's own worship of Napoleon , it was later observed , could be taken as an example of this tendency . 
 Hazlitt for the most part agreed with his contemporary Romantics that poetry can make us better human beings . The following year , in his Lectures on the English Poets , referring to tragic poetry especially , he would observe how " in proportion as it sharpens the edge of calamity and disappointment , it strengthens the desire of good . " Yet , he remained alert to ways in which poetry can also express and reinforce our less admirable tendencies . Following an observation of Burke he notes that " people flock to see a tragedy ; but if there were a public execution in the next street , the theatre would very soon be empty . [ ... ] We are [ ... ] fond of indulging our violent passions [ .... ] We cannot help it . The sense of power is as strong a principle in the mind as the love of pleasure . " 
 <unk> , this tendency , as shown in Coriolanus , could seem to so glorify tyranny and oppression as to lead people to accept it in practice : 
 The whole dramatic moral of Coriolanus is that those who have little shall have less , and that those who have much shall take all that others have left . The people are poor ; therefore they ought to be starved . They are slaves ; therefore they ought to be beaten . They work hard ; therefore they ought to be treated like beasts of burden . They are ignorant ; therefore they ought not to be allowed to feel that they want food , or clothing , or rest , that they are enslaved , oppressed , and miserable . This is the logic of the imagination and the passions ; which seek to aggrandise what excites admiration and to heap contempt on misery , to raise power into tyranny , and to make tyranny absolute ; to thrust down that which is low still lower , and to make wretches desperate : to exalt magistrates into kings , kings into gods ; to degrade subjects to the rank of slaves , and slaves to the condition of brutes . The history of mankind is a romance , a mask , a tragedy , constructed upon the principles of poetical justice ; it is a noble or royal hunt , in which what is sport to the few is death to the many , and in which the spectators <unk> and encourage the strong to set upon the weak , and cry havoc in the chase though they do not share in the spoil . We may depend upon it that what men delight to read in books , they will put in practice in reality . 
 In this way Hazlitt demonstrated how poetry might be used to glorify tyranny and oppression , a tendency he saw disturbingly prominent in Coriolanus . A lifelong advocate of individual freedom and the cause of the people as against the oppression of aristocracy , the tyranny of " legitimate " monarchy , Hazlitt was disturbed by this tendency in the human imagination as expressed in poetry , and it was here that these misgivings first entered into his general theory of poetry . These thoughts were not particularly noticed for a century and a half , when critic John Kinnaird pointed out how curiously at odds with the more typical critical theories of poetry Hazlitt 's idea was , setting him apart from contemporaries such as Wordsworth and Coleridge : " Students of Hazlitt 's thought have strangely neglected this passage , yet the idea it introduces is perhaps the most original , and surely the most heretical , idea in the entire range of his criticism . " Kinnaird notes that Lionel Trilling was the first critic to grasp the " originality and importance of this passage " , though even Trilling interpreted Hazlitt 's idea of the human love of power in too narrow a sense . 
 Having observed the workings of what he thought an alarming tendency of the poetic imagination , as well as Shakespeare 's possible aristocratic bias , Hazlitt then observes that , after all , traits of Coriolanus 's character emerge , even in this dramatic context , that Shakespeare clearly shows to be less than admirable . For example , " Coriolanus complains of the fickleness of the people : yet , the instant he cannot gratify his pride and obstinacy at their expense , he turns his arms against his own country . If his country was not worth defending , why did he build his pride in its defence ? " 
 Ultimately , Hazlitt tried to form a balanced judgement of the play . Comparing Hazlitt 's account with that of a famous contemporary , David Bromwich thought that nothing like this critical stance can " be found anywhere in the whole range of Coleridge 's criticism . " 
 = = = Falstaff ( Henry IV and The Merry Wives of Windsor ) = = = 
 The character of Sir John Falstaff appeared in three of Shakespeare 's plays , Henry IV , Part 1 , Henry IV , Part 2 , and The Merry Wives of Windsor . The bulk of Hazlitt 's commentary on the two history plays is devoted to Falstaff , whom he considers to be " perhaps the most substantial comic character ever invented " . 
 Falstaff had been of interest to Shakespearean commentators for years . Forty years earlier , a full @-@ length book had appeared , An Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John Falstaff ( 1777 ) , by Maurice Morgann , often taken as the beginning of that school of Shakespearean criticism which considers the characters of Shakespeare 's plays as though they were real people . Hazlitt , who seems to have had little acquaintance with Morgann 's work , is careful never to lose sight of Falstaff 's status as a character in a play — three plays , in fact , though the two parts of Henry IV are examined in a single essay . 
 In conveying his impressions of Falstaff , Hazlitt first emphasises the sheer physical bulk that we remember him by : " We are as well acquainted with his person as his mind , and his jokes come upon us with double force and relish from the quantity of flesh through which they make their way , as he shakes his fat sides with laughter [ ... ] . 
 Then Hazlitt observes the connection between Falstaff 's body and his " wit " : " Falstaff 's wit is an emanation of a fine constitution ; an exuberance of good @-@ humour and good @-@ nature ; an overflowing of his love of laughter and good fellowship ; a giving vent to his heart 's ease , and over @-@ contentment with himself and others . " 
 Answering those who consider Falstaff a " mere sensualist " , he points out how little we actually see Falstaff indulging himself . " All this is as much in imagination as in reality . His sensuality does not <unk> and <unk> his other faculties [ ... ] . His imagination keeps up the ball after his senses have done with it . He seems to have even a greater enjoyment of the freedom from restraint , of good cheer , of his ease , of his vanity , in the ideal exaggerated description he gives of them , than in fact . " 
 This leads Hazlitt to consider why , when Falstaff " is represented as a liar , a braggart , a coward , a glutton , etc . , [ ... ] we are not offended but delighted with him [ ... ] . " The answer is that " he is all these as much to amuse others as to gratify himself . He openly assumes all these characters to shew the humourous part of them . The unrestrained indulgence of his own ease , appetites , and convenience , has neither malice nor hypocrisy in it . In a word , he is an actor in himself almost as much as upon the stage , and we no more object to the character of Falstaff in a moral point of view than we should think of bringing an excellent comedian , who should represent him to the life , before one of the police offices . " 
 Hazlitt goes on to present extracts of his favourite scenes , including those between Falstaff and Prince Hal , and Falstaff and Mistress Quickly . This is merged into a consideration of the way Falstaff interacts with some other characters , and the way Shakespeare 's characters reflect on one another , each in his or her behaviour shedding light on key traits in the others . 
 This in turn leads to commentary on the " heroic and serious parts of " Henry IV , parts 1 and 2 , and , finally , to more general reflections on Shakespeare 's genius . But the character of Falstaff has had the lion 's share of the discussion , and Hazlitt ends his essay on the two history plays by balancing his personal feelings about Falstaff with a more distanced , objective comment on the dramas as history plays in a broader context : 
 " The truth is , that we never could forgive the Prince 's treatment of Falstaff [ ... ] " by banishing him after the Prince has become King Henry V , " though perhaps Shakespear knew what was best , according to the history , the nature of the times , and of the man . " 
 Hazlitt 's enthusiastic explanation of how Falstaff 's fatness contributes to our amused sympathy with him was later especially admired by the critic John Dover Wilson . And John Kinnaird considered the " sketch of Falstaff " in this essay to be a " masterpiece " , " a brilliant [ ... ] portrait of comic exuberance incarnate " , though perhaps in part a creation of his own imagination rather than being entirely faithful to the character as created by Shakespeare . 
 Falstaff 's appearance in The Merry Wives of Windsor is far less significant ; although he found things to admire in this play , to Hazlitt , " Falstaff in the Merry Wives of Windsor is not the man he was in the two parts of Henry IV . " 
 = = = Hamlet = = = 
 Though at times Hazlitt delighted in actors ' interpretations of Shakespearean characters , and he thought some of Shakespeare 's plays eminently suited for the stage , he opens the chapter on Hamlet by proclaiming , " We do not like to see our author 's plays acted , and least of all , Hamlet " . Here , more than anywhere else , he sides with Charles Lamb in believing Shakespeare 's plays to suffer in stage presentation . Neither John Kemble nor his favourite actor Edmund Kean played the role of Hamlet to his satisfaction . " Mr. Kean 's Hamlet is as much too splenetic and rash as Mr. Kemble 's is too deliberate and formal . " This , he felt , is a play to be read , and he noted that by his time it had already been so often read as to have become part of the common culture . " This is that Hamlet the Dane , whom we read of in our youth " . One might say , he observes , that Hamlet is just a character in a play : " Hamlet is a name ; his speeches and sayings but the idle coinage of the poet 's brain . " Yet Shakespeare gives those sayings a reality in the mind of the reader , making them " as real as our own thoughts . " 
 Of all Shakespeare 's plays , this one is " the most remarkable for the ingenuity , originality , and unstudied developement of character " , writes Hazlitt . He thought of Hamlet more often than any of Shakespeare 's other plays because " it abounds most in striking reflections on human life , and because the distresses of Hamlet are transferred , by the turn of his mind , to the general account of humanity . " 
 " The character of Hamlet [ ... ] is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion , but by refinement of thought and sentiment " , writes Hazlitt , and he sides with Schlegel and Coleridge in thinking that Hamlet " seems incapable of deliberate action " . " His ruling passion is to think , not to act " . 
 Although the focus in this essay is largely on the character of Prince Hamlet , Hazlitt also comments on the movement of the dramatic action . Shakespeare lends all the characters and settings an air of verisimilitude , so that the reader might consider " the whole play [ to be ] an exact transcription of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark , at the remote period of time fixed upon , before the modern refinements in morals and manners were heard of . [ ... ] the characters think and speak and act just as they might do , if left entirely to themselves . There is no set purpose , no straining at a point . " 
 Hazlitt also reflects on Shakespeare 's thorough understanding of the complexity of human character . Queen Gertrude , " who was so criminal in some respects [ was ] not without sensibility and affection in other relations of life . " Again , he comments on the idea expressed by other critics that some characters are too inconsistent in their behaviour to be plausible , particularly Polonius . If " his advice to [ his son ] Laertes is very excellent , and his advice to the King and Queen on the subject of Hamlet 's madness very ridiculous " , that is " because [ Shakespeare ] kept up the distinction which there is in nature , between the understandings and the moral habits of men . [ ... ] Polonius is not a fool , but he makes himself so . " 
 Hazlitt 's essay on Hamlet was later used by David Bromwich in an extensive comparison of Coleridge 's and Hazlitt 's critical views in general . Although , to Bromwich , Coleridge 's criticism of Hamlet contained a greater number of original ideas , including the general assessment of Prince Hamlet 's character , Hazlitt 's view is notable in that it does not , like Coleridge , reduce that character to a single dominating flaw , his inability to act . In one of his lectures on Shakespeare , Coleridge claimed that " Shakespeare wished to impress upon us the truth that action is the chief end of existence — that no faculties of intellect , however brilliant , can be considered valuable , or indeed otherwise than as misfortunes , if they withdraw us from or render us repugnant to action , and lead us to think and think of doing , until the time has elapsed when we can do anything effectually . " Hazlitt , on the other hand , instead of applying this moral , pointed to the necessity of each reader 's identifying with Hamlet to understand him ( which , he believed , occurred more readily than with any other of Shakespeare 's characters ) and the reader 's judging of Hamlet in part on the basis of what that reader then saw in himself . This made it unlikely that Hamlet 's entire character would be reduced to a single flaw that would provide the reader with a moral lesson . 
 Shakespeare did not force Prince Hamlet to conform to any particular rules of morality . " The moral perfection of this character has been called in question " , Hazlitt writes , but " the ethical delineations of [ Shakespeare ] do not exhibit the drab @-@ coloured <unk> of morality . " Hazlitt understood that human character is too complicated for such a portrayal to conform to the truth of human nature . " On the morality of literature " , observes Bromwich , " Coleridge will usually be found a resolute guide , and Hazlitt an unsettling observer . " 
 John Kinnaird also paid particular attention to Hazlitt 's " celebrated " sketch of Prince Hamlet in this essay . Although Hazlitt does not entirely belong to the school of pure " character " critics , this essay does tend to be more of a " character " criticism than others , asserts Kinnaird , because Hazlitt shared with his Romantic contemporaries an " ambivalence toward tragedy " . Hamlet to him as to his contemporaries was a modern character who was " obsessed with evil in the world [ , ] [ ... ] long [ ed ] to escape from knowledge of it in themselves [ and had a ] pessimistic sense that suffering changes nothing and that the world must go on as it is . " Thus , Hazlitt could declare , " It is we who are Hamlet . " 
 Hazlitt incorporated into this chapter material from his review of Kean 's performance of Hamlet at Drury Lane on 12 March 1814 ( " Mr. Kean 's Hamlet " , The Morning Chronicle , 14 March 1814 ) . That review already included Hazlitt 's musings on the difficulty of presenting Hamlet on stage , after seeing how even his favourite Kean failed to interpret Hamlet 's character adequately . The celebrated passages that begin with " This is that Hamlet the Dane " and include the assertion " It is we who are Hamlet " appear , however , only in the final form of the essay in Characters of Shakespear 's Plays . 
 = = = King Lear = = = 
 In the essay on King Lear , which he entitled simply " Lear " , Hazlitt makes no references to the performances of any actors . In fact , here he fully agrees with Lamb that King Lear , like Hamlet , cannot be adequately presented on stage . No actors , he felt , could do justice to the overwhelming imaginative power of this play . 
 Hazlitt was so deeply affected by this tragedy that he begins the chapter with a regret that he had to write about it at all . " To attempt to give a description of the play itself or its effect upon the mind , is mere impertinence " . Yet what he did write turned out to be a major piece of literary criticism that contributed to his general concepts about tragedy and poetry , and made a powerful impression on the poet John Keats . 
 " The greatest strength of genius " , Hazlitt writes , " is shewn in describing the strongest passions " . This play takes as its subject the strongest passions , and Shakespeare 's genius rose to the occasion . Here , Shakespeare was more " in earnest " than in any of his other creations , and " he was fairly caught in the web of his own imagination " . The result was his best tragedy , and therefore his best play . 
 Of King Lear in general , Hazlitt writes : 
 The passion which he has taken as his subject is that which strikes its root deepest into the human heart [ ... ] This depth of nature , this force of passion , this tug and war of the elements of our being , this firm faith in filial piety , and the giddy anarchy and whirling tumult of the thoughts at finding this prop failing it , the contrast between the fixed , immovable basis of natural affection , and the rapid , irregular starts of imagination , suddenly wrenched from all its accustomed holds and resting @-@ places in the soul , this is what Shakespear has given , and what nobody else but he could give . 
 Some space is devoted to the psychological scrutiny of the principal characters , but with consideration , also , of their function in the dramatic construct . " The character of Lear " is perfectly conceived for its place in the play , " the only ground on which such a story could be built with the greatest truth and effect . It is his rash haste , his violent impetuosity , his blindness to every thing but the dictates of his passions or affection , that produces all his misfortunes , that aggravates his impatience of them , that enforces our pity for him . " 
 Hazlitt then comments on some of the other characters seen not in isolation but as they interact with and affect one another , comparing and contrasting them to highlight subtle differences . For example , the characters of Goneril and Regan , the comparison of which he begins with a note of personal distaste ( " they are so thoroughly hateful that we do not even like to repeat their names " ) , are shown , he points out , partly in their reaction to their sister Cordelia 's desire that they treat their father well — " ' <unk> not to us our duties ' " — and partly by the contrast of their hypocrisy with the candor of the otherwise evil Edmund . 
 Hazlitt lingers briefly on the character of Lear 's third daughter , Cordelia , observing , in one of his psychological asides , that " the indiscreet simplicity of her love [ ... ] has a little of her father 's obstinacy in it " . 
 Going beyond specific characters , or even specific interactions among them , Hazlitt delineates what he calls the " logic of passion " , the rhythm of emotions in the drama , and its effect on the mind of the reader or viewer . " We see the ebb and flow of the feeling , its pauses and feverish starts , its impatience of opposition , its accumulating force when it has had time to recollect itself , the manner in which it avails itself of every passing word or gesture , its haste to repel insinuation , the alternate contraction and dilatation of the soul , and all ' the dazzling fence of controversy ' in this mortal combat with poisoned weapons , aimed at the heart , where each wound is fatal . " He observes , too , in explaining an instance of what later came to be called comic relief , how when the reader 's feelings are strained to the utmost , " just as [ ... ] the fibres of the heart [ ... ] are growing rigid from over @-@ strained excitement [ ... ] [ t ] he imagination is glad to take refuge in the half @-@ comic , half @-@ serious comments of the Fool , just as the mind under the extreme anguish of a surgical operation vents itself in sallies of wit . " 
 And again , on Shakespeare 's artistry , Hazlitt remarks on the way the second plot , involving Gloucester , Edgar , and Edmund , is interwoven with the main plot : " Indeed , the manner in which the threads of the story are woven together is almost as wonderful in the way of art as the carrying on the tide of passion , still varying and unimpaired , is on the score of nature . " 
 Hazlitt appreciatively quotes long extracts from what he considered some of the best scenes , and remarks that , as sad as the concluding events are , " The oppression of the feelings is relieved by the very interest we take in the misfortunes of others , and by the reflections to which they give birth . " This leads to his mentioning the then @-@ current practice of substituting , on stage , a happy ending for Shakespeare 's tragic one , which had been approved by no less an authority than Dr. Johnson . Arguing against this practice , Hazlitt brings in a lengthy quote from an article Lamb wrote for Leigh Hunt 's Reflector , which concludes : " A happy ending ! — as if the living martyrdom that Lear had gone through , — the flaying of his feelings alive , did not make a fair dismissal from life the only decorous thing for him . " 
 Hazlitt , however , in the view of John Kinnaird , goes beyond Lamb in maintaining that it is Lear 's very despair , by which " all the powers of thought and feeling " were elicited and intensified , that gives him tragic " strength and grandeur " . 
 By early 1818 , a few months after the publication of Characters of Shakespear 's Plays , John Keats had acquired a copy . Fascinated by what he read , particularly by the essay on King Lear , he underlined passages and added comments in the margins . Keats especially liked what Hazlitt wrote on the play 's " ebb and flow of the feeling " and noted , using a term he had heard Hazlitt himself apply to Shakespeare in his 27 January lecture " On Shakspeare and Milton " , " This passage has to a great degree hieroglyphic <unk> . " Together with what he had already read of Hazlitt 's work , especially the essay " On Gusto " from The Round Table , which had helped him develop his celebrated idea about " Negative Capability " , this essay on King Lear inspired much of his own poetry and thoughts about poetry . 
 Hazlitt ends the chapter by making four points about genius , poetry , and especially tragedy . To David Bromwich the most important of these is the third , " That the greatest strength of genius is shewn in describing the strongest passions : for the power of the imagination , in works of invention , must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions , which are the subject of them . " 
 Bromwich noted that Hazlitt 's thoughts , particularly as applied to Lear , are here in line with those of Shelley in his Defence of Poetry . Bromwich also noted that for Hazlitt the power of this play is achieved by Shakespeare 's unwillingness to soften the harshness of " nature " , as expressed in Lear 's halting , broken outcries , such as " I will have such <unk> on you both , [ Goneril and Regan ] / That all the world shall — — " . This approach is never quite followed by even so great a contemporary poet as Wordsworth . To Hazlitt , this is a demonstration of why the greatest poetry of his own age failed to achieve the level of greatness that Shakespeare reached here . That King Lear is strongest in subordinating the artistry of dramatic poetry to the power of nature is also why its kind of poetry is superior to the more artificial kind produced by Pope . 
 = = = Macbeth = = = 
 Among Shakespeare 's four principal tragedies , Macbeth , according to Hazlitt in this chapter , is notable for its wild extremes of action , its preponderance of violence , and its representation of " imagination " strained to the verge of the forbidden and the darker mysteries of existence . " This tragedy is alike distinguished for the lofty imagination it displays , and for the tumultuous vehemence of the action ; and the one is made the moving principle of the other " , Hazlitt writes . Macbeth " moves upon the verge of an abyss , and is a constant struggle between life and death . The action is desperate and the reaction is dreadful . [ ... ] The whole play is an unruly chaos of strange and forbidden things , where the ground rocks under our feet . " 
 Here again , Hazlitt is interested not merely in individual characters but in the character of the play as a whole , focusing especially on the supernatural underpinnings , with the prophecies of the three witches on the " blasted heath " , with which Macbeth struggles , wrestling with his destiny , through to the play 's tragic climax . Hazlitt is especially interested in the " design " of Macbeth , in its general mood , its " full poetic ' impression ' " , and in this , according to John Kinnaird , he anticipates the method of the twentieth @-@ century Shakespearean critic G. Wilson Knight . " Shakespear " , writes Hazlitt , " lost sight of nothing that could in any way give relief or heightening to his subject [ ... ] . " 
 Further noting Shakespeare 's crafting of the play , Hazlitt points to fine touches at the beginning that contribute to a unified effect : " The wildness of the scenery , the sudden shifting of the situations and characters , the bustle , the expectations excited , [ all ] are equally extraordinary . " " Shakespear " , he writes , " excelled in the openings of his plays : that of Macbeth is the most striking of any . " 
 He also , as in his essay on Hamlet , notes the realistic effect of Macbeth : " His plays have the force of things upon the mind . What he represents is brought home to the bosom as a part of our experience , implanted in the memory as if we had known the places , persons , and things of which he treats . " 
 In considering the characters , Hazlitt emphasises the importance of their interaction , the way in which a major character 's behaviour helps define that of another . This is especially true of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth , locked together in a struggle against all Scotland and their fate . Macbeth , as he is about to commit his bloodiest deeds , is " assailed by the stings of remorse , and full of ' preternatural <unk> . ' [ ... ] In thought he is absent and perplexed , sudden and desperate in act , from his own <unk> . " This is in contrast with , and " set off by " the character of " Lady Macbeth , whose obdurate strength of will and masculine firmness give her the ascendancy over her husband 's <unk> virtue . [ ... ] The magnitude of her resolution almost covers the magnitude of her guilt . " But in effect Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exchange places as the action develops . He " becomes more callous as he plunges deeper in guilt [ ... ] and [ ... ] in the end anticipates his wife in the boldness and <unk> of his enterprises , while she for want of the same stimulus of action , [ ... ] goes mad and dies . " 
 Here as elsewhere , Hazlitt illuminates the characters not only by contrast with others in the same play but with characters in other plays . A lengthy passage , adapted from an 1814 drama review by Hazlitt , compares Macbeth and King Richard III from Shakespeare 's play of that name . Both characters " are tyrants , usurpers , murderers , both aspiring and ambitious , both courageous , cruel , treacherous . " But Richard is " naturally incapable of good " and " wades through a series of crimes [ ... ] from the ungovernable violence of his temper and a reckless love of mischief " , while Macbeth , " full of ' the milk of human kindness ' " , " is with difficulty prevailed upon to commit [ ... ] the murder of Duncan " and is filled " with remorse after its perpetration . " 
 Similarly , though Lady Macbeth is evil , " [ s ] he is only wicked to gain a great end " and it is only her " inexorable self @-@ will " that prevents her being diverted from her " bad purpose " which masks her " natural affections " ; whereas Goneril and Regan , in King Lear , " excite our loathing and abhorrence " as Lady Macbeth does not . Further , Hazlitt notes that Lady Macbeth displays human emotions , " swelling exultation and keen spirit of triumph , [ ... ] <unk> eagerness of anticipation [ ... ] solid , substantial flesh and blood display of passion " ; while the witches from the same play are only " hags of mischief " , " unreal , abortive , half @-@ existences " . 
 Because of their human qualities , we never entirely lose sympathy with Macbeth and Lady Macbeth , and our imagination participates with theirs in the tragedy . Their imagination makes the two more human and yet also destroys them . As Kinnaird points out ( elaborating on an idea of Joseph W. Donohue , Jr . ) , Hazlitt in part sees Macbeth as a tragedy of imagination itself . 
 One concern addressed by Hazlitt is the assertion by previous critics that Macbeth is little more than a crude and violent amalgam of extremes filled with " Gothic " <unk> . Hazlitt notes , however , that should anyone think Macbeth 's character is so composed of contradictory extremes as to be implausible , it is , rather , the circumstances and the passions in conflict that provide the extremes , while Macbeth 's character retains a strong underlying unity throughout . " Macbeth in Shakespear no more loses his identity of character in the fluctuations of fortune or the storm of passions than Macbeth in himself would have lost the identity of his person . " Kinnaird notes that here , as if anticipating it by a century , Hazlitt argues against the view advanced by Elmer Edgar Stoll in 1933 , that Macbeth 's character is too full of contradictions to be plausible . 
 Although he lingers nostalgically on his memory of the great actress Sarah Siddons 's performance as Lady Macbeth , and a few years earlier had acknowledged that Kean and John Kemble had been at least partly successful in the role of Macbeth ( though each in different portions of it ) , on the whole he expressed doubts about the success of the staging of this play , again agreeing with Lamb . By the time he composed this chapter of Characters , he could write , " We can conceive [ ... ] no one to play Macbeth properly , or to look like a man that had encountered the <unk> Sisters . " Further observations follow about the witches themselves . Part of the problem was that by his day , there remained few who really believed in the supernatural , and " by the force of the police and of philosophy [ ... ] the ghosts in Shakespear will become obsolete . " He concludes by quoting at length a passage from an essay by Lamb on the originality of Shakespeare 's portrayal of the witches . 
 = = = The Merchant of Venice = = = 
 Hazlitt 's treatment of The Merchant of Venice centres on the character of Shylock . A few years earlier , Edmund Kean had appeared as the Jewish moneylender in his debut performance at Drury Lane . Hazlitt , the drama critic for the Morning Chronicle in January 1814 , sat close to the stage and watched every facial expression , every movement . He was astounded at Kean 's , for the time , radically unconventional portrayal of Shylock as a full , rounded , complex human being , full of vigour , rather than a doddering , malevolent stereotype . His positive review of Kean 's performance became critical in boosting the actor 's career . But Kean 's performance also helped alter Hazlitt 's own view of Shylock , which made its way into this essay a few years later . Hazlitt admitted that he had tended to accept the older interpretation of Shylock 's character as it had been depicted on stage , which followed centuries @-@ old prejudices against the Jews , and made him a one @-@ dimensional character . Kean 's performance led him to study the play closely and think deeply about Shylock . Though Shylock 's " mind is warped with prejudices and passion [ ... ] that he has but one idea , is not true ; he has more ideas than any other person in the piece ; and if he is intense and inveterate in the pursuit of his purpose , he shews the utmost elasticity , vigour , and presence of mind , in the means of attaining it " . 
 Although old prejudices against the Jews were starting to disappear , as Hazlitt notes ( he refers to the portrayal of " the benevolent Jew " in Richard Cumberland 's play The Jew of 1794 ) , and some reviewers had begun to discover something respectable in Shylock 's figure , a century and a half later critic David Bromwich would suggest that , in retrospect , it was Hazlitt himself , even more than Kean , who paved the way for what became the prevalent reading of Shylock 's character . Though Shylock is serious about revenge , he is true to himself in other ways that cast a less than favourable light on other characters in the play . After Hazlitt 's account , according to Bromwich , it became less easy to find a simple resolution to the problems in the play or to withhold entirely our sympathy for Shylock , particularly in view of a passage like the following : 
 Shylock is a good hater ; " a man no less sinned against than sinning . " If he carries his revenge too far , yet he has strong grounds for " the lodged hate he bears Anthonio " , which he explains with equal force of eloquence and reason . He seems the <unk> of the vengeance of his race ; and though the long habit of brooding over daily insults and injuries has crusted over his temper with inveterate misanthropy , and hardened him against the contempt of mankind , this adds but little to the triumphant pretensions of his enemies . There is a strong , quick , and deep sense of justice mixed up with the gall and bitterness of his resentment . [ ... ] The desire of revenge is almost inseparable from the sense of wrong ; and we can hardly help sympathising with the proud spirit , hid beneath his " Jewish <unk> " , stung to madness by repeated undeserved provocations , and labouring to throw off the load of obloquy and oppression heaped upon him and all his tribe by one desperate act of " lawful " revenge , till the ferociousness of the means by which he is to execute his purpose , and the pertinacity with which he adheres to it , turn us against him ; but even at last , when disappointed of the sanguinary revenge with which he had glutted his hopes , and exposed to beggary and contempt by the letter of the law on which he had insisted with so little remorse , we pity him , and think him hardly dealt with by his judges . 
 Other critics even in later years insisted that the character of Shylock is that of an outsider separated from society , that the Jewish Shylock represented an older form of justice , meant to be supplanted by the Christian view , represented by Portia , who argued for the prevalence of mercy . Shylock , these critics maintained , must be removed in order to allow society to attain a Christian form of peace . Hazlitt 's view , however , has remained as a valid countervailing concept of the play , one that does not arrive at easy conclusions or take sides readily . 
 Hazlitt also reflects on several other characters . Portia , for example , was no favourite of his , and " has a certain degree of affectation and pedantry about her " . <unk> he finds " a very admirable subordinate character " . 
 Once again , as John Kinnaird observed , Hazlitt is here far more than a " character critic " , showing serious interest in the structure of the play as a whole . " The whole of the trial @-@ scene " , he remarks in this essay , " is a master @-@ piece of dramatic skill . The legal acuteness , the passionate declamations , the sound maxims of jurisprudence , the wit and irony interspersed in it , the fluctuations of hope and fear in the different persons , and the completeness and suddenness of the catastrophe , cannot be surpassed " . He points to some beautiful poetic passages , and concludes that " the graceful winding up of this play [ ... ] is one of the happiest instances of Shakespear 's knowledge of the principles of the drama " . 
 = = = Othello = = = 
 While Hazlitt 's discussion of Othello includes observations about the characters , his consideration of this play , as with all of the four major tragedies , is combined with ideas about the purpose and value of tragedy and even of poetry in general . Expanding upon Aristotle 's idea in the Poetics that " tragedy purifies the affections by terror and pity , " he asserts that tragedy " makes us thoughtful spectators in the lists of life . It is the refiner of the species ; a discipline of humanity . " 
 Furthermore , Othello , more than the other tragedies , has for the average viewer or reader a " close [ ... ] application " to the experiences of everyday life . Hazlitt brings out this point by comparing Othello to Macbeth , where " there is a violent struggle between opposite feelings , between ambition and the stings of conscience , almost from first to last : in Othello , the doubtful conflict between contrary passions , though dreadful , continues only for a short time , and the chief interest is excited by the alternate ascendancy of different passions , by the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred . " 
 Hazlitt 's discussion of the particular characters incorporates observations about the way Shakespeare creates them , showing that , rather than being broad types , characters even superficially similar differ in finely discriminated ways . Desdemona and Emilia , for example , are " to outward appearance , characters of common life , not more distinguished than women generally are , by difference of rank and situation . " As the dialogue unfolds , " the difference of their thoughts and sentiments is however laid open , their minds are separated from each other by signs as plain and as little to be mistaken as the complexions of their husbands . " 
 With all his frequently noted attention to character and characters — Hazlitt 's partly psychological approach to character necessarily referred to observed real @-@ life behavior — he also frequently emphasises the art by which Shakespeare created dramatic " character " . Particularly in tragedy , a " sense of power " , he believed , is the essential medium by which a poet of genius operates on the minds of his audience . When the author instills in the reader or viewer 's imagination the sense of power that he must have had in grasping and conveying intertwined passions , he makes us identify with a character such as Othello , and feel in ourselves the way Iago plays upon his mind so that , ironically , his weakness is made to undermine his strength . 
 Hazlitt often focuses , as well , on specific traits by comparing the characters not to those of real life but to characters in Shakespeare 's other plays , comparing , for example , Iago with Edmund in King Lear . His interest in the art of drama emerges even more obviously when he compares Iago with the villainous character <unk> in Edward Young 's The Revenge ( 1721 ) , still a popular play in Hazlitt 's day . 
 For Hazlitt , Othello is especially notable for the interplay between the characters , and the way Shakespeare communicates the slow and gradual " movement of passion [ ... ] the alternate ascendancy of different passions , [ ... ] the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred . " He finds especially remarkable the gradual alteration of Othello 's feelings about Desdemona as his mind is played upon by Iago . Othello is not naturally a violent person in everyday life : " The nature of the Moor is noble , confiding , tender and generous ; but his blood is of the most inflammable kind ; and being once roused by a sense of his wrongs , he is stopped by no considerations of remorse or pity till he has given a loose to all the dictates of his rage and despair . [ ... ] The third act of Othello is [ Shakespeare 's ] finest display , not of knowledge and passion separately , but of the two combined . " Hazlitt continues : 
 It is in working [ Othello 's ] noble nature up to this extremity through rapid but gradual transitions , in raising passion to its height from the smallest beginnings and in spite of all obstacles , in painting the expiring conflict between love and hatred , tenderness and resentment , jealousy and remorse , in unfolding the strength and the weakness of our nature , in uniting sublimity of thought with the anguish of the keenest woe , in putting in motion the various impulses that agitate this our mortal being , and at last blending them in that noble tide of deep and sustained passion , impetuous but majestic [ ... ] that Shakespear has shewn the mastery of his genius and of his power over the human heart . 
 Desdemona 's character is shown in her attachment to her husband . " Her beauty and external graces are only indirectly glanced at . " Her attachment to Othello begins in a manner " a little fantastical and headstrong . " But after that her " whole character consists in having no will of her own , no prompter but her obedience . " Even " the extravagance of her resolutions , the pertinacity of her affections , may be said to arise out of the gentleness of her nature . " 
 Three years earlier , in the review " Mr. Kean 's Iago " in The Examiner ( 7 August 1814 ) , Hazlitt had ventured to speculate that Iago 's suggestions of lasciviousness in Desdemona may have had some basis in truth , as " purity and grossness sometimes ' nearly are allied , / And thin partitions do their bounds divide . ' " Although he omitted this thought from Characters of Shakespear 's Plays , that did not stop an anonymous reviewer in Blackwood 's Magazine from accusing him of calling Desdemona a " lewd " character . In " A Reply to ' Z ' " , written in 1818 but never published , Hazlitt answers his accuser : " It is not true that I have insinuated that Desdemona was a lewd woman , any more than Shakespear has insinuated it , but I have dared to say that he alone could have given additional elegance and even delicacy to a female character from the very disadvantageous circumstances in which Desdemona is placed . " 
 Hazlitt 's treatment of the character of Iago is written in part as a response to those who " thought this whole character unnatural , because his villainy is without a sufficient motive . " Hazlitt responds with a psychological analysis that exerted great influence and sparked considerable discussion : Shakespeare " knew that the love of power , which is another name for the love of mischief , is natural to man . [ ... ] He would know this [ ... ] merely from seeing children paddle in the dirt or kill flies for sport . Iago in fact belongs to a class of character , common to Shakespear and at the same time peculiar to him ; whose heads are as acute and active as their hearts are hard and callous . Iago is [ ... ] an extreme instance of the kind : that is to say , of diseased intellectual activity , with the most perfect indifference to moral good or evil , or rather with a decided preference of the latter , because it falls more readily in with this favourite propensity , gives greater zest to his thoughts and scope to his actions . " This interpretation was later admired and built upon by Shakespearean critic A.C. Bradley . 
 John Kinnaird later commented on Hazlitt 's words terming Iago " an amateur of tragedy in real life " , pointing out that Bradley and others after him developed the idea that Hazlitt saw Iago as an artist in his own right , " a dramatic artist <unk> " . " But the form Iago 's will to ' mischief ' takes is not primarily aesthetic or creative but practical and critical . Soldier that he is , he has a ' craving after action of the most difficult and dangerous kind , ' and he has none of the artist 's sympathy with pleasure ; his ' licentious ' bent is always ' saturnine , ' and stems from ' a desire of finding out the worst side of every thing , and of proving himself an over @-@ match for appearances ' [ ... ] " . David Bromwich later warned against carrying too far the idea that Iago is an artist figure within the play , a representation of Shakespeare himself , as Iago 's " genius is [ ... ] the opposite of Shakespeare 's . It presents all things in a distorting medium [ ... ] . Iago 's peculiar genius is " as Hazlitt represented it , " the exuberance of one part of Shakespeare 's mind — not an allegorical representation of the whole of it . " 
 = = = The Tempest = = = 
 The Tempest , Hazlitt claims , is one of Shakespeare 's " most original and perfect " plays , similar in some ways to A Midsummer Night 's Dream but finer as a play , if not as rich in poetic passages . The Tempest demonstrates the author to be a master of both comedy and tragedy , with a full command over " all the resources of passion , of wit , of thought , of observation " . Yet again , Hazlitt here devotes considerable space to not just the characters in the play , but the character of the play as a whole . The world of the play seems to be created out of nothing ; yet , though dream @-@ like , in large part a product of the imagination , its setting resembles that of a painting we may have seen — " Prospero 's enchanted island [ with its ] airy music , the tempest @-@ <unk> vessel , the turbulent waves , all have the effect of the landscape background of some fine picture " — its poetry having a music that conjures up meaning in the listener 's mind — " the songs [ ... ] without conveying any distinct images , seem to recall all the feelings connected with them , like snatches of half @-@ forgotten music heard indistinctly and at intervals " — and its characters , many of whom , like Ariel , we know could not really exist , are drawn so as to seem " as true and natural as [ Shakespeare 's ] real characters " . All is so artfully unified that " that part which is only the fantastic creation of his mind , has the same palpable texture , and coheres ' <unk> ' with the rest . " 
 Hazlitt provides brief appreciative sketches of many of the characters and their relationships . For example : 
 The courtship between Ferdinand and Miranda is one of the chief beauties of this play . It is the very purity of love . The pretended interference of Prospero with it heightens its interest , and is in character with the magician , whose sense of preternatural power makes him arbitrary , tetchy , and impatient of opposition . 
 In quoting the speech of the old counselor Gonzalo on the ideal commonwealth he would rule , Hazlitt observes that here " Shakespear has anticipated nearly all the arguments on the Utopian schemes of modern philosophy " . 
 He <unk> with special interest the characters of Caliban and Ariel , pointing out that , as they arise within the structure of the play , neither could exist without the other , and neither alone illuminates the sum of our nature better than both together . Caliban is gross , of the earth , whereas " Ariel is imaginary power , the swiftness of thought personified . " 
 Shakespear has , as it were by design , drawn off from Caliban the elements of whatever is ethereal and refined , to compound them in the unearthly mould of Ariel . Nothing was ever more finely conceived than this contrast between the material and the spiritual , the gross and delicate . 
 Hazlitt was particularly interested in Caliban , in part because others thought the character vulgar or evil . Though he is a " savage " , " half brute , half demon " , and " the essence of grossness " , Caliban is not in the least " vulgar " . " The character grows out of the soil where it is rooted , <unk> , uncouth and wild , <unk> by any of the <unk> of custom [ .... ] Vulgarity is not natural coarseness , but conventional coarseness , learnt from others , contrary to , or without an entire conformity of natural power and disposition ; as fashion is the common @-@ place affectation of what is elegant and refined without any feeling of the essence of it . " Stephano and Trinculo are vulgar by comparison , and " in conducting [ them ] to Prospero 's cell " , by understanding the " nature " by which it is surrounded , " Caliban shews the superiority of natural capacity over greater knowledge and greater folly . " 
 Casting a retrospective light on his interest in Caliban in Characters of Shakespear 's Plays , the following year Hazlitt , in a review of " Mr. Coleridge 's Lectures " , responded indignantly to Coleridge 's calling Caliban a " villain " , as well as a " Jacobin " , who wanted only to spread anarchy . Though speaking somewhat tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , Hazlitt rises to Caliban 's defence : " Caliban is so far from being a prototype of modern Jacobinism , that he is strictly the legitimate sovereign of the isle " . Hazlitt did not necessarily believe that Caliban deserved to supplant Prospero as ruler , but he shows that Caliban 's very existence raises questions about the fundamental nature of sovereignty , justice , and society itself . As noted by David Bromwich , Coleridge found reasons to apologise for society as it was . Hazlitt , on the other hand , refused to take sides , leaving as open questions the issues that emerged in the play . " It was left to Hazlitt to interpret Caliban 's coarseness and the justice of his protests as both alike irreducible . " 
 = = = Twelfth Night ; Or , What You Will = = = 
 Hazlitt 's commentary on Twelfth Night uses Shakespeare 's play to illustrate some of his general ideas about comedy , thoughts that he explored at greater length in later works , such as his Lectures on the English Comic Writers ( 1819 ) . 
 Nobody , according to Hazlitt ( voicing his disagreement with Dr. Johnson ) , excelled Shakespeare in tragedy ; although his comedies could be first rate , other writers , such as Molière , Cervantes , and Rabelais , excelled him in some types of comedy . It was in the comedy of " Nature " that Shakespeare was supreme . This is not comedy that satirises the " ridiculous " but is rather the comedy of " convivial laughter " , which gently mocks human foibles and invites us to share in innocent pleasures . Of this kind of comedy , Twelfth Night is " one of the most delightful " . Unlike the " comedy of artificial life , of wit , of satire , " Shakespeare 's more gentle comedy " makes us laugh at the follies of mankind , not despise them [ ... ] . Shakespear 's comic genius resembles the bee rather in its power of extracting sweets from weeds or poisons , than in leaving a sting behind it . " 
 Besides his further general remarks , Hazlitt lingers appreciatively over a number of amusing scenes and poetic passages , including the songs , all showing how " Shakespear 's comedy is of a pastoral and poetical cast . Folly is indigenous to the soil [ .... ] Absurdity has every encouragement afforded it ; and nonsense has room to flourish in . " Characters of vastly different types are all welcome and fit into his scheme : " the same house is big enough to hold Malvolio , the Countess , Maria , Sir Toby , and Sir Andrew <unk> @-@ cheek . " He particularly admires the character of Viola , whom Shakespeare gives many speeches of " impassioned sweetness " . Characterising the play as a whole by quoting the author 's own words in it — " Shakespear alone could describe the effect of his own poetry . " — he reflects that the play 's poetry comes " ' o 'er the ear like the sweet south / That breathes upon a bank of violets , / Stealing and giving odour . ' " 
