 Here Hazlitt steps back to observe his own character , musing that if he himself were less " saturnine " , he might well like the comedies as much as the tragedies , or at least that is how he feels , " after reading [ ... ] parts of this play " . 
 = = = As You Like It = = = 
 Although Hazlitt had seen As You Like It on stage , he remembered it most fondly from having read it so frequently that he practically had it memorised . In Characters of Shakespear 's Plays , he makes no mention at all of any stage performances , treating the play as one primarily meant to be read . What strikes him as most notable about it is its character of a " pastoral drama " , one that presents an " ideal " world — that is , a world of thought and imagination , not action . And though it is a comedy , its interest derives not so much from in our being made to laugh at any particular human follies , but rather , " more out of the sentiments and characters than out of the actions or situations . It is not what is done , but what is said , that claims our attention . " 
 " The very air of the place " , wrote Hazlitt about the Forest of Arden , " seems to breathe a spirit of philosophical poetry ; to stir the thoughts , to touch the heart with pity , as the drowsy forest <unk> to the sighing gale " , and the character who most embodies the philosophical spirit of the place is Jacques , who " is the only purely contemplative character in Shakespear . " Among the lovers , Hazlitt particularly likes the character of Rosalind , " made up of sportive gaiety and natural tenderness " . And the couples , Touchstone and Audrey , and Silvius and Phebe , have their different places in the picture . The other characters , including Orlando and the Duke , also come in for their share of commentary . All in all , Hazlitt finds this to be one of the most quotable and quoted of Shakespear 's plays : " There is hardly any of Shakespear 's plays that contains a greater number of passages that have been quoted in books of extracts , or a greater number of phrases that have become in a manner proverbial . " 
 Hazlitt 's concept of the play as one in which the interest is intended to arise not out of the action or situation but rather its contemplative nature has remained a vital one , reaching into the twentieth century , and now the twenty @-@ first . 
 = = = Measure for Measure = = = 
 Measure for Measure has frequently been considered a " problem play " . It was a problem for Hazlitt in that it contains almost no character with whom one can feel complete sympathy . " [ T ] here is in general a want of passion ; the affections are at a stand ; our sympathies are reflected and defeated in all directions . " Angelo , the Deputy ruler of Vienna , is forgiven by the Duke but draws only Hazlitt 's hatred , as " he seems to have a much greater passion for hypocrisy than for his mistress . " " Neither are we enamoured of Isabella 's rigid chastity , though she could not act otherwise than she did . " Isabella 's brother Claudio " is the only person who feels naturally " , yet even he does not show well in his pleading for life at the sacrifice of his sister 's virginity . There is no easy solution for his plight , and " he is placed in circumstances of distress which almost preclude the wish for his deliverance . " Over a century later , commentator R.W. Chambers placed Hazlitt as the first of a long line of notable Shakespearean critics who felt the same way , and he quoted Characters of Shakespear 's Plays in establishing his contention ( as a basis for arguing his own different view of the play ) that Hazlitt was among the first of dozens of distinguished critics who could not comprehend how Mariana could love and plead for someone like Angelo , and in general showed a distaste for much in Measure for Measure . 
 Yet , unlike Coleridge , and despite his own reservations , Hazlitt found much to admire in Measure for Measure , a " play as full of genius as it is of wisdom . " He quotes at length passages of " dramatic beauty " , and also finds occasion to use this play as an example supporting his characterisation of the general nature of Shakespeare 's genius , and the relation between morality and poetry . " Shakespear was in one sense the least moral of all writers ; for morality ( commonly so called ) is made up of antipathies [ ... ] " . Yet " in another [ sense ] he was the greatest of all moralists . He was a moralist in the same sense in which nature is one . He taught what he had learnt from her . He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow @-@ feeling for it . " 
 Although Hazlitt had reviewed a performance of Measure for Measure for The Examiner on 11 February 1816 , and incorporated a few passages , with modifications , into this chapter , including some of his general philosophical reflections and a mention of some of Schlegel 's opinions , yet he says nothing in Characters of Shakespear 's Plays about any stage performances of this play . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 = = = = Tragedies = = = = 
 Hazlitt believed that because tragedy engages our emotions most profoundly , it is the greatest kind of drama . Of the tragedies based on Greek and Roman history , he ranked Julius Caesar beneath the other Roman tragedies , Coriolanus and Antony and Cleopatra . But , as elsewhere , he expresses admiration for the fine discrimination of character , the depiction of " the manners of the common people , and the jealousies and heart @-@ burnings of the different factions " in Julius Caesar . 
 In Antony and Cleopatra , " Shakespear 's genius has spread over the whole play a richness like the overflowing of the Nile " . Overall , this play " presents a fine picture of Roman pride and Eastern magnificence : and in the struggle between the two , the empire of the world seems suspended , ' like the swan 's down feather , / That stands upon the swell at full of tide , / And neither way inclines . ' " 
 Timon of Athens , to Hazlitt " as much a satire as a play " , seemed to him " to be written with as intense a feeling of his subject as any one play of Shakespear " and " is the only play of our author in which spleen is the predominant feeling of the mind . " 
 A focal point of Hazlitt 's account of Troilus and Cressida is a comparison of the characterisation in this play and that in Chaucer 's poem Troilus and Criseyde ( one of Shakespeare 's sources ) . Chaucer 's characters are full and well developed ; but Chaucer unfolded each character in itself , one at a time . Shakespeare displayed characters as they see themselves as well as how others see them , and showed the effects each has on the others . Shakespeare 's characters were so distinctive that it is as if each were expressed by a distinct " faculty " of his mind ; and , in effect , these faculties could be considered as showing " excessive sociability " , notable for " how they gossiped and compared notes together . " Twentieth @-@ century critic Arthur Eastman thought that , although these remarks did insufficient justice to Chaucer , they were particularly original in revealing " the sophisticated genius of Shakespeare . " 
 For Hazlitt , the essence of Romeo and Juliet is Shakespeare 's portrayal of the love that comes with " the ripening of the youthful blood " ; and with that love the imagination of the youthful lovers is stirred to dwell not so much on present pleasure but " on all the pleasures they had not experienced . All that was to come of life was theirs . [ ... ] Their hopes were of air , their desires of fire . " In many beautiful poetic passages , " the feelings of youth and of the spring are [ ... ] blended together like the breath of opening flowers . " Assessing the character of the play as a whole , he states : " This play presents a beautiful coup @-@ d 'oeil of the progress of human life . In thought it occupies years , and embraces the circle of the affections from childhood to old age . " 
 = = = = Histories = = = = 
 In Hazlitt 's commentary on King John , his last on any of the history plays , he offers his view of history plays in general : " If we are to indulge our imaginations , we had rather do it upon an imaginary theme ; if we are to find subjects for the exercise of our pity and terror , we prefer seeking them in fictitious danger and fictitious distress . " 
 Still , he finds much to appreciate in the history plays : here , it is the weak , vacillating , sometimes contemptible character of King John ; the " comic " but forthright , noble character of Philip the Bastard ; the desperation and excess of maternal tenderness in Constance ; and many beautiful and affecting passages . Hazlitt also offers some reflections on Shakespeare 's versification . There was some controversy over whether this play was genuinely Shakespeare 's . He concludes that the verse shows that it certainly was , a judgement borne out by later critics . 
 Hazlitt remarks that Richard II , less well known than Richard III , is the finer play . Worth noting is the exchange of places between the King and Bolingbroke , the usurping king — " The steps by which Bolingbroke mounts the throne are those by which Richard sinks into the grave " — and he compares the manner and politics of the age with those of his own . Among various poetical passages , he finds the speech of John of Gaunt in praise of England , " one of the most eloquent that ever was penned . " 
 Henry V Hazlitt thought only second @-@ rate among Shakespeare 's plays , yet filled with much fine poetry . Regarding the King himself , he considered the character of this " pageant " play entertaining enough , until one compares King Henry with the historical Henry V , who was as barbarous as any of the historical absolute monarchs . 
 Henry VI , the three parts considered together in one chapter , is not , for Hazlitt , on a level with the other history plays , but , in a long comparison of King Henry VI with King Richard II , he finds occasion to reinforce his major theme of the fine discrimination of superficially similar characters . 
 Richard III for Hazlitt is <unk> made for acting , " properly a stage play ; it belongs to the theatre , rather than to the closet . " It is dominated by the character of King Richard , whom Shakespeare portrays as 
 towering and lofty ; equally impetuous and commanding ; haughty , violent , and subtle ; bold and treacherous ; confident in his strength as well as in his cunning ; raised high by his birth , and higher by his talents and his crimes ; a royal usurper , a princely hypocrite , a tyrant , and a murderer of the house of Plantagenet . 
 Hazlitt comments on the efforts of several actors in playing the role , particularly Kean . Portions of his review of Kean 's first performance as Richard , written for The Morning Chronicle of 15 February 1814 , were incorporated into this chapter . 
 Differing with Dr. Johnson , who found nothing of genius in Henry VIII but the depiction of the " ' meek sorrows and virtuous distress ' " of Queen Katherine , Hazlitt finds in this play , though not one of Shakespeare 's greatest , " considerable interest of a more mild and thoughtful cast , and some of the most striking passages in the author 's works . " In addition to the portrayal of Katherine , Hazlitt likes that of Cardinal Wolsey and of King Henry himself , which , though " drawn with great truth and spirit [ is ] like a very disagreeable portrait , sketched by the hand of a master . " And " the scene of [ the Duke of ] Buckingham led to execution is one of the most affecting and natural in Shakespear , and one to which there is hardly an approach in any other author . " 
 = = = = Comedies = = = = 
 Reflecting on Twelfth Night , Hazlitt considered that his own preference for tragedy could be in part due to his own " saturnine " temperament , and asserted that , regardless of individual preferences , Shakespeare was as skilled in comedy as in tragedy . With this acknowledgement , he had quite a few appreciative comments to make about the comedies . 
 Hazlitt found sheer delight in A Midsummer Night 's Dream , especially relishing its playfully inventive poetry and quoting at length several of his favourite passages . He also considers how it exhibits the fine discrimination of character to be found everywhere in Shakespeare . As elsewhere , he crosses the boundaries of plays and enumerates subtle differences between even the fairy characters , in this case in an extensive comparison of Puck in this play and Ariel in The Tempest . 
 This is one play that Hazlitt felt cannot be properly represented on stage . Its beauties are primarily those of poetry : " Poetry and the stage do not agree well together . The ideal can have no place upon the stage , which is a picture without perspective . [ ... ] Where all is left to the imagination ( as is the case in reading ) every circumstance [ ... ] has an equal chance of being kept in mind , and tells according to the mixed impression of all that has been suggested . " 
 Although the early play The Two Gentlemen of Verona seemed to Hazlitt like " little more than the first outlines of a comedy loosely sketched in " , he also found in it " passages of high poetical spirit , and of inimitable quaintness of humour " . 
 Hazlitt proclaims The Winter 's Tale as " one of the best @-@ acting of our author 's plays " , and recalls with delight some of his favourite actors who played the parts , including Sarah Siddons and John Kemble . He notes the incisive psychology of the unfolding of King Leontes 's madness , the appealing <unk> of Autolycus , and the charm of Perdita 's and Florizel 's speeches , after wondering how it could be that Pope doubted the authenticity of the play as Shakespeare 's . 
 Hazlitt thought All 's Well that Ends Well to be a particularly " pleasing " play , though less as a comedy than as a serious dramatisation of an original tale by Boccaccio . Helena is a noble example of womanhood , and , in the comic part of the play , Hazlitt is especially amused by the character of <unk> , the " parasite and hanger on of [ Count ] Bertram 's whose " folly , boasting , and cowardice [ ... and ] false pretensions to bravery and honour " are unmasked in " a very amusing episode . " The source of Shakespeare 's play leads Hazlitt to <unk> at length on the writing of Boccaccio , who had never had " justice [ ... ] done him by the world . " 
 Love 's Labour 's Lost , thought Hazlitt , " transports us quite as much to the manners of the court , and the quirks of the courts of law , as to the scenes of nature or the fairy @-@ land of [ Shakespeare 's ] own imagination . Shakespear has set himself to imitate the tone of polite conversation then prevailing among the fair , the witty , and the learned " . " If we were to part with any of the author 's comedies " , he writes , " it should be this . " Yet he also mentions many amusing characters , dramatic scenes , and noble lines of poetry he would not willingly part with , quoting at length long passages spoken by both Biron and by Rosaline . 
 Much Ado About Nothing Hazlitt found to be an " admirable comedy " , neatly balancing the comic against more serious matter . He reflects , " Perhaps that middle point of comedy was never more nicely hit in which the ludicrous blends with the tender , and our follies , turning round against themselves in support of our affections , retain nothing but their humanity . " 
 The Taming of the Shrew Hazlitt sums up very simply as " almost the only one of Shakespear 's comedies that has a regular plot , and downright moral [ .... ] It shows admirably how self @-@ will is only to be got the better of by stronger will , and how one degree of ridiculous perversity is only to be driven out by another still greater . " 
 While The Comedy of Errors has a few passages " which bear the decided stamp of [ Shakespeare 's ] genius " , Hazlitt for the most part characterises it as " taken very much from the <unk> of Plautus , and is not an improvement on it . " 
 Hazlitt ends his detailed account of the plays with a chapter on " Doubtful Plays of Shakespear " , the greater part of which consists of direct quotations from Schlegel , whose remarks Hazlitt finds worth considering , if he does not always agree with them . Most of the plays now accepted as Shakespeare 's , or at least partly by Shakespeare , were also accepted as his by Hazlitt . The two notable exceptions were Titus Andronicus and Pericles , Prince of Tyre . Of the former , Hazlitt nevertheless respected Schlegel 's defence of it enough to quote the latter at length . And he allows that some parts of Pericles could have been by Shakespeare but more likely were " imitations " of Shakespeare " by some contemporary poet . " 
 Hazlitt felt compelled to add to his commentary on the plays some words on Shakespeare 's nondramatic poetry , in the chapter " Poems and Sonnets " . While he liked a few of the sonnets , for the most part Hazlitt found Shakespeare 's nondramatic poetry to be artificial , mechanical , and , overall , " laboured , uphill work . " On the whole , wrote Hazlitt , " Our idolatry of Shakespear [ ... ] ceases with his plays . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Characters of Shakespear 's Plays argues against a century and a half of criticism that saw Shakespeare as a " child of nature " , deficient in art and full of faults . To anchor his position , Hazlitt makes an observation by the poet Alexander Pope — despite Pope 's being one of those very critics — his unifying theme : " every single character in Shakespear , is as much an individual , as those in life itself " , and he explores the Shakespearean art that , as much as observation of nature , brought those characters to life . 
 Much of the book synthesises Hazlitt 's own views with those of his predecessors in Shakespearean criticism . The greatest of these critics was August Wilhelm Schlegel , the contemporary German literary scholar and critic who also heavily influenced Coleridge and who Hazlitt believed appreciated Shakespeare better than any English critic . " Certainly no writer among ourselves " , wrote Hazlitt , " has shown either the same admiration of his genius , or the same philosophical acuteness in pointing out his characteristic excellences . " 
 Hazlitt also merges with his presentation , in a general way , the approach of his immediate British predecessors , the " character critics " , like Maurice Morgann , who had begun to take a psychological approach , focusing on how the characters in the plays behave and think like people we know in real life . 
 In this vein , each of Hazlitt 's essays incorporates numerous often very personal commentaries on the characters . For example , in the account of Cymbeline , he announces , " We have almost as great an affection for Imogen as she had for Posthumus ; and she deserves it better . " And comparing Falstaff with Prince Hal , he proclaims , " Falstaff is the better man of the two . " Commenting on " the character of Hamlet " , he in effect joins a discussion among his contemporaries , adding to the mix of similar assessments by Goethe , Schlegel , and Coleridge his observation that Hamlet " is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion , but by refinement of thought and sentiment . " 
 Although Hazlitt 's attention to " characters " in this manner was not original , and was later criticised , he built upon the approach , adding his own conceptions of how Shakespeare presented human nature and experience . 
 One idea , elaborating on his originally stated theme , to which Hazlitt returns several times — in Macbeth , A Midsummer Night 's Dream , Henry IV , and elsewhere — is that Shakespeare does not only create highly individual characters . More than any other dramatist , he creates characters that are of similar general types , and yet , as in real life , differ in subtle ways : 
 Shakespear was scarcely more remarkable for the force and marked contrasts of his characters than for the truth and subtlety with which he has distinguished those which approached the nearest to each other . For instance , the soul of Othello is hardly more distinct from that of Iago than that of Desdemona is shewn to be from <unk> 's ; the ambition of Macbeth is as distinct from the ambition of Richard III. as it is from the meekness of Duncan ; the real madness of Lear is as different from the feigned madness of Edgar as from the babbling of the fool [ ... ] . 
 In the classical view , through at least Dr. Johnson , poetry " holds a mirror up to nature " . The Romantics began to shift the focus to the role of the imagination . In common with his Romantic contemporaries , Hazlitt focuses on how , to communicate the meaning of the play , Shakespeare 's imagination , by the medium of poetry , stimulates the reader 's or audience 's imagination . Several times , Hazlitt observes how Shakespeare by this imaginative construction seemed to become each character in turn . For example , in " Antony and Cleopatra " he stops to observe , " The characters breathe , move , and live . Shakespear [ ... ] becomes them , and speaks and acts for them . " And in " Henry IV " : " He appears to have been all the characters , and in all the situations he describes . " 
 We as readers or audience appreciate the characters by the force of our imagination 's seeming to participate in the scene , as if we were present during such an event in real life . Commenting on the scene in Julius Caesar where Caesar confides to Marc Antony his apprehensions about Cassius , Hazlitt writes : " We know hardly any passage more expressive of the genius of Shakespeare than this . It is as if he had been actually present , had known the different characters and what they thought of one another , and had taken down what he heard and saw , their looks , words , and gestures , just as they happened . " In " Hamlet " , he observes that " the characters think and speak and act just as they might do , if left entirely to themselves . [ ... ] The whole play is an exact transcript of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark [ ... ] . " 
 In " Troilus and Cressida " , by a comparison with Chaucer 's method of depicting character , he explains in detail how Shakespeare 's idea of " character " is not fixed , and Shakespeare shows the characters not only by their own behaviour but as they view and react to one another . Likewise , Shakespeare 's attention was not merely to habitual outward behaviour , but to the most transitory , fleeting inward impressions . " Shakespear exhibited [ ... ] not only what things are in themselves , but whatever they might seem to be , their different reflections , their endless combinations . " 
 At times , Shakespeare 's illumination of his characters ' inner life was so strong that Hazlitt believed no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespeare 's conception . In " Lear " he approvingly quotes his friend Charles Lamb 's argument that , in general , Shakespeare 's plays are unsuited for the stage . The thought crops up repeatedly that " [ t ] he stage is not in general the best place to study our author 's characters in . " And elsewhere , " Poetry and the stage do not agree well together . " In such statements , he approached the position of Lamb ( to whom he dedicated Characters of Shakespear 's Plays ) , who felt that no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespearean drama , that the artifice of the stage interposes a barrier between the author 's conception and the audience 's imagination . As critic John Mahoney put it , to both Lamb and Hazlitt , " the performance of Shakespeare in a theatre must always be disappointing to an extent because the slightest departure from the vision conjured by the imagination is so immediately detected and so quickly a source of aesthetic displeasure . " 
 Certain plays in particular fall into the category of those unfitted for the stage , for example , A Midsummer Night 's Dream and Hamlet . Particularly in the greatest tragedies , this inner focus is so strong that Hazlitt again advances beyond the idea of individual character to that of the " logic of passion " — powerful emotions experienced interactively , illuminating our common human nature . This idea is developed in Hazlitt 's accounts of King Lear , Othello , and Macbeth . 
 At least partly explaining why both Lamb and Hazlitt felt the inadequacy of Shakespearean stage performances was that the theatres themselves were huge and gaudy , audiences were noisy and unmannerly , and dramatic presentations in the early nineteenth century were sensationalistic , laden with artificial and showy props . In addition , unless one sat down in the pit , one could easily miss the subtleties of the actors ' facial and vocal expressions . 
 For all his insistence that justice could not be done to Shakespeare 's plays on stage , Hazlitt frequently made exceptions . A devoted playgoer from an early age , and now a drama critic , he relished many of the stage performances he had witnessed . In some cases , as with Edmund Kean ( to whom he refers frequently in this book , usually with admiration ) and Sarah Siddons ( he could " conceive of nothing grander " than her performance as Lady Macbeth ) , their interpretations of roles in Shakespearean drama left indelible impressions , extending his ideas of the potential of the characters represented . For example , in " Romeo and Juliet " he proclaims , " Perhaps one of the finest pieces of acting that ever was witnessed on the stage , is Mr. Kean 's manner of doing this scene [ when Romeo is banished ] [ ... ] He treads close indeed upon the genius of his author . " 
 Hazlitt throughout his book seems to waver between these two opinions — that frequently the actors offer the best interpretations of Shakespeare , and that no view of Shakespeare on stage can match the rich experience of reading the plays — without acknowledging the apparent contradiction . 
 Some plays he considered to be especially suitable for the stage , such as The Winter 's Tale , which he declares to be " one of the best @-@ acting of our author 's plays " . Here he recalls some acting triumphs he had witnessed long ago : " Mrs. Siddons played Hermione , and in the last scene acted the painted statue to the life — with true monumental dignity and noble passion ; Mr. Kemble , in Leontes , worked himself up into a very fine classical <unk> ; and Bannister , as Autolycus , roared as loud for pity as a sturdy beggar could do who felt none of the pain he counterfeited , and was sound of wind and limb . " 
 Richard III for Hazlitt was another that was " properly a stage @-@ play " , and in that chapter " criticise [ s ] it chiefly with a reference to the manner in which we have seen it performed " , and then compares various actors ' interpretations of the character of King Richard : " If Mr. Kean does not entirely succeed in concentrating all the lines of the character , as drawn by Shakespear [ ... ] [ h ] e is more refined than Cooke ; more bold , varied , and original than Kemble in the same character . " 
 Hazlitt also objects to the way Richard III was frequently edited for the stage at that time . " To make room for [ ... ] worse than needless additions " from other plays , often not by Shakespeare , " many of the most striking passages in the real play have been omitted by the foppery and ignorance of the prompt @-@ book critics . " Viewing it as the stage presentation of a story , he finds this play is damaged by these manipulations , as , in Shakespeare 's original , the " arrangement and developement of the story , and the mutual contrast and combination of the dramatis personae , are in general as finely managed as the developement of the characters or the expression of the passions . " He remarks on another kind of editing — what would soon become known as " <unk> " — in the treatment of a passage in Romeo and Juliet in which the frank speech of Juliet alarmed the <unk> of his day . He quotes the passage , commenting that " we have no doubt that it has been expunged from the Family Shakespear . " 
 Story development and " the business of the plot " are scrutinised in several chapters . " Shakespear excelled in the openings of his plays : that of Macbeth is the most striking of any . " Commenting on the " developement of the catastrophe " in Cymbeline , he takes occasion to note that the contention of Dr. Johnson that " Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding @-@ up of his plots " , is so far from being true that in King Lear , Romeo and Juliet , Macbeth , Othello , and Hamlet , among " other plays of less moment [ ... ] the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural and striking means . " Hazlitt will frequently offer a brief sketch of the story and stop to note particular excellences of Shakespeare 's technique . He thus finds the " whole of the trial scene " in The Merchant of Venice to be " a master @-@ piece of dramatic skill . " 
 Occasionally Hazlitt also discusses the plays from yet other perspectives . Shakespeare 's reliance on earlier source material comes into consideration in " Coriolanus " and " All 's Well that Ends Well " in particular . Repeatedly , Hazlitt focuses on scenes as they were staged . In the words of Arthur Eastman , he " reads the plays like a director , quick to detect cues as to motion , gesture , costume . " Remarking on Hazlitt 's " theatrical sense " , Eastman says that " it 's not simply the physical that Hazlitt has in mind — it 's the whole interrelationship of one person with another , one mind with other minds — presences both physical and psychological upon a stage . " 
 In line with Schlegel , more than with any previous English @-@ language critic ( except Coleridge , who also followed Schlegel ) , Hazlitt found " unity " in Shakespeare 's plays not in their observing the traditional classical unities of time , place , and action , but in their unity of theme . His most complete elaboration of this idea is in his chapter on Antony and Cleopatra : 
 The jealous attention which has been paid to the unities both of time and place has taken away the principle of perspective in the drama , and all the interest which objects derive from distance , from contrast , from privation , from change of fortune , from long @-@ cherished passion ; and contrasts our view of life from a strange and romantic dream , long , obscure , and infinite , into a smartly contested , three hours ' inaugural disputation on its merits by the different candidates for theatrical applause . 
 In the discussion of Macbeth , it is Macbeth 's unity of character that is significant . In many chapters , he emphasises the dominant mood , a unifying theme , the " character " of the play as a whole . In , again , Macbeth , the entire play " is done upon a stronger and more systematic principle of contrast than any other of Shakespear 's plays . " He notes that " a certain tender gloom overspreads the whole " of Cymbeline . Romeo and Juliet shows " the whole progress of human life " in which " one generation pushes another off the stage . " Reading A Midsummer Night 's Dream " is like wandering in a grove by moonlight : the descriptions breathe a sweetness like odours thrown from beds of flowers . " 
 Another earlier criticism of Shakespeare , that his writing was not " moral " , was still alive in Hazlitt 's day . Coleridge frequently emphasised the immorality of characters like Falstaff . To Hazlitt , this was entirely the wrong approach to take to morality in the medium of dramatic poetry , and he stops from time to time to comment on Shakespeare 's morality . In considering Hamlet , for example , he declares that the character of Hamlet should not be judged by ordinary moral rules . " The ethical delineations of " Shakespeare " do not exhibit the drab @-@ coloured <unk> of morality . " In " Measure for Measure " he remarks that Shakespeare 's morality is to be judged as that of nature itself : " He taught what he had learnt from her . He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow @-@ feeling for it . " Shakespeare 's " talent consisted in sympathy with human nature , in all its shapes , degrees , depressions , and elevations " , and this attitude could be considered immoral only if one considers morality to be " made up of antipathies " . 
 Scattered throughout the chapters are more general critical discussions , such as that on tragedy in the essay " Othello " , comedy in " Twelfth Night " , and the value for human life of poetry in general , in " Lear " , among many others . Along the way , Hazlitt intersperses lengthy quotations from the plays , sharing with the reader poetic passages he thought particularly excellent . This practice resembled the by then common practice of collecting long extracts from the plays as the " beauties " of Shakespeare . Hazlitt , however , also adds critical commentary ( though often far less extensive than would become the practice in later years ) , with the quotations illustrating particular points about the plays as well as sharing with his readers what he thought worthy of attention . All this , done as no one had before , made Characters of Shakespear 's Plays the first handbook for the study and appreciation of all of Shakespeare 's plays . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 = = = 1817 – 1830 : Contemporary reception = = = 
 Characters of Shakespear 's Plays was Hazlitt 's most successful book . As he had circulated advance copies before publication , it was noticed favourably before it formally appeared on 9 July 1817 . Leigh Hunt proclaimed enthusiastically that " it is the least of all its praises to say that it must inevitably supersede the <unk> and half @-@ informed criticisms of Johnson . " 
 After publication , not all of the reaction was this positive . The Tory British Critic sniped that the book was " stuffed with dull , common @-@ place , Jacobin declamation " , and the Quarterly Review , with the same political bias , rebuked Hazlitt for his uncomplimentary portrayal of King Henry VIII . But for the most part , the praise continued . Hunt , in a fuller review in The Examiner , applauded not only the author 's enthusiasm " but the very striking susceptibility with which he changes his own humour and manner according to the nature of the play he comes upon ; like a spectator in a theatre , who accompanies the turns of the actor 's face with his own . " John Hamilton Reynolds , reviewing it in The Champion , went so far as to claim that " This is the only work ever written on Shakespeare that can be deemed worthy of Shakespeare " . 
 The first edition sold out in six weeks . It was only some months afterward that the voice of Francis Jeffrey , the highly respected editor of The Edinburgh Review , was heard . Jeffrey began by expressing reservations : this is not a book of great learning and less a book of criticism than of appreciation . And yet , Jeffrey concedes , the " appreciation " is of the highest kind , and he is " not [ ... ] much inclined to disagree with " Hazlitt " after reading his eloquent exposition " of the points he makes about Shakespeare . " The book [ ... ] is written less to tell the reader what Mr. H. knows about Shakespeare or his writings , than to explain to them what he feels about them — and why he feels so — and thinks that all who profess to love poetry should feel so likewise . " While Characters does not " show extraordinary knowledge of [ Shakespeare 's ] production " it nevertheless shows " very considerable originality and genius . " 
 On 30 May 1818 , a second edition appeared , this time published by Taylor and Hessey . At first this sold well . At that time , however , literary criticism was subject to exceptionally strong political influences . In particular , the most unscrupulous of the Tory periodicals did not hesitate to indulge in <unk> lies to discredit adherents of what they considered unacceptable political views . Hazlitt , never reticent about criticising kings or government ministers , soon became a target . Only a little more than a week had passed when the Quarterly Review " delivered a diabolical notice of Characters of Shakespeare 's Plays — possibly by its editor , William Gifford . " ( It could have actually been by a certain John Russell , writing anonymously ; but Hazlitt laid the blame on Gifford , who was responsible for the journal 's contents and may have encouraged Russell . ) Gifford , or Russell , sliding from literary criticism into character assassination , wrote : 
 We should not have condescended to notice the senseless and wicked sophistry of this writer [ ... ] had we not considered him as one of the representatives of a class of men by whom literature is more than at any former period disgraced [ ... ] it might not be unprofitable to show how small a portion of talent and literature was necessary for carrying on the trade of sedition . [ Hazlitt had dared to criticise the character of King Henry VIII . ] The few specimens which we have selected of his ethics and his criticism are more than sufficient to prove that Mr. Hazlitt 's knowledge of Shakespeare and the English language is exactly on a par with the purity of his morals and the depth of his understanding . 
 Sales completely dried up . Hazlitt got the chronology a bit wrong but was otherwise not exaggerating when he wrote in 1821 : 
 Taylor and Hessey told me that they had sold nearly two editions of the Characters of Shakespear 's Plays in about three months , but that after the Quarterly Review of them came out , they never sold another copy . 
 The attacks in the Tory periodicals , soon extended to other works by Hazlitt , killed not merely the sales of Characters of Shakespear 's Plays but , as far as much of the general public was concerned , his reputation as a literary critic . 
 = = = 1830 – 1900 : Under a cloud = = = 
 Though the influence of Hazlitt 's only full @-@ length treatment of Shakespeare somewhat receded , it did not completely die out . Hazlitt 's son and grandson brought out editions of Hazlitt 's works later in the century . His miscellaneous and familiar essays were read , and Hazlitt was commended as a stylist by a discerning few . As a critic , though he had passed out of the public eye , an even more select few understood how high a place he deserved in the ranking of literary critics . William Makepeace Thackeray , for example , praised Hazlitt in 1844 as " one of the keenest and brightest critics that ever lived . " Another rare exception was the Scottish journalist Alexander Ireland , who in a brief memoir of Hazlitt in 1889 wrote that Hazlitt 's book on Shakespeare , " although it professes to be dramatic criticism , is in reality a discourse on the philosophy of life and human nature , more suggestive than many approved treatises expressly devoted to that subject . " 
 For the most part , although Hazlitt continued to be read and his influence was to a degree felt , he was throughout most of the remainder of the nineteenth century infrequently cited as a critic . 
 = = = 1900 – 1950 : Reemergence = = = 
 Around the turn of the twentieth century , the influence of Characters began to be exerted more explicitly , notably in the studies of critic A.C. Bradley , who approvingly adopted Hazlitt 's explanation of the character of Iago . At about this time , George Saintsbury , who wrote a comprehensive history of English criticism ( finished in 1904 ) , recorded his extreme distaste for Hazlitt 's character , and , as noted by critic Elisabeth Schneider , found his writings " filled with vast ignorance , errors , prejudice , and an unpleasantness of temper amounting almost to insanity " . Yet he also ranked Hazlitt high as a critic , among the greatest in the language . Characters he placed lower than some of Hazlitt 's other critical works ; yet he allowed that , aside from such " outbursts " as his railing against the historical King Henry V , and his over @-@ reliance on quotation from Schlegel , Characters of Shakespear 's Plays is filled with much that is admirable , notably Hazlitt 's comparison of Chaucer 's and Shakespeare 's characterisation and his observation that Shakespeare " has no prejudices for or against his characters " . Saintsbury found Hazlitt 's critical judgements sound as a rule , and he thought that the characterisations of Falstaff and Shylock were " masterpieces " . 
 Even as the " character " critics began to fall out of favour , and Hazlitt , who was lumped together with them , was also pushed aside , some influence remained . Hazlitt 's general approach to Shakespeare 's plays , in conveying the prevailing mood , the character of the play itself , had its influence on later twentieth @-@ century critics , like G. Wilson Knight . Other major Shakespeareans , like John Dover Wilson , would occasionally refer approvingly to one of Hazlitt 's insights or notable passages , such as the characterisation of Falstaff . 
 = = = 1950 – 1970 : <unk> = = = 
 Hazlitt 's Shakespearean criticism continued to find some acceptance from then on , yet a stigma still hung about his character , and his criticism was often judged to be overly emotional and " impressionistic " . This attitude changed only gradually . In 1955 , René Wellek , in his history of literary criticism in all Western culture for the previous two centuries , largely supported these earlier views . Characters , to him , centres excessively on Shakespeare 's characters and , worse , Hazlitt " confuses fiction and reality " and discusses fictional characters as though they were real people . Yet he also notes , a half @-@ century after Saintsbury , and following Schneider 's lead , that for all of Hazlitt 's impressionism , " there is more theory in Hazlitt than is generally realised . " He also thought that Hazlitt shows considerable " psychological acumen " in explaining certain types of characters , such as Iago , and that Hazlitt 's " character sketch of Iago is superior to Coleridge 's " . He also praises Hazlitt 's freedom , in Characters and elsewhere , from " the defects which infected his nearest critical rivals , Johnson and Coleridge : chauvinism , prudery , and unctuous sermonising . [ ... ] He is free of the prudery which in his day pervaded English culture . " 
 Contemporaneously , Walter Jackson Bate , a critic specialising in the English Romantic period , voiced his approval of Hazlitt 's Shakespearean criticism , seen in the context of that of other Romantics . " Like Coleridge [ ... ] or [ ... ] Keats " , wrote Bate , " Hazlitt had the characteristic romantic delight in Shakespeare 's ability to unveil character in a single passage or even a single line — in ' flashes of passion ' that offer a ' revelation as it were of the whole context of our being . ' " 
 More attention soon came to Hazlitt 's book . Lionel Trilling was the first critic to recognise the importance of Hazlitt 's radically new idea about poetry as expressed in his essay on Coriolanus . Herschel Baker in 1962 noted that the best parts of Hazlitt 's book , such as the " stirring essays on Othello and Macbeth " , place " Hazlitt near the top of those who have written greatly on the greatest of all writers . " 
 In 1968 , Arthur M. Eastman published a retrospective study of 350 years of Shakespearean criticism . At that time , it still seemed necessary to apologise for including Hazlitt among the major Shakespearean critics of his age . But in A Short History of Shakespearean Criticism , Eastman finally concludes that , although much of what Hazlitt says about Shakespeare is not original , it " is well enough said to find a place in the story . " 
 Before Eastman finishes , however , he enumerates several things that Hazlitt did formulate in an original manner . Besides such memorable expressions as " It is we who are Hamlet " , Hazlitt , like no critic before him , was supremely attentive to " the whole interrelationship of one person with another , one mind with other minds — presences both physical and psychological upon a stage . " With this focus on what Hazlitt had to say about Shakespeare 's stagecraft and the way his plays were acted , Eastman thus rescued him from the opprobrium of being associated , in the most superficial way , with the " character " critics . Differing from his contemporaries Lamb and Coleridge , " Hazlitt [ ... ] brings to Shakespeare both a drama critic 's sense of the plays as theatre and a closet critic 's sense that the theatre of the mind so far surpasses that of the stage that certain of the plays can only be acted there . " 
 Eastman also points to Hazlitt 's focus on the underlying unity of the plays . Hazlitt may not have done this as well as Coleridge ( who , Eastman thought , was better at suggesting avenues of approach for others to find unity in Shakespeare 's plays ) , " Yet the demonstrations of unity in Cymbeline and Othello and King Lear make us see what otherwise we might not . " Eastman also rescues Hazlitt 's political commentary , which , however abrasive it might be , " opens such questions " for general discussion , " so that the politics of the plays enters into the arena of interpretation in a new and dignified way . " 
 Overall , Eastman concludes , despite the book 's many shortcomings , Characters of Shakespear 's Plays was the " best handbook " of its century for the study of Shakespeare 's plays . 
 = = = 1970 – 2000 : Revival = = = 
 It remained for John Kinnaird in his 1978 full @-@ length study of Hazlitt as thinker and critic to reconcile Hazlitt as " character " critic with Hazlitt as drama critic . Hazlitt was a character critic to an extent ; but he was also a dramatic critic who paid attention to staging and dramatic form . And even his character criticism transcended the focus on individual characters to create " a larger study of the ways of dramatic imagination " . In the course of his study of Shakespeare , Hazlitt , as Kinnaird points out , also shows how it is Shakespeare 's " art " that enables him to represent " nature " , dismissing the older critical view that Shakespeare was a " child of nature " but deficient in " art " . 
 Kinnaird further delves into the ideas in Characters of Shakespear 's Plays , especially that of " power " as involved in Shakespeare 's plays and as investigated by Hazlitt , not only the power in physical force but the power of imagination in sympathising with physical force , which at times can overcome our will to the good . He explores Hazlitt 's accounts of Shakespeare 's tragedies — Macbeth , Hamlet , Othello , King Lear , and especially Coriolanus — where he shows that Hazlitt reveals that our love of power in sympathising with what can involve evil can overcome the human desire for the good . This , Kinnaird points out , has serious implications in considering the meaning and purpose of tragic literature in general . 
 Along the way , Kinnaird notes the influence of Characters on later Shakespearean criticism , including that of A.C. Bradley , G. Wilson Knight , and C.L. Barber . 
 Hazlitt , concludes , Kinnaird , was too often misunderstood and dismissed as no more than a " character " critic . But his contribution to Shakespeare studies was much broader and deeper than that , and , despite problems with some of Hazlitt 's own theories , Characters of Shakespear 's Plays was a " seminal " work . 
 By this time , a revival of interest in Hazlitt was well under way . Only a few years later , in 1983 , in his study of Hazlitt as critic , David Bromwich considers at length some issues involving Characters of Shakespear 's Plays . Against some allegations to the contrary in earlier studies of Hazlitt , Bromwich concludes that Hazlitt borrowed little from Coleridge , and he presents several contrasts in their critical views , particularly about Shakespeare , as evidence . In extended discussions of Hazlitt 's critical treatment of the character of Iago in Othello , of Shylock in The Merchant of Venice , of Caliban in The Tempest , of Hamlet , and , at great length , of Coriolanus , he uses the contrast between Coleridge 's criticism and Hazlitt 's to highlight the essential originality of Hazlitt 's critical stance , and he observes that Hazlitt 's views frequently provide a bracing alternative to Coleridge 's . He also delves into the issue of Hazlitt 's influence on Keats partly by means of Characters , particularly the chapter on King Lear , and he finds in Hazlitt 's comments on Lear interesting contrasts and similarities with the critical views of Wordsworth and Shelley . Building upon the arguments advanced by Kinnaird , Bromwich further challenges the " reductive " notion that Characters was simply a work of " character " criticism . 
 = = = 2000 and afterward = = = 
 Sustained by the accelerated revival of interest in Hazlitt toward the close of the twentieth century , the legacy of Characters of Shakespear 's Plays has been valued increasingly as well . In 1994 Harold Bloom , in voicing his appreciation of Hazlitt 's accounts of Coriolanus and of Edmund in King Lear , ranked Hazlitt second only to Dr. Johnson as an English @-@ language literary critic . He echoed and reinforced that assessment in his 2008 edition of Othello . Other new editions of Shakespeare also look back to Hazlitt 's interpretations of his plays . In 2000 , Jonathan <unk> in The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism placed Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as distinguished Shakespearean critics of their age and noted his study of Shakespeare as one of the " landmarks that still serve as points of departure for fresh thinking nearly two centuries later . " In 2006 , with Hazlitt 's full reinstatement as a major Shakespearean critic , philosopher Colin McGinn based an entire book about Shakespeare 's plays on Hazlitt 's idea that Shakespeare was a " philosophical " poet . 
 = The Museum of Curiosity = 
 The Museum of Curiosity , formerly titled The Professor of Curiosity , is a comedy panel game on BBC Radio 4 that was first broadcast on 20 February 2008 . It is hosted by John Lloyd ( Professor of Ignorance at the University of Buckingham , and later at Southampton Solent University ) . He acts as the head of the ( fictional ) titular museum , while a panel of three guests – typically a comedian , an author and an academic – each donate to the museum an ‘ object ’ that fascinates them . The radio medium ensures that the suggested exhibits can be absolutely anything , limited only by the guests ’ imaginations . 
 Bill Bailey acted as co @-@ host of the programme in the first series , under the title of curator of the museum . Bailey left the show after he initially decided to " retire " from panel games , and was replaced by Sean Lock in the second series . Each subsequent series has seen a different comedian take over as the sidekick / curator , with Jon Richardson , Dave Gorman , Jimmy Carr , Humphrey Ker , Phill Jupitus , Sarah Millican and Noel Fielding assuming the role in the third , fourth , fifth , sixth , seventh , eighth and ninth series respectively . Gorman also stood in for Richardson for one episode of the third series , after Richardson was stranded due to the eruption of Eyjafjallajökull . Ker also functioned as a stand @-@ in , this time for Jimmy Carr , when Carr was unable to attend one episode in series 5 . 
 The programme has often been compared to the television panel game QI . Both were co @-@ created by Lloyd , several of the Museum 's ' curators ' and comic guests have appeared regularly on QI , and the QI Elves ( QI 's research team , who provide host Stephen Fry with live information as required during the programme ) provide the research . As a result , some critics consider the radio show to be a spin @-@ off of the TV programme , and some have further ventured that The Museum of Curiosity is not as good as its forerunner . Most reviews of The Museum of Curiosity , however , are positive . 
 = = Format = = 
 In series one , the programme began with Bailey introducing the show and playing its theme tune , which he performed in a slightly different way in each episode . In subsequent series , the theme tune was , instead , performed by House Of Strange Studios of East London . The host / professor and the curator / sidekick introduce themselves . They then give a short guide to the museum , followed by the introduction of the " advisory committee " , a guest panel made up of celebrities and academic experts , during which Lloyd reads their <unk> aloud . 
 Afterward , each member of the " committee " donates something to the museum . The donation can be anything , regardless of its size , cost , <unk> , or even existence . Examples of donations include a yeti , the Battle of Waterloo , and absolutely nothing . Lloyd and the curator then decide what form the exhibit could take and where in the museum it could be displayed . In series one , the programme ended either with Lloyd and Bailey reading audience suggestions for additional exhibits or asking the audience curious questions . Bailey ended the show by giving a humorous comment on a Bertrand Russell quote . Both of these ideas were dropped in series two . 
 From series two onward , the show has maintained a standard format . It is presented in two halves ; in the first half , Lloyd and the curator introduce the three guests , provide an explanation of who they are , and the five engage in a general discussion . In the second half , the curator declares the Museum open for donations , and each guest explains what they wish to " donate " to the museum ( again , as the museum is fictional , nothing is actually exchanged ) . Questioning of all three guests ensures that everyone says something about each donation . 
 = = Production = = 
 The programme 's pilot episode was recorded on 16 April 2007 and was the entitled The Professor of Curiosity . The guests for this episode were Alastair Fothergill , Victoria Finlay and Simon Munnery . This pilot , recorded at the Rutherford Room at the institute of Physics , has not been broadcast . The first series was recorded at the Pleasance Theatre in Islington and , since then , the show has been recorded at the BBC Radio Theatre , with occasional recordings at other venues , such as the Shaw Theatre and RADA Studios ( formerly The Drill Hall ) , all in London . The series was created by Lloyd , Richard Turner and Dan Schreiber . Turner and Schreiber also produce the show . The show 's researchers are James Harkin , Xander <unk> ( for series one ) , Molly Oldfield ( from series two onward ) and <unk> Colgan ( Series 5 onward ) . 
 A live version of the show was staged at the Natural History Museum , London on 9 November 2012 for charity . The guests for this edition were Terry Pratchett , Dave Gorman , Alan West , Baron West of Spithead , Helen Keen , Richard Fortey and Erica McAlister . The show was hosted by John Lloyd , with Producer Dan Schreiber taking the role of curator . 
 Further live shows were staged at the 2014 Edinburgh Fringe featuring a number of top comedians and other guests . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 = = = 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 = = = Series 3 = = = 
 = = = Series 4 = = = 
 = = = Series 5 = = = 
 = = = Series 6 = = = 
 = = = Series 7 = = = 
 = = = Coding Special = = = 
 = = = Series 8 = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reaction to the series was mixed . Phil <unk> in The Guardian described the show as being " unusual " and " eclectic " . Chris Campling , who wrote a preview of the first episode , highlighted it in his " Radio Choice " column for The Times . Gillian Reynolds highlighted the programme as one of her radio choices in the Daily Telegraph . Rosanna <unk> in Scotland on Sunday compared the show positively to QI , also created by Lloyd , while Frances Lass from the Radio Times said it was better , claiming it was , " QI with even more jokes . Made me bark with laughter " , that , " Lord Reith would be so proud " and the programme was , " Pornography for the brain ! " 
 Miranda Sawyer of The Observer criticised the show , saying that , " it 's no QI , because the joy of that programme rests almost entirely in the host , Stephen Fry , and his subversion of the prissy , clever character we 're familiar with ( in QI , Fry is clever , but relaxed ) . The Museum of Curiosity is presented partly by Bill Bailey and mostly by John Lloyd , producer of QI ( are you getting a theme ? ) . Lloyd may well be a nice chap , but we haven 't a clue who he is , and , on the evidence of this , he isn 't a big or witty enough character for us to feel desperate to get to know him . " 
 Nicholas Lezard in The Independent on Sunday was lukewarm about the show , saying that the combination of comedian and scientist guests " more or less worked " , but he felt the show may not have been greenlit without Lloyd and Bailey 's involvement . 
 Kate Chisholm in The Spectator found the show a welcome change from the " smutty jokes and banal innuendo " usually associated with the timeslot , and compared the series to Paul Merton 's Room 101 , " but without the ego " . 
 Elisabeth Mahoney in The Guardian was critical of the second series . While praising the discussion between the guests as , " funny and flowing , and quite endearingly quirky " , she found that the programme " fizzled away when it reached what ought to have been its crux : the donation of kooky items to the imaginary museum . Instead , we had a reminder of what they were , and then a sudden ending that was both limp and abrupt . " 
 After appearing on the show in series 6 , Richard Herring wrote on his blog : " What a delightful and fascinating programme this is ( and one that I think might benefit from an extended podcast release - two hours of material is recorded for the 27 minute show and it 's pretty much all gold ! ) . At times I was so enjoying listening to the others talking that I almost forgot that I was meant to be taking part . It was a wide @-@ ranging discussion taking in ants on stilts , pianists with crippling , mechanical little fingers , the changing meridian and okapi sex ( can you guess what I contributed ? ) . The show has a dedicated team of nerds behind it who have dug out amazing facts and I love the way it has a panel comprising comedians , scientists and experts and attempts to link each contribution to similar areas of the different disciplines . While most TV panel shows ( including to some extent even QI ) gravitate to putting in the same well @-@ known comedy faces , you get a lot more interesting stuff by mixing it up a bit . The zoologist , Dr Christofer Clemente , came up with the funniest lines of the show . But would they book him on Mock The Week ? It 's intelligent and stimulating programming that is increasingly being edged out of TV and even radio , leaving a gaping open goal for independent internet productions to score in . I discussed this with one of the razor @-@ minded team after the show . The TV companies insist on getting big names into all shows , which takes up all the budget and seems to ignore the fact that the pool of possible contributors gets smaller and more boring . But glad that a few shows designed to expand the mind rather than crush the spirit still exist . " 
 = Cheshire , Connecticut , home invasion murders = 
 The Cheshire , Connecticut , home invasion murders occurred on July 23 , 2007 . Jennifer Hawke @-@ Petit and her two daughters were raped and murdered , while her husband , Dr. William Petit , was injured during a home invasion in Cheshire , Connecticut . The Hartford Courant referred to the case as " possibly the most widely publicized crime in the state 's history " . In 2010 Steven Hayes was convicted of the murders and sentenced to death . His accomplice , Joshua Komisarjevsky , was found guilty on October 13 , 2011 , and sentenced to death on January 27 , 2012 . In August 2015 , the state of Connecticut abolished the death penalty , and both Hayes and Komisarjevsky had their death sentences commuted to life sentences . 
 = = Background = = 
 Late in the afternoon of Sunday , July 22 , 2007 , 48 @-@ year @-@ old Jennifer Hawke @-@ Petit and her 11 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Michaela Petit went to a local grocery store in Cheshire , Connecticut . They picked up food for Jennifer 's pre @-@ birthday meal that Michaela planned to prepare for her . During their trip to the grocery store , they attracted the attention of Joshua Komisarjevsky , who followed them home . 
 Steven Hayes messaged Komisarjevsky : " I 'm chomping at the bit to get started . Need a margarita soon . " Hayes then texted , " We still on ? " Komisarjevsky replied , " Yes . " Hayes ' next text asked , " Soon ? " , to which Komisarjevsky replied : " I 'm putting the kid to bed hold your horses " . Hayes then wrote : " Dude , the horses want to get loose . LOL . " 
 = = Home invasion = = 
 According to Hayes ' confession , the two men had planned to rob the Petit house under cover of darkness leaving the family bound , but unharmed . Hayes attributed the outcome to a change of plan . Upon their arrival in the early hours of July 23 , they found William Petit sleeping on a couch on the porch . Komisarjevsky struck William on the head with a baseball bat found in the yard and then tied him up at gunpoint in the basement . The children and their mother were then bound and locked in their respective rooms . Hayes said that he and Komisarjevsky were not satisfied with their haul , and that a <unk> was found which showed an available balance . 
 A gas station 's video surveillance shows Hayes purchasing $ 10 worth of gasoline in two cans he had taken from the Petit home . After returning to the house , and unloading the gas , he took Jennifer to the bank . The prosecution later claimed that this was evidence of premeditated murder . Hayes convinced Jennifer to withdraw $ 15 @,@ 000 from her line of credit when the bank opened . Bank surveillance cameras captured the transaction which shows Jennifer Hawke @-@ Petit , on the morning of July 23 , as she informed the teller of her situation . The bank manager then called 911 and reported the details to police while Jennifer was still with the teller . The manager reported to the 911 dispatcher , in real time , as Jennifer left the bank and was picked up by Hayes , describing his clothing as he drove away with her . The manager stated that Jennifer had indicated the assailants were " being nice " , and she believed they only wanted money . 
 The Cheshire police response to the bank 's " urgent bid " began with assessing the situation and setting up a vehicle perimeter . The police used up more than half an hour taking these preliminary measures while the assailants were raping and murdering the women inside the house . The police made no effort to make the assailants aware of their presence . 
 During this time , Hayes and Komisarjevsky escalated the aggravated nature of their crimes : Komisarjevsky raped the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Michaela . Komisarjevsky , who had photographed the sexual assault of the girl on his cell phone , then provoked Hayes into raping Jennifer . While Hayes was raping her on the floor of the living room , Komisarjevsky entered the room and announced that William Petit had escaped . Hayes then strangled Jennifer , doused her lifeless body and parts of the house , including the daughters ' rooms , with gasoline . While tied to their beds , both daughters had been doused with gasoline ; each had her head covered with a pillowcase . A fire was started , and Hayes and Komisarjevsky fled the scene . Hayley and Michaela both died of smoke inhalation . 
 William Petit had been able to free himself , escape his confines , and call to a neighbor for help . The neighbor indicated that he did not recognize him due to the severity of Petit 's injuries . In court testimony , William Petit stated that he felt a " jolt of adrenaline " coupled with a need to escape upon hearing one of the perpetrators state : " Don 't worry , it 's going to be all over in a couple of minutes . " Petit then told the jury , " I thought , it 's now or never because in my mind at that moment , I thought they were going to shoot all of us . " 
 Hayes and Komisarjevsky fled the scene using the Petit family car . They were immediately spotted by police surveillance , pursued , and arrested one block away . The whole invasion lasted seven hours . 
 The scenario was revealed in a confession by Hayes just hours after the killings . Detectives testified that Hayes smelled strongly of gasoline throughout the interrogation . Each perpetrator blamed or implicated the other as the mastermind and driving force behind the spree . There were even attempts to blame William Petit as an accomplice . Komisarjevsky later kept a diary , entered into evidence , in which he chose to call Petit a " coward " and claimed that he could have stopped the murders had he wanted to . 
 = = Victims = = 
 Jennifer Hawke @-@ Petit ( born September 26 , 1958 ) was a nurse and co @-@ director of the health center at Cheshire Academy , a private boarding school . She met her husband , William Petit , in 1985 on a pediatric rotation at Children 's Hospital when he was a third @-@ year medical student at the University of Pittsburgh and she was a new nurse . Their eldest daughter Hayley ( born October 15 , 1989 ) had just graduated from Miss Porter 's School and was scheduled to attend Dartmouth College . Hayley had been an active fundraiser for multiple sclerosis research , following Jennifer 's diagnosis with that disease . Daughter Michaela ( born November 17 , 1995 ) attended the Chase Collegiate School before her death . 
 William Petit , the sole survivor of the home invasion , is an endocrinologist in Cheshire . He survived when he escaped via a direct external exit from the basement despite his injuries . He has not returned to his medical practice since the murders , stating his desire to be active in the foundations set up to honor the memory of his deceased family . He contemplated running for Congress as a Republican , but later decided against it . 
 = = Perpetrators = = 
 Steven J. Hayes ( born May 30 , 1963 , in Homestead , Florida ) was found guilty on 16 of 17 counts related to the home invasion murders on October 5 , 2010 . On November 8 , 2010 , the jury returned with a recommendation for him to be executed . He was formally sentenced to death by Superior Court Judge Jon C. Blue on December 2 , 2010 . 
 Hayes is an inmate of the Connecticut Department of Correction . His criminal history shows him sentenced for his first offense at the age of 16 . He is incarcerated in the Northern Correctional Institution , which houses the state 's death row for men , in Somers , Connecticut . The method of execution employed by Connecticut was lethal injection , and the state execution chamber was located in the Osborn Correctional Institution in Somers . This sentence became an automatic life sentence when Connecticut abolished the death penalty in 2015 . 
 Joshua A. Komisarjevsky ( born August 10 , 1980 ) was Hayes ' co @-@ conspirator in the home invasion and murders . He was born in 1980 to a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl impregnated by a 20 @-@ year @-@ old mechanic and was adopted by Benedict Komisarjevsky , the son of theatrical director Theodore Komisarjevsky and dancer Ernestine <unk> , and his wife Jude ( née <unk> ) . Komisarjevsky remained incarcerated at the Walker Reception Center in lieu of a $ 15 million bond until his conviction . His trial began on September 19 , 2011 , and on October 13 , 2011 , he was convicted on all 17 counts . On December 9 , 2011 , the jury recommended the death penalty . On January 27 , 2012 Judge Jon Blue sentenced Komisarjevsky to death by lethal injection . His sentence also became an automatic life sentence when Connecticut abolished the death penalty in 2015 . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Hayes ' trial = = = 
 The jury in Hayes ' case was composed of seven women and five men . Following the completion of the trial , the jury deliberated for about four hours to reach its guilty verdicts . 
 The second phase of the trial began on October 18 , 2010 , during which the jurors had to decide if Hayes should be executed or imprisoned for life . The second day of these deliberations began on November 6 , 2010 . Attorney Thomas Ullman told the jury that a sentence of life in prison would be the harshest possible punishment for his client Hayes , because he was so tormented by his crimes and would be isolated in prison . " Life in prison without the possibility of release is the harshest penalty , " Ullman said . " It is a fate worse than death . If you want to end his misery , put him to death , " he added . " If you want him to suffer and carry that burden forever , the guilt , shame , and humiliation , sentence him to life without the possibility of release . " 
 On November 8 , 2010 , the jury returned with a recommendation that Hayes be executed . The jury recommended a death sentence on each of the six capital felony counts for which Hayes was convicted . In the sentencing phase , the jury had deliberated for about 17 hours , over the course of three and a half days , before reaching a decision . 
 Hayes had attempted to negotiate a life sentence in a plea bargain . After the verdict , his defense attorney stated : " Hayes smiled upon hearing the jury 's recommendation of a death sentence . " He then added : " He is thrilled . He 's very happy with the verdict . That 's what he 's wanted all along . " 
 For the first time in state history , the Connecticut state judicial branch offered post @-@ traumatic stress assistance to jurors , who served for two months on the triple @-@ murder trial , because they had been required to look at disturbing images and hear grisly testimony . 
 On December 2 , 2010 , Hayes apologized for the pain and suffering he had caused the Petit family and added that : " Death for me will be a welcome relief and I hope it will bring some peace and comfort to those who I have hurt so much . " Judge Jon Blue formally imposed six death sentences , one for each of the capital charges ; Blue then added a sentence of 106 years for other crimes Hayes committed during the home invasion , including kidnapping , burglary , and assault , before finishing with , " This is a terrible sentence , but is , in truth , a sentence you wrote for yourself in flames . May God have mercy on your soul . " The judge also gave Hayes an official execution date of May 27 , 2011 ; Blue said that this date was a formality , because if Hayes appealed his case , his execution could be delayed for decades . His death sentence became a life sentence in August 2015 when the state abolished the death penalty . 
 = = = Komisarjevsky 's trial = = = 
 Komisarjevsky was found guilty on October 13 , 2011 . On December 9 , 2011 , the jury recommended the death penalty . On January 27 , 2012 , Komisarjevsky was sentenced to death by lethal injection . During the hearing , Komisarjevsky insisted that he did not intend to kill anyone and spoke about the shame , hurt and disappointment he had caused : " I will never find peace within . My life will be a continuation of the hurt I caused . The clock is now ticking and I owe a debt I cannot repay . " He said that forgiveness was not his to have , " and he needs to forgive his worst enemy – himself . " Blue set July 20 , 2012 as Komisarjevsky 's execution date . Like Hayes , Komisarjevsky 's death sentence was turned into a life sentence in August 2015 . 
 = = Subsequent developments in Connecticut capital punishment law = = 
 In 2009 , the Connecticut General Assembly sent legislation to abolish the state 's death penalty to Governor M. Jodi Rell ostensibly to be signed into law . However , on June 5 , 2009 , Rell vetoed the bill instead and cited the Cheshire murders as an exemplary reason for doing so . On November 8 , 2010 , Rell issued the following statement regarding the jury 's recommendation of a sentence of death for Hayes : 
 The crimes that were committed on that brutal July night were so far out of the range of normal understanding that now , more than three years later , we still find it difficult to accept that they happened in one of our communities . I have long believed that there are certain crimes so heinous , so depraved , that society is best served by imposing the ultimate sanction on the criminal . Steven Hayes stands convicted of such crimes – and today the jury has recommended that he should be subjected to the death penalty . I agree . 
 On April 11 , 2012 , the Connecticut House of Representatives voted to repeal capital punishment for future cases ( leaving past death sentences in place ) . The Connecticut Senate had already voted for the bill , and on April 25 Governor Dan Malloy signed the bill into law . 
 In August 2015 , the Connecticut Supreme Court declared all capital punishment inconsistent with the state constitution , effectively commuting the killers ' sentences to life imprisonment . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 2007 , John Carpenter , an employee of the Chase Collegiate School , ran the New York City Marathon , raising $ 8 @,@ 554 for the " Miles for Michaela " campaign - a scholarship benefit . The same year , William Petit established the Michaela Rose Petit ' 14 Scholarship Fund of the Chase Collegiate School . He also established the Hayley 's Hope & Michaela 's Miracle MS Memorial Fund . 
 On January 6 , 2008 , over 130 @,@ 000 <unk> candles were lit in front of thousands of homes across Cheshire in " Cheshire Lights of Hope " , a fundraiser for multiple sclerosis and a tribute to the Petit family . Founded by a local couple , Don and Jenifer Walsh , the event raised over $ 100 @,@ 000 for Hayley 's Hope and Michaela 's Miracle Memorial funds . 
 The murder , and its aftermath , were featured on the news magazine show Dateline NBC , in a segment entitled " The Family on Sorghum Mill Drive " , and on December 9 , 2010 , William Petit appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show in a full @-@ hour episode about the murders of his family and the work of the Petit Family Foundation . 
 On August 5 , 2012 , Petit married Christine <unk> , and moved to Farmington , Connecticut . He met her when she was volunteering with the Petit Family Foundation . 
 HBO broadcast a documentary by filmmaker David Heilbroner called The Cheshire Murders about the murders on July 22 , 2013 . On August 1 , 2013 , Petit told station <unk> that he and <unk> were expecting a child together . The baby who was revealed to be a boy and named William Petit III was born on November 23 , 2013 . In October 2013 , Petit announced that he was considering running for Congress for the Republican Party after being approached by the National Republican Congressional Committee , who had asked him if he would be interested in running . Petit ultimately decided not to be a candidate . 
 Petit condemned the state 's decision to abolish the death penalty in August 2015 , saying he believed the court had overstepped its powers and urging it to give greater consideration to the " emotional impact , particularly on victims and their loved ones " that death penalty cases generate . 
 = The Landlady ( Fyodor Dostoyevsky ) = 
 The Landlady ( Russian : <unk> , <unk> ) is a novella by Russian author Fyodor Dostoyevsky , written in 1847 . Set in Saint Petersburg , it tells of an abstracted young man , Vasily Mikhailovich Ordynov , and his obsessive love for Katerina , the wife of a dismal husband whom <unk> perceives as a malignant fortune @-@ teller or mystic . The story has echoes of Russian folklore and may contain autobiographical references . In its time The Landlady had a mixed reception , more recently being seen as perhaps unique in Dostoyevsky 's oeuvre . The first part of the novella was published in October 1847 in Notes of the Fatherland , the second part in November that year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the reclusive and bookish scholar Vasily Ordynov is compelled to leave his apartment he wanders aimlessly through Saint Petersburg , contemplating his despair over a loveless life , his childhood and his future . Through this distraction he finds himself within a church , where he notices an old man , Ilia Murin , with his young wife , Katerina . His fascination for the couple , particularly Katerina , causes him to contrive further encounters , with the intention of securing a lodging at their home . He becomes their house guest . The gloomy Murin is a perceived Old Believer , with powers of clairvoyance that have perturbed his neighbours and the local police , and which appear to control his wife . Katerina implies that Murin was her mother 's lover , that she might be Murin 's biological daughter , and that the pair ran @-@ off together after he killed her father . There is an unresolved suggestion that Murin caused the death of Katerina 's fiancé during their escape . 
 Ordynov develops a passion for Katerina , which she reciprocates after nursing him through delirium . While in delirium Ordynov , in dream or reality , spies on Murin who has taken to his bed through illness and is recounting tales to Katerina – he rushes into Murin 's room ; Murin 's attempt to shoot Ordynov with a gun , misses . Ordynov tries to convince Katerina of her need to detach herself from Murin physically and psychologically , and believes he has overcome her reluctance to do so when he hears her sing a song of love and freedom . Katerina offers wine to Ordynov and Murin as she considers her choice . Murin uses the language of prediction and psychology to show any choice as futile , as Katerina is predestined by her sex to be a captive of a master and her own grief . Ordynov now fully believes that Murin is a sorcerer and that Katerina is his slave , as she herself believes . Using Murin 's argument , he offers to buy Katerina , to effect her liberation . Murin indicates a veiled threat that the price would be bloodshed for both buyer and goods . Fearing a lost cause , Ordynov intends to kill Murin , but fails as a knife falls from his hand and as Katerina falls at her husband 's feet . 
 Murin afterwards explains to the police that both Katerina and Ordynov are weak and would hand back freedom if it were given ; that she needs the control of a master , and he couldn 't kill a stronger man even with the means to do so . 
 = = Background = = 
 In October 1846 Dostoyevsky wrote to his brother Mikhail that his short story Mr. <unk> was well @-@ received , and that he was continuing to work on Saved <unk> for Vissarion Belinsky . The idea for The Landlady already existed at that point , and three days later he again wrote to Mikhail saying that the proposed Saved <unk> would be shelved as he wanted to introduce a new style , and that " more original , lively and bright thoughts were asking to be put on paper " . He later pointed out the favourable similarities between the progress of the The Landlady and that of his first novel , Poor Folk . 
 On 26 November 1846 Dostoyevsky announced that he had ended his affiliation with Nekrasov and <unk> 's journal The Contemporary , to join Andrey <unk> 's Notes of the Fatherland . He also ended his association with Belinsky 's literary circle after a dispute in early 1846 – subsequently Belinsky left Notes of the Fatherland to write for The Contemporary . <unk> published most of Dostoyevsky 's pre @-@ prison stories in 1846 , except A Novel in Nine Letters , issued in The Contemporary , and <unk> , printed in The Illustrated <unk> . In early 1847 Dostoyevsky noted in a letter to his brother that work on The Landlady had begun – on 9 September 1847 it was finalized . According to Dostoyevsky 's wishes the first part was published in October – second part was issued the following month . 
 = = Themes and style = = 
 The Landlady in its length lies between a long short story and a short novel . According to <unk> , the story incorporates themes found in artistic fairy tales , which , unlike typical folk tales , are written by a particular person , and not collected from hearsay . According to Professor S. <unk> , The Landlady is a " recreation of folktale diction and imagery " and " its plot is based on the three folklore motifs , man – woman dominance , the incestuous father – daughter relationship , and Volga outlaw tales . " 
 The abstracted chief protagonist , Ordynov , is a prototype of future characters that would appear in " White Nights " and <unk> <unk> . C. E. Passage felt that the work was influenced by Gogol 's Taras Bulba and A Terrible Vengeance , <unk> 's <unk> , Hoffmann 's Die <unk> des <unk> , Der <unk> , Der <unk> Gast , Der <unk> and Der <unk> . In Dostoevsky : The Adapter , Passage argues that the " truth of the matter is that Dostoevsky was again compounding story elements as in the case of The Double . " 
 Alfred Bem postulates in <unk> <unk> that The Landlady incorporates autobiographical elements . Influenced by Freud 's psychoanalysis , he argued that Ordynov 's familial relationship with Katerina and Murin was similar to Dostoyevsky 's own , and found reflections of the writer 's affair with Avdotya <unk> , whom he met within her husband 's political circle . Bem states that tiring quarrels between circle members Nikolay Nekrasov and Ivan Turgenev worsened Dostoyevsky 's health , although he had stress problems prior to working on The Landlady . Elements of Gothic literature were also detected in the story 's dark atmosphere , and the strange character of the relationship between Katerina and Ordynov . Valery <unk> believes that the novella discusses good and evil . The critic Stanisław Mackiewicz stated that he found " the key to understand its symbolic content and Belinsky 's fierce rejection . I am of the belief that the young person represents the Russian intelligence , and the woman with the expressive name ' The Landlady ' the Russian folk , while the haunted fortuneteller echoes the religious beliefs of that folk and especially the schismatic Old Believers . " 
 Sophie Ollivier says that the novella tries to " penetrate into the essence of the historical consciousness of the Russian people , of the Russian faith " . Robert Mann believes that Murin is based on the Prophet Elijah , and that Ordynov has a similar religiosity to several literary characters in the 1860s and 1870s . Murin could also be a precursor of The Grand Inquisitor from The Brothers Karamazov . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Landlady received mixed reception . Dostoyevsky was criticized for plagiarizing other works , specifically E.T.A. Hoffmann 's <unk> . Vissarion <unk> called the novella " terrible rubbish " and further commented that he " had tried to reconcile <unk> to Hoffmann , adding a bit of humour after the latest fashion , and covering the whole with a thick veneer of " <unk> " [ Russian cultural tradition ] . " <unk> saw the work as resembling the stories of Tit <unk> ( Vladimir Titov ) and that the book has " not a single simple and lively word or phrase " and that " everything is affected , strained , on stilts , artificial and false . " Recent reception has been more positive than the contemporary . Kenneth A. Lantz stated that it is " unique among Dostoyevsky 's works in its extreme melodrama , eeriness and general obscurity . " 
 = Christ Illusion = 
 Christ Illusion is the tenth studio album by the American thrash metal band Slayer . Released on August 8 , 2006 , the album received generally favorable critical reviews , and it entered the Billboard 200 at number 5 — the band 's second highest U.S. chart position as of 2015 . Christ Illusion includes the Grammy Award @-@ winning songs " Eyes of the Insane " and " Final Six " , and is the band 's first studio album to feature original drummer Dave Lombardo since 1990 's Seasons in the Abyss . It is also the first time since Divine Intervention that they recorded songs in D # tuning . The songs " Jihad " , " Flesh Storm " , " Catalyst " and " <unk> " were recorded in D # tuning , while the songs " Catatonic " , " Eyes of the Insane " , " Skeleton Christ " and " <unk> " were recorded in Drop B tuning . The remaining songs were recorded in C # tuning . 
 Depicting a mutilated Christ painted by longtime collaborator Larry Carroll , the album 's graphic artwork courted controversy . An alternative cover was issued to conservative retailers who felt uncomfortable with the original . The band also put out a censored cover which censored out the offensive artwork . Lyrics , particularly in the song " Jihad " , describe the September 11 attacks from the perspective of a terrorist . Following protests , all Indian stocks of the album were recalled and destroyed by EMI India . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Christ Illusion was recorded via computer between two studios : NRG Studios , North Hollywood , with assistant engineer Dave Colvin ; and Westlake Studios , Los Angeles , where Brian Warwick assisted . Guitarist Kerry King recalls nine of the eleven songs originally slated for Christ Illusion were demoed in 2004 , with Dave Lombardo at the drum kit . However , Lombardo recalls recording with King as far back as early 2003 , when two demos were completed at Lombardo 's home . In a July 2004 interview , guitarist Jeff Hanneman reported " Me and Kerry have a bunch of songs , " and expressed the band 's intent to finish the record that year . Slayer 's label American Recordings was at the time negotiating a switch of record distributors from Columbia Records to Warner Bros. Records , meaning the recording would have been temporarily shelved until the issue became resolved . For this reason the group did not finish a record at that time , as the distribution deal with Warner Records was not finalized until late July 2005 . 
 Slayer wished for Reign in Blood producer Rick Rubin to produce the album , and expected him to do so after Rubin expressed an initial interest . Rubin was busy , however , which caused a further delay to recording . While Christ Illusion 's recording was finally underway Rubin lent production to Metallica 's Death Magnetic , an action later described by King as a " slap in the fucking face . " Josh Abraham produced the album instead , and was praised by Blabbermouth 's Don Kaye " for capturing much more of the spark than has been apparent on the last few records . " Despite missing an opportunity to produce Christ Illusion , Rubin contributed in an " executive production " capacity . King was critical of his involvement , and said he cannot recall Rubin 's presence in the studio during the recording , and that Rubin 's main contribution was in providing suggestions during the final mix . Jamie Thomson of UK 's The Guardian newspaper was scornful of Rubin 's contribution , and observed Slayer " seem unwilling to ditch the nu @-@ metal tendencies that have made much of their recent output so <unk> , which suggests Rubin 's involvement was considerably less hands @-@ on than in his remarkable redemptions of Johnny Cash and Neil Diamond . " 
 As with Slayer 's previous two albums , all rhythm guitar tracks on Christ Illusion were laid down by King . Using a Marshall <unk> 800 as the main guitar sound throughout the album , King wrote roughly 80 % of his guitar solo parts prior to the sessions . The song " Catalyst , " meanwhile , almost saw inclusion on Slayer 's 2001 album God Hates Us All , existing in an alternative version which features former drummer Paul Bostaph on drums . Lombardo 's involvement marked the first time he , King , Araya and Hanneman had appeared together on record since the release of Seasons in the Abyss in 1990 , a reason cited by guitarist Jeff Hanneman for an alleged clearer punk vibe throughout the songs on the album . Lombardo personally described the album as " a matured Reign in Blood " , while King described it as " a mix between God Hates [ Us All ] and Seasons [ in the Abyss ] . " 
 Although eleven songs were originally slated for the album , only ten made the final track listing . A song penned by Hanneman , entitled " Final Six , " was meant for inclusion , with the song name originally declared as the album 's title by vocalist Tom Araya to George Stroumboulopoulos of CBC 's The Hour . Questioned about the album 's title by Kevin and Bean of Los Angeles KROQ @-@ FM , King replied " I 'm not positive it 's been nailed yet . I think last week was the deadline and I 'm not sure where it ended up , so I 'm gonna have to take the fifth on that one . The way it was going , my vote was overlooked , so … That 's why I 'm not real thrilled about it . " However , Araya took one weekend off for vacation during the recording of the album and required a two @-@ hour gall bladder operation the following Monday on May 5 , 2006 . Thus , he was unable to finish the vocals for the song in time for the album 's release . King hinted " Final Six " might appear on a special digipack release of Christ Illusion , a release which eventually surfaced in July 2007 . 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 Being Slayer 's ninth studio album , Christ Illusion was originally scheduled for release on June 6 , 2006 , the sixth day of the sixth month of the sixth year of the 2000s decade . This connotation with the Book of Revelation 's Number of the Beast was being used as a marketing ploy to hype a number of media releases at the time , most notably the remake of the horror film The Omen . King said the idea was scrapped because of the number of other bands that had the same idea , but USA Today reported that the release date was thwarted because the band had failed to secure sufficient studio recording time . Having missed the " Satanic " date , the release was pushed back to July 25 ; however , this date was not met either . Despite this , an exclusive T @-@ shirt , limited to 666 units and only available via the band 's store , was released in commemoration of " the sixth day of the sixth month of the sixth year " . Five thousand copies of the limited edition EP " Eternal Pyre " were also released on this date , and made available via Hot Topic stores in the US . The EP previewed the song " Cult " , and the track was made available for streaming on the band 's official website the same day . Issued in Europe on June 23 , the EP landed at number 48 on the Swedish charts and number 2 on the Finnish charts , while on June 30 , Nuclear Blast Records released a 7 " vinyl picture disc version limited to a thousand copies . 
 Not all media attention surrounding the group on June 6 was favorable . National Day of Slayer , LLC , which describes itself as " a non @-@ profit corporation in the State of Wyoming " , requested on their website that Slayer fanatics participate in " The National Day of Slayer " by coming together and listening to the group 's tracks . However , vandals attacked St. Joseph 's Seminary in Yonkers , New York , by spray @-@ painting a large pentagram in front of the doors , black inverted crosses in two columns in front of the main entrance , and the number six on three steps leading into the Seminary . The words " Reign in Blood " were scrawled on the seminary landing , while the phrase " Better to reign in Hell than to serve in Heaven " , taken from Book 1 of John Milton 's poem Paradise Lost , was found inscribed on two inside columns . The National Day of Slayer website took credit for inspiring the perpetrator ( s ) , and a media investigation discovered that the site had left instructions that fans " spray paint Slayer logos on churches , synagogues , or cemeteries " . 
 Fans were given an exclusive preview of further tracks culled from the upcoming album before its release . In addition to " Cult " , the tracks " Jihad " and " Eyes of the Insane " were made available for streaming on the Spanish website <unk> in late June . A listening party event for the album took place on July 22 at Duff 's Brooklyn in New York City 's Williamsburg neighborhood . Filmed on the set of The Henry Rollins Show , a live rendition of " Disciple " ( taken from Slayer 's 2001 album God Hates Us All ) was posted online , followed by " Cult " ' s live performance which aired on the Independent Film Channel a few days later . BBC Radio 1 's " Mike Davis Rock Show " gave " Skeleton Christ " a premier airing on August 1 , and by August 4 the full album was available for streaming via Slayer 's official MySpace profile . AOL Radio complimented this by launching an " All Slayer " station in anticipation of Christ Illusion 's release , playing all of Slayer 's previously released songs and tracks from the upcoming record . 
 In late July 2006 , bus benches in several Californian cities were decorated with promotional artwork for Christ Illusion . City officials in Fullerton , California , demanded the artwork be immediately removed from seventeen bus benches located throughout the city , and contacted the hired company which had originally put the adverts in place to assume the task . The officials disliked the band 's name , which they felt referred to a murderer . They also took offense to the antichrist and skull logo adorning the bench artwork . Eventually , the artwork was removed . However , various Orange County , California areas surrounding the city of Fullerton still had benches sporting the cover artwork . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Christ Illusion was released on August 8 , 2006 by American Recordings / Warner Bros. Records . In its first week of release , the album sold 62 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200 Chart . Though this ranked as the band 's highest chart position as of 2015 , and was their first top 10 charting since 1994 's Divine Intervention , the album dropped to number 44 the following week . Christ Illusion reached number 9 in Australia , number 3 in Canada , number 6 in Austria , number 8 in the Netherlands , number 10 in Norway , number 9 in Poland and debuted at number 2 in Finland and Germany . The single " Eyes of the Insane " won the " Best Metal Performance " category at the 49th Grammy Awards . The song " Final Six " also won in the same category at the 50th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album was met with mostly favorable reviews . On Metacritic , it was given a score of 72 out of 100 based on 21 reviews . Thom Jurek of AllMusic hailed the album as " raging , forward @-@ thinking heavy metal melding with hardcore thrash " , and wrote that Christ Illusion marked a return to " what made them such a breath of fresh air in the first place . " Ben Ratliff of The New York Times described the album as possessing " a kind of demented gravity , and the music bears it out : it is the most concentrated , focused Slayer record in 20 years . " PopMatters critic Adrien Begrand called it " Slayer 's best album in sixteen years and their most thought @-@ provoking work to date " , and the album was placed at number 15 on PopMatters ' list of The Best Metal Albums of 2006 . Drummer Lombardo came in for particular praise ; though Rolling Stone panned the album , the reviewer acknowledged that " at least their awesome drummer Dave Lombardo shows off some chops . " Blabbermouth 's Don Kaye thought that " while flawed " , Christ Illusion " proves that the band still has a few tricks up its sleeve and one very potent weapon behind the kit . " Peter Atkinson of KNAC.com felt similarly , and reported Lombardo 's " performance is top notch throughout and does give the album a looser feel than Paul Bostaph 's technical precision offered . " In 2011 , Complex Media Network 's music website , Consequence of Sound , honored Christ Illusion on a List ' Em Carefully installment dedicated to writer David Buchanan 's top thirteen metal records released between 2000 and 2010 , citing foreign controversy and overall sonic brutality during drummer Dave Lombardo 's powerful return . Decibel Magazine gave it a favorable review , stating , " Their hatred for religion in general , Christianity in particular , unwitting Americans , and anyone on the other side of a soldier 's gun has inspired Slayer to record their most vital album in years . " Chris Campion of The Observer stated that the album is " their most rigorously conceived and focused for years . " 
 Not all critics were positive . Chris Steffen of Rolling Stone magazine dismissed the album , noting that it " mines much of the same territory as its predecessor , God Hates Us All , just without the memorable riffs . " Jamie Thomson of The Guardian described the album as " wholly disappointing , " and thought the band sounded " unwilling to ditch the nu @-@ metal tendencies that have made much of their recent output so <unk> . " KNAC.com contributor Peter Atkinson felt that the album " demands <unk> — more <unk> so than any other album the band has done , " and that " that , in a nutshell , is Christ Illusion 's glaring weakness . " 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 Several aspects of Christ Illusion 's content and promotion generated adverse attention and publicity . In particular the cover art , painted by Larry Carroll and depicting a mutilated , stoned Jesus . Carroll , who had painted the cover artwork to previous Slayer albums such as Reign in Blood , South of Heaven and Seasons in the Abyss , resumed duties on Christ Illusion . Working solely from track names and formative lyrics , Carroll produced the original on a 4 @-@ by @-@ 4 @-@ foot slab of wood using a combination of media . Having requested an image of Christ in " a sea of despair " , King commented that an early version seemed as though Christ was " chilling out in the water " . The final image portrays Christ with a missing eye and amputated hands , and standing amidst a sea of blood and severed heads . Araya deemed this version " much better because he looked like a drug addict ! " , while King admired the artwork enough to purchase the original . Certain album pre @-@ orders gave fans the chance to win one of ten autographed lithographs of the artwork , while an alternative , non @-@ graphic cover was made to appease retailers who had refused to stock the original version . 
 World Entertainment News Network reported Slayer were attracting controversy through issuing the artwork . Joseph Dias , general secretary of the Mumbai Christian group Catholic Secular Forum , ( CSF ) took " strong exception " to the original album artwork , and issued a memorandum to Mumbai 's police commissioner in protest . Chris Steffen of Rolling Stone magazine commented that " The album art takes it all over the top with an image axeman Kerry King dubs ' Christ in a Sea of Despair ' " , while KNAC.com 's Peter Atkinson deemed the artwork " defiantly sacrilegious " . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 Lyrical themes explored on Christ Illusion deal with terrorism , warfare and religion , drew criticism from conservative groups . It includes a depiction of the September 11 attacks from the viewpoint of one of the terrorists ( " Jihad " ) , and a portrayal of a soldier 's experience of post @-@ traumatic stress ( " Eyes of the Insane " ) . The song " Cult " revolves around King 's perception of flaws in American religion , while " <unk> " has been described as a " government hating song " . 
 Critical reaction to the album 's lyrical content was mixed . Thom Jurek of Allmusic felt the " dark , unrelentingly twisted @-@ as @-@ fuck lyrics reflect a singular intensity , " and praised the band for connecting their anti @-@ religion stance with a belief that religion has underscored many wars throughout history . However , Rolling Stone 's Chris Steffen mourned that it had become " downright painful to hear Tom Araya — at 45 years old ! — continue to belt out the band 's increasingly self @-@ parodying , anti @-@ religious lyrics , " and singled out lyrics such as " Religion 's a whore " and " I 've made my choice : six six six ! " as over the top . Jamie Thomson of The Guardian wrote that the album left " no blasphemy ... <unk> " , while Peter Atkinson of KNAC.com observed that " when not fixating on religion , the band revisit their other favorite subject — war — in surprisingly familiar terms , " and remarked that Slayer had sunk " to the level of God @-@ repelling dunderheads Deicide . " He concluded the review with the opinion that " It 's déjà vu all over again from God Hates Us All — and once you 've titled something God Hates Us All , haven 't you made your point enough already ? " 
 The Catholic Secular Forum condemned the album 's lyrical content . Joseph Dias issued a statement in which he deemed the lyrics to " Skeleton Christ " to be an " insult to Christianity . " The memorandum was sent to Mumbai 's police commissioner , and further expressed concern that the track " Jihad " would offend " the sensibilities of the Muslims ... and secular Indians who have respect for all faiths . " EMI India met with the CSF , apologizing for Christ Illusion 's release and recalling the album with no plans of a reissue . On October 11 , 2006 it was announced all stocks had been destroyed . Though Araya had expected " Jihad " ' s treatment of the events of 9 / 11 to create an American backlash , it failed to materialise , in part , he believes , due to peoples ' view that the song is merely " just Slayer being Slayer " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Writing , performance and production credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Slayer 
 Tom Araya – bass , vocals 
 Jeff Hanneman – guitar 
 Kerry King – guitar 
 Dave Lombardo – drums 
 Production 
 Rick Rubin – executive production 
 Josh Abraham – production , mixing 
 John Ewing Jr . – engineering 
 Ryan Williams – mixing engineer 
 Dave Colvin – assistant engineer ( at NRG ) 
 Brian Warwick – assistant engineer ( at Westlake Studios ) 
 Armand B. Crump – guitar tech , bass tech 
 Norm Costa – drum tech 
 Vlado Meller – mastering 
 Artwork and design 
 <unk> – art direction , design 
 Josh Victor Rothstein – photography 
 Larry Carroll – cover art 
 <unk> Kittens – art direction , cover design ( special edition only ) 
 = = = Studios = = = 
 NRG , Los Angeles , CA , USA – recording 
 Westlake Studios , Los Angeles , CA , USA – recording 
 Pulse Recording , Los Angeles , CA , USA – mixing 
 Sony Music Studios , New York City , NY , USA – mastering 
 = = = DVD credits = = = 
 Slayer on Tour ' 07 
 Matt Weston – direction 
 Dave Wither – direction 
 Brett Jordan – direction 
 Andrew <unk> – production 
 Kevin Flynn – editing 
 " Eyes of the Insane " 
 Tony Petrossian – direction , production , editing 
 Amanda Fox – production 
 " South of Heaven " 
 Adam Rothlein – direction , editing 
 Jen Rothlein – production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Statute of Uses = 
 The Statute of Uses ( 27 Hen 8 c 10 ) was an Act of the Parliament of England that restricted the application of uses in English property law . The Statute was originally conceived by Henry VIII of England as a way to rectify his financial problems by simplifying the law of uses , which moved land outside the royal tax revenue , traditionally gathered through seisin . His initial efforts , which would remove uses almost completely , were stymied at the 1529 Parliament by members of the House of Commons , many of whom were landowners ( who would lose money ) and lawyers ( who benefited in fees from the confusing law on uses ) . Academics disagree on how the Commons were brought around , but an eventual set of bills introduced in 1535 was passed by both the Lords and Commons in 1536 . 
 The eventual bills invalidated all uses that did not impose an active duty on trustees , with the beneficiaries of the use being held as the legal owners of the land , meaning they had to pay tax . The Statute partially led to the Pilgrimage of Grace , and more importantly the development of trusts , but academics disagree as to its effectiveness . While most agree that it was important , with Eric Ives writing that " the effect which its provisions had upon the development of English land law was revolutionary " , some say that by allowing uses and devises in certain areas it not only failed to remove the fraudulent element from land law but actively encouraged it . 
 = = Background = = 
 The common law of England did not provide for a way to dispose of land held by feudal tenure through wills , only urban land , and instead uses were applied , which allowed a landowner to give his land to one or more feoffees , to dispose of it or treat it as the original landowner provided . It was viewed with distrust due to the possibility of abuse ; Edward Coke wrote that " there were two Inventors of Uses , Fear and Fraud ; Fear in Times of Troubles and civil Wars to save their <unk> from being forfeited ; and Fraud to defeat due Debts , lawful Actions , Wards , <unk> , <unk> etc " . With as many as 13 of such feoffees , there was much confusion over the title to land following a lord 's death , as evidenced by the case of Sir John Fastolf , which lasted from 1459 to 1476 . While this was a problem that needed correcting , the actual motivation of the Statute was not to do so , but instead to bolster the finances of Henry VIII . For several years prior to the Statute , Henry had been struggling with the need to raise revenue ; his royal lands did not provide enough , loans and <unk> would have destroyed his personal popularity ; as a result , simply increasing the size of his royal lands was the best option . He turned his attention to land law , arguably the most well developed and complex parts of the common law , and sought to reform it to further his aims . This was well @-@ aimed , since it was uses that were destroying his income ; the royal revenue was traditionally gathered through seisin , which uses completely ignored . 
 Two bills were drawn up to be submitted to Parliament in 1529 . The first , which took note of " grate <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> the <unk> <unk> for <unk> of <unk> , tenements , and other <unk> as well by <unk> as by uses and <unk> of false evidence " , was a radical and " drastic " act bill that would have removed uses completely ( unless registered at the Court of King 's Bench or Court of Common Pleas ) and abolished entails " so that all manner of possessions be in state of fee simple from this day forward for ever " , although barons and above were allowed entails ; in addition , nobody was allowed to buy such land without the king 's license . These measures were to obtain the support of the nobility for the second bill , which gave the King wardship over all the land held by noble orphans . When the orphan came of age and asked for the return of the lands , the king was to have a year 's revenue from a third of those lands . While this plan was acceptable to barons and other senior nobles , it required passing by the House of Commons . The large landowners in the Commons felt that it prohibited them from making secure wills , while the lawyers saw it as stripping valuable business away from them by simplifying such cases ; with these groups making up the majority of Parliament , these plans came to nothing . 
 The Parliament of 1532 saw another attempt by Henry to push the bill through , but it again met resistance ; while the support of the nobility was valuable , it was useless in the Commons . Henry instead sought to appeal to one of the two opposition groups , and picked the lawyers . Many lawyers admitted that the uses made fraud easy and open , and in addition the lawyers of the common law were jealous of the Court of Chancery 's equitable jurisdiction , and sought to strip it away . As a result , Henry decided to bring them over to his side by frightening them , listening to a petition against court procedure and lawyers ' fees , and openly musing about putting a clause in the draft bills that would fix the amount they could charge ; Holdsworth argues that this was the reason the lawyers chose to ally with Henry , and the reason for the Statute 's passage . John Bean disagrees , arguing first that many lawyers were landowners , and would have lost more personally than any reduction in fees could have produced , and second that even if they had been convinced , it is unlikely that lawyers made up a majority of the Commons and could have pushed a bill through alone . 
 = = Passage and text of the Statute = = 
 In 1535 , three draft bills were presented to Parliament concerning uses and wills , along with one concerning <unk> . It is from these bills that the Statute of Uses and the succeeding Statute of <unk> came . The three bills on uses suggested two different ways to deal with the problem . The first proposed severely limiting the situation in which uses could arise , with uses having no legal effect apart from that expressed when they were created . No contract or bargain over land could change the use of that land ; anyone who suffered from the breach of such a contract had limited remedies in the courts . While this scheme would have prevented most of the evils of uses , it would also have submitted property law to the common law and limited other , beneficial developments ; it would also not stop the practice of getting rid of land through a devise , doing nothing to alleviate the King 's financial concerns . The second , and more complex suggestion , was contained in the other two bills on uses . This simply removed the idea of an equitable interest in land , leaving only the idea of a legal interest , and left uses , maintaining the elastic and variable nature of property law rather than submitting it to the more @-@ rigid standards of the common law . Parliament eventually accepted the second idea , and the bill was passed in April 1536 as the Statute of Uses ( 27 <unk> <unk> ) . As such , all uses were invalid except for those that imposed an active duty on a trustee , and the beneficiaries of the use were held to be the legal owners , paying tax as a result . 
 The Statute of Uses also provided that that a widow was not have both jointure and dower as was made possible by the Statute . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Most immediately , the Statute partially led to the Pilgrimage of Grace , where rebels demanded not only an end to Henry 's religious changes but an abandonment of the Statute . More importantly , the Statute led to the development of the trust as a replacement . While the Statute is believed to have led to the abolition of devises ( and this was certainly the King 's intent ) , Robert Megarry argues that it failed in doing so . A <unk> " to the use of such person and persons , and of such estate and estates as I shall appoint by my will " produced a use without formally creating a legal estate ; the land was held on a lease , rather than freehold . As a result , it was unaffected by the Statute of Uses , which banned all other methods . Because of this , Megarry argues that not only did it keep devises intact , it gave it power in the common law as well as under equity . The precise aims of the Statute ( that the law of property be made more open ) was reversed by its impact , which made it far easier to convey property secretly . 
 Academic assessment of the Statute was initially disparaging , with some saying that it added at most " three words to a conveyance " , but it was understood to be important by lawyers of the time and in the modern era . Decades later , both Francis Bacon and Edward Coke gave readings on it , while William Holdsworth called it " perhaps the most important addition that the legislature has ever made to our private law " , with Eric Ives writing that " the importance of the Statute of Uses is beyond doubt . The effect its provisions had on English land law development was revolutionary , and from it have grown the crucial doctrines of the trust " . 
 = = Repeal = = 
 The whole Act was declared , by section 1 of , and Schedule 1 to , the Law of Property ( Amendment ) Act 1924 , to have been repealed by the Law of Property Act 1922 . 
 The whole Act was repealed by section 207 of , and Schedule 7 to , the Law of Property Act 1925 . The repeal of the Statutes of Uses did not affect the operation thereof in regard to dealings taking effect before the <unk> of the Law of Property Act 1925 . 
 = = External Links = = 
 Statute of Uses as enacted in Ontario 
 = Fort Tanjong Katong = 
 Fort Tanjong Katong , which stood from 1879 to 1901 , was one of the oldest military forts built by the former British colonial government of Singapore . The fort gave its name to today 's Fort Road , and it used to stand on the grounds of the present Katong Park . Fort Tanjong Katong , the only one of its kind on the eastern side of the island , was part of a series of defensive batteries and fortifications along the southern coast of Singapore , that defended the eastern approaches to the Singapore Harbour and Singapore Town against seaborne attacks . Due to its poor structural design and remoteness , the fort was subsequently abandoned and buried until its rediscovery in 2001 . Found with traces of a moat and near intact perimeter wall , the fort was considered by local archaeological experts as one of Singapore 's most important archaeological finds of a " true 19 @-@ century fort " to date . As a result , an archaeology group has been lobbying for the site to be gazetted as a National Monument . As of May 2010 , the National Heritage Board has stated that it has no plans to gazette the fort for the time being . 
 = = History = = 
 Fort Tanjong Katong was designed and built in 1879 by Henry Edward McCallum , who was the Colonial Engineer and Architect of the Singapore History Museum on Stamford Road . The fort reflected the British concerns that other European powers such as the Netherlands and Russia , might attack the strategically located colony founded by Sir Stamford Raffles of the British East India Company in 1819 . On the island of Sentosa , Fort Siloso , Fort Connaught and Fort <unk> were built around the same time as Fort Tanjong Katong , to guard the western and eastern entrances to the New Harbour ( now Keppel Harbour ) . 
 The fort was sitting atop a wet , low @-@ lying coconut plantation and occupied an area of approximately two hectares , and had a small elevated battery of three 7 @-@ inch ( 180 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns facing the sea , along with bombproof shelters . The battery was surrounded by a ditch measuring 100 feet wide on the flanks . A local team of contractors constructed the fort in less than 12 months . The fort 's garrison included members of the Singapore Volunteer Artillery ( SVA ) that held regular gun drills and their annual training camps at the fort . In 1885 , works began on upgrading the existing gun batteries in Singapore , and the three @-@ gun battery at Tanjong Katong was replaced with a pair of more powerful and longer range Mark VII 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns . 
 = = = " Wash @-@ out Fort " = = = 
 Beset by problems from the start , the Fort Tanjong Katong was nicknamed the " Wash @-@ out Fort " . Due to the soft ground , each time the guns were fired , the range finding equipment would shake , and would need to be recalibrated . To make matters worse , it was difficult to find the ammunition for the new 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns as it was not common in Singapore . The remoteness of the site , which hindered supply and reinforcement , reduced the effectiveness of Fort Tanjong Katong as a defensive position . 
 Barely five years after upgrades were completed in 1888 , it was suggested the fort be demolished . Debates over the fort lingered on between the Colonial Defence Committee in London , and the Local Defence Committee in Singapore for nearly a decade . The fort was finally rendered obsolete and abandoned in 1901 when the guns were removed . Instead of destroying the fort , the British thought it simpler to bury it , which was done sometime after World War I. A portion of a bastion was still visible above ground well into the 1960s , when a public park was built atop the fort for the fast @-@ growing Katong suburbs . In the late 1960s , the bastion was finally buried when land reclamation in the East Coast took place , and its memory was soon forgotten in the ensuing decades . 
 = = = Rediscovery = = = 
 In 2001 , the outline of the top of the bastion wall became visible during a dry spell ; this prompted a Katong resident , Jack Sim , to seek out the relevant authorities to investigate its origins . Despite much public discussion and interest generated by the discovery , it was not until in 2004 that the Singapore government finally approached a team of archaeologists to excavate the forgotten fort . The excavation was made possible by a community @-@ based project named " Raising History , Planting Roots " , that was initiated by the Mountbatten Citizens ' Consultative Committee with local residents and schools as a community involvement program to encourage ownership of local heritage . In just four weeks , an amount of S $ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 120 @,@ 000 ) was raised from corporate sponsors and a fund @-@ raising dinner , held at Suntec City Mall on 27 September 2004 . Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong , a Member of Parliament for Marine Parade Group Representation Constituency , was the guest of honour at the event . 
 The long @-@ awaited excavation began on 29 September 2004 , led by a handful of archaeologists and dedicated archaeology volunteers called Southeast Asian Archaeology . Nearly 2 metres down , the volunteers uncovered significant remains of the fort still in situ — a pair of infantry bastions that did not appear in the original plans , the perimeter of the moat 's inner escarpment and what appears to be the drawbridge superstructure . Experts call it Singapore 's only ' true fort ' — one with protection all around — and it was considered one of Singapore 's most important archaeological finds . 
 The archaeological dig at the former Fort Tanjong Katong site , provided a unique opportunity for many like @-@ minded Singaporeans to participate actively in uncovering the remains of the old fort . For nearly 10 months , more than 1 @,@ 000 volunteers ranging from school students to housewives , retirees , working professionals on their off @-@ days assisted the archaeologists on site and discovering first hand on the 125 @-@ year @-@ old military fort . 
 The Raffles Museum of Biodiversity Research , a natural history research unit of the National University of Singapore , assisted with the analysis of marine artefacts and corals that were uncovered at the site , and some 36 bags of samples have been deposited with the museum for further analysis . A Preliminary Site Report ( dated 7 May 2006 ) was later compiled and submitted to the relevant authorities which outlined the research process , preliminary findings , variety of volunteers , and a list of the archaeology research team involved . 
 = = = <unk> again = = = 
 To date , the excavation project at Fort Tanjong Katong has ended and only the south @-@ eastern bastion , which was nearly fully excavated , has been cordoned off indefinitely ( the south @-@ western bastion was left untouched ) . Except for the cordoned off bastion , other exposed fort remains were reburied again in December 2005 by the National Parks Board , which runs the park , to protect them against the elements for future archaeologists to discover . It was also done because the dug @-@ out pits could well breed mosquitoes ; there were also fears that someone might fall into one of the 2 m @-@ deep holes . The remaining funds , about S $ 150 @,@ 000 , were ploughed back into bursaries and scholarships for the constituency 's students . 
 The archaeology group is lobbying for the site to be gazetted as a National Monument , and to incorporate the fort remains to be featured as part of the park in future . To date , its status is still pending while waiting for the final decision by the Preservation of Monuments Board and the Urban Redevelopment Authority . 
 = Halfway Gone = 
 " Halfway Gone " is a song by American band Lifehouse . It is the first single released from their fifth studio album , Smoke & Mirrors ( 2010 ) . It was first released via digital download in the United States and Canada on October 26 , 2009 . It was then solicited to mainstream radio on January 12 , 2010 . Several remixes of the song were later released on iTunes on April 6 , 2010 in an album called Halfway Gone Remixes . The song was a commercial success , charting in Canada , the United States , Australia , Austria , Belgium , Germany , the Netherlands , and New Zealand . The accompanying music video portrays Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade singing most of the lyrics in a local park , and also features several anonymous people singing the lyrics as well . The band has performed the song live on several occasions . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The song was written by Lifehouse 's lead singer , Jason Wade , and American singer @-@ songwriter Kevin Rudolf . In an interview with Billboard , Rudolf said , " I chose [ to work on ] ' Halfway Gone ' because Jason Wade is such a great writer , great singer , and great artist . " The song was produced by Lifehouse and record producer , Jude Cole , at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , VA . " Halfway Gone " was released via digital download in the United States and Canada on October 26 , 2009 . A few months later , it was solicited to mainstream radio on January 12 , 2010 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Halfway Gone " was described as a " fun rock @-@ pop [ song ] that would brighten most people 's day " by Alex Lai of <unk> Nathaniel Schexnayder of Jesus Freak Hideout called the song an " effective rock song " , noting that the song is " an easy album highlight as well as a hit single " . Billboard 's Michael Menachem gave a positive review of the song saying that " the song opens up with blurred ' <unk> @-@ ooh @-@ oohs ' that establish an uptempo pace , and its lively , danceable rhythm works well with frontman Jason Wade 's vocals , which waver between intimate and explosive . " He also said that working with Kevin Rudolf and Jacob Kasher resulted in " a fresh sound for Lifehouse as the band aims to extend its run on the hot AC and Billboard Hot 100 charts . " Ultimate Guitar described the song as " laid @-@ back in its approach " , but commended its " hooks and infectious backing ' whoas ' in the chorus . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Halfway Gone " debuted at number 99 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It moved up and down the chart for several months and eventually peaked at number 50 . It debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 78 . It stayed on the chart for 13 weeks , until peaking at number 67 on the chart . The song debuted and peaked on the Billboard Pop Songs chart at number 25 . On the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart , the song debuted at 43 . It has since peaked at number 16 , after being on the chart for 11 consecutive weeks . It debuted on Billboard 's Radio Songs chart at number 67 , and eventually peaked at number 47 . On the Adult Contemporary chart , the song peaked at number 12 after being on the chart for 17 non @-@ consecutive weeks . The song also charted on the Billboard Digital Songs chart and peaked at number 56 . 
 The song also achieved international success . It debuted on Belgium 's Ultratip chart at number 27 for the week of March 20 , 2010 and stayed on the chart for seven consecutive weeks before peaking at number two on the chart . The song debuted on the Media Control Charts in Germany at number 35 , which became its peak position on the chart . In Australia , the song debuted at number 47 on the ARIA Charts . It has since peaked at number 30 , after being on the chart for eight weeks . The song debuted at number 63 in Austria , and later peaked at number 40 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 . It also charted in New Zealand , and debuted at number 34 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , which became its peak . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lifehouse debuted their first live performance of " Halfway Gone " on The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien on January 19 , 2010 . They also performed the song on Live with Regis and Kelly on March 2 , 2010 , and two days later on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on March 4 , 2010 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , directed by Frank Borin , was first released on Lifehouse 's official website on November 24 , 2009 . Later that day , it was also released on iTunes . It features all Lifehouse members singing lead vocals , and also features miscellaneous people , including actresses Lola Blanc and Aurelia Scheppers , singing lead vocals throughout the music video . 
 In the music video , it begins with an out @-@ of @-@ focus view of Wade , seemingly alone , coming up a hill towards the camera . When he stops and starts singing , the camera comes into focus and the other band members come out from behind him and start lip @-@ synching his vocals . A group of people ( In which one of them is YouTube star , Wendy McColm ) pull up in cars and they also lip @-@ synch the song , in addition to performing other activities throughout the video . The video 's effects allow people to seemingly appear out of nowhere throughout the video . 
 The video was shot in the Anthony C. <unk> Park ( formerly Balboa Park ) in the Lake Balboa district of Los Angeles ' San Fernando Valley . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Three remixes of " Halfway Gone " were released on April 6 , 2010 into an extended play on iTunes , entitled Halfway Gone Remixes . The names of the remixes are the " Morgan Page Remix " , the " Jody Den Broeder Club Remix " , and the " Fred Falke Remix " . The remixes were mixed by the progressive house producers Morgan Page and Jody Den Broeder , and house music producer Fred Falke . 
 Hayley Beck of <unk> Magazine gave a positive review of the EP , saying " Honestly I could hear these songs being played in a nightclub , and I definitely never would 've imagined myself dancing around to a Lifehouse track ! " She continues to describe the album , and describes the vocals as " coarse vocals laid over a <unk> , mellow beat . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Jason Wade , Kevin Rudolf , Jacob Kasher , Jude Cole 
 Production - Jude Cole , Lifehouse 
 Mixing - Serban Ghenea 
 Engineering - John Hanes 
 Source : Smoke & Mirrors ( Deluxe Version ) - iTunes LP 
 = = Charts = = 
 = M @-@ 64 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 64 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs for 63 @.@ 765 miles ( 102 @.@ 620 km ) through the western part of the state in land that is part of the Ottawa National Forest . The highway connects with County Trunk Highway B ( CTH B ) at the state line near Presque Isle , Wisconsin . As it passes through dense forests , M @-@ 64 runs along lakes Gogebic and Superior . The northern end is at a junction with US Highway 45 ( US 45 ) in Ontonagon . 
 The M @-@ 64 designation was used on two other separate highways before it was used for the current highway . The first was at the other end of the state near the Ohio state line , and the second was on the Keweenaw Peninsula near Eagle Harbor . The current highway has carried the M @-@ 64 moniker since 1930 , when it was assigned along two disconnected highways . These two parts were joined into a single corridor soon after . M @-@ 64 was one of the last highways in the state of Michigan to be paved in 1961 . In the early part of the 21st century , the state replaced the bridge over the Ontonagon River and shifted the highway 's northern terminus . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 64 starts at the Wisconsin state line north of Presque Isle , Wisconsin , where it runs north as the continuation of CTH B into the state of Michigan . The trunkline runs through dense forests along the Presque Isle River in a rural area of Gogebic County ; this region is a part of the Ottawa National Forest . As the highway enters the community of Marenisco , it follows Pine and Fair avenues through town . On the north side of Marenisco , M @-@ 64 turns easterly and runs concurrently with US 2 for about two miles ( 3 km ) including a crossing of the Presque Isle River . East of town , M @-@ 64 separates from US 2 and turns northeasterly toward the southern end of Lake Gogebic . The road turns north along the western shore of the lake and provides access to Lake Gogebic State Park . About halfway along the lakeshore , the highway crosses into Ontonagon County and from the Central to the Eastern time zone . 
 At Merriweather , M @-@ 64 turns easterly again , this time merging with M @-@ 28 and becoming a part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour . The two highways run together along the northern end of Lake Gogebic to Bergland . Turning north once again , M @-@ 64 crosses a branch line of the Canadian National Railway . The highway runs through more dense forests parallel to the Big Iron River on this north – south leg . The trunkline leaves the national forest as it passes into the community of White Pine , and the road runs near a former copper mine in the area . M @-@ 64 approaches the shores of Lake Superior at Silver City . There , it meets the eastern terminus of the former M @-@ 107 , a highway designation that ran west into the Porcupine Mountains along the current 107th Engineers Memorial Highway . M @-@ 64 turns east along Lake Superior following the shoreline to the outskirts of Ontonagon . The highway crosses the Ontonagon River and terminates on the eastern shore . The current intersection with US 45 that marks the end of M @-@ 64 on the south side of downtown is also the western terminus of M @-@ 38 . 
 M @-@ 64 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like all other state trunkline highways . As a part of these responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the highway . These traffic counts are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This number is an expression of the traffic that uses a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT 's surveys showed that the highest AADT along M @-@ 64 was 3 @,@ 333 vehicles daily on the Ontonagon River Bridge ; the lowest traffic was between US 2 and the Gogebic – Ontonagon county line at 418 vehicles per day . The only segments of the trunkline that have been included on the National Highway System ( NHS ) are the US 2 and M @-@ 28 concurrencies . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's defense , economy and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 By July 1 , 1919 , the first roads to carry the M @-@ 64 designation were signed in the southern Lower Peninsula . This highway ran from the Ohio state line north to Hillsdale , ending in rural southeastern Calhoun County . This trunkline was extended northerly in 1926 through Homer to end at the contemporary US 12 in Albion . In the latter half of 1929 , this highway was redesignated M @-@ 9 ( now M @-@ 99 ) . At the same time , the original M @-@ 9 in Keweenaw County between US 41 and Eagle Harbor was renumbered M @-@ 64 . The net effect was to swap the numbers between roads on opposing ends of the state . The next year , the M @-@ 64 number was swapped with another highway , the original M @-@ 129 that ran along the west side of Lake Gogebic and south to the Wisconsin state line . 
 = = = Current highway = = = 
 By 1927 , a few roadways that are now part of M @-@ 64 were built and open to traffic . The road south of Marenisco was a county road at the time , and the highway between Silver City and Ontonagon was a part of the western segment of M @-@ 35 . By the beginning of 1930 , a highway called M @-@ 129 was designated south of US 2 to the Wisconsin state line and north along Lake Gogebic . By the end of the year , this road was renumbered as the southern section of M @-@ 64 ; the northern section of M @-@ 64 was the highway previously designated as the westernmost segment of M @-@ 35 . The gap between the two sections was filled in by 1932 . Some curves in the roadway south of Marenisco were realigned , smoothing out the routing of the highway in late 1961 . As this project was completed , the last segments of M @-@ 64 were fully paved , making the highway one of the last in the state to be fully hard @-@ surfaced . 
 = = = Ontonagon River Bridge = = = 
 The first bridge across the Ontonagon River was built in 1891 . It was heavily damaged after a fire in the village a few years later . This bridge was deemed inadequate for the needs of traffic in Ontonagon in the 1930s . The Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) contracted for a replacement span in 1939 . A temporary crossing was used while the original span was demolished and replaced with a swing bridge . This style of bridge was popular with the department in the first half of the 20th century , but fell out of favor as the MSHD transitioned to bascule bridges . Because of this change , the Ontonagon River Bridge was the last of its type built in the state when it was completed in 1940 . 
 MDOT determined in the early part of the 21st century that the swing bridge had " operational problems " . Construction in 2006 replaced the span with a new structure and realigned both M @-@ 64 and M @-@ 38 in the village . That October , the new bridge was opened upstream of the former crossing . As a result , the northern terminus of M @-@ 64 is now at a junction with US 45 and M @-@ 38 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Redrum ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Redrum " is the sixth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 10 , 2000 . The story for the episode was developed by Steven Maeda and Daniel Arkin , the teleplay was written by Maeda , and the episode was directed by Peter Markle . " Redrum " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 13 @.@ 2 million households . Overall , the episode received moderately positive reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , a lawyer friend of Doggett 's named Martin Wells tries to clear his name of the crime after his wife is murdered . Unfortunately for him , his perception of time regresses backwards , day by day . This leads to confusion , but ultimately an answer as to who killed Wells ' wife . 
 " Redrum " , described as a " Twilight Zone @-@ type thriller " by critics , heavily featured the actor Joe Morton , who had previously played a role in the 1991 sci @-@ fi film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day alongside series co @-@ star Robert Patrick . The title of the episode was purposely picked by episode writer Steven Maeda to be " murder " spelled backwards . The episode 's main character , Martin Wells , was named after famed 19th century author H.G. Wells . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Martin Wells , a renowned Baltimore prosecutor , wakes up in a prison cell and notices a stitched up wound on his right cheek . A guard enters and takes him for his transfer . Wells ' long @-@ time friend , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , and his partner , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , await him and warn of reporters outside . As he exits the building , a man Wells recognizes draws a pistol and shoots him . Wells stares at Scully ’ s watch as he dies . The hands stop and then begin to turn backwards . 
 Upon waking up again , Wells is surprised to find no bullet wounds on his body . Scully and Doggett arrive to interrogate Wells , but he is confused about what is going on . A furious Doggett claims that he has been accused of murdering his wife , Vicky , and initially believes that Wells is faking his confusion in order to build an insanity defense . However , Doggett shows signs of doubt when he notices Wells ' genuine anguish over Vicky 's death . Wells is brought into court and he recognizes his father @-@ in @-@ law , Al <unk> , as the man who shot him . When Wells ' next court date is announced to be Thursday , he realizes that he has somehow travelled back to the day before his shooting . When the judge decides to transfer Wells to a different cell , he makes a scene in the court and accuses <unk> of planning to kill him during the transfer . 
 In his second meeting of the day with Scully and Doggett , Wells explains that he cannot remember the last few days . Scully suggests that maybe he did do it . Wells begins having flashes of the murder but they are unclear . Waiting in his cell , he kills a spider . Later , a nanny cam from his house reveals that the only person to arrive between the police ’ s arrival and the last time his wife is on camera is Martin Wells . Eventually , Wells meets his lawyers and tells them about the nanny cam . However , it turns out that it is Wednesday : Wells is somehow “ living the week backwards ” . 
 While going to meet Doggett and Scully , Wells gets shoved into a <unk> game and while picking them up gets slashed on his right cheek from a man with the spider web tattoo on his hand . Wells tells Doggett and Scully that he is moving backwards in time and cannot recall the past few days . Doggett is skeptical , but Scully hears him out . Wells says there must be a reason for it and Scully suggests that the answer may already be within him . Studying the evidence of the case , Wells has a flash of the murder that reveals the knife in a hand with a spider web tattoo . 
 Martin next awakes in Doggett 's home . Wells tells Doggett the description of the killer but the man isn ’ t in lock @-@ up yet because that won ’ t happen until Wednesday . Doggett and Wells arrive at the apartment and retrieve the nanny cam , but discover that someone disabled the cam and used its remote control , a device no one knew about except Mr. and Mrs. Wells and their nanny , Trina Galvez . At Trina Galvez ’ s home , Wells and Doggett discover the killer , a man named Cesar Ocampo , who threatened to kill Galvez 's family if she refused him entrance . At the station house , Doggett informs Wells that <unk> only wants to talk to him . Ocampo reveals that his brother , Hector , was sentenced to time in prison for a false conviction . Wells bargains with Cesar Ocampo , saying that if Cesar confesses to Vicky ’ s murder , he will take a look at his brother ’ s case . Cesar tells him that Hector hung himself in a jail cell a few weeks ago . Doggett calls Martin Wells out into the hall and the police arrest Martin because they have a case against him . Evidence against Ocampo isn ’ t strong enough yet . 
 Martin wakes up , having moved back to the day before . He rushes home to try and save his wife . Martin admits to evidence suppression and that Hector <unk> ’ s brother is out for revenge . Wells and his wife hide . Suddenly , they hear someone else at the door . Ocampo appears and accosts Wells . Vicky Wells comes out of hiding but is thrown through the coffee table . As Ocampo prepares to slit her throat , he is shot dead by timely arriving Doggett . Wells eventually goes to prison for his evidence suppression , a punishment he feels he deserves . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Redrum " , described as a " Twilight Zone @-@ type thriller " in The Complete X @-@ Files , was developed by Steven Maeda and Daniel Arkin , while the teleplay was written solely by Maeda . Maeda purposely picked the title to be the backwards spelling of " murder " ; notably , the same plot device was used by novelist — and one @-@ time X @-@ Files writer — Stephen King in his book The Shining . Furthermore , Maeda used the spider and its web to symbolize Martin Wells ' confusion at being trapped in his situation . Wells was played by noted actor Joe Morton who had previously played a role in the 1991 sci @-@ fi film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . Robert Patrick later noted that " Joe Morton is a fantastic actor . We never worked together in [ Terminator 2 ] , but we 're in that movie together . And Joe was The Brother from Another Planet . " 
 The scene of Martin Wells ' assassination was filmed at the " legendary " Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . This location , which has been the shooting location for over 200 productions , including Forrest Gump and Pretty Woman , is perhaps more infamous as the site of Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy 's assassination by Sirhan Sirhan in 1968 . Several of the names in the episode were allusions to historical figures or acquaintances of the writer . Most notably , Martin Wells is named after famed 19th century author H.G. Wells , noted for his contributions to science fiction with The Time Machine in 1896 and The War of the Worlds in 1898 . Furthermore , the character of Janet Wilson , the lawyer of Wells , was named after Maeda 's wife . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Redrum " first aired on Fox on December 10 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 16 million households , and 13 @.@ 2 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 40th most @-@ watched episode for the week ending December 10 . The episode subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on April 14 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " How do you stop a murder that 's already happened ? " 
 Critical reception to the episode was moderately positive , although several reviewers criticized the episode 's monologues . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a " B + " . Morgan criticized the episode 's narrative , sardonically noting that Martin Wells was a " man who may get a second chance . At life . At truth . At pretentious , overlong monologues . " Juliette Harrisson of Den of Geek wrote positively of the episode , calling it " an excellent backwards episode , in which the audience is left satisfied that the horrific event that sparked it off has been prevented , but the guest protagonist has to pay a high price for the happy outcome . " However , she was slightly critical that the episode " barely features the regular characters at all " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She called the episode " a double mystery : on one hand Martin 's investigation of his wife 's murder ; and on the other , an investigation into the workings of his own soul . " Vitaris , too , was critical of the ending monologue , noting that " the voiceover ruins the mood of the final shot . " 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , writing that it was an " example of an episode that starts off strong , only to fumble when it comes to the follow through " . He was particularly praiseworthy towards Morton 's performance , noting that his presence " more than makes up for " the lack of Doggett and Scully . He concluded that the episode is " a smart that the script makes Wells in some way culpable for what happened , and tries to establish him as a merciless hard @-@ ass " but that the " reveal is never really satisfying . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a moderately positive review and rated it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted that the episode was " constructed with great skill by Steven Maeda and Daniel Arkin . " Despite this , Shearman and Pearson noted that " with the series in flux , this is an especially unhelpful time to attempt an episode which so abandons the house style ; The X @-@ Files urgently needs to assert what it is , not what it isn 't . " 
 = On the Brink ( Spooks ) = 
 " On the Brink " is the fifth episode of series seven of the British espionage television series Spooks , and the 60th episode overall . It was originally broadcast on digital channel BBC Three on 10 November 2008 , and repeated on frontline channel BBC One on 17 November . The episode was written by Christian Spurrier , his first writing credit for the series , and directed by Edward Hall . Set during the credit crunch , in this episode , Section D chief Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) works undercover to stop Alexis Meynell ( Paul Rhys ) , a banker who is attempting to bankrupt the country . Later , Ros discovers Meynell 's motive . 
 The idea behind the episode came from the financial crisis of Northern Rock in late 2007 ; the producers wanted to set up a story about a bank collapse so severe it could result in an economic collapse . The episode was filmed in May 2008 , with a lot taking place in London 's Blue Fin building . About six million viewers saw the episode from both BBC One and Three broadcasts ; the BBC One ratings were steady despite heavy competition from I 'm a Celebrity , Get Me Out of Here ! on ITV1 . Critical reactions towards the episode were positive for including a change in plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Section D believes banker Alexis Meynell is trying to bankrupt the country . Sir Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) asks the Chancellor of the Exchequer Gillian Calderwood ( Selina Cadell ) to freeze Meynell 's assets , but is turned down due to lack of evidence . To get the evidence they need , Ros is sent undercover to the London Stock Exchange , where Meynell is targeting the bank Highland Life . After starting a rumour about the bank , he starts betting against it . When the chairman of Highland Life , Francis <unk> ( Simon Williams ) , attempts to keep the bank afloat , Meynell doubles his position , bankrupting Highland Life . Ros uses the opportunity to swipe a memory card from Meynell 's mobile phone , containing his secure email account that could prove his guilt . However , they find nothing relevant . Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) relays this to Ros and tells her to get closer to Meynell . 
 Ben Kaplan ( Alex Lanipekun ) breaks into Meynell 's office to learn of deals between Highland Life and Salma , a Russian bank that according to Elizabeta Starkova ( Paloma Baeza ) , has connections with the Russian mafia . It is also revealed Highland Life owes Salma £ 65 billion . It was this reason that earlier in the episode , Denham committed suicide . In order to get Meynell to trust her to become part of his plan , Ros sleeps with him . Later , Calderwood receives a call from Asa Darlek ( Stephen Noonan ) , Meynell 's associate from Salma , and threatens to either have the £ 65 billion paid back , or he will go public to inform the country the true extent of its debts . Ros presents a third option ; have Calderwood announce she will back Highland Life , while at the same time she will convince Meynell to bet against it . Such a plan would financially ruin Meynell . The next morning however , Darlek realises she is MI5 and threatens to kill her if Calderwood does not back down . Ros fights the gun off and Calderwood goes ahead with her statement . Later , Lucas releases Elizabeta as an asset . Meanwhile , Jo Portman ( Miranda Raison ) believes Boscard ( Gus Gallagher ) , her captor from the end of series six , is still alive after seeing several hallucinations of him . Later , Ros puts her mind at rest when she shows Jo photographic evidence Boscard is indeed dead , and it was Jo who killed him . 
 Running on a tip that Connie James ( Gemma Jones ) may have leaked the top secret Sugarhorse to the Russians due to her affair with Hugo Prince , one of only five people to know about the operation , Harry has officers search her home . Harry later finds a tape left by Prince in a Big Ben souvenir . Prince left a message that there is a leak in Sugarhorse , but Connie is not responsible . Later , Harry admits to Lucas that in " The Tip @-@ Off " he was lying about not knowing what Sugarhorse and asks him to recall anything during his interrogations . Lucas eventually recalls the word " Pilgrim " uttered several times . He did a background check and informs Harry that " Pilgrim " is the codename for Bernard Qualtrough , the same man apparently helping Harry find the mole . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Christian Spurrier , his first writing credit for the series . He joined the Spooks writing staff in January 2008 . Producer Katie Swinden wanted to base an episode on the economy , which at the time was facing a recession following the financial crisis of the British bank Northern Rock just months before . After trying a few different stories , the producers settled on a story about a bank collapse that is so severe it could result in an economic collapse . Spurrier did research on banking climate in the City of London in March 2008 , and realised the economy was going down , but also wanted to exaggerate the numbers for the episode . Ros was chosen to lead because the character had a background in business . In some of the original drafts of the episode , John Castle would return as Jocelyn Myers , Ros ' father , but later on the producers realised they did not need him . The producers also wanted to include some jeopardy in the climax , namely adding a gun to a head or a bomb , which created the scenes where Darlek threatened to kill Ros . Spurrier felt he had a " lot of juggling " in writing three separate storylines ; the main plot , the Sugarhorse subplot and Jo ; but did a lot of learning how to write a Spooks script as he wrote it . 
 The character of Alexis Meynell was inspired by Howard Brenton 's writing for " The Russian " in the fourth series . Spurrier wanted him to always suspect Ros , but at the same time be intrigued by her . The producers enjoyed casting Paul Rhys for the role as his performance was " fantastically scary . " In playing Asa Darlek , Stephen Noonan had to abandon his Liverpudlian accent and sport a Russian one , which Noonan worked hard on . Director Edward Hall provided the voice for Hugo Prince . 
 The episode was filmed throughout May 2008 . The helicopter shots of the city were filmed before principal photography of the seventh series started . Almost all scenes where shot during the day , including the scenes set during the night . The second day of the shoot for the episode took place at a house not belonging to the crew , used as the home of Connie James . The Blue Fin building in London provided several locations for the episode , mostly the stock exchange room . Real life traders were used to film scenes set in the floor . Swinden noted that the traders were " interesting guys " to work with , and told the producers the story was " very close to home . " The producers borrowed two expensive cars , more prominently an Aston Martin <unk> convertible , which were driven by Armitage and Norris . Armitage was asked to drive the car for only 10 yards , but the actor ended up getting carried away by wheel @-@ spinning and driving the car around a city block . Another car was a Bentley used for Denham 's suicide . Because it was on loan , Firth 's options on acting as if he was trying to save Denham was very limited without having to damage the car . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three from 10 : 30 pm on Monday , 10 November 2008 , after the broadcast of the fourth episode on BBC One . The episode would later be repeated on BBC One the next week on 17 November 2008 during the 9 pm to 10 pm time slot , except in Northern Ireland , where it was withheld until 10 : 35 pm . According to overnight figures , the first look on BBC Three was seen by 691 @,@ 500 , a 6 @.@ 1 per cent share on its timeslot . The BBC One repeat was viewed by 4 @.@ 95 million , with a 20 @.@ 3 % audience share . Though it went against I 'm a Celebrity , Get Me Out of Here ! on ITV1 , which attracted over eight million viewers , Spooks ratings remained steady from the previous week . According to the final numbers from the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode was viewed by 0 @.@ 79 million from BBC Three , and later 5 @.@ 21 million from BBC One , together adding up to 6 million . 
 The episode received positive reactions from television critics . Gerard O 'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph called it " another pertinent , brilliantly written episode " and reacted positively towards the episode 's " new kind of threat : the economic terrorist . " O 'Donovan also praised Paul Rhys ' acting for " giving his villainous all . " Mof Gimmers of TV Scoop praised the episode for having " a refreshing change from the usual theme of this series " , with Rhys ' performance and the sub plot of the Sugarhorse story arc adding " definitely one of the best stories so far in what has been an impressive series , if a little heavy on the Islamic terrorist side at times . With three episodes to go the Sugarhorse story is building nicely to a crescendo . " 
 = Titanium ( song ) = 
 " Titanium " is a song by French DJ and music producer David Guetta , featuring vocals by Australian recording artist Sia . Taken from Guetta 's fifth studio album , Nothing but the Beat , the song was written by Sia , Guetta , Giorgio Tuinfort and Afrojack . Production was also handled by Guetta , Tuinfort and Afrojack . " Titanium " was initially released for digital download on August 8 , 2011 , as the first of four promotional singles from the album . It was later released as the album 's fourth single in December 2011 . The song originally featured the vocals of American recording artist Mary J. Blige , whose version of the song leaked online in July 2011 . 
 " Titanium " is a ballad which draws from the genres of house , pop and urban @-@ dance . The song 's lyrics are about inner strength . Sia 's vocals on " Titanium " received comparisons to those by Fergie and the song was also musically compared to Coldplay 's work . Critics were positive towards the song and noted it as one of the standout tracks from Nothing but the Beat . " Titanium " attained top 10 positions in several major music markets , including Australia , Austria , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , The Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland and the United States . In the United Kingdom , it peaked at number one , becoming Guetta 's fifth number @-@ one single on the chart and Sia 's first . 
 The song 's accompanying music video premiered on December 21 , 2011 but does not feature appearances by Guetta or Sia . Instead , the video focuses on a young boy , played by actor Ryan Lee , with supernatural powers . Along with other songs , " Titanium " was pulled from radio stations in the US after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Titanium " was written by Sia , David Guetta , Giorgio Tuinfort and Afrojack . Production was also handled by Guetta , Tuinfort and Afrojack . After discovering Sia 's music online , Guetta picked her to appear on his fifth studio album , Nothing but the Beat . Guetta told an insider from Los Angeles , " I was totally amazed by Sia ... This has made me more curious to study her music more because I was really impressed . I have the biggest people on the album and she has a different profile , more like an indie kind of artist and it makes her song even more special , it makes it stand out I think . " 
 The song originally featured vocals from American recording artist Mary J. Blige , whose version of the song leaked online in July 2011 . In an interview with News.com.au , Guetta spoke about its leak , saying , " You shouldn 't even know about that ... I 'd rather not speak about it . That was annoying . It wasn 't supposed to be out there . " Sia recorded a demo of the song , which was then sent to Blige and other artists . Eventually , Guetta decided to stay with her version . He explained , " The first time I heard what Sia did , because she was not in the studio with me , I fell in love with it ... I didn 't even want to give it to anyone else ; it was perfect the way it was . It 's not only about how big you are in America , it 's about the song and the voice . " American pop singer Katy Perry was the first person to be offered the track but turned it down because she felt its message was too similar to that of her song " Firework " . An insider told Take 40 Australia , " So that ' Titanium ' song , Sia wrote it for Katy , but [ Katy ] didn 't want to do a song with Guetta ... " According to Sia 's manager , Jonathan Daniel of Crush Management , Sia wrote the song for American R & B singer Alicia Keys . Guetta considered approaching other female singers to record on the song , however Perry advised him to keep Sia on the track . Guetta ultimately followed this suggestion . Sia revealed that Guetta put her vocals on the song without asking for permission : 
 " And then Mary J. Blige sang it . And then he took her vocal off it , and put my vocal back on , my demo vocal , without asking and released it . And I never even knew it was gonna happen , and I was really upset . Because I had just retired , I was trying to be a pop songwriter , not an artist . " 
 " Titanium " was released for digital download on August 8 , 2011 , as the first of four promotional singles from the album , as part of the iTunes Store 's countdown to the album 's release . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Titanium " has been described as " an emotional near @-@ ballad " that draws from the genres of house , pop and urban @-@ dance . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a tempo of 126 beats per minute . The verses are in the key of E @-@ flat major , with a chord progression of Eb – Bb – Cm . The chorus and breakdown are set in the key of C minor , with a chord progression of Ab – Bb – Gm – Cm . Sia 's vocal range span from the note of G3 to the note of Eb5 
 According to Andrew Gregory of The Daily Telegraph , the song 's intro features " a hint of 80 's flavour " . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush noted that the song " has the headache @-@ inducing club beat , whining synths [ and ] atmospheric sound effects . " Ben Norman of About.com noted that it " incorporate [ s ] a strumming guitar ... before a staggering beat filters in , Sia 's trademark pipes positively ooze with emotional inflection . " The strumming guitar sounds were compared to those of " Every Breath You Take " . 
 " Titanium " has lyrics about inner strength , such as : " I 'm bulletproof , nothin ' to lose / Fire away , fire away / Ricochet , you take your aim / Fire away , fire away / You shoot me down , but I won 't fall / I am titanium . " Al Fox of BBC Music wrote that on the song , Sia has " ghostly mandolin @-@ esque vocals " . Cameron Adams of Herald Sun called them " square @-@ peg " , while Melinda Newman of HitFix compared her vocals to those by Fergie . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club wrote that on the song , Sia " manage [ s ] to keep [ her ] head above the waves of synths ... by amping up [ her ] vocals to match the outsized beats . " David Jeffries of Allmusic compared the song to the music of Coldplay . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Titanium " garnered critical acclaim from music critics . David Byrne and Tony Peregrin of Windy City Times described " Titanium " as " epic and " energizing " , writing , " it is Sia who steals the show " on Nothing but the Beat . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy agreed , calling the song one of " the record 's standouts " . A writer for Samesame.com.au called it the " best cut " on the album , and wrote that it is " a track you will quickly be running on repeat . " Tom Ewing of The Guardian wrote , " Sia , on ' Titanium ' , handles the album 's best hook well . " Rich Lopez of Dallas Voice wrote that the " collaborative lyrics elevate this song to a higher level than any previous track " from the album , and called it " clever writing " from Sia . Ben Norman of About.com wrote that the song " basically blows the rest of his album out of the water . Teaming up with Sia was probably the smartest move he [ Guetta ] has done in recent memory when it comes to actual musical quality . " David Griffiths off 4Music called it " The most intriguing hook @-@ up " on the album , writing that " ' Titanium ' sees Guetta giving the Australian songstress some long overdue commercial appeal , while Sia 's vocals bring a quirky twist . " Kerri Mason of Billboard magazine described the song as " Guetta 's quirkiest and most epic track to date ( in itself an unusual combination ) . " Jamie Horne of The Border Mail called it a " strong " track . Joe Copplestone of PopMatters noted that songs on the album such as " Titanium " and " Night of Your Life " , " recall the power " of Guetta 's previous collaborations with Kelly Rowland on " When Love Takes Over " ( 2009 ) and " Commander " ( 2010 ) . " Titanium " was nominated for Dance Work of the Year at the 2012 APRA Music Awards , but lost to " From the Music " by The <unk> . 
 After the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in December 2012 , " Titanium " was pulled from radio stations in the United States due to the use of gun @-@ related lyrics in the song . " Titanium " is part of a group of songs that have been taken off the air , including Kesha 's " Die Young " , and " Pumped Up Kicks " by Foster the People . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the French Singles Chart , " Titanium " debuted at number nine on August 13 , 2011 . After weeks of ascending and descending the chart , the song peaked at number three on January 7 , 2012 , giving Guetta his thirteenth top 10 hit in France . In Australia , the song debuted at number 31 on the ARIA Singles Chart on August 15 , 2011 , and peaked at number five on September 5 , 2011 . It was certified five times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of 350 @,@ 000 copies . " Titanium " became Sia 's second highest charting single as a solo artist in the country as well as Guetta 's ninth top 10 hit there . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , it debuted at number 18 on August 15 , 2011 . The following week , the song fell to number 39 and eventually fell out of the top 40 . Upon its release as a single in December 2011 , " Titanium " re @-@ entered the chart at number 12 on December 5 , 2011 , and peaked at number three on January 30 , 2012 . It was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting sales of 45 @,@ 000 copies . In Austria , " Titanium " debuted and peaked at number three on August 19 , 2011 , and remained in the top 10 for ten consecutive weeks . The song was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting sales of 30 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " Titanium " also reached the top 10 in the charts of Belgium , Canada , Denmark , Finland , Germany , Ireland , Italy , The Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland . On the UK Singles Chart , " Titanium " debuted at number 16 on August 20 , 2011 , and fell to number 31 the following week . The song descended the UK Singles Chart for three consecutive weeks and eventually fell out of the top 100 . Upon its release as a single in December 2011 , " Titanium " re @-@ entered the UK Singles Chart at number 61 on January 14 , 2012 , and climbed to number eight the following week . On February 11 , 2012 , it peaked at number one , and became Guetta 's fifth number @-@ one single on the chart and Sia 's first . The song also reached number one on the UK Dance Chart . " Titanium " was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies . " Titanium " was the fourth best @-@ selling single of 2012 in the UK , and it has sold over one million copies there as of February 2013 . 
 In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 66 on the issue dated August 27 , 2011 . After it was released to US radio in April 2012 , " Titanium " reached a new peak of number seven on the issue dated July 21 , 2012 , and became Guetta 's fourth top @-@ ten single on the Hot 100 . It also peaked at number three on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and number three on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . " Titanium " was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . As of March 2014 , the song has sold 3 @,@ 852 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and reception = = = 
 The music video for " Titanium " was directed by David Wilson . It was filmed in December 2011 in Sainte @-@ Marthe @-@ sur @-@ le @-@ Lac and at Dorval High School , in the province of Quebec , Canada . A 14 @-@ second preview of the video was uploaded to Guetta 's official YouTube account on December 16 , 2011 . The preview showed a young boy ( played by actor Ryan Lee ) in the smoky woods running away from a SWAT team of men . The video then closes with the caption , " The Music Video Coming Soon " . The full video premiered online on December 21 , 2011 . Neither Guetta nor Sia appear in the video . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine noted that " the supernatural scene and suburban setting " in the video recall the science fiction film Super 8 ( 2011 ) , in which Lee stars . Becky Bain of Idolator wrote that , " The video is beautifully shot , and is courageous enough not to answer all its mysteries . " A writer for Capital FM called it a " very cinematic video " . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens in a deserted , destroyed school hallway with Lee 's character shown sitting on the ground . As the first verse begins , he slowly begins to stand up and makes his way through the hallway . The boy then sees a female teacher in a classroom who 's stricken with fear and closes the door , realizing that the boy is the cause of the damage . As the boy makes his way outside the school building , a police car arrives and the teacher rushes outside to tell the policeman about the boy , who then quickly rides a bicycle home to pack his things . While at home , he sees a news report about the incident , causing him to quickly gather his things to flee . Several policemen then appear outside the front door of the boy 's house , while he tries to escape through the back door . The boy realizes that the door is locked so he uses his telekinetic powers to grab the keys from the kitchen bench . The policemen then enter the house to find that the boy has escaped , but find a teddy bear and a plush frog floating in the air . The final scene shows the boy running away from a SWAT team in the woods . The boy is caught by one of the men who pushes him to the ground . The video ends with the boy using his supernatural powers once again to push the men away in a burst of power ; this references how the boy destroyed the school in the first place , as he 's in the same position he was in at the beginning of the video . The aftermath of the outburst in the end , however , remains unknown . 
 = = Usage in media and live performances = = 
 " Titanium " was used in the fifth season of the American television show Gossip Girl episode " I Am Number Nine " , which aired on November 7 , 2011 . It also appears on the soundtrack of the 2014 film Wild Tales . Scottish recording artist Emeli Sandé performed " Titanium " with Guetta at the NRJ Music Awards , held in France on January 29 , 2012 . On April 21 , 2012 , Sia made a surprise appearance during Guetta 's set for the second weekend of Coachella in Indio , California , where they performed " Titanium " . The song also appears in the 2016 dance video game Just Dance 2017 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Nothing but the Beat . 
 Afrojack – songwriting , production , mixing 
 Sia Furler – songwriting , lead vocals 
 David Guetta – songwriting , production , mixing 
 Giorgio Tuinfort – songwriting , production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In May 2012 , " Titanium " was covered by British recording artist Tulisa Contostavlos on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . An a cappella version of the song was sung by Anna Kendrick and Brittany Snow during a shower scene in the film Pitch Perfect ( 2012 ) . On October 22 , 2012 , former Lady Gaga backup singer <unk> and 16 @-@ year @-@ old Avery Wilson performed " Titanium " as a duet during the October battle rounds of the third season of The Voice US . Dutch symphonic rock band Within Temptation covered the song during their special program Within Temptation Friday on the Belgian radio station Q Music , where the band choose songs to cover not related to their style of music . Their version was then included on their cover album The Q @-@ Music Sessions , released in April 2013 . On April 23 , 2013 , Michelle <unk> and <unk> M. performed " Titanium " as a duet during the battle rounds of the fourth season of The Voice US . On May 10 , 2013 , Demi Lovato covered the song during a concert in San Diego , California . On May 16 , 2013 , Adam Lambert and Angie Miller performed a duet of the song on the finale of the twelfth season of American Idol , where Miller was a finalist . <unk> Bailey 's version of " Titanium " reached number 13 on the French singles chart in 2015 and spent 34 weeks there . It also appeared on the Belgian French Wallonia Ultratop chart , peaking at number 23 . 
 = = = The X Factor performances = = = 
 On October 31 , 2011 , Andrew Wishart covered " Titanium " in the third series of The X Factor Australia . " Titanium " was also covered by Martin Madeja on the second season of X Factor Germany on November 8 , 2011 . On February 10 , 2012 , Morten Benjamin performed the song on the fifth season of X Factor Denmark . On October 11 , 2012 , 13 @-@ year @-@ old Beatrice Miller performed " Titanium " during the judges ' houses round of the second season of The X Factor USA . The song was also performed by Jahméne Douglas during the judges ' houses round and Lucy <unk> during the third live show of the ninth series of The X Factor UK on October 20 , 2012 . On November 7 , 2013 , <unk> Santiago performed " Titanium " during Week 2 on Night 2 of the third season of The X Factor USA , where all the contestants had to sing their Save Me song due to graphic issues . 
 = = = Jahméne Douglas version = = = 
 British pop and soul singer Jahméne Douglas released a cover version of " Titanium " on July 22 , 2013 as the lead single from his debut studio album , Love Never Fails ( 2013 ) . Douglas ' version peaked at number 94 on the UK Singles Chart . Talking to Digital Spy , Douglas said : " It 's very hard to sing . I was scared to do it because it 's a big chart song and I 'm quite old school . For me , the song is about strength and the music video is based around domestic violence and how a woman gets out of it . The lyrics are so powerful for that interpretation . Hopefully if someone is in that situation and watches it , they 'll think , I can get out . " A music video to accompany the release of " Titanium " was first released onto YouTube on June 12 , 2013 at a total length of three minutes and fifty @-@ four seconds . The music video shows Douglas next to a piano , while a story of domestic abuse plays out . 
 = No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit RAAF = 
 No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 2 OCU ) is a fighter training unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Located at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , the unit trains pilots to operate the McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , conducts refresher courses for pilots returning to the type , and trains future Hornet instructors . Pilots new to the Hornet enter No. 2 OCU after first qualifying to fly fast jets at No. 79 Squadron and undertaking initial fighter combat instruction at No. 76 Squadron . Once qualified on the F / A @-@ 18 , they are posted to one of No. 81 Wing 's operational Hornet units , No. 3 Squadron , No. 75 Squadron or No. 77 Squadron . 
 The unit was established as No. 2 ( Fighter ) Operational Training Unit ( No. 2 OTU ) in April 1942 at Port Pirie , South Australia , and relocated to RAAF Station Mildura , Victoria , the following month . During World War II , it provided training on a wide range of aircraft , including P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , Vultee Vengeances , Avro Ansons , CAC Boomerangs , Supermarine Spitfires and Airspeed Oxfords . Disbanded in March 1947 , No. 2 OTU was re @-@ formed at Williamtown in March 1952 in response to the demand for more highly trained pilots to serve in the Korean War . It was renamed No. 2 ( Fighter ) Operational Conversion Unit in September 1958 , and since then has conducted training with the CAC Sabre , Dassault Mirage III , and Macchi MB @-@ 326 , prior to taking delivery of the Hornet . 
 = = Role and equipment = = 
 The role of No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 2 OCU ) is to " support the preparation for and the conduct of effective airspace control , counter air strike and combat air support operations through the provision of trained personnel " . Located at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , it comes under the control of No. 81 Wing , part of Air Combat Group . 
 No. 2 OCU is primarily responsible for conducting operational conversion courses on the RAAF 's McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet multi @-@ role fighter , which entered service in 1985 . The unit takes students who have converted to fast jets with No. 79 Squadron , located at RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , and undergone lead @-@ in fighter training at No. 76 Squadron , based at Williamtown . Most are new to operational flying , but some are " retreads " ( experienced pilots converting from another aircraft type ) . As No. 2 OCU 's instructors are among the RAAF 's most experienced Hornet pilots , they often play a significant role developing new tactics , in cooperation with fighter combat instructors at other No. 81 Wing units . 
 No. 2 OCU operates both single @-@ seat F / A @-@ 18A Hornets and two @-@ seat F / A @-@ 18Bs . The F / A @-@ 18B is largely identical to the A model aside from its dual cockpit , which reduces internal fuel capacity by about six per cent . Aircraft livery includes a yellow @-@ and @-@ black tail fin flash , the base featuring a yellow tiger 's head outlined in black , with a red mouth , white fangs and white eyes . The unit crest shows a winged kangaroo carrying a joey in its pouch , symbolising " ' Mother Australia ' flying with her young " . The motto is Juventus Non Sine <unk> ( " The Young Shall Have Wings " ) . 
 Hornet conversion courses run for six months , after which graduates are posted to one of the RAAF 's front @-@ line fighter units , No. 3 Squadron or No. 77 Squadron at Williamtown , or No. 75 Squadron at RAAF Base Tindal , Northern Territory . Students must first gain their instrument rating on the Hornet , and are then taught basic fighter manoeuvres , air combat techniques , air @-@ to @-@ air gunnery , and air @-@ to @-@ ground tactics . The course culminates with Exercise High Sierra , a biannual event that was first run at Townsville , Queensland , in 1986 . The exercise lasts for two weeks and involves day and night flights , including precision strike sorties with practice and live bombs . 
 As well as operational conversion , No. 2 OCU conducts refresher courses and fighter combat instructor courses on the Hornet . Pilots who have not flown Hornets for more than nine months undertake the two @-@ week refresher course . Fighter combat instructor courses run for five months and are given every two years . Students are chosen from among the most experienced Hornet squadron pilots and undergo instruction in how to train others , as well as how to deal with complex operational scenarios . This is tested in simulated combat with other types of US or RAAF aircraft , as available , including F @-@ 15 Eagles , F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcons , and F / A @-@ 18 Super Hornets . Graduates become qualified F / A @-@ 18 instructors and initially remain with No. 2 OCU for the next two @-@ year cycle . After this time , they are posted to one of the front @-@ line squadrons or No. 81 Wing 's headquarters as Hornet weapons @-@ and @-@ tactics specialists . Along with training pilots , No. 2 OCU may be called upon to conduct operational tasks in " particular circumstances " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Operational training : 1942 – 47 = = = 
 During World War II , the RAAF established several operational training units ( OTUs ) to convert recently graduated pilots from advanced trainers to combat aircraft , and to add fighting techniques to the flying skills they had already learned . No. 2 ( Fighter ) Operational Training Unit ( No. 2 OTU ) was formed on 2 April 1942 at Port Pirie , South Australia . Its inaugural commanding officer was Wing Commander Peter Jeffrey , a fighter ace who had led No. 3 Squadron in North Africa . Jeffrey had recently brought on line Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons , two of the first three fighter units raised to help defend northern Australia as the Japanese advanced toward New Guinea . His team of instructors at No. 2 OTU included fellow aces from the North African campaign , Clive Caldwell and Wilf Arthur . Originally equipped with CAC Wirraways and Fairey Battles , the unit 's complement was augmented by P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , Vultee Vengeances , Avro Ansons , CAC Boomerangs , Supermarine Spitfires and Airspeed Oxfords after it relocated to RAAF Station Mildura , Victoria , in May . By September 1942 , its fleet of aircraft included nine of the 106 Kittyhawks the RAAF had on hand at the time . During November , No. 2 OTU conducted comparative trials that pitted a Spitfire Mk V against a P @-@ 40E ; the final report of these trials judged that although the Spitfire had superior performance according to most criteria , the P @-@ 40E was also a useful design . 
 No. 2 OTU 's Spitfire section was transferred to RAAF Station Williamtown , New South Wales , in March 1943 , under the command of ace John Waddy . Jeffrey handed over command of No. 2 OTU at Mildura in August 1943 ; the same month , the unit logged over 5 @,@ 000 flying hours , its highest level during the war . For the remainder of the conflict it maintained an average strength of more than 100 aircraft . North African campaign aces and former No. 3 Squadron commanders Bobby Gibbes and Nicky Barr served successively as chief flying instructor from March 1944 until the end of the Pacific War . Group Captain Arthur led the unit from July to November 1944 , when Group Captain Jeffrey resumed command . During 1945 , the Spitfires and Kittyhawks were replaced by 32 North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs . Training concluded that October , following the cessation of hostilities , and No. 2 OTU was reduced to a care @-@ and @-@ maintenance unit . During the war , it had graduated 1 @,@ 247 pilots , losing 45 students in fatal accidents . Jeffrey completed his appointment in June 1946 , and the unit was disbanded on 25 March 1947 . 
 = = = Operational training : 1952 – 58 = = = 
 Post @-@ war demobilisation saw the disbandment of all the RAAF 's OTUs . Operational conversion of new pilots then became the responsibility of front @-@ line squadrons . This practice disrupted the squadrons ' normal duties , and the advent of the Korean War and the introduction of jet aircraft further necessitated a more formal system of operational training . According to Dick Cresswell , commanding officer of No. 77 Squadron in Korea from September 1950 to August 1951 : 
 It is hard to believe that I actually sent 11 pilots home to Australia as they were not capable of doing the job properly . I don 't blame the pilots , but I do blame the Air Force system . We had no operational training units , no operational training system and , as a result , the pilots came to Korea poorly trained and without instrument ratings . They just couldn 't operate in the area . 
 The RAAF moved to rectify the situation by re @-@ forming No. 2 OTU on 1 March 1952 to convert RAAF pilots to jet aircraft and train them for fighter operations . Headquartered at RAAF Base Williamtown , it was equipped with Wirraways , Mustangs , and de Havilland Vampire jets . Cresswell took command of No. 2 OTU on 21 May 1953 . The unit ceased flying Mustangs that October , retaining its Wirraways and Vampires . In April 1954 , it began conducting fighter combat instructor courses , as well as refresher courses on jets . Cresswell delivered the first Australian @-@ built CAC Sabre jet fighter to No. 2 OTU in November , and the same month established the unit 's Sabre Trials Flight . The flight was responsible for performance testing and developing combat flying techniques , in concert with the Aircraft Research and Development Unit ( ARDU ) . On 3 December 1954 , Creswell led a formation of twelve No. 2 OTU Vampires in the shape of two sevens over Sydney to greet No. 77 Squadron upon its arrival from service in Korea aboard the aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance . Training courses on the Sabre began on 1 January 1955 . Once the Sabre entered operational service in March 1956 , the Sabre Trials Flight was dissolved and its responsibilities passed to No. 3 Squadron . Pilots underwent their introduction to jets and fighter combat at No. 2 OTU , but finished their conversion to Sabres at a front @-@ line squadron . 
 = = = Operational conversion : 1958 – current = = = 
 In May 1958 , No. 1 Applied Flying Training School began equipping with Vampire jet trainers at RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia . As RAAF pilots were now gaining their first exposure to jets elsewhere , No. 2 OTU took over from the fighter squadrons the responsibility of converting trained jet pilots to Sabres . Reflecting its new primary role , it was renamed No. 2 ( Fighter ) Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 2 OCU ) in September 1958 , and ceased Vampire courses the same month . Wing Commander Neville McNamara , later Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) and Chief of the Defence Force Staff , served as commanding officer from August 1959 until January 1961 . During his tenure , the unit undertook exercises with No. 75 Squadron at RAAF Bases Amberley , Townsville and Darwin . Two Sabre pilots from No. 2 OCU and one from No. 75 Squadron died in separate incidents early in 1960 ; each had attempted to eject at low level and suffered fatal head injuries from colliding with the aircraft 's canopy during the ejection sequence . All RAAF Sabres were grounded until ARDU developed a modification to shatter the canopy immediately before the pilot ejected . 
 Along with Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons , also based at Williamtown , No. 2 OCU was under the control of No. 81 Wing from 1961 until the wing was disbanded in 1966 . By late 1963 , personnel were busy developing training material for the pending Sabre replacement , the Dassault Mirage III , a task that required them to translate the manufacturer 's technical documentation from the original French . No. 2 OCU received its first Mirages in February and March 1964 . It commenced conversion courses on the type that October , and fighter combat instructor courses in August 1968 . The RAAF eventually took delivery of 100 Mirage <unk> single @-@ seat fighters and 16 Mirage IIID two @-@ seat trainers ; No. 2 OCU operated both models . Squadron Leader John Newham , later to serve as CAS , held temporary command of the unit from July 1965 to April 1966 . A Sabre @-@ equipped aerobatic display team named the " Marksmen " was formed within No. 2 OCU during 1966 and 1967 . Between 1967 and 1984 , six of the unit 's Mirages suffered major accidents , resulting in three fatalities . Experience in the Vietnam War led the RAAF to begin training forward air controllers in 1968 . The task initially fell to No. 2 OCU before a specialised unit , No. 4 Forward Air Control Flight , was formed in 1970 . In October 1969 , the OCU began operating the Macchi MB @-@ 326 jet for lead @-@ in fighter training , as well as the Mirage . No. 5 Operational Training Unit , based at Williamtown , took over responsibility for Macchi courses from April 1970 until its disbandment in July the following year ; the Macchis were then transferred back to No. 2 OCU . 
 In preparation for the introduction of the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , No. 2 OCU temporarily ceased flying operations on 1 January 1985 and transferred Macchi and Mirage training to No. 77 Squadron , which assumed responsibility for fighter combat instructor , introductory fighter , and Mirage conversion courses . Beginning on 17 May , the first fourteen Australian Hornets — seven single @-@ seat F / A @-@ 18As and seven two @-@ seat F / A @-@ 18Bs — and a Hornet simulator were delivered to No. 2 OCU . Conversion courses on the type commenced on 19 August with four F / A @-@ 18Bs and three students . No. 2 OCU has remained the prime user of the two @-@ seat Hornet , though some are operated by the fighter squadrons , Nos. 3 , 75 and 77 . The first year of Hornet service saw No. 2 OCU , as the then @-@ only RAAF operator , undertake demonstration flights around the country to unveil the new fighter to the Australian public . All of the Hornet units came under the control of a newly re @-@ formed No. 81 Wing on 2 February 1987 . An intense training program that year resulted in 21 pilots converting to the type . In June 1987 , Macchi training courses again became the responsibility of No. 2 OCU ; this role was taken over by No. 76 Squadron in January 1989 . No. 2 OCU suffered its only Hornet loss to date when an F / A @-@ 18B crashed at Great Palm Island , Queensland , during a night @-@ time training flight on 18 November 1987 , killing the pilot . Two Hornets collided during an air @-@ to @-@ air combat training exercise the previous year , but both managed to return to base . The unit temporarily relocated to RAAF Base Richmond , New South Wales , in July 1990 , while Williamtown 's runway was resurfaced . 
 The RAAF began modifying four of its Boeing 707 jet transports to enable air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling of the Hornets in December 1988 ; No. 2 OCU staff commenced training for airborne tanker operations in July 1991 , subsequently adding this capability to the Hornet conversion course . By the mid @-@ 1990s , the unit had 12 instructors and a complement of 18 Hornets , including 13 two @-@ seaters . It was running two conversion courses per year , with eight students per course , and had an average failure rate of 10 per cent . Several of its instructors were US and Canadian pilots on exchange with the RAAF . In 2000 , No. 2 OCU joined Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons as part of No. 78 Wing , which had been re @-@ established as an operational training formation . As of 2005 , the unit had a strength of between 12 and 14 instructors and ran three Hornet conversion courses and one fighter combat instructor course over two @-@ year cycles . About six new Hornet pilots took part in each of the conversion courses , and the unit generally graduated 15 new Hornet pilots over each cycle . By 2007 , No. 2 OCU had returned to the aegis of No. 81 Wing , under Air Combat Group . Although the duration of the conversion courses has remained unchanged since the Hornets were introduced into service , the content covered has been altered over time to reflect upgrades to the Hornets , the replacement of the Macchis with BAE Hawk 127 trainers in the early 2000s , and experience gained from using Hornets in combat during the Iraq War . No. 2 OCU conducted its 32nd fighter combat instructor course in 2013 . The graduation exercise , Aces North , was the first to involve RAAF F / A @-@ 18 Super Hornets , Airbus KC @-@ 30 tankers , and Boeing E @-@ 7 Wedgetail early warning aircraft , as well as the ' Classic ' Hornets . 
 = One Breath ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " One Breath " is the eighth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 11 , 1994 . It was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , directed by R. W. Goodwin , and featured guest appearances by Melinda McGraw , Sheila Larken and Don S. Davis . The episode helped to explore the series ' overarching mythology . " One Breath " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 5 , being watched by 9 @.@ 1 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Scully is found comatose in hospital after her abduction in the earlier episode " Ascension " . Mulder attempts to investigate what has happened to her , but finds himself hindered by a man he had believed to be an ally . 
 Anderson returned to the series only days after having given birth , missing the previous episode due to her pregnancy . Morgan and Wong attempted to create a version of the earlier episode " Beyond the Sea " , this time centered on Duchovny 's character Mulder . The episode also introduced the character of Melissa Scully , an attempt to provide a romantic lead for Mulder which was later dropped . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 FBI special agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is currently missing , having disappeared after being kidnapped by a deranged multiple @-@ abductee in the two @-@ part episodes " Duane Barry " and " Ascension " . Her partner Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) has continued his work without her , but is still investigating her disappearance , believing her to have been abducted by aliens . His investigations into similar abductions in the past have been aided by The Lone Gunmen , a trio of conspiracy theorists made up of John Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) , Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) and Richard Langly ( Dean Haglund ) . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Scully 's mother , Margaret , ( Sheila Larken ) tells Mulder a story about Dana shooting a snake with her brothers as a child and regretting what she did afterwards . She indicates she is ready to let go of Dana , and shows Mulder Scully 's gravestone . Mulder , however , refuses to give up . 
 Scully then turns up mysteriously at a hospital in a coma . An out of control Mulder demands to know how she got there , and is escorted out by security but later calms down and meets with Dr. Daly ( Jay <unk> ) , who reveals that no one can figure out how she got there or what 's wrong with her . He tells Mulder and Mrs. Scully that she has a living will that dictates she be taken off of life support when her condition falls to specific criteria . At Scully 's bedside , Mulder meets her older sister Melissa ( Melinda McGraw ) . Scully has a vision of sitting in a boat , attached by rope to a dock where Mulder and Melissa stand , and nurse Owens behind them . Frohike visits Scully and sneaks out her medical chart , which the Lone Gunmen later investigate . Byers finds that Scully 's blood contains branched DNA that may have been used for identification but now is inactive and nothing more than a poisonous waste product in her system . 
 The mysterious Nurse Owens visits Scully at her bedside , trying to reach her in her coma . Later Mulder visits Scully while another nurse takes her blood . When distracted , a mysterious man steals Scully 's blood sample and runs . Mulder chases him down to the parking lot where he is confronted by X , who demands that he stop pursuing what happened to Scully and let her die . He then executes the man who stole her blood . When Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) calls Mulder to his office regarding the incident , Mulder denies any involvement and claims that the Cigarette Smoking Man is responsible for what happened to Scully . Mulder demands to know where he is but Skinner refuses to tell him . 
 In another vision Scully lies on a table and is visited by her deceased father . Mulder , sitting with Melissa in the hospital cafeteria , is asked by a woman for change for the cigarette machine . When she says that a pack of Morleys is already there and leaves , Mulder opens it and finds the Cigarette Smoking Man 's address inside . Mulder bursts into the Cigarette Smoking Man 's home and holds him at gunpoint , demanding to know why Scully was taken instead of him . The Cigarette Smoking Man claims he likes the both of them , which is why she was returned ; he reveals that he told Skinner it was Mulder who shot the man in the parking lot , although he didn 't believe this to be true , incidentally revealing himself as unaware of who did shoot the man , namely X. He tells Mulder that he 'll never know the truth if he kills him , and Mulder decides not to . 
 Mulder returns to FBI headquarters and types out a resignation letter that he hands into Skinner . Skinner visits his office as Mulder is packing his things , and relates an out @-@ of @-@ body experience he had in Vietnam . Skinner refuses to accept Mulder 's resignation and Mulder realizes that he was the one who provided him with the Cigarette Smoking Man 's location . Heading to the parking garage , Mulder is met by X , telling him that he 'll have a chance for revenge that night when men , believing him to have information on Scully , will search his apartment at a specific time . Mulder is waiting with his gun at his apartment when Melissa arrives . Although he initially refuses to leave , Melissa is able to convince Mulder to see Scully , where he holds Scully 's hand and talks to her . Returning home to find his apartment trashed , Mulder sits on the floor and cries . 
 The next day , Scully awakens . Mulder is called to the hospital and sees her , returning her cross necklace , where she indicates she heard his voice while in her coma . Scully tells him she doesn 't remember anything after being kidnapped by Duane Barry . Later Scully asks one of the nurses if she can see Nurse Owens , as she wants to thank her , but the nurse tells Scully that no nurse named Owens works at the hospital . 
 = = Production = = 
 Gillian Anderson , who had just given birth to her daughter Piper days before this episode spent the majority of the episode in a hospital bed . 
 The episode title , " One Breath " comes from a line from Scully 's father when he talks to her during the episode . The character ' The Thinker ' , who later appears in person in the episode " Anasazi " was named after online X @-@ Files fan ' <unk> ' . The episode introduces Melinda McGraw as Scully 's sister Melissa . McGraw had previously worked with writers Glen Morgan and James Wong , who specifically wrote the part with her in mind . Thoughts were given to having a romantic interest between Mulder and Melissa , but the concept never came to pass . 
 Writer Glen Morgan said of the episode , " Duchovny challenged us to do a " Beyond the Sea " for him . The show had been so dark and bleak , and Jim and I feel that there is a side to the paranormal that 's very hopeful . We wanted to do that side of it . I thought it would be a great opportunity for Duchovny , but then the situation came up with Gillian 's pregnancy . We needed to get her off her feet anyway . There 's a line in there where Scully 's sister says ' Just because the belief is positive and good doesn 't make it silly or trite ' . It was the whole theme of the show . " 
 Chris Carter described the opening scene — in which Scully discovers the truth about death , sadness , and sorrow — as " a way he would never imagined an X @-@ Files episode to begin with " , and that the related scene with Scully 's tombstone was " a soft but beautiful opening " that " sets up the episode in a frightening way " . The image of Scully in the boat was meant to symbolize " being tethered to something very tenuously , and that there was a chance for you to be cut adrift and slip into the unknown " . Skinner facing the Smoking Man placed the character as " both an antagonistic and institutional figure " that tries to be both an FBI agent and an ally of Mulder and Scully — his refusal to allow the Smoking Man to smoke in his office " speaks of [ Skinner 's ] alliances and allegiances to Agent Scully and his hatred of this man he cannot vanquish , he cannot get rid of , but he has to tolerate " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " One Breath " premiered on the Fox network on November 11 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 16 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 5 with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 9 @.@ 1 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " One Breath " received mostly positive reviews from critics . The Munchkyn Zone reviewer Sarah Stegall gave the episode a glowing review and rated it 6 sunflower seeds out of 5 . Stegall stated the episode " works on several levels " and called it the " best yet " . John Keegan , writing for Critical Myth , gave the episode a favorable review and rated it a 10 out of 10 . Keegan stated " this is easily one of the best episodes of the series , if not the best " and concluded it is " truly a masterpiece " . Nina Sordi , writing for Den of Geek , ranked the episode as the eighth best in the series ' run , calling it " just too unforgettable " . Sordi added that " verbal sparring matches between Mulder and Scully 's equally feisty sister , Melissa , created an interesting dynamic in the absence of Scully 's perspective " . Nick De Semlyen and James White of Empire named it the fifteenth " greatest " episode of the series , considering it a " testament to the X @-@ Files writing staff 's ability to turn the temporary loss of one of the stars into a compelling , suspenseful and worthwhile piece of the overall mythology " . In a retrospective of the second season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a B. Its " absurd symbolism and the introduction of Scully 's dopey New Age sister " were criticized , but it was felt that these elements did not prevent " One Breath " from being a " richly layered installment " . It was also felt that the episode featured " arguably Duchovny 's best performance " . Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club hailed " One Breath " as an essential episode of the show . He felt that there was a " sloppiness to the mythology " and that " the resolution of the whole coma situation is weak " . However , the " incredibly moving moments " and highlights such as Mulder attacking the Smoking Man and Skinner 's speech about Vietnam turned it into an episode " more about the moments than the big picture " . 
 In 1996 , Chris Carter declared " One Breath " to be one of the series ' most popular episodes . Co @-@ writer James Wong also enjoyed the episode , saying " I really love that show " . Director R. W. Goodwin said of the episode , " What 's so unusual about " One Breath " is that it had very little to do with our usual X @-@ File stuff . It was more about human emotions , drama , relationships " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " One Breath " earned a nomination for an Emmy Award by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences for Outstanding Cinematography - Series . 
 = Universal City Studios , Inc. v. Nintendo Co . , Ltd . = 
 Universal City Studios , Inc. v. Nintendo Co . , Ltd. was a case heard by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York by Judge Robert W. Sweet . In their complaint , Universal Studios alleged that Nintendo 's video game Donkey Kong was a trademark infringement of King Kong , the plot and characters of which Universal claimed as their own . Nintendo argued that Universal had themselves proved that King Kong 's plot and characters were in the public domain in Universal City Studios , Inc. v. RKO General , Inc . 
 Sweet ruled that Universal had acted in bad faith by threatening Nintendo 's licensees and that it had no right over the name King Kong or the characters and story . He further held that there was no possibility for consumers to confuse Nintendo 's game and characters with the King Kong films and their characters . Universal appealed the case , but the verdict was upheld . 
 The case was a victory for Nintendo , which was still a newcomer to the U.S. market . The case established Nintendo as a major player in the industry and arguably gave the company the confidence that it could compete with the giants of American media . The case was selected as number 20 on GameSpy 's list of the " 25 Dumbest Moments in Gaming " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1982 , Sid Sheinberg , the president of MCA and Universal City Studios and a seasoned attorney , was trying to find a way to get his company into the booming video game market . In April , he learned of the success of Nintendo 's Donkey Kong video game and sent Robert Hadl , vice president of legislative matters , to investigate . Hadl 's analysis was that Donkey Kong 's storyline was based on that of King Kong and was thus an infringement of Universal 's rights to that film 's characters and scenario . 
 Sheinberg also learned of a licensing agreement between Nintendo and Coleco , a producer of home video game consoles . Sheinberg scheduled a meeting with Coleco president Arnold Greenberg on April 27 , 1982 , ostensibly to discuss possible investment in Coleco . Instead , Universal admonished Greenberg for copyright infringement and threatened to sue if the ColecoVision shipped with Donkey Kong as planned . The next day , Universal <unk> Coleco and Nintendo giving them 48 hours to cease marketing Donkey Kong , to dispose of all Donkey Kong inventory , and to hand over all records of profits made from the game . On May 5 , Greenberg agreed to pay Universal royalties of 3 % of Donkey Kong 's net sale price , amounting to six million units and worth about $ 4 @.@ 6 million . A week later , he signed an agreement that stated that Universal would not sue Coleco as long as Coleco paid royalties . 
 Meanwhile , Hadl learned that Tiger Electronics had licensed King Kong for a handheld game . He decided that Universal 's earnings from it were too low and that the license 's granting of exclusive rights to Tiger would impede the agreement with Coleco . On May 4 , Sheinberg sent Tiger a <unk> demanding that they send their game in for further approval . Universal reviewed it and decided that King Kong was too similar to Donkey Kong . On May 8 , Steinberg revoked Tiger 's license , but Tiger president O. R. Rissman refused to give in and challenged Universal 's claim that it owned the King Kong name . 
 Nintendo 's attorney ( and future board member ) Howard Lincoln was at first inclined to settle for $ 5 – 7 million . Eventually , however , he decided to fight , reassuring the head of the company 's U.S. division , Minoru Arakawa , that this was a sign that Nintendo had made it big . On May 6 , Arakawa and Lincoln met with Coleco and Universal in Los Angeles . Hadl reiterated his stance that Donkey Kong infringed Universal 's rights to King Kong . Lincoln countered that Nintendo had discovered many unlicensed uses of King Kong 's name and characters and that Universal 's trademark on these was less than 10 years old . In private , Greenberg tried to persuade Nintendo to sign a licensing agreement ; he had not told them that he had already done so . By the end of the meeting , Hadl agreed to send a chain of title to Nintendo regarding Universal 's ownership of the King Kong name . When this failed to materialize in the next few weeks , Lincoln prodded Universal again . They responded with more demands for royalties . 
 Lincoln researched the merits of Universal 's claims to King Kong and deemed them untenable . Nintendo called for another meeting , which was set up for May 21 . Believing that Nintendo was finally caving , Sheinberg intimated that Nintendo might expect future business from Universal if they agreed to settle the matter . Lincoln only repeated Nintendo 's position that Universal had no legal basis to make any threats . He recalled later , 
 Mr. Arakawa and I decided that we would go down and simply tell him [ Sheinberg ] that we 've come to tell you to your face that we would pay you if we thought we were liable , but we had done our homework and we were not prepared to pay anything because we hadn 't done anything wrong . We just wanted to essentially look him in the face and tell him that . It seemed the honorable thing to do . As it turned out , maybe Hadl had led him to believe that we had come down to reach some sort of monetary settlement with him . And it was really funny because it was not what he was expecting and his reaction was shock . 
 Knowing that a court battle lay ahead , Hadl contacted Rissman , the errant Tiger licensee , to compromise on the handheld King Kong game . Hadl wanted to remove the exclusivity provision of the license and to distinguish the handheld game from Donkey Kong so as to weaken any potential counterclaims that one of Universal 's licensees had violated Nintendo 's intellectual property rights . Rissman complied , giving the hero a fireman hat , replacing barrel graphics with bombs , and making the game platforms straight instead of crooked . This design was approved in early June . 
 = = District court = = 
 On June 29 , 1982 , Universal officially sued Nintendo . The company also announced that it had agreed to license the rights to King Kong to Coleco . On January 3 , 1983 , Universal then sent cease @-@ and @-@ desist letters to Nintendo 's licensees offering three options : stop using Donkey Kong characters , obtain a license from Universal , or be sued . Six licensees caved , but Milton Bradley refused to do so . When Ralston Purina 's offer of $ 5 @,@ 000 for the use of Donkey Kong characters on breakfast cereal was turned down , they also refused to settle . 
 Lincoln hired John Kirby to represent Nintendo in court . Kirby had won other big cases for the likes of PepsiCo . , General Foods , and Warner @-@ Lambert . Kirby researched the game 's development , taking depositions from designer Shigeru Miyamoto and Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi in Japan . Miyamoto claimed that he had in fact called his ape character King Kong at first , as that was a generic term in Japan for any large ape . 
 Universal City Studios , Inc. v. Nintendo , Co . , Ltd. was heard at the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York by Judge Robert W. Sweet . The trial lasted seven days , during which Universal , represented by the New York firm Townley & Updike , argued that the name Donkey Kong could be confused with King Kong and that the plot of the game was an infringement on that of the film . Kirby showed key differences between Donkey Kong and King Kong . He also alleged that Universal had no rights to the King Kong characters and that they had in fact successfully sued RKO Pictures in 1975 in Universal City Studios , Inc. v. RKO General , Inc . , wherein they proved that the plot of King Kong was in the public domain and thus opened the way for Dino De Laurentiis 's remake . 
 Judge Sweet ruled against Universal and chastised the company : 
 Throughout this litigation , Universal knew , as a result of the RKO litigation , that it had no rights to any visual image of King Kong from the classic movie or its remake . Nonetheless , Universal , when it seemed beneficial , made sweeping assertions of rights , attempting to extract license agreements from companies incapable of or unwilling to confront Universal 's " profit center . " 
 He ruled that Universal did not own King Kong , but even if King Kong was Universal 's property , the possibility that anyone would confuse Donkey Kong and King Kong was unlikely . In his opinion , Donkey Kong was " comical " and the ape character " farcical , childlike and nonsexual . " The King Kong character , on the other hand , was " a ferocious gorilla in quest of a beautiful woman . " Sweet declared that " At best , Donkey Kong is a parody of King Kong . " Furthermore , Sweet said , the cease @-@ and @-@ desist letters that Universal had sent to Nintendo 's licensees gave the game company the right to seek damages . Finally , Sweet ruled that Tiger 's King Kong was an infringement of Donkey Kong : 
 Donkey Kong 's particular expression of a gorilla villain and a carpenter hero ( with or without a fire hat ) who must dodge various obstacles ( whether bombs or fireballs ) while climbing up ladders ( whether complete or broken ) and picking up prizes ( umbrellas or purses ) to rescue a fair @-@ haired ( whether knotted or <unk> ) hostage from the gorilla is <unk> against Universal and its licensees . 
 Nintendo was given the option to either take Universal 's licensing profits for their game or accept statutory damages . Nintendo opted for the former , receiving $ 56 @,@ 689 @.@ 41 . Nintendo also received damages and attorney 's fees . 
 = = Appeal = = 
 Universal appealed the verdict to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit . Nintendo and Universal argued the appeals case on May 23 , 1984 . As evidence of consumer confusion , Universal presented the results of a telephone survey of 150 managers and owners of arcades , bowling alleys , and pizza restaurants who owned or leased Donkey Kong machines . To the question " To the best of your knowledge , was the Donkey Kong game made with the approval or under the authority of the people who produce the King Kong movies ? " , 18 % of those surveyed answered in the affirmative . However , to the question " As far as you know , who makes Donkey Kong ? " , no one named Universal . Universal argued that this was enough evidence to show that consumers were confused about the distinction between the two names . 
 They also provided six examples from print media of more cases of confusion between Donkey Kong and King Kong . The October 1982 issue of Videogaming Illustrated , for example , was shown to read " our Donkey Kong presentation continues as we look at other gorillas who have had a fondness for women . Prominent among them is King Kong , who has much in common with the video villain . " Another example was Craig <unk> 's 1982 The Winner 's Book of Video Games , which states that " Donkey Kong [ is ] a video version of the film classic King Kong . " 
 In its decision on October 4 , 1984 , the court upheld the previous verdict . They declared that " The two properties have nothing in common but a gorilla , a captive woman , a male rescuer , and a building scenario . " Further , the court ruled that " The ' Kong ' and ' King Kong ' names are widely used by the general public and are associated with apes and other objects of enormous proportions . " As for Universal 's survey , the court found it unconvincing , as Universal did not own the " image . . . of King Kong climbing the Empire State Building / World Trade Center with Fay Wray / Jessica Lange in his paw " and that by only soliciting opinions from people who already had Donkey Kong games , the survey failed to establish confusion from potential customers . Finally , the survey asked " an obvious leading question in that it suggested its own answer . " 
 Regarding Universal 's printed examples , the court found that 
 The statements cited by Universal recognize that the Donkey Kong theme loosely evokes the King Kong films . However , none of the statements remotely suggests that the authors were under the impression that Donkey Kong was connected with the company holding the King Kong trademark . 
 The court agreed that some consumers were confused about the two marks . " However , the fact that there may be a few confused consumers does not create a sufficiently disputed issue of fact regarding the likelihood of confusion so as to make summary judgment improper . " 
 = = <unk> and second appeal = = 
 When Nintendo filed its counterclaims on May 20 , 1985 , Sweet ruled that Universal would pay Nintendo $ 1 @.@ 8 million for " legal fees , photocopying expenses , costs incurred creating graphs and charts , and lost revenues . " He ruled against Nintendo 's claims to damages from Universal establishing licenses with Nintendo 's licensees in those cases where the licensees continued to pay Nintendo . Nintendo 's licensees , Coleco among them , filed their own counterclaims . Universal paid Coleco by buying stock in the company . 
 Universal and Nintendo both appealed the counterclaims suit . The case was argued on June 16 , 1986 . 
 In the decision , rendered on July 15 , the court upheld the previous verdicts . They ruled that , 
 First , Universal knew that it did not have trademark rights to King Kong , yet it proceeded to broadly assert such rights anyway . This amounted to a wanton and reckless disregard of Nintendo 's rights . 
 Second , Universal did not stop after it asserted its rights to Nintendo . It embarked on a deliberate , systematic campaign to coerce all of Nintendo 's third party licensees to either stop marketing Donkey Kong products or pay Universal royalties . 
 Finally , Universal 's conduct amounted to an abuse of judicial process , and in that sense caused a longer harm to the public as a whole . Depending on the commercial results , Universal alternatively argued to the courts , first , that King Kong was a part of the public domain , and then second , that King Kong was not part of the public domain , and that Universal possessed exclusive trademark rights in it . Universal 's assertions in court were based not on any good faith belief in their truth , but on the mistaken belief that it could use the courts to turn a profit . 
 Nintendo thanked John Kirby with a $ 30 @,@ 000 sailboat christened the Donkey Kong along with " exclusive worldwide rights to use the name for sailboats . " The character in Nintendo 's Kirby series of video games may have been named after John Kirby , in honor of his services in the Donkey Kong case . It is rumored that a copy of the game was eventually sent to John Kirby who was humored and flattered . 
 = Great Comet of 1882 = 
 The Great Comet of 1882 formally designated C / 1882 R1 , 1882 II , and <unk> , was a comet which became very bright in September 1882 . It was a member of the Kreutz Sungrazers , a family of comets which pass within 1 R ☉ of the Sun 's photosphere at perihelion . The comet was bright enough to be visible next to the Sun in the daytime sky at its perihelion . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The comet appeared suddenly in the morning skies of September 1882 . As it was already visible to the naked eye , it was discovered independently by many people . Reports suggest that it was first seen as early as 1 September 1882 , from the Cape of Good Hope as well as the Gulf of Guinea , and over the next few days many observers in the southern hemisphere reported the new comet . 
 The first astronomer to record observations of the comet was W. H. Finlay , the Chief Assistant at the Royal Observatory in Cape Town , South Africa . Finlay 's observation on 7 September at 16h GMT was also an independent discovery , and he reported that the comet had an apparent magnitude of about 3 , and a tail about a degree in length . 
 The comet brightened rapidly , and within days had become an exceptionally bright object . Her Majesty 's Astronomer at the Cape , David Gill , reported watching the comet rise a few minutes before the Sun on 18 September , and described it as " The nucleus was then undoubtedly single , and certainly rather under than over 4 ″ in diameter ; in fact , as I have described it , it resembled very much a star of the 1st magnitude seen by daylight . " . 
 = = Perihelion = = 
 The comet was rapidly approaching perihelion when it was discovered . At perihelion , the comet is estimated to have been only 300 @,@ 000 miles or 480 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 0032 AU ) from the Sun 's surface . Subsequent orbital studies have determined that it was a <unk> comet , one which passes extremely close to the surface of the Sun . For many hours on either side of its perihelion passage , the comet was easily visible in the daytime sky next to the Sun . It reached an estimated magnitude of − 17 . 
 Shortly after perihelion was reached on 17 September , the comet transited the Sun . At the Cape , Finlay observed the comet with the aid of a neutral density filter right up until the moment of transit , when the Sun 's limb was " boiling all about it " . Finlay noted that the comet disappeared from view very suddenly , and no trace of it could be seen against the Sun 's surface . 
 = = Post @-@ perihelion evolution = = 
 After its perihelion passage , the comet moved into dark skies , and although it faded as it receded from the Sun it remained one of the most prominent objects in the sky . On 30 September , observers , including Finlay and E. E. Barnard , began to notice that the comet 's nucleus was elongated and broken into two pronounced bright balls of light , and by 17 October it was clear that it had broken into at least five fragments . Observers reported that the relative brightness of the fragments varied from day to day . 
 In mid @-@ October , the comet developed a notable <unk> , pointing towards the Sun . Anti @-@ tails are a fairly common cometary phenomenon , and result from orbital geometry giving the appearance of a tail pointing towards the Sun although material can only be driven away from the Sun . 
 The nucleus reached its maximum apparent size in December 1882 . The comet faded gradually , but despite its fragmentation it remained visible to the naked eye until February 1883 . The last definite sighting of the comet was made by B. A. Gould at Córdoba on 1 June 1883 . 
 = = Orbital studies = = 
 Studies of the orbit of the comet showed that the Great Comet of 1882 was moving on an almost identical path to previous great comets seen in C / 1843 D1 and C / 1880 C1 . These comets had also suddenly appeared in the morning sky and had passed extremely close to the Sun at perihelion . One suggestion was that all three were in fact the same comet , with an orbital period that was being drastically shortened at each perihelion passage . However , studies showed this to be untenable , as the orbital period of this comet is 772 ± 3 years and the others are 600 – 800 years . 
 Heinrich Kreutz studied the orbits of the three great comets , and developed the idea that the three comets were fragments of a much larger progenitor comet which had broken up at an earlier perihelion passage . The fragmentation of the Great Comet of 1882 itself demonstrated that this was plausible . It is now thought that the Great Comet of 1882 is a fragment of X / 1106 C1 , and that Comet du Toit ( C / 1945 X1 ) and Comet Ikeya – Seki ( C / 1965 S1 ) are two of its sister fragments . 
 It is now well established that the comets C / 1843 D1 , C / 1880 C1 , C / 1882 R1 , C / 1887 B1 , C / 1963 R1 , C / 1965 S1 , and C / 1970 K1 are all members of a family known as the Kreutz Sungrazers , which are all descended from one comet . Current models do not support the frequent supposition in the prior literature that the famous comet of 372 BC is in fact the ultimate parent of the Sungrazers . The comet of 372 BC is often associated with Aristotle who , along with others from his time , described that comet in his writings . However , Aristotle was only twelve at the time of the comet 's appearance and the historian , Callisthenes of Olynthus , who also wrote about it was born ten years after its appearance . Consequently , their reports should not be taken as eye @-@ witness accounts . Further , there is no mention of the comet in Chinese literature of the time . Instead either the comet of February 423 or of February 467 with orbital periods of around 700 years is now considered the likely progenitor of the Sungrazers . The fragments of the Great Comet of 1882 will return in several hundred years ' time , spread out over perhaps two or three centuries . 
 = Loving You ( 1957 film ) = 
 Loving You is a 1957 American Technicolor musical drama structured as Elvis Presley 's first starring film vehicle , following his debut the previous year in a supporting role in the black @-@ and @-@ white film , Love Me Tender . Directed by Hal Kanter , the cast is completed by Lizabeth Scott , Wendell Corey , and Dolores Hart in her movie debut . 
 The storyline , about a delivery man who is discovered by a music publicist and a country – western musician who want to promote the talented newcomer , was scripted by Herbert Baker and Hal Kanter , based on the short story " A Call from Mitch Miller . " Kanter expanded the script after being inspired by Presley 's last appearance on the Louisiana Hayride , and his manager Colonel Tom Parker 's antics . 
 A box office success , Loving You opened nationwide on July 9 , 1957 . Paramount Pictures chose to ignore the first @-@ run theater system , opting instead to release the film in sub @-@ run neighborhood theaters , a system later dubbed the " Presley Pattern . " Composed by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller , Presley 's single " ( Let Me Be Your ) Teddy Bear " backed with " Loving You " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Walter " Tex " Warner ( Wendell Corey ) , a seasoned country and western bandleader past his prime , and his manager and love interest , Glenda Markle ( Lizabeth Scott ) , work for the campaign of Texas gubernatorial candidate Jim Tallman . During a campaign stop in the town of Delville , Deke Rivers ( Elvis Presley ) and a workmate deliver an order of beer . While they are unloading , the workmate talks to Glenda about Deke 's singing ability , which Glenda jumps on to revive the sagging interest in the event by using local talent . She convinces Deke to sing a song with the backing of Tex 's Rough Ridin ' Ramblers . 
 Seeing the positive reception by the female audience , Glenda tries to convince Deke to join the Tex Warner Show . Driving in Deke 's <unk> , she tells him about his potential . Not willing to leave his first steady job in a year , he rejects the offer , but Glenda asks him to think about it . Upon returning to town , Glenda calls the Highway Beverage Company , after which she and Tex quit the Tallman campaign to return to their own roadshow . Later that night , Deke is provoked at a restaurant by the boyfriend of one of his fans , who wants to hear him sing a song . After singing to a tune from the jukebox , he starts a fight with him . He is later exonerated by the police . 
 The following morning , as the group is leaving town , Deke accepts Glenda 's offer , after being fired because of a complaint by a customer regarding a late delivery . Glenda just happens to have prepared a contract , which grants her half of his income . With Tex headlining , they start touring throughout Texas , along two other acts : Susan " Susie " Jessup ( Dolores Hart ) and a singing trio . As Deke 's popularity grows , Glenda devises publicity stunts to leverage it . At one show , she pays two aged woman to criticize him . When they start to argue with young fans , Glenda has a press photographer document the incident . As the tour progresses , Deke and Susan become interested in one another . After playing small venues , the group is hired to play in a large Amarillo theater on a four @-@ day run . Convinced that it is his ticket to regain fame , Tex accepts Glenda 's suggestion to share the bill with Deke , after which she calls reporters of The Dallas Chronicle to write a story on Deke . 
 After the end of the four day engagement , Deke 's management is offered a one @-@ man show in Freegate , Texas , outside of Dallas . Due to the terms of the contract , Tex fires Susan and the singing trio , leaving only Deke in the show . Before he has to begin his new tour , Deke drives Susan to her family 's farm . Meanwhile , in another publicity move , Glenda convinces Tex to buy a Cadillac against his life insurance for Deke , inventing a story to tell Deke that it was a gift from the widow of an oil magnate . Back on the farm , Deke and Susan talk , where she tells him about being fired , after which they are about to kiss , when they are interrupted by her parents , who ask him to sing the song he promised . After Deke sings " Loving You " , a surprised Susan remarks that she never heard him sing that way ; Deke admits that he never felt that way before . 
 Glenda arrives at the farm with the Cadillac , and urges him to leave with her for Freegate to do the show . On their way back , Deke confesses to Glenda that his real surname is Tompkins . Deciding to disclose his past , they drive to Allen City , to the Woodbine cemetery , where he shows her the Tomb of Deke Rivers . He explains that when the orphanage he lived in burned down eleven years earlier , he decided to bury his past , and took Rivers ' name . 
 Meanwhile , in Freegate , the concert is cancelled by the Mayor 's office , after they received complaints from parents about Deke 's music . Glenda arranges a studio telecast of a concert from Freegate in order to gain publicity ; this enables her to convince the town board to allow him to perform . Deke , unhappy , is considering leaving the entertainment business . When Glenda finds out , she talks him into performing , after which they kiss . 
 On the day of the telecast , Deke is shocked after learning that Tex was married and later divorced to Glenda . Disillusioned , he drives off before the show . When Glenda finds out about it from Tex , she goes after Deke , finding him after he was run off the road by crossing cattle . Glenda confesses everything to him : getting him fired and lying about the Cadillac , after which she tears up their contract , before convincing him to return for the broadcast . 
 While the concert is delayed , fans are filmed by local newscasters defending Deke 's music . Eventually , an upset Susan arrives to reveal that Deke will not appear on the show . However , Deke does appear shortly after , declaring that he had " something very important to say to somebody " , and starts the show by singing " Loving You " . As the song ends , Susan goes onstage with him , after which they meet Tex and Glenda backstage . Deke offers to let them both manage him , as he is offered a recording contract . Tex and Glenda reconcile ; meanwhile , Deke and Susan kiss . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Cast notes = = 
 Elvis Presley ( 1935 – 1977 ) plays Deke Rivers ( whose real name is Jimmy Tompkins ) , a <unk> who is discovered by the manager of a band . The film is Presley 's second motion picture following his debut in the 1956 film Love Me Tender and his first starring role . It also marked the beginning of his seven @-@ film streak for Paramount produced by Hal Wallis . For the role , Presley dyed his hair black following his favorite actors : Tony Curtis and Rudolph Valentino . As the second of his 1956 three @-@ movie deal with Paramount Pictures , Presley was paid US $ 150 @,@ 000 . 
 Lizabeth Scott ( 1922 – 2015 ) plays Glenda Markle , manager and love interest of bandleader " Tex " Warner . Known for her roles in the 1940s and early 1950s , Scott returned from retirement to star in the movie . 
 Wendell Corey ( 1914 – 1968 ) plays Walter " Tex " Warner , bandleader of the Rough Ridin ' Cowboys and the roadshow that Deke joins and revitalizes . Corey was known for his appearances in Alfred Hitchcock 's Rear Window and Joseph Anthony 's The Rainmaker . A decade earlier , he co @-@ starred with Lizabeth Scott in 1947 's Desert Fury and I Walk Alone . 
 Dolores Hart ( born 1938 ) plays Susan Jessup , a young singer who tours with Tex Warner 's band and Deke 's love interest . Cast in her first movie role , Hart was discovered by Wallis after he saw her in a production of Joan of Lorraine at Loyola University . He screen @-@ tested Hart on January 16 , 1957 , and later signed her for US $ 250 a week . Then named Dolores Hicks , Wallis requested her to change her name to favor her acting career . She adopted Hart , after the maiden surname of a friend . The actress changed it legally to " Dolores Hart " . A year after Loving You , Hart was cast as Presley 's love interest in his 1958 black @-@ and @-@ white musical drama , King Creole . 
 Ken Becker ( 1931 – 2000 ) , also occasionally billed as Kenny Becker or Kenneth Becker , plays Deke 's rival , Wayne , who loses a fistfight with Deke . Becker played similar roles in three later Presley films , G.I. Blues ( 1960 ) , Girls ! Girls ! Girls ! ( 1962 ) and <unk> ( 1964 ) . 
 Jana Lund ( 1933 – 1991 ) plays Daisy Bricker , the object of Wayne 's jealousy , who kisses Deke ( Presley 's first on @-@ screen kiss ) . A year earlier , she appeared in another rock and roll film , 1956 's Don 't Knock the Rock . Following Loving You , she had roles in three other titles in the <unk> film genre , 1958 's High School Hellcats , Hot Car Girl and Frankenstein 1970 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was based on the short story " A Call from Mitch Miller " , written by Mary Agnes Thompson and published in the June 1956 issue of Good Housekeeping . In that year , producer Hal Wallis bought the rights for the story to turn it into a vehicle for Presley 's first starring role for Paramount Pictures . Six months before the start of the production , Wallis loaned Presley to 20th Century Fox , where he appeared in his movie debut , the 1956 film Love Me Tender . 
 The producer then selected Hal Kanter to direct the film and to co @-@ write the script with Herbert Baker . To write a script adjusted to Presley , Kanter traveled to Memphis , Tennessee , to meet him in person . Along with Presley 's entourage , he went to Shreveport to see the last performance of the singer on the country television show , Louisiana Hayride . Kanter witnessed the reaction from fans , as well as Presley 's manager Colonel Tom Parker 's handling of the spectacle , both of which he used as an inspiration for the script . The working titles of the movie were " Lonesome Cowboy " , " Running Wild " , " Stranger in Town " , and " Something for the Girls " . Due to the appeal of Presley 's previous film being titled after a song sung by Presley , Wallis selected the final name for the film , using the Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller ballad penned for the movie , " Loving You " . 
 Shot in Technicolor and VistaVision , the production started on January 21 , 1957 , ending on March 8 . The film was shot at the Paramount studios , except the Jessup farm scenes , which were shot in the Hollywood Hills . The film features appearances by Presley 's guitarist Scotty Moore , bassist Bill Black , drummer D.J. Fontana , and The Jordanaires . Presley 's parents , Gladys and Vernon , who visited the set of the film , were included in the final scene of the film as part of the audience of the telecast . 
 Loving You premiered in Memphis on July 10 , 1957 at the Strand Theater . Presley did not go to that showing , instead opting to take girlfriend Anita Wood , as well as his parents to a private midnight screening . The film opened nationally on July 30 , 1957 and peaked at # 7 on the Variety National Box Office Survey , staying on the chart for four weeks . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The soundtrack of the film was recorded from January 15 – 18 , 1957 , at the Paramount Pictures Scoring Stage , and in two additional sessions at Radio Recorders in Hollywood on January 12 , 13 , and 19 , and February 23 – 24 , 1957 . It contains seven songs , composed expressly for the movie by writers contracted to Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music , the publishing companies owned by Presley and his manager , Colonel Tom Parker . The title tune , " Loving You " , was composed by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller . The single " ( Let Me Be Your ) Teddy Bear " backed with " Loving you " sold over a million copies , and was later certified platinum on March 27 , 1992 by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Performed by Presley : 
 " Mean Woman Blues " 
 " ( Let Me Be Your ) Teddy Bear " 
 " Loving You " 
 " Got a Lot o ' Livin ' to Do " 
 " Lonesome Cowboy " 
 " Hot Dog " 
 " Party " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film premiered on July 9 , 1957 , at the Strand Theater in Memphis , opening nationally on July 30 . Due to Presley 's massive appeal , for the first time , the studio decided to bypass the established first @-@ run theater system . Paramount opted instead for a wide release , sending it to neighborhood theaters in New York , Chicago , and Detroit . This new system was dubbed the " Presley Pattern " , which consisted of delivering the product to its direct market by cutting the expenses of premieres in downtown theaters , choosing instead local venues for a wider and more profitable release . 
 Upon its release , it appeared on Variety 's National Box Office Survey for four weeks , peaking at number seven . The film grossed a total of US $ 3 @.@ 7 million in 1957 . While Presley was in the army , the movie was re @-@ released in the summer of 1959 . The box office results were not impressive , the film grossing US $ 74 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Variety wrote a favorable review , noting that Presley " shows improvement as an actor ... being surrounded by a capable crew of performers " . The New York Times criticized his acting : the review opened " For Paramount 's ' Loving You ' , starring America 's favorite hound @-@ dog <unk> ... does just about everything , and little else , to prove that it ain 't — isn 't " . The Los Angeles Times declared it " A furtive step on Presley 's part in a screen career " . The Michigan Christian Advocate delivered a negative review and called the film " an apologia for Elvis Presley " and considered it " part of the passing American scene " that would " undoubtedly bore many and interest an equal number " . 
 On its review , Monthly Film Bulletin qualified Presley 's career as " one of the most puzzling and less agreeable aspects of modern popular music " . the review declared : " Presley adopts a slurred and husky style of delivery and a series of grotesque body gestures to impose on his otherwise innocuous material a suggestive meaning . ... in ' Loving You ' he is allowed more scope and is at times both the cause and sum total of the film 's somewhat doubtful entertainment value . " Down Beat opened its review mentioning the negative reception of Presley by the press , indicating that while other publications " hotly despised " him , Down Beat was " prepared to dismiss him with a decimating round of <unk> " . The reviewer , however noted that after watching Loving You , it was " amiss to speak unkindly of [ Presley ] " , and that the film was " a rather entertaining pic " . It remarked the " resourcefulness " of Lizabeth Scott , the " positive acting ability augmented by a fresh prettiness " of Dolores Hart , and the " witty lines and range of expressions " delivered by Wendell Corey . The review favored Presley , describing his performance as " an overpowering , if touchingly naive , celluloid sexuality . " It concluded : " For all his high @-@ voltage on @-@ stage erotica ... he plays the sullen country boy convincingly ... evincing all the emotion of a well bred head of livestock . " 
 = = = Later reviews and evaluation in film guides = = = 
 While it rated the film with two stars out of five , Allmovie defined it as " one of Elvis Presley 's liveliest and most interesting early films ... one of the best in ( his ) output " . MSN Movies called it " a streamlined and sanitized retake on the story of Elvis " . 
 Leonard Maltin 's Movie Guide rated Loving You with 2 ½ stars out of 4 , the review declared : " Elvis ' second movie is highlighted by his performance of ' Teddy Bear ' and the title tune " . Meanwhile , Steven H. Scheuer 's Movies on TV lowered the rating to 2 stars out of 4 . Scheuer opined that the film was " tailor @-@ made for Presley and his tunes , the story matters little — too little , if one doesn 't dig Elvis " . <unk> 's Golden Movie Retriever rated it with 2 bones out of 4 . Michael Weldon , in Psychotronic Encyclopedia of Film , gave a positive review : " Elvis at his best , top @-@ billed for the first time " . Leslie Halliwell , in his Film and Video Guide , felt the opposite , giving zero stars out of 4 , and dismissed it as an " empty @-@ headed , glossy star vehicle " . 
 Mick Martin 's & Marsha Porter 's DVD & Video Guide rated it with 3 stars out of 5 . It described it as a " better @-@ than @-@ average Elvis Presley vehicle " and concluded that " the main attraction is Elvis singing his rock ' n ' roll songs , including the title tune . " Also assigning 3 stars ( out of 5 ) , The Motion Picture Guide opined " Loving You is one of Presley 's better films . He gives a fine performance , both in the great concert scenes and in the dramatic ones ; Hal Kanter directs with vigor " . 
 = White @-@ winged fairywren = 
 The white @-@ winged fairywren ( Malurus leucopterus ) is a species of passerine bird in the fairywren family Maluridae . It lives in the drier parts of central Australia ; from central Queensland and South Australia across to Western Australia . Like other fairywrens , this species displays marked sexual dimorphism and one or more males of a social group grow brightly coloured plumage during the breeding season . The female is sandy @-@ brown with light @-@ blue tail feathers ; it is smaller than the male , which , in breeding plumage , has a bright @-@ blue body , black bill , and white wings . Younger sexually mature males are almost indistinguishable from females and are often the breeding males . A troop of white @-@ winged fairywrens in spring and summer has a brightly coloured older male accompanied by small , inconspicuous brown birds , many of which are also male . Three subspecies are recognised . Apart from the mainland subspecies , one is found on Dirk Hartog Island , and another on Barrow Island off the coast of Western Australia . Males from these islands have black rather than blue breeding plumage . 
 The white @-@ winged fairywren mainly eats insects , supplementing this with small fruits and leaf buds . It occurs in heathland and arid scrubland , where low shrubs provide cover . Like other fairywrens , it is a cooperative breeding species , and small groups of birds maintain and defend territories year @-@ round . Groups consist of a socially monogamous pair with several helper birds who assist in raising the young . These helpers are progeny that have attained sexual maturity but remain with the family group for one or more years after fledging . Although not yet confirmed genetically , the white @-@ winged fairywren may be promiscuous and assist in raising the young from other pairings . As part of a courtship display , the male wren plucks petals from flowers and displays them to female birds . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A specimen of the white @-@ winged fairywren was first collected by French naturalists Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard in September 1818 , on Louis de Freycinet 's voyage around the Southern Hemisphere . The specimen was lost in a shipwreck , but a painting entitled <unk> <unk> by Jacques Arago survived and led to the bird 's description in 1824 by French ornithologist Charles Dumont de Sainte @-@ Croix . The name for the species was derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> ' white ' and pteron ' wing ' . 
 Ironically , the original specimen was of the black @-@ plumaged subspecies from Dirk Hartog Island , which was not recorded again for 80 years . Meanwhile , the widespread blue @-@ plumaged subspecies was discovered and described as two separate species by John Gould in 1865 . He called one specimen collected from inland New South Wales the white @-@ winged superb warbler , M. <unk> , while another , which appeared to have a white back and wings , was described as M. leuconotus , the white @-@ backed superb warbler . It was not until the early 20th century that both of these blue @-@ plumaged mainland forms were found to be of a single species . George Mack , ornithologist of the National Museum of Victoria , considered the specific name leuconotus to take precedence in his 1934 revision of the genus , and more recent studies have followed suit . The back region between the shoulders is in fact bare , with feathers that arise from the shoulder ( scapular ) region and sweep inwards in different patterns . This variation confused the early naturalists who described the white @-@ backed and blue @-@ backed species . 
 The white @-@ winged fairywren was often referred to as the blue @-@ and @-@ white wren , and early observers , such as Norman <unk> of Victoria , refer to them by this name . However , like other fairywrens , the white @-@ winged fairywren is unrelated to the true wren ( family Troglodytidae ) . It was previously classified as a member of the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae , and later as a member of the warbler family Sylviidae , before they were placed in the newly recognised Maluridae in 1975 . More recently , DNA analysis has shown the Maluridae family to be related to the Meliphagidae ( honeyeaters ) , and the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes , scrubwrens , thornbills , gerygones and allies ) in the large superfamily Meliphagoidea . 
 Within the Maluridae , it is one of 12 species in the genus , Malurus . It is most closely related to the Australian red @-@ backed fairywren , with which it makes up a phylogenetic clade with the white @-@ shouldered fairywren of New Guinea as the next closest relative . Termed the bicoloured wrens by ornithologist Richard Schodde , these three species are notable for their lack of head patterns and ear tufts and their uniform black or blue plumage with contrasting shoulder or wing colour ; they replace each other geographically across northern Australia and New Guinea . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are three recognised subspecies of Malurus leucopterus . Both black @-@ plumaged forms have been called black @-@ and @-@ white fairywren . 
 M. l. leuconotus is endemic to mainland Australia and distinct in that it is the only subspecies to have nuptial males that show prominent blue @-@ and @-@ white plumage . The name of this species is derived from the Ancient Greek leukos ' white ' and <unk> ' back ' . Birds in the southern parts of its range tend to be smaller than those in the north . 
 M. l. leucopterus is restricted to Dirk Hartog Island , off the western coast of Australia , and nuptial males display black @-@ and @-@ white plumage . This subspecies is the smallest of the three and bears a proportionally longer tail . It was collected again in 1916 by Tom Carter , 98 years after de Freycinet 's expedition collected the type specimen . 
 M. l. edouardi , like M. l. leucopterus , have black @-@ and @-@ white coloured males , and are found only on Barrow Island , also off the western coast of Australia . Birds of this subspecies are larger than those of M. l. leucopterus but have a shorter tail . The female has a more cinnamon tinge to her plumage than the grey @-@ brown of the other two subspecies . It was described by A.J. Campbell in 1901 . 
 M. l. leucopterus and M. l. edouardi are both generally smaller than their mainland relatives , and both subspecies tend to have smaller family groups that consist of only one male and one female , with an occasional helper bird . While the island subspecies and mainland species have been found to have similar social structure , breeding pairs on both islands have , on average , smaller clutches , longer incubation times , and fewer live fledglings . Additionally , while M. l. leuconotus is considered of least concern by the IUCN due to its widespread occurrence , both island subspecies are considered vulnerable by the Australian government due to their delicate nesting sites that are easily disturbed by human construction and habitation . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 Both island subspecies are nearer in genetic distance to mainland populations of leuconotus than to each other ; Dirk Hartog Island is 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the mainland while Barrow Island is 56 kilometres ( 35 mi ) from the mainland . Gene flow between the populations existed at the beginning of the present interglacial period , some 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago , at a time when sea levels were lower and both islands connected with the mainland . 
 There are three theories as to how the three races of white @-@ winged fairywren could have evolved . The first suggests that black @-@ and @-@ white plumage is an ancestral condition and , following separation of the three populations , blue @-@ and @-@ white plumage evolved in the mainland species . The second hypothesis suggests that black @-@ and @-@ white plumage evolved convergently on the two separate islands . The third suggests that black @-@ and @-@ white plumage evolved once from the blue @-@ and @-@ white ancestral condition , and later the mainland species re @-@ evolved blue plumage . 
 The distribution of the three bi @-@ coloured fairywren species indicates their ancestors lived across New Guinea and northern Australia in a period when sea levels were lower and the two regions were joined by a land bridge . Populations became separated as sea levels rose , and New Guinea birds evolved into the white @-@ shouldered fairywren , and Australian forms into the red @-@ backed fairywren and the arid @-@ adapted white @-@ winged fairywren . 
 = = Description = = 
 Measuring 11 to 13 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 3 in ) in length , white @-@ winged fairywrens are one of the two smallest species of Malurus . Males typically weigh between 7 @.@ 2 and 10 @.@ 9 grams ( 0 @.@ 25 and 0 @.@ 38 oz ) while females weigh between 6 @.@ 8 and 11 grams ( 0 @.@ 24 and 0 @.@ 39 oz ) . Averaging 8 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) in males and 8 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) in females , the bill is relatively long , narrow and pointed and wider at the base . Wider than it is deep , the bill is similar in shape to those of other birds that feed by probing for or picking insects off their environs . It is finer and more pointed in this species than in other fairywrens . 
 Fully mature adults are sexually dimorphic , with the male being larger and differing in colour from the female . The adult female is sandy @-@ brown with a very light blue tail , and a pinkish buff bill . The male in breeding plumage has a black bill , white wings and shoulders , and a wholly cobalt blue or black body ( depending on subspecies ) . These contrasting white feathers are especially highlighted in flight and ground displays in breeding season . The male in eclipse plumage resembles the female , though it may be distinguished by its darker bill . Both sexes have long , slender , distinct tails held at an upward angle from their bodies . Measuring around 6 @.@ 25 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 46 in ) , the tail feathers have a white fringe , which disappears with wear . 
 Nestlings , fledglings , and juveniles have brown plumage and pink @-@ brown bills with shorter tails than adults . Young males develop blue tail feathers and darker bills by late summer or autumn ( following a spring or summer breeding season ) , while young females develop light blue tails . By the subsequent spring , all males are fertile and have developed cloacal protuberances , which store sperm . In contrast , during the breeding season , fertile females develop <unk> brood patches , which are bare areas on their bellies . Males entering their second or third year may develop spotty blue and white plumage during the breeding season . By their fourth year , males have assumed their nuptial plumage , where the scapulars , secondary wing coverts , and secondary flight feathers are white while the rest of their bodies are a vibrant cobalt blue . All sexually mature males moult twice a year , once before the breeding season in winter or spring , and again afterwards in autumn ; rarely , a male may moult directly from nuptial to nuptial plumage . The breeding males ' blue plumage , particularly the ear @-@ coverts , is highly iridescent due to the flattened and twisted surface of the barbules . The blue plumage also reflects ultraviolet light strongly , and so may be even more prominent to other fairywrens , whose colour vision extends into this part of the spectrum . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 In 1980 , Tideman characterised five different patterns of calls among Malurus leucopterus leuconotus ; these were recognised by Pruett and Jones among the island subspecies M. l. edouardi . The main call is a reel made by both sexes in order to establish territory and unify the group . It is a long song of " rising and falling notes " that is first signaled by 3 – 5 chip notes . Although seemingly weak in sound , the reel carries a long way above the stunted shrubland . A harsh <unk> call is often used to establish contact ( especially between mothers and their young ) and to raise alarm ; it is characterised by a series of " loud and abrupt " calls that vary in frequency and intensity . Adults will use a high @-@ pitched peep that may be made intermittently with reels as a contact call to birds that are more distant . Nestlings , fledglings , and females around the nest will use high pips — quiet , high @-@ pitched , and short calls . When used by a mature female , they are mixed with harsh calls . Nestlings may also make " gurgling " noises when they are being fed . The subordinate helpers and feeders may also make this sound . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The white @-@ winged fairywren is well adapted to dry environments , and <unk> leuconotus is found throughout arid and semi @-@ arid environments between latitudes 19 and <unk> in mainland Australia . It occupies coastal Western Australia from around Port Hedland south to Perth , and stretches eastwards over to Mount Isa in Queensland , and along the western parts of the Great Dividing Range through central Queensland and central western New South Wales , into the northwestern corner of Victoria and the Eyre Peninsula and across the Nullarbor . It commonly <unk> with other species of fairywren , including the purple @-@ backed fairy @-@ wren ( M. lamberti assimilis ) . White @-@ winged fairywrens often inhabit heathlands or treeless shrublands dominated by saltbush ( Atriplex ) and small shrubs of the genus <unk> , or grasses such as tussock grass ( Triodia ) and cane @-@ grass ( <unk> ) , as well as floodplain areas vegetated with lignum ( <unk> <unk> ) . M. l. leucopterus inhabits similar habitats on Dirk Hartog Island and M. l. edouardi does the same on Barrow Island . The white @-@ winged fairywren is replaced to the north of its range on mainland Australia by the red @-@ backed fairywren . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The usual form of locomotion is hopping , with both feet leaving the ground and landing simultaneously . However , birds may run when performing the rodent @-@ run display . Its balance is assisted by a proportionally large tail , which is usually held upright and rarely still . The short , rounded wings provide good initial lift and are useful for short flights , though not for extended jaunts . 
 White @-@ winged fairywrens live in complex social groups . Clans consist of 2 – 4 birds , typically one brown or partially blue male and a breeding female . Nest helpers are birds raised in previous years which remain with the family group after fledging and assist in raising young ; they may be male that have retained their brown plumage , or female . Birds in a group roost side @-@ by @-@ side in dense cover and engage in mutual preening . Several subgroups live within one territory and make up a clan , which is presided over by one blue ( or black ) male who assumes breeding plumage . While the blue male is dominant to the rest of the brown and partially blue males within his clan , he nests with only one female and contributes to the raising of only her young . It is unclear whether or not he fathers young in any of the other nests within his territory . 
 Each clan has a specified area of land that all members contribute to foraging from and defending . Frequently , territory sizes , normally 4 to 6 hectares ( 10 to 15 acres ) , are correlated with the abundance of rain and resources in a region ; smaller territories occur where insects and resources are plentiful . Additionally , the feeding territories are larger during the winter months when these birds spend much of their time foraging with the entire clan . White @-@ winged fairywrens occupy much larger territories than other fairywren species . 
 Observed in this species , the wing @-@ fluttering display is seen in several situations : females responding , and presumably acquiescing , to male courtship displays , juveniles begging for food , by helpers to older birds , and immature males to senior ones . The fairywren lowers its head and tail , <unk> and quivers its wings and holds its beak open silently . 
 Both the male and female adult white @-@ winged fairywren may utilise a rodent @-@ run display to distract predators from nests with young birds . The head , neck and tail are lowered , the wings are held out and the feathers are fluffed as the bird runs rapidly and voices a continuous alarm call . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The white @-@ winged fairywren is primarily insectivorous ; its diet includes small beetles , bugs , moths , praying mantises , caterpillars , and smaller insects , including spiders . The larger insects are typically fed to nestlings by the breeding female and her helpers , including the breeding male . Adults and juveniles forage by hopping along the shrubland floor , and may supplement their diets with seeds and fruits of saltbush ( <unk> ) , goosefoot ( Chenopodium ) and new shoots of samphire . During spring and summer , birds are active in bursts through the day and accompany their foraging with song . Insects are numerous and easy to catch , which allows the birds to rest between forays . The group often shelters and rests together during the heat of the day . Food is harder to find during winter and they are required to spend the day foraging continuously . 
 = = = Courtship and breeding = = = 
 <unk> exhibit one of the highest incidences of extra @-@ pair mating , and many broods are brought up a by male who is not the natural father . However , courtship methods among white @-@ winged fairywrens remain unclear . Blue @-@ plumaged males have been seen outside of their territory and in some cases , carrying pink or purple petals , which among other species advertise the male to neighboring females . In contrast , black @-@ plumaged males on Barrow and Dirk Hartog islands often carry blue petals . While petal @-@ carrying outside of clan territories strongly suggests mating with other females is occurring , further genetic analysis is necessary . 
 During another courtship display the male bows deeply forward facing the female , reaching the ground with his bill and spreading and flattening his plumage in a near @-@ horizontal plane for up to 20 seconds . In this pose , the white plumage forms a striking white band across his darker plumage . 
 Breeding females begin to build their nests in the spring and construct domed structures composed of spiderwebs , fine grasses , thistle @-@ down , and vegetable @-@ down , typically 6 to 14 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) tall and 3 to 9 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 35 in ) thick . Each nest has a small entrance on one side and they are normally placed in thick shrubs close to the ground . A clutch of 3 – 4 eggs is generally laid anywhere from September to January , with incubation lasting around 14 days . The white @-@ winged fairywren generally breeds in the spring in the southwest of Western Australia , but is more opportunistic in arid regions of central and northern Australia , with breeding recorded almost any month after a period of rainfall . Incubation is by the breeding female alone , while the breeding male ( a brown or blue male ) and nest helpers aid in feeding the nestlings and removing their fecal sacs . The newly hatched nestlings are altricial , gaping immediately for food , and developing downy feather tracts and opening their eyes by the third or fourth day . Nestlings remain in the nest for 10 – 11 days , and fledglings continue to be fed for 3 – 4 weeks following their departure from the nest . Fledglings then either stay on to help raise the next brood or move to a nearby territory . It is not unusual for a pair bond to hatch and raise two broods in one breeding season , and helpers tend to lessen the stress on the breeding female rather than increase the overall number of feedings . Like other fairywrens , the white @-@ winged fairywren is particularly prone to parasitic nesting by the Horsfield 's bronze cuckoo ( Chalcites basalis ) . Parasitism by the shining bronze cuckoo ( C. lucidus ) and black @-@ eared cuckoo ( C. <unk> ) is rarely recorded . 
 = = Predators and threats = = 
 Adults and their young may be preyed upon by mammalian predators , such as the red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) or the feral cat ( Felis catus ) , and native predatory birds , such as the Australian magpie ( Gymnorhina tibicen ) , butcherbird species ( Cracticus spp . ) , laughing kookaburra ( Dacelo novaeguineae ) , currawongs ( Strepera spp . ) , crows and ravens ( Corvus spp . ) , shrike @-@ thrushes ( Colluricincla spp . ) and reptiles such as goannas . Another threat to the birds is from humans ; many nests are trampled on ( even by the occasional bird watcher ) during breeding season because the nests are hidden close to the ground and therefore difficult for passers @-@ by to spot . 
 = Battle of Samakh = 
 The Battle of Samakh was fought on 25 September 1918 , during the Battle of Sharon which together with the Battle of Nablus formed the set piece Battle of Megiddo fought from 19 to 25 September 1918 , in the last months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of the First World War . During the cavalry phase of the Battle of Sharon the Desert Mounted Corps commanded by the Australian Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel , captured the Esdraelon Plain ( also known as the Jezreel Valley and the Plain of Armageddon ) 40 – 50 miles ( 64 – 80 km ) behind the front line in the Judean Hills on 20 September , when the 3rd Light Horse Brigade captured Jenin . The 4th Light Horse Brigade , Australian Mounted Division was deployed guarding supply columns , and prisoners , before being ordered to attack and capture Samakh on the shore of the Sea of <unk> . Here the Ottoman and German garrison had been ordered by the commander of the Yildirim Army Group to fight to the last man . 
 Samakh , in the centre of a rearguard line stretching from Tiberias through Samakh and on to Deraa was intended to cover the retreat of three Ottoman armies . The rearguard was set up to delay the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) cavalry in the Desert Mounted Corps after the British Empire infantry victories in the Judean Hills at the Battle of Tulkarm , and the Battle of Tabsor during the Battle of Sharon . These and other battles fought during the Battle of Nablus including the Third Transjordan attack , also part of the Battle of Megiddo , forced the retreat of the Ottoman Fourth , the Seventh and the Eighth Armies north towards Damascus . 
 On 20 September , German General Otto Liman von Sanders , the commander of the Yildirim Army Group , ordered Samakh 's German and Ottoman garrison to prepare a strong rearguard defence of the town . By dawn on 25 September , when a regiment and two squadrons of the Australian 4th Light Horse Brigade attacked Samakh , the rearguard was strongly entrenched . The assault , which began with a mounted cavalry charge , ended two hours later after close quarter fighting in the village and the railway station . After fierce fighting with bayonets and swords , from room to room in the railway buildings , the town was captured . This victory , which captured the centre of the rearguard line , concluded the Battle of Sharon section of the Battle of Megiddo and opened the way for the cavalry pursuit to Damascus , which was captured on 1 October . By the time the Armistice of Mudros between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire was signed at the end of October , Aleppo had been captured and fighting was in progress further north . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks in March – April and April – May 1918 , by the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) , which had been responsible for the Sinai and Palestine Campaign since March 1916 , its commander General Edmund Allenby ordered the occupation of the Jordan Valley . He also ordered the front line be extended across the Judean Hills to the Mediterranean Sea . Most of the British infantry and Yeomanry cavalry regiments were redeployed to the Western Front to counter Ludendorff 's Spring Offensive and were replaced by British India Army infantry and cavalry . As part of re @-@ organisation and training , these newly arrived soldiers carried out a series of attacks on sections of the Ottoman front line during the summer months . These attacks were aimed at pushing the front line to more advantageous positions in preparation for a major attack , and to acclimatise the newly arrived infantry . It was not until the middle of September that the consolidated force was ready for large @-@ scale operations . 
 On 19 September , the XXI Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Edward Bulfin had , with the support of a creeping barrage , broken through the Ottoman front line during the Battle of Sharon . In the afternoon the XX Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode was then ordered to begin its own attack , supported by an artillery barrage . These attacks by both the XX and XXI Corps continued until midday on 21 September , when a successful flanking attack by the XXI Corps , combined with the XX Corps assault , forced the Seventh and Eighth Armies to disengage . The Seventh Army commanded by the Ottoman Army Ferik or <unk> Ferik , Mustafa Kemal retreated from the Nablus area towards the Jordan River , crossing at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge before the rearguard at Nablus was captured . The Desert Mounted Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel advanced through the gap created by the XXI Corps infantry during the morning of 19 September to almost encircle the Ottoman forces fighting in the Judean Hills , capturing Nazareth , Haifa , Afulah and Beisan , Jenin and Samakh before advancing to Tiberias . During this time , Chaytor 's Force commanded by Major General Edward Chaytor captured part of the retreating Ottoman and German column at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge to cut off this line of retreat across the Jordan River . To the east of the river , as the Fourth Army began its retreat , Chaytor 's Force advanced to capture Es Salt on 23 September . Amman was captured on 25 September during the Second Battle of Amman where a strong Fourth Army rearguard was defeated on 25 September . 
 Samakh was regarded by both Allenby , the British commander of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force , and the German General Otto Liman von Sanders , commander of the Yildirim Army Group , as a key strategic point . The town controlled the most direct road to Damascus on the Ottoman lines of communication and the Palestine Railways which ran across a series of bridges across the Jordan River from Deraa . 
 It was clear , that only one course remained open to me . The Tiberias sector from Lake <unk> to Samakh must be held with all the means at our disposal to prevent the pursuit overtaking us , whilst the formations retiring along the River Jordan and east of Jordan to the Yarmuk Valley sector , from Samakh to Der 'a , must form [ a ] front for at least the time being . 
 During the unsuccessful attack of the 5th Cavalry Division on Nazareth in the early morning of 20 September , Liman von Sanders accompanied by General <unk> , Major <unk> and Rittmeister Hecker , had escaped on their way to Damascus . They arrived at Tiberias during the afternoon of 20 September , before continuing on to Samakh and Deraa . He alerted the garrisons he passed to the advance of the EEF and ordered the establishment of a rearguard line . The line was to run from Deraa down the Yarmuk River Valley , across the Jordan River and west to Samakh , around the shore of the Sea of Galilee to Tiberias and northwards to Lake <unk> . Two main roads and the railway lines to Damascus , would be protected and time gained for the development of the defence of Damascus , if the garrisons were not defeated . Liman von Sanders described Samakh " as the essential link between the two main sectors of the line " but also " the weak link between the two @-@ halves . " He reinforced the garrison at Samakh with German machine gunners and ordered the commander , a German officer to hold the town to the last man . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Asia Corps retreat = = = 
 By the morning of 21 September , German Colonel Gustav von Oppen 's Asia Korps remained intact . It consisted of the 16th and 19th Divisions , the 701st Battalion was still complete with a troop and a squadron of cavalry , six machine guns and 18 light Bergmann machine guns , an additional machine gun company of six guns an infantry @-@ artillery platoon with two mountain guns / howitzers , a trench mortar section with four mortars . The 701st Artillery Detachment consisted of two four @-@ gun 77 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) , one four @-@ gun 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) howitzer batteries and the " <unk> " Machine Gun Detachment . The remnants of the 702nd and the 703rd Battalions were formed into a battalion to which a rifle company , a machine gun company and a trench mortar detachment were attached . 
 With about 700 German and 1 @,@ 300 Ottoman soldiers of the 16th and 19th Divisions , von Oppen succeeded in retreating towards Beisan via Mount Ebal during 21 September but was forced to leave behind all guns or baggage . They suffered some casualties when fired on by artillery , before bivouacking that night at Tammun with the 16th and 19th Divisions at Tubas , unaware that Desert Mounted Corps had already occupied Beisan . They were moving northwards from Tubas towards Beisan when von Oppen learned it had already been captured . He decided to advance during the night of 22 September to Samakh where he correctly guessed Liman von Sanders would order a strong rearguard action . However , Jevad , the commander of the Eighth Army ordered him to cross the Jordan instead ; he successfully got all the Germans and some of the Ottoman soldiers across before the 11th Cavalry Brigade attacked and captured the remainder , to finalise the capture of Afulah and Beisan . Liman von Sanders was very critical of Jevad 's intervention which considerably weakened the Samakh position , but von Oppen would have had to break through a whole cavalry division to get there . 
 = = = Reconnaissance by 4th Cavalry Division unit = = = 
 While the Central India Horse ( 10th Cavalry Brigade ) or the 19th Lancers ( 12th Cavalry Brigade ) , 4th Cavalry Division , continued to hold the bridge at Jisr el Mejamie , captured at 05 : 00 on 21 September , during the Capture of Afulah and Beisan , one of their squadrons made a reconnaissance to Samakh to blow up the railway east of the town . The 10th Brigade relieved the 19th Lancers at Jisr el Mejamie on 23 September , so it was probably the 10th Brigade which carried out the reconnaissance . However , the patrol was forced to retire when heavily fired on by two 10 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 1 inches ) guns ( also described as " two 4 @.@ 2 guns , " ) from north east of the town , but they reported a train had arrived at Samakh which was still there at 11 : 00 on 24 September . 
 = = = Australian Mounted Division advance to Jisr el Mejamie = = = 
 Chauvel , commander of the Desert Mounted Corps , ordered the capture of the towns of Samakh and Tiberias to complete the strategic and tactical line held by his cavalry across the Esdraelon Plain from Acre north of Haifa on the Mediterranean Sea to Nazareth . On 24 September the Australian Mounted Division commanded by Major General Henry West Hodgson , was ordered to capture Samakh and the railway bridges over the Yarmuk gorge , four days after Liman von Sanders had alerted the rearguard garrison , which " led to the most fiercely – fought action of the whole pursuit " in preparation for a further advance towards Damascus . 
 However Hodgson 's reserve , the 11th Light Horse Regiment and one squadron of the 12th Light Horse Regiment , with the 4th Light Horse Brigade 's headquarters and Machine Gun Squadron , were the only troops available . The 5th Light Horse Brigade was ordered at 15 : 10 on 24 September , while they were at Jenin , to send a regiment to reinforce the attacking force during its approach to Samakh . They sent the 15th Light Horse Regiment which reported at Samakh at 07 : 00 half an hour after the town was captured . Meanwhile , the remainder of the 5th Light Horse Brigade stayed at Jenin until the evening of 25 September when they rode to the railway near <unk> , with Mount Gilboa " on their right , " to water for a couple of days . 
 The 4th Light Horse Brigade ( less the 4th Light Horse Regiment and two squadrons or five troops of 12th Light Horse Regiment ) arrived at Beisan at 13 : 45 on 24 September . Here they received Order No. 31 from the Australian Mounted Division to attack Samakh . After leaving Beisan for Jisr el Mejamie , at 16 : 35 they received a message dropped from an aircraft , which reported that Samakh was defended by 50 rifles and machine guns . They arrived at Jisr el Mejamie at 21 : 00 and made contact with the regiment of the 4th Cavalry Division , holding the bridge . A further order to capture Samakh was received at 22 : 10 , which included the additional objective of reconnoitring towards Tiberias , where they were to cooperate with the 3rd Light Horse Brigade in capturing the town . The orders gave the brigade commander , Brigadier General William Grant , the choice of attacking immediately , or waiting for the 4th Light Horse Regiment and the squadrons of the 12th Light Horse Regiment . He decided not to delay attacking the apparently weak rearguard , as he expected to be reinforced by the 15th Light Horse Regiment , 5th Light Horse Brigade , on the way to Samakh . If Grant had waited for reinforcements , the attack would have been during in daylight , in full view of the defenders in the railway station building , which may have resulted in at least as many casualties , and perhaps many more , during a potentially more protracted fight . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Cavalry charge = = = 
 The 4th Light Horse Brigade crossed the Jordan and Yarmuk Rivers at Jisr el Mejamie at 02 : 30 on 25 September in order to arrive at Samakh before dawn , advancing along the railway line . Grant ordered the 11th Light Horse Regiment to attack mounted from the southeast at dawn , supported by machine guns which were to be deployed due south , on the railway . 
 The attack began before dawn , when the two leading light horse squadrons were heavily fired on by rifles and machine guns from several outposts at 04 : 25 , causing nearly 100 horse casualties . No reconnaissance by the light horse had been possible , but the 19th Lancers reported that the village and station buildings lay at the end of a flat plain 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) wide , without any cover and no apparent obstacles to a cavalry charge . This unexpected fire revealed the garrison was deployed covering the open plain for some 700 yards ( 640 m ) south of Samakh , extending on either side to the mountains . The 11th Light Horse Regiment , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Parsons , had planned to attack the garrison 's flank , but as no flank attack was possible , he swung the regiment around to attack straight on . A and B squadrons galloped on either side of the railway line , with all 12 machine guns of the 4th Machine Gun Squadron providing covering fire for the charging squadrons . They fired at the flashes created by the Ottoman rifles and machine guns . 
 Both squadrons succeeded in entering the village , while one squadron of 12th Light Horse Regiment moved forward towards the town from the west , in support . The 11th Light Horse Regiment 's reserve ' C ' squadron moved forward to occupy Hill 377 on the eastern flank , watching the railway from Deraa and the road on the eastern side of the Sea of Galilee . Meanwhile , the 4th Light Horse Brigade Headquarters and the 12th Light Horse Regimental Headquarters , forming the attacking units ' reserve , were deployed on the plain south of the town and east of the railway . Here they were heavily fired on by artillery , on the right flank near the Sea of Galilee , and forced to move to cover . Preston claims it was the 4th Light Horse Regiment which " was sent in mounted on the west . " 
 This cavalry charge was unique during the whole of the First World War , being the only one carried out in the dark and across country , which had not been previously reconnoitred . The ground was found to be scattered with clumps of long spiked thistles , and a number of pitfalls causing nine men to be injured from falls during the charge . 
 = = = Dismounted attack = = = 
 As soon as A and B Squadrons of the 11th Light Horse Regiment reached the town and dismounted , the 4th Machine Gun Squadron stopped their covering fire , to target the German or Ottoman machine guns on the right , which they silenced . Then the 4th Machine Gun Squadron galloped forward to take up a position at the western end of the town , while the two attacking squadrons dismounted , to approach the railway station buildings on foot . 
 The substantial two storied station building , solidly build of stone , made an effective strong redoubt for the garrison , with the windows used by the defenders to fire their automatic rifles and throw their grenades from . At this time several white flags were reported at the station , but when the light horsemen approached they were fired on , and it was in this way that most of the light horsemen who died during the battle were killed . Once they succeeded in entering the station buildings , hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting from room @-@ to @-@ room with rifles , bayonets , and swords , followed . Other groups of defenders deployed in the locomotives , tenders and carriages standing in the railway sidings , were also attacked . 
 The savage hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting in the railway buildings and sidings lasted for more than an hour before the light horsemen captured the area . Over 20 Ottoman and German soldiers were killed in the station buildings alone during the fighting . At the same time , ' C ' Squadron , of the 11th Light Horse Regiment , and / or one squadron of the 12th Light Horse Regiment , moved up into the village of Samakh and captured the town during less severe fighting . 
 There were 28 German and Ottoman soldiers killed and 33 wounded while 331 unwounded prisoners were captured . Other captures included one <unk> field gun , seven heavy machine guns , three automatic rifles , a large dump of rifles , bayonets , automatic pistols and ammunition , which was subsequently burnt . A motor boat escaped but another was destroyed by fire and its occupants were captured . Two locomotives , eight carriages , 12 goods wagons along with an aircraft and a wireless were also captured . The light horsemen suffered 17 killed and 60 wounded with one man missing and 77 horses killed , the 11th Light Horse Regiment lost two captains , one lieutenant and 11 other ranks killed , while four officers and 25 other ranks were wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While the 4th Light Horse Brigade buried their dead and the field ambulance treated the wounded , a squadron of the 12th Light Horse Regiment advanced along the western shore of the Sea of Galilee , to meet with the 3rd Light Horse Brigade which had captured Jenin , which had advanced direct over the hills from Nazareth at 15 : 00 on 25 September , to capture Tiberias . Strong patrols also advanced up the Yarmuk River valley east of Samakh , but every bridge across the Jordan River was found to be strongly guarded , 30 at one and 60 Germans in a redoubt with an engine and tender , at another . The rugged Jebel Ain en Nimr mountain , 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) above the Sea of Galilee and less than two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from its southern shore was occupied by 500 Ottoman infantry and one gun . 
 The capture of Samakh and operations around the Sea of Galilee concluded the Battles of Megiddo . Chauvel 's Desert Mounted Corps had captured Haifa , Nazareth and Tiberias , two Ottoman armies had been eliminated from the Judean Hills and the Fourth Army east of the Jordan was in full retreat to Deraa and Damascus . Allenby acknowledged in a cable to the Australian Government that " the completeness of our victory is due to the action of the Desert Mounted Corps under General Chauvel . " " The battle had been as brilliant in execution as it had been in conception ; it had no parallel in France or on any other front , but rather looked forward in principle and even in detail to the Blitzkrieg of 1939 . " 
 I have your HW wire and that from Troopers proposing a Cavalry raid to Aleppo . I don 't think Aleppo possible ; but am sending 3 Divisions of Cavalry , as soon as I can , to Damascus . Chaytor 's Division of Anzac Light Horse is about Amman now , and will deal with enemy coming from the South . Prisoners number well over 40 @,@ 000 and are still coming in . I have Australian mounted troops at the S. end of Lake Tiberias , and they are pushing to Tiberias . If I get Damascus , Beirut falls to us certainly ; and I hope to push troops , Northwards , thither , by the coast – road from Haifa , feeding from the sea , stage by stage . 
 On 27 September , the 4th Light Horse Brigade left Samakh at 06 : 00 and arrived at Tiberias at 08 : 00 , where they received two days supplies and one day 's iron ration , to last until after breakfast on 29 September . They rode out towards Damascus at 10 : 00 , leaving the 15th Light Horse Regiment ( 5th Light Horse Brigade ) to guard Samakh until they were relieved by the 7th ( Meerut ) Division , XXI Corps . 
 = Gene Robinson = 
 Vicky Gene Robinson ( born May 29 , 1947 in Fayette County , Kentucky ) is an American retired bishop of the Diocese of New Hampshire in the Episcopal Church in the United States of America . Robinson was elected bishop coadjutor in 2003 and succeeded as diocesan bishop in March 2004 . Before becoming bishop , he served as Canon to the Ordinary to the VIII Bishop of New Hampshire . 
 Robinson is widely known for being the first priest in an openly gay relationship to be consecrated a bishop in a major Christian denomination believing in the historic episcopate . His sexual orientation was privately acknowledged in the 1970s , when he studied in seminary , was ordained , married , and started a family . He went public with his sexual identity and divorced in 1986 . He entered a formal relationship with his second spouse , Mark Andrew , in 1988 . When delegates to the Episcopal convention were voting on the ratification of his election , it became an issue of controversy . His election was ratified 62 to 45 . After his election , many theologically conservative Episcopalians in the United States abandoned the Episcopal Church , formed the Anglican Church in North America ( <unk> ) and aligned themselves with bishops outside the Episcopal Church in the United States , a process called the Anglican realignment . His story has appeared in print and film . 
 In 2009 he was given the Stephen F. Kolzak Media Award . In 2010 he announced his intention to retire in 2013 , at 65 . His successor is A. Robert Hirschfeld , who was elected bishop coadjutor on May 19 , 2012 , and consecrated bishop in Concord , New Hampshire , on August 4 , 2012 . Hirschfeld served with Robinson until Robinson 's formal retirement on January 5 , 2013 . In 2014 , Robinson announced his plans to divorce Mark Andrew . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robinson 's parents were poor tenant farmers who worked in the tobacco fields as sharecroppers . The family used an outhouse , drew water from a cistern , and did laundry in a cast @-@ iron tub over an open flame . Their house did not have running water until Robinson was ten years old . When Robinson was born , he was so seriously ill that the doctor was certain he would not survive . He was temporarily paralyzed from birth and his head was misshapen . So likely was Robinson 's death that the physician asked Robinson 's father Charles for a name for the baby 's birth and death certificates . Robinson 's parents were young ( his mother Imogene was twenty ) and they were hoping for a girl . They named the baby " Vicky Gene Robinson " for Charles ' father Victor and the baby 's mother Imogene . For a long time , Robinson 's parents believed the boy would die soon . Much later in life , Robinson 's father would tell him he couldn 't take any joy in the boy 's development because he always thought each step was going to be the last thing . Robinson 's parents were and still are members of a small Disciples of Christ congregation . Robinson describes his childhood as very religious . Robinson had perfect Sunday School attendance for thirteen years . 
 = = Education and marriage = = 
 Robinson chose The University of the South in Sewanee , Tennessee , in 1965 because they offered him a full scholarship . Robinson intended to study towards a medical degree but decided to major in American Studies . During his college days , Robinson began to seriously consider the ordained ministry and said it almost immediately felt right . During high school and then college , Robinson had been exploring philosophical and theological questions and has said , " The Episcopal Church got a hold on me . " He graduated from Sewanee cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts degree in American studies in 1969 and attended seminary that fall . Robinson studied for a Master of Divinity degree from the Episcopal General Theological Seminary in New York City . While doing an intern year as a chaplain at the University of Vermont , he began dating his future wife , Isabella " Boo " McDaniel . Robinson says that about " a month into their relationship , [ he ] explained his background and his fears about his sexuality . " They continued dating and , as Robinson puts it , " about a month before the marriage , [ he ] became frightened that ... this thing would raise its ugly head some day , and cause her and me great pain . " Robinson and McDaniel discussed it and decided to go ahead with the marriage in 1972 . 
 = = Early career and children = = 
 Robinson received his degree in 1973 and was ordained a deacon in June 1973 at the cathedral of the diocese of Newark , New Jersey . He served as curate at Christ Church in Ridgewood , New Jersey , and was ordained a priest six months later . He and his wife remained at the Ridgewood parish for two years until June 1975 . They then moved to New Hampshire , where Boo had grown up . Their goal was to start a business and ministry : in the winter it was called " The Sign of the Dove Retreat Center " and in the summer it became " Pony Farm " . Boo still runs " Pony Farm " as a horse camp for children . In 1977 , Robinson began working with a committee in the Diocese of New Hampshire to study human sexuality and co @-@ authored a small manual on the subject . Robinson and Boo 's first daughter , Jamee , was born in 1977 , followed by a second daughter , Ella , in 1981 . Robinson treasures his marriage stating , " [ T ] hat is inextricably tied up with having children . And since I cannot imagine my life without Jamee and Ella , it 's just a completely irrelevant question for me . And I don 't regret having been married to Boo , either , even if there had not been children . It 's just a part of my journey , and why would I possibly regret that ? " 
 = = Coming out and career = = 
 Robinson came out to his and Boo 's friends in 1985 / 1986 and he sold out his part of the business to Boo . They remain friends . In November 1987 , Robinson met his partner , Mark Andrew , while on vacation in St. Croix . Andrew was on vacation and worked in Washington , D.C. , at the national office of the Peace Corps . On July 2 , 1988 , Robinson and Andrew moved into a new house and had it blessed by Bishop Douglas <unk> , an event which they considered to be the formal recognition of their life together . Andrew currently works in the New Hampshire state government . He was legally joined to Robinson in June 2008 in a private civil union ceremony , followed by a religious ceremony , both in St Paul 's Church , Concord . Earlier , Robinson had said , " I always wanted to be a June bride . " Robinson and Andrew ended their union in 2014 . 
 Robinson became Canon to the Ordinary in 1988 , the executive assistant to the then bishop of New Hampshire , Douglas <unk> . Robinson remained in this job for the next seventeen years until he was elected bishop . Robinson and his daughters are very close . Ella actively helped her father with public relations at the General Convention in 2003 . Just a week before the General Convention , Robinson had been with his daughter Jamee and held his four @-@ hour @-@ old first granddaughter . He now has two granddaughters . 
 = = Election as bishop = = 
 Robinson was elected bishop by the New Hampshire diocese on June 7 , 2003 , at St. Paul 's Church in Concord . Thirty @-@ nine clergy votes and 83 lay votes were the threshold necessary to elect a bishop in the Diocese of New Hampshire at that time . The clergy voted 58 votes for Robinson and the laity voted 96 for Robinson on the second ballot . The Episcopal Church requires in its Canon 16 that the election procedure and the candidate who is elected be subjected to review and must be consented to by the national church . No objections were raised to the procedure of the election . If diocesan election occurred within 120 days ( 3 months ) of a General Convention , canon law requires consent by the House of Deputies and then the House of Bishops at the General Convention itself . Consent to the election of Robinson was given in August at the 2003 General Convention . The General Convention of 2003 became the center for debate over Robinson 's election , as conservatives and liberals within the Church argued over whether Robinson should be allowed to become bishop . Some conservative factions threatened a schism within both the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Communion should Robinson be elected . Before the House of Deputies can vote on a resolution , a legislative committee must examine the piece of legislation first . The Committee on the Consecration of Bishops held a two @-@ hour hearing on Robinson 's election and supporters and opponents were allowed to speak . One of the speakers was Robinson 's daughter , Ella , who read a letter from his ex @-@ wife Boo in strong support of Robinson . The House of Deputies , which consists of laypersons and priests , voted in the affirmative : the laity voted 63 in favor , 32 opposed , and 13 divided ; the clergy voted 65 in favor , 31 opposed , and 12 divided . 
 Robinson won the first two of three votes required for his election to be ratified , but allegations suddenly arose in August 2003 that Robinson had inappropriately touched a male parishioner and had connections with <unk> , which at the time carried a link to <unk> , a resource site for bisexual people that included links to pornography sites . The final vote was postponed to address these last @-@ minute charges . David W. Virtue , a critic of gay ordination , brought up the pornography allegation , claiming that : " Gene Robinson 's website is linked by one click to 5 @,@ 000 pornographic websites . " When no such link was found on the Diocese of New Hampshire web page profiling the bishop @-@ elect , Virtue stated that the link was on the website of an organization Robinson supported . Robinson was already known to be associated with Outright , a secular organization for the support of young LGBT people . Fred Barnes , a Fox News commentator , repeated the allegations on the website of The Weekly Standard . On the day the allegations arose , the website issued a press release stating that it had removed the offending link , that it had been unaware of the pornographic links on <unk> , and that Robinson had no involvement with that particular chapter of Outright . 
 The male parishioner of Manchester , Vermont ( in a diocese neighboring Robinson 's ) who had alleged the " touching " , was then reported to have said , during the investigating committee 's telephone call with him , that the acts in question were two separate occasions of what felt to him like intentionally seductive arm @-@ squeezing and back @-@ stroking , although in a public setting . The man acknowledged that others might have regarded the two incidents as " natural , " yet the incidents were disturbing to him nonetheless . The investigating committee 's report also stated that man regretted having used the word " harassment " in his e @-@ mail , and that man declined an invitation to bring formal charges . After a two @-@ day investigation , neither allegation proved of merit . The House of Bishops voted for Robinson in the affirmative , with 62 in favor , 43 opposed , and 2 abstaining . 
