 = = Consecration as bishop = = 
 The election in New Hampshire , like all elections of bishops in the Episcopal Church , was done by a synodical election process , unlike many other parts of the Anglican Communion where bishops are appointed . This detail would be misunderstood when the international commentary following Robinson 's election suggested he should voluntarily step down or be asked to do so . The Jeffrey John case in the Church of England is the best example to contrast the election of bishops with the appointment of bishops . Jeffrey John is an openly gay priest living in a long @-@ standing celibate relationship ( he self @-@ identifies as celibate ) and was appointed as a bishop . One person alone , Richard Harries , Bishop of Oxford , had the authority to appoint the Bishop of Reading ( an area bishop in Oxford diocese ) ; though new bishops are customarily consecrated by the archbishop . Rowan Williams , Archbishop of Canterbury , however , allegedly persuaded him to not proceed with the appointment . This precedent would be used by the wider Anglican Communion to pressure Robinson . Robinson said that " there was not a single bishop involved in the choosing of me to be Bishop of New Hampshire . " 
 The Elections and Transitions Committee arranged for the Whittemore Center to be used for the consecration , a large hockey rink on the campus of the University of New Hampshire in Durham . The numbers expected were about 3 @,@ 000 people , 300 press , a 200 strong choir , and 48 bishops . The security was strong : just as Barbara Harris had to wear a bullet @-@ proof vest at her consecration , Robinson was showing his bullet @-@ proof vest to Harris herself . Robinson 's parents , sister , daughter and their families and his ex @-@ wife Boo were all at the consecration . Robinson was consecrated on November 2 , 2003 , in the presence of Frank Griswold , Presiding Bishop , and six co @-@ consecrating bishops : 48 bishops in all . 
 Robinson 's election and consecration prompted a group of 19 bishops , led by Robert Duncan , Bishop of the Diocese of Pittsburgh , to make a statement warning the church of a possible schism between the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Communion . Rowan Williams , Archbishop of Canterbury , stated that " [ it ] will inevitably have a significant impact on the Anglican Communion throughout the world and it is too early to say what the result of that will be . " He added : " [ I ] t is my hope that the church in America and the rest of the Anglican Communion will have the opportunity to consider this development before significant and irrevocable decisions are made in response . " Desmond Tutu , Archbishop emeritus of Cape Town , stated that he did not see what " all the fuss " was about , saying the election would not <unk> the Church of the Province of Southern Africa . Other senior bishops of the church , like Peter <unk> , Archbishop of the Church of Nigeria and head of the Global South , have made Robinson a figurehead in their dispute with the Episcopal Church . Some disaffected Episcopalians have disaffiliated from the Episcopal Church and formed the Convocation of Anglicans in North America with the support of the Nigerian church . 
 = = After consecration = = 
 Reports from Britain describe how Robinson has received death threats , had to wear bulletproof vests , and needed protection since his election and consecration . 
 In February 2006 , Robinson was treated at an inpatient rehabilitation facility to deal with his " increasing dependence on alcohol " . Diocesan officials were surprised by the news and asserted that they did not notice his alcoholism affect his ministry in any way . The Episcopal Church , through its General Convention , has long recognized alcoholism as a treatable human disease , not a failure of character or will . The members of the Standing Committee issued a statement fully supporting Robinson . He returned to work in March 2006 . 
 Robinson was featured prominently in a documentary film entitled For the Bible Tells Me So , which screened at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival . 
 He has opposed the Roman Catholic ban on homosexual seminarians , stating : " I find it so vile that they think they are going to end the child abuse scandal by throwing out homosexuals from seminaries . " 
 Due to the controversy surrounding his consecration , Bishop Robinson was not invited to the 2008 Lambeth Conferences by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Rowan Williams . A group of conservative bishops ( including <unk> and Duncan ) who opposed Robinson 's consecration gathered in Jerusalem one month prior to Lambeth 2008 , at the Global Anglican Future Conference , an event which is perceived by some as schismatic . 
 Robinson did however visit the United Kingdom privately in July 2008 , during which he participated in a film screening and question and answer session with Sir Ian McKellan at the Royal Festival Hall , and was invited to preach at St Mary 's Putney , events which attracted much media attention . The sermon was interrupted by a heckler who was then escorted out of the service . Robinson asked the rest of the congregation , most of whom greeted the interruption with slow @-@ clapping , to " pray for that man " , before completing his sermon . The Primate of the Episcopal Church of the Sudan , Archbishop Daniel Deng Bul , on July 22 at a public press conference during the 2008 Lambeth Conference called for Robinson to resign , and for all those who had participated in his consecration to confess their sin to the conference . 
 In 2009 Robinson was selected to deliver the invocation at the kickoff event of President Barack Obama 's inaugural weekend . Despite his extended involvement with Obama during the campaign , his selection was widely discussed as an effort to counterbalance the role of the choice of evangelical pastor Rick Warren . Media outlets noted Warren compared the legitimization of same @-@ sex marriage to the legalization of " incest , polygamy or ' an older guy marrying a child ' " . Warren also supported California Proposition 8 , which banned same @-@ sex marriage in the state . However , Warren took a conciliatory tone towards Obama : " I applaud his desire to be the president of every citizen . " The kickoff event was held at the Lincoln Memorial two days before Obama 's swearing @-@ in . It asked " the God of our many understandings " for seven blessings , and to help Obama , as President , in seven ways . Neither HBO 's exclusive live broadcast , nor the Presidential Inauguration Committee 's blog of the event included the invocation , but the prepared text was posted in full on the website of the Episcopal Diocese of New Hampshire , and video shot informally by attendees was posted on YouTube . National Public Radio , which relied on the HBO feed that omitted it , broadcast a recording the following day with an interview of Robinson about its limited exposure ; in that venue , Robinson described it as conforming to the four @-@ fold Franciscan prayer model . According to the Washington Blade , it was the Presidential Inaugural Committee that made the decision for the prayer to be a part of the pre @-@ show and not the show , itself , with a spokesman from that committee maintaining the prayer was dropped through an unspecified " error . " Some gay activists maintain that this was a slight on the part of the Obama administration . 
 In April 2009 , Robinson made the Out magazine Third Annual Power 50 list of the most influential gay men and women in the USA , landing at number 7 . In August 2009 , Gene Robinson was a key speaker at the 2009 Greenbelt Festival , held at Cheltenham Racecourse , Gloucestershire , England . Here he delivered three talks , each garnering an attendance in the thousands , based not only on his views of Christianity and homosexuality , but also on human sexuality in general and the rights of LGBT members of society . The three talks were entitled " Homosexuality : What the Bible says & why it matters " , " Keeping your cool in the eye of the storm " and " Sexuality and spirituality : keeping them together " . As well as these three talks , Gene Robinson made a big impact on some gay and lesbian festival @-@ goers by leading them collectively in prayer on the second night of the festival as part of a small group . 
 = Mysida = 
 Mysida is an order of small , shrimp @-@ like crustaceans in the <unk> superorder Peracarida . Their common name opossum shrimps stems from the presence of a brood pouch or " marsupium " in females . The fact that the larvae are reared in this pouch and are not free @-@ swimming characterises the order . The mysid 's head bears a pair of stalked eyes and two pairs of antennae . The thorax consists of eight segments each bearing branching limbs , the whole concealed beneath a protective carapace and the abdomen has six segments and usually further small limbs . 
 Mysids are found throughout the world in both shallow and deep marine waters where they can be benthic or pelagic , but they are also important in some fresh water and brackish ecosystems . Many benthic species make daily vertical migrations into higher parts of the water column . Mysids are filter feeders , omnivores that feed on algae , detritus and zooplankton . Some mysids are cultured in the laboratory for experimental purposes and are used as a food source for other cultured marine organisms . They are sensitive to water pollution , so are sometimes used as bioindicators to monitor water quality . 
 = = Description = = 
 The head of a mysid bears two pairs of antennae and a pair of large , stalked eyes . The head and first segment ( or sometimes the first three segments ) of the thorax are fused to form the cephalothorax . The eight thoracic segments are covered by the carapace which is attached only to the first three . The first two thoracic segments bear maxillipeds which are used to filter plankton and organic particulate from the water . The other six pairs of thoracic appendages are biramous ( branching ) limbs known as pereopods , and are used for swimming , as well as for wafting water towards the maxillipeds for feeding . Unlike true shrimps ( <unk> ) , females have a marsupium beneath the thorax . This brood pouch is enclosed by the large , flexible oostegites , bristly flaps which extend from the basal segments of the pereopods and which form the floor of a chamber roofed by the animal 's sternum . This chamber is where the eggs are brooded , development being direct in most cases . 
 The abdomen has six segments , the first five of which bear pleopods , although these may be absent or vestigial in females . The fourth pleopod is longer than the others in males and has a specialized <unk> function . 
 The majority of species are 5 – 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) long , and vary in colour from pale and transparent , through to bright orange or brown . They differ from other species within the superorder Peracarida by featuring statocysts on their uropods ( located on the last abdominal segment ) . These help the animal orient itself in the water and are clearly seen as circular vesicles : together with the pouch the statocysts are often used as features that distinguish mysids from other shrimp @-@ like organisms . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Mysids have a cosmopolitan distribution and are found in both marine and freshwater environments , the deep sea , estuaries , shallow coastal waters , lakes , rivers and underground waters . They are primarily marine and fewer than ten percent are found in freshwater . There are about 72 freshwater species in total , being predominantly found in the palearctic and <unk> zones . These non @-@ marine mysids occur in four distinct types of habitats ; some are estuarine species ; some were isolated in the Ponto @-@ Caspian Basin where <unk> has since radiated enormously ( 23 species ) ; some are glacial relicts and some are subterranean <unk> relicts . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Some species are benthic ( living on the seabed ) and others pelagic ( living in mid @-@ water ) , but most are found close to , crawling on or burrowing into the mud or sand . Most marine species are benthic by day but leave the seabed at night to become planktonic . Locomotion is mostly by swimming , the pleopods being used for this purpose . Some mysids live among algae and seagrasses , some are solitary while many form dense swarms . Mysids form an important part of the diet of such fish as shad and flounder . In general , they are free @-@ living , but a few species , mostly in the subfamily <unk> , are commensal and are associated with sea anemones and hermit crabs . Several taxa have also been described from different freshwater habitats and caves . <unk> <unk> and its close relatives inhabit cold , deep lakes and have a diurnal cycle of vertical migrations . 
 The majority of Mysida are omnivores , feeding on algae , detritus , and zooplankton . Scavenging and cannibalism are also common , with the adults sometimes preying on their young once they emerge from the marsupium . The pelagic and most other species are filter feeders , creating a feeding current with the exopods of their pereopods . This wafts food particles into a ventral food groove along which they are passed before being filtered by setae ( bristles ) on the second maxillae . Larger planktonic prey can be caught in a trap composed of the endopods of the thoracic appendages . Some benthic species , especially members of the subfamily <unk> , have been observed feeding on small particles which they collected by grooming the surfaces of their bodies and legs . 
 Individual mysids are either male or female , and fertilisation is external . The gonads are in the thorax and are tubular in shape . Males have two gonopores in the eighth thoracic segment and a pair of long penises . The female gonopores are in the sixth thoracic segment and the oostegites are attached to the first to seventh pereopods to form a brood pouch . Mating usually takes place at night and lasts only a few minutes . During the process , the male inserts his penises into the marsupium and releases sperm . This stimulates the female and the eggs are usually released into the marsupium within an hour . Here they are fertilised and retained , development of the embryos in the brood pouch being direct with the young hatching from the eggs as miniature adults . The size of a mysid brood generally correlates with body length and environmental factors such as density and food availability . The age at which mysids reach sexual maturity depends on water temperature and food availability . For the species <unk> bahia , this is normally at 12 to 20 days . The young are released soon afterwards , and although their numbers are usually low , the short reproductive cycle of mysid adults means a new brood can be produced every four to seven days . 
 = = <unk> mysids = = 
 Some species of mysids are easy to culture on a large scale in the laboratory as they are highly adaptive , and can tolerate a wide range of conditions . Despite low fecundity , these species have a short reproductive cycle which means they can quickly reproduce in vast numbers . They can be cultured in static or flow @-@ through systems , the latter having been shown to be able to maintain a higher stocking density than a static system . In flow @-@ through systems , juvenile mysids are continuously separated from the adult brood stock in order to reduce mortality due to cannibalism . Artemia ( brine shrimp ) juveniles ( incubated for 24 hours ) are the most common food in mysid cultures , sometimes enriched with highly unsaturated fatty acids to increase their nutritional value . 
 Cultured mysids are thought to provide an ideal food source for many marine organisms . They are often fed to cephalopods , fish larvae , and commercial farmed shrimp due to their small size and low cost . Their high protein and fat content also makes them a good alternative to live enriched Artemia when feeding juveniles ( especially those that are difficult to maintain such as young seahorses ) and other small fauna . 
 Their sensitivity to water quality also makes them suitable for <unk> . <unk> bahia and <unk> <unk> are frequently used to test for pesticides and other toxic substances , with A. bahia found to be more sensitive during the periods when it is moulting . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 The Mysida belong to the superorder Peracarida , which means “ near to shrimps ” . Although in many respects mysids appear similar to some shrimps , the main characteristic separating them from the superorder Eucarida is their lack of free @-@ swimming larvae . The order Mysida is extensive and currently includes approximately 160 genera , containing more than 1000 species . 
 Traditionally , Mysida were united with another , externally similar group of pelagic crustaceans , the <unk> , into a broader order <unk> , but that classification is generally abandoned at present . While the previous grouping had good morphological support , molecular studies do not corroborate the monophyly of this group . Previously Mysida included two other families , <unk> and <unk> , but these have now been placed in a separate order , <unk> . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = Seung @-@ Hui Cho = 
 Seung @-@ Hui Cho ( in Korean , properly " Cho Seung @-@ Hui " ) ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; January 18 , 1984 – April 16 , 2007 ) was a South Korean @-@ born mass murderer who killed 32 people and wounded 17 others on April 16 , 2007 , at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg , Virginia . An additional six people were injured jumping from windows to escape . He was a senior @-@ level undergraduate student at the university . The shooting rampage came to be known as the Virginia Tech shooting . Cho committed suicide after police breached the doors of the building where the majority of the shooting had taken place . His body is buried in Fairfax , Virginia . 
 Born in South Korea , Cho arrived in the United States at the age of eight with his family . He became a U.S. permanent resident as a South Korean national . In middle school , he was diagnosed with a severe anxiety disorder with selective mutism , as well as major depressive disorder . After his diagnosis , he began receiving treatment and continued to receive therapy and special education support until his junior year of high school . During Cho 's last two years at Virginia Tech , several instances of his abnormal behavior , as well as plays and other writings he submitted containing references to violence , caused concern among teachers and classmates . 
 In the aftermath of the shootings , Virginian governor Tim Kaine convened a panel consisting of various officials and experts to investigate and examine the response and handling of issues related to the shootings . The panel released its final report in August 2007 , devoting more than 30 pages to detailing Cho 's troubled history . In the report , the panel criticized the failure of the educators and mental health professionals who came into contact with Cho during his college years to notice his deteriorating condition and help him . The panel also criticized misinterpretations of privacy laws and gaps in Virginia 's mental health system and gun laws . In addition , the panel faulted Virginia Tech administrators in particular for failing to take immediate action after the first shootings . Nevertheless , the report did acknowledge that Cho was still primarily responsible for not seeking assistance and for his murderous rampage . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Cho was born on 18 January 1984 in the city of Asan , in South Korea 's South Chungcheong Province . Cho and his family lived in a basement apartment in the South Korean capital of Seoul for a couple of years before immigrating to the United States . Cho 's father was self @-@ employed as a bookstore owner , but made minimum wages from the venture . Seeking better education and opportunities for his children , Cho 's father immigrated to the United States in September 1992 with his wife and three children . Cho was eight years old at the time . The family first lived in Detroit , then moved to the Washington metropolitan area after learning that it had one of the largest South Korean expatriate communities in the U.S. , particularly in Northern Virginia . Cho 's family settled in Centreville , an unincorporated community in western Fairfax County , Virginia about 25 miles ( 40 km ) west of Washington , D.C. Cho 's father and mother opened a dry @-@ cleaning business in Centreville . After the family moved to Centreville , Cho and his family became permanent residents of the United States as South Korean nationals . His parents became members of a local Christian church , and Cho himself was raised as a member of the religion , although he " hated his parents ' strong Christian faith . " According to one report , Cho had left a note in his dormitory which contained a rant referencing Christianity and denigrating " rich kids " . In a video that Cho mailed to the NBC headquarters in New York he stated , " Thanks to you I die like Jesus Christ , to inspire generations of the weak and defenseless people . " 
 = = = Family concerns about Cho 's behavior during childhood = = = 
 A few members of Cho 's family , those who remained in South Korea , had concerns about his behavior during his early childhood . Cho 's relatives thought that he was selectively mute or mentally ill . According to Cho 's uncle , Cho " didn 't say much and did not mix with other children . " Cho 's maternal great @-@ aunt described Cho as " cold " and a cause of family concern from as young as eight years old . According to his great @-@ aunt , who met him twice , Cho was extremely shy and " just would not talk at all . " He was otherwise considered " well @-@ behaved , " readily obeying verbal commands and cues . The great @-@ aunt said she knew something was wrong after the family 's departure for the United States because she heard frequent updates about Cho 's older sister but little news about Cho . During an ABC News Nightline interview on August 30 , 2007 , Cho 's grandfather reported his concerns about Cho 's behavior during childhood . According to Cho 's grandfather , Cho never looked up to him to make eye contact , never called him grandfather , and never moved to embrace him . 
 = = = Behavior in school = = = 
 Cho attended the Poplar Tree Elementary School in Chantilly , an unincorporated , small community in Virginia 's Fairfax County . According to Kim <unk> @-@ won , who met Cho in the fifth grade and took classes with him , Cho finished the three @-@ year program at Poplar Tree Elementary School in one and a half years . Cho was noted for being good at mathematics and English , and teachers pointed to him as an example for other students . At that time , according to Kim , nobody disliked Cho and he " was recognized by friends as a boy of knowledge ; ... a good dresser who was popular with the girls . " Kim added that " I only have good memories about him . " An acquaintance noted that " Every time he came home from school he would cry and throw tantrums saying he never wanted to return to school " when Cho first came to the U.S. in about the second grade . 
 In 1999 , during the spring of Cho 's eighth grade year , the Columbine High School massacre made international news . Cho was transfixed by it . " I remember sitting in Spanish class with him , right next to him , and there being something written on his binder to the effect of , you know , ' ' F ' you all , I hope you all burn in hell , ' which I would assume meant us , the students , " said Ben Baldwin , a classmate of Cho . Also , Cho wrote in a school assignment about wanting to " repeat Columbine " . The school contacted Cho 's sister , who reported the incident to their parents . Cho was sent to a psychiatrist . 
 Cho attended secondary schools in Fairfax County , including Ormond Stone Middle School in Centreville and Westfield High School in Chantilly , and by eighth grade had been diagnosed with selective mutism , a social anxiety disorder which inhibited him from speaking . Through high school , he was bullied for his shyness and unusual speech patterns . According to Chris Davids , a high school classmate in Cho 's English class at Westfield High School , Cho looked down and refused to speak when called upon . Davids added that , after one teacher threatened to give Cho a failing grade for not participating in class , he began reading in a strange , deep voice that sounded " like he had something in his mouth . [ ... ] " While several students recalled instances of Cho being bullied and mocked at Westfield , most left him alone and later said they were not aware of his anger . Cho graduated from Westfield High School in 2003 . 
 = = = Selective @-@ mutism diagnosis = = = 
 Immediately after the incident , reports carried speculation by Cho 's family members in South Korea that he was autistic . However , no known record exists of Cho ever being diagnosed with autism , nor could an autism diagnosis be verified with Cho 's parents . The Virginia Tech Review Panel report dismissed an autism diagnosis and experts later doubted the autism claim . 
 More than four months after the attack , The Wall Street Journal reported on August 20 , 2007 that Cho had been diagnosed with selective mutism . The Virginia Tech Review Panel report , also released in August 2007 , placed this diagnosis in the spring of Cho 's eighth @-@ grade year , and his parents sought treatment for him through medication and therapy . In high school , Cho was placed in special education under the ' emotional disturbance ' classification . He was excused from oral presentations and participation in class conversation and received 50 minutes a month of speech therapy . He continued receiving mental health therapy as well until his junior year , when Cho rejected further therapy . 
 To address his problems , Cho 's parents also took him to church . According to a pastor at the Centreville Korean Presbyterian Church , Cho was a smart student who understood the Bible , but he was concerned about Cho 's difficulty in speaking to people . The pastor added that , until he saw the video that Cho sent to NBC News , he never heard him say a complete sentence . The pastor also recalled that he told Cho 's mother that he speculated Cho was autistic and he asked her to take him to a hospital , but she declined . 
 Forbidden by federal law to disclose ( without Cho 's permission ) any record of disability or treatment , Westfield officials disclosed none of Cho 's speech and anxiety @-@ related problems to Virginia Tech . 
 = = <unk> at Virginia Tech = = 
 In his freshman year at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University ( Virginia Tech ) , Cho enrolled as an undergraduate major in business information technology , a program that included " a combination of computer science and management coursework offered by the Pamplin College of Business . " By his senior year , Cho was majoring in English . Virginia Tech declined to divulge details about Cho 's academic record and why he changed his major , citing privacy laws . 
 At the time of the attacks , Cho lived with five roommates in Suite 2121 , a three @-@ room suite in Harper Hall , a dormitory that houses 249 co @-@ ed students , located just west of Cochrane Hall on the Virginia Tech campus . 
 = = = Relationship with faculty = = = 
 Professor Nikki Giovanni , who taught Cho in a poetry class in the fall of 2005 , had him removed from her class because she found his behavior " menacing . " She recalled that Cho had a " mean streak " and described his writing as " intimidating . " Cho had intimidated female students by photographing their legs under their desks and by writing obscene , violent poetry . Giovanni offered that " [ she ] was willing to resign before [ she ] would continue with him . " About six weeks after the semester began , Giovanni wrote a letter to then @-@ department head Lucinda Roy , who removed Cho from the class . Roy alerted the student affairs office , the dean 's office , and the campus police , but each office responded that there was nothing they could do if Cho made no overt threats against himself or others . After Giovanni was informed of the massacre , she remarked that " [ I ] knew when it happened that that 's probably who it was , " and " would have been shocked if it wasn 't . " 
 Roy , who had taught Cho in Introduction to Poetry the previous year , described him as " an intelligent man , " and that he seemed to be an awkward , lonely and insecure student who never took off his sunglasses , even indoors . She described Cho 's behavior as " arrogant " and " obnoxious " at times , and that she tried several different ways to help him . Roy declined to comment on Cho 's writings , saying only in general that they " seemed very angry . " She added that Cho , when called on in class , would take 20 seconds to answer questions , and whispered his response . He also took cell phone pictures of her in class . After Roy became concerned with Cho 's behavior and the themes in his writings , she started meeting with Cho to work with him one @-@ on @-@ one . However , she soon became concerned for her safety , and told her assistant that she would use the name of a dead professor as a duress code , in order to alert the assistant to call security . After Roy notified authorities of Cho 's behavior , she urged Cho to seek counseling , but to her knowledge , Cho never followed through with the request , in spite of his insistence to the contrary 
 When creative writing professor Lisa Norris , who taught Cho in both Advanced Fiction Writing and Contemporary Fiction , was asked about him by Mary Ann Lewis , associate dean for Liberal Arts and Human Sciences , she was not told that he was suffering from mental health problems or about prior police reports concerning his harassment of female students . According to Norris , " my guess is that either the information was not accessible to her [ Lewis ] or it was privileged and could not be released to me . " Lewis told Norris to recommend that Cho seek counseling at the on @-@ campus Cook Counseling Center , as Lewis had already done . 
 = = = Relationship with students = = = 
 Fellow students described Cho as a " quiet " person who " would not respond if someone greeted him . " Student Julie Poole recalled the first day of a literature class the previous year when the students introduced themselves one by one . When it was Cho 's turn to introduce himself , he did not speak . According to Poole , the professor looked at the sign @-@ in sheet and found that , whereas all the others had written out their names , Cho had written only a question mark . Poole added that " we just really knew him as the question mark kid " . 
 Karan Grewal , who shared a suite with Cho at Harper Hall , reported that Cho " would sit in a wood rocker by the window [ in his room at the dormitory ] ; and stare at the lawn below " . According to Grewal , " Cho appeared to never go to class or read a book during his senior year , " adding that Cho just typed on his laptop , went to the dining hall and clipped his hair in the bathroom , cleaning up the hair afterwards . Grewal also reported that he witnessed Cho riding his bicycle in circles in the parking lot of the dormitory . 
 Andy Koch and John Eide , who once shared a room with Cho at Cochrane Hall during 2005 and 2006 , stated that Cho demonstrated other repetitive behaviors , such as listening repeatedly to " Shine " by the alternative rock band Collective Soul . Cho wrote the song 's lyrics " Teach me how to speak ; Teach me how to share ; Teach me where to go " on the wall of his dormitory room . Koch described two further unusual incidents , including one where Cho stood in the doorway of his room late at night taking photographs of him ( Koch ) and a second incident where Cho repeatedly placed harassing cell phone calls to Koch as " Cho 's brother , ' Question Mark ' , " a name Cho also used when introducing himself to girls . Koch and Eide searched Cho 's belongings and found a pocket knife , but they did not find any items that they deemed seriously threatening to them . Koch also described a telephone call that he received from Cho during the Thanksgiving holiday break from school . During that call , Koch said that Cho claimed to be " vacationing with Vladimir Putin , " with Cho adding " Yeah , we 're in North Carolina . " In response , Koch told him " I 'm pretty sure that 's not possible , Seung . " Because of Cho 's behavior , Koch and Eide , who had earlier tried to befriend him , gradually stopped talking to him and told their friends , especially female classmates , not to visit their room . 
 Koch and Eide claimed Cho was involved in at least three stalking incidents , two of which resulted in verbal warnings by the Virginia Tech campus police . The first alleged stalking incident occurred on November 27 , 2005 . After the incident , according to Koch , Cho claimed to have sent an instant message online to the female student by AOL Instant Messenger and found out where she lived on the campus . Eide stated that Cho then visited her room to see if she was " cool " , adding that Cho remarked that he only found " promiscuity in her eyes " . Eide added that , when Cho visited the female student , Cho said , " Hi , I 'm Question Mark " to her , " which really freaked her out . " The female student called the campus police , complaining that Cho had sent her annoying messages and made an unannounced visit to her room . Two uniformed members of the campus police visited Cho 's room at the dormitory later that evening and warned him not to contact the female student again . Cho made no further contact with the student . 
 The final alleged stalking incident came to light on December 13 , 2005 . In the preceding days , Cho had contacted a female friend of Koch via AIM and wrote on her door board a line from Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet , Act 2 , scene II , in which Romeo laments to Juliet : " By a name , I know not how to tell who I am . My name , dear saint , is hateful to myself , because it is an enemy to thee . Had I it written , I would tear the word . " 
 The young woman was initially unconcerned by Cho 's AIM messages and the Shakespearean message he left on her door board , until she was contacted by Andy Koch via AIM . Koch told her that Cho was involved in an earlier stalking incident and that , " i think he is schizophrenic " [ sic ] . After Koch 's encouragement , the young woman contacted the campus police , who again warned Cho against further unwanted contact . After that warning , Cho made no further contact with the second female student . 
 Later the same day , Cho sent a text message to Koch with the words , " I might as well kill myself now . " Worried that Cho was suicidal , Koch contacted his father for advice , and both of them contacted campus authorities . The campus police returned to the dormitory and escorted Cho to New River Valley Community Services Board , the Virginia mental health agency serving Blacksburg . 
 = = Psychiatric evaluation = = 
 = = = Court @-@ ordered psychiatric assessment = = = 
 On December 13 , 2005 , Cho was found " mentally ill and in need of hospitalization " by New River Valley Community Services Board . The physician who examined Cho noted that he had a flat affect and depressed mood , even though Cho " denied suicidal thoughts and did not acknowledge symptoms of a thought disorder . " Cho , suspected of being " an imminent danger to himself or others , " was detained temporarily at <unk> St. Albans Behavioral Health Center in Radford , Virginia , pending a commitment hearing before the Montgomery County , Virginia district court . 
 Virginia Special Justice Paul Barnett certified in an order that Cho " presented an imminent danger to himself as a result of mental illness , " but instead recommended treatment for Cho as an outpatient . On December 14 , 2005 , Cho was released from the mental health facility after Judge Barnett ordered Cho to undergo mental health treatment on an outpatient basis , with a directive for the " court @-@ ordered [ outpatient ] to follow all recommended treatments . " Since Cho underwent only a minimal psychiatric assessment , the true diagnosis for Cho 's mental health status remains unknown . 
 Because Cho was not involuntarily committed to a mental health facility as an inpatient , he was still legally eligible to buy guns under Virginia law . However , according to Virginia law , " [ a ] magistrate has the authority to issue a detention order upon a finding that a person is mentally ill and in need of hospitalization or treatment . " The magistrate also must find that the person is an imminent danger to himself or others . Virginia officials and other law experts have argued that , under United States federal law , Barnett 's order meant that Cho had been " adjudicated as a mental defective " and was thus ineligible to purchase firearms under federal law ; and that the state of Virginia erred in not enforcing the requirements of the federal law . 
 = = = Family efforts = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Review Panel report shed light on numerous efforts by Cho 's family to secure help for him as early as adolescence . However , when Cho reached 18 and left for college , the family lost its legal authority over him , and their influence on him waned . Cho 's mother , increasingly concerned about his inattention to classwork , his classroom absences and his asocial behavior , sought help for him during summer 2006 from various churches in Northern Virginia . According to Dong Cheol Lee , minister of One Mind Presbyterian Church of Washington ( located in Woodbridge ) Cho 's mother sought help from the church for Cho 's problems . Lee added that " [ Cho 's ] problem needed to be solved by spiritual power ... that 's why she came to our church – because we were helping several people like him . " Members of Lee 's church even told Cho 's mother that he was afflicted by " demonic power " and needed " deliverance . " Before the church could meet with the family , however , Cho returned to school to start his senior year at Virginia Tech . 
 = = Virginia Tech shooting = = 
 Around 7 : 15 a.m. EDT ( 11 : 15 UTC ) on April 16 , 2007 , Cho killed two students , Emily J. Hilscher and Ryan C. " Stack " Clark , on the fourth floor of West Ambler Johnston Hall , a high @-@ rise co @-@ educational dormitory . Investigators later determined that Cho 's shoes matched a blood @-@ stained print found in the hallway outside Hilscher 's room . The shoes and bloody jeans were found in Cho 's dormitory room where he had stashed them after the attack . 
 Within the next two and a half hours , Cho returned to his room to rearm himself ; he mailed a package to NBC News that contained pictures , digital video files and documents . At approximately 9 : 45 a.m. EDT ( 13 : 45 UTC ) , he then crossed the campus to Norris Hall , a classroom building on the campus where , in a span of nine minutes , Cho shot dozens of people , killing 30 of them . As police breached the area of the building where Cho attacked the faculty and students , Cho committed suicide in Norris 211 with a gunshot to his temple . Cho 's gunshot wound destroyed his face , obscuring identification of his body for several hours . The police identified Cho by matching the fingerprints on the guns used in the shootings with immigration records . Before the shootings , Cho 's only known connection to Norris Hall was as a student in the sociology class , which met in a classroom on the second floor of the building . Although police had not stated positively at the time of the initial investigation that Cho was the perpetrator of the Norris Hall shootings and the earlier one at West Ambler Johnston Hall , forensic evidence confirmed that the same gun was used in both shooting incidents . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 = = = = Weapons = = = = 
 During February and March 2007 , Cho began purchasing the weapons that he later used during the killings . On February 9 , 2007 , Cho purchased his first handgun , a .22 caliber Walther P22 semi @-@ automatic pistol , from <unk> Inc . , a federally licensed firearms dealer based in Green Bay , Wisconsin and the operator of the website through which Cho ordered the gun . <unk> Inc. shipped the Walther P22 to <unk> <unk> in Blacksburg , Virginia , where Cho completed the legally required background check for the purchase transaction and took possession of the handgun . Cho bought a second handgun , a 9mm Glock 19 semi @-@ automatic pistol , on March 13 , 2007 from Roanoke Firearms , a licensed gun dealer located in Roanoke , Virginia . 
 Cho was able to pass both background checks and successfully complete both handgun purchases after he presented to the gun dealers his U.S. permanent residency card , his Virginia driver 's permit to prove legal age and length of Virginia residence and a checkbook showing his Virginia address , in addition to waiting the required 30 @-@ day period between each gun purchase . He was successful at completing both handgun purchases because he did not disclose on the background questionnaire that a Virginia court had ordered him to undergo outpatient treatment at a mental health facility . 
 On March 22 , 2007 , Cho purchased two 10 @-@ round magazines for the Walther P22 pistol through eBay from Elk Ridge Shooting Supplies in Idaho . Based on a preliminary computer forensics examination of Cho 's eBay purchase records , investigators suspected that Cho may have purchased an additional 10 @-@ round magazine on March 23 , 2007 from another eBay seller who sold gun accessories . 
 Cho also bought jacketed hollow @-@ point bullets , which result in more tissue damage than full metal jacket bullets against unarmored targets by expanding upon entering soft tissue . Along with a manifesto , Cho later sent a photograph of the hollow point bullets to NBC News with the caption " All the [ shit ] you 've given me , right back at you with hollow points . " 
 = = = = Motive = = = = 
 During the investigation , the police found a note in Cho 's room in which he criticized " rich kids " , " debauchery " and " deceitful charlatans " . In the note , Cho continued by saying that " you caused me to do this . " Early media reports also speculated that he was obsessed with fellow student Emily Hilscher and became enraged after she rejected his romantic overtures . Law enforcement investigators could not find evidence that Hilscher knew Cho . Cho and one of his victims , Ross <unk> , attended the same English class during Autumn 2006 . Also in one video , he mentions " martyrs like Eric and Dylan " , almost certainly referring to Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold , the perpetrators of Columbine High School massacre . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 = = = = Crime investigation = = = = 
 Through ballistics examination , law enforcement investigators determined that Cho used the Glock 19 pistol during the attacks at the West Ambler Johnston dormitory and at Norris Hall on the Virginia Tech campus . Police investigators found that Cho fired more than 170 shots during the killing spree , evidence technicians finding at least 17 empty magazines at the scene . During the investigation , federal law enforcement investigators found that the serial numbers were illegally filed off on both the Walther P22 and the Glock 19 handguns used by Cho during the rampage . " Investigators also say Cho practiced shooting at a firing range in Roanoke , about 40 miles from the campus , in mid @-@ March . " According to a former FBI agent and ABC consultant , " This was no spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment crime . He 's been thinking about this for several months prior to the shooting . " 
 = = = = Review of Cho 's medical records = = = = 
 During the investigation , the matter of Cho 's court @-@ ordered mental health treatment was also examined to determine its outcome . Virginia investigators learned after a review of Cho 's medical records that he never complied with the order for the mandated mental health treatment as an outpatient . The investigators also found that neither the court nor New River Valley Community Services exercised oversight of his case to determine his compliance with the order . In response to questions about Cho 's case , New River Valley Community Services maintained that its facility was never named in the court order as the provider for his mental health treatment , and its responsibility ended once he was discharged from its care after the court order . In addition , Christopher Flynn , director of the Cook Counseling Center at Virginia Tech , mentioned that the court did not notify his office that Cho was required to seek outpatient mental health treatment . Flynn added that , " When a court gives a mandatory order that someone get outpatient treatment , that order is to the individual , not an agency ... The one responsible for ensuring that the mentally ill person receives help in these sort of cases ... is the mentally ill person . " 
 As a result , Cho escaped compliance with the court order for mandatory mental health treatment as an outpatient , even though Virginia law required community services boards to " recommend a specific course of treatment and programs " for mental health patients and " monitor the person 's compliance . " As for the court , Virginia law also mandated that , if a person fails to comply with a court order to seek mental health treatment as an outpatient , that person can be brought back before the court " and if found still in crisis , can be committed to a psychiatric institution for up to 180 days . " Cho was never summoned to court to explain why he had not complied with the December 14 , 2005 order for mandatory mental health treatment as an outpatient . 
 The investigation panel had sought Cho 's medical records for several weeks , but due to privacy laws , Virginia Tech was prohibited from releasing them without permission from Cho 's family , even after his death . The panel had considered using subpoenas to obtain his records . On June 12 , 2007 , Cho 's family released his medical records to the panel , although the panel said that the records were not enough . The panel obtained additional information by court order . Like the perpetrators of both the Columbine and Jokela school massacres , Cho was prescribed the antidepressant drug Prozac prior to his rampage , a substance suspected by Peter <unk> and David Healy of leading to suicidal behaviors . It is not known if Cho ever complied in filling or taking this prescription ; or if he had taken and then discontinued the prescribed medication . The toxicology test from the official autopsy later showed that neither psychiatric nor any kind of illegal drugs were in his system during the time of the shooting . 
 In August 2009 , Cho 's family allowed Virginia Tech to release the records , along with those found in July 2009 , to the public . Previously , they were only given to the panel . 
 = = = = Investigative panel report = = = = 
 In the aftermath of the killing spree , Virginia Governor Timothy Kaine ( D ) appointed a panel to investigate the campus shootings , with plans for the panel to submit a report of its findings in approximately two to three months . Kaine also invited former Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge to join the panel to " review Cho 's mental health history and how police responded to the tragedy . " To help investigate and analyze the emergency response surrounding the Virginia Tech shootings , Kaine hired the same company that investigated the Columbine High School massacre . 
 The panel 's final report devoted more than 30 pages to detailing Cho 's mental health history . The report criticized Virginia Tech educators , administrators and mental health staff in failing to " connect the dots " from numerous incidents that were warning signs of Cho 's mental instability beginning in his junior year . The report concluded that the school 's mental health systems " failed for lack of resources , incorrect interpretation of privacy laws , and passivity . " The report called Virginia 's mental health laws " flawed " and its mental health services " inadequate " . The report also confirmed that Cho was able to purchase two guns in violation of federal law because of Virginia 's inadequate background check requirements . 
 = = = = Reaction of Cho 's family = = = = 
 Cho 's older sister prepared a statement on her family 's behalf to apologize publicly for her brother 's actions , in addition to lending prayers to the victims and the families of the wounded and killed victims . " This is someone that I grew up with and loved . Now I feel like I didn 't know this person , " she said in the statement issued through a North Carolinian attorney . " We never could have envisioned that he was capable of so much violence . " Cho 's grandfather stated , " My grandson Seung @-@ Hui was very shy . I can 't believe he did such a thing . " 
 In a 2008 article acknowledging the anniversary of the massacre , the Washington Post did a follow @-@ up on the family , reporting that they had gone into hiding for months following the massacre and , after eventually returning home , had " virtually cut themselves off from the world . " Several windows in their home have been papered over and drawn blinds cover the rest . The only real outside contact they have maintained is with an FBI agent assigned to their care and their lawyer , refusing even to contact their own relatives in South Korea . 
 = = Media package sent to NBC News = = 
 During the time period between the two shooting events on April 16 , Cho visited a local post office near the Virginia Tech campus where he mailed a parcel with a DVD inside to the New York headquarters of NBC News , which contained video clips , photographs and a manifesto explaining the reasons for his actions . The package , addressed from " A. Ishmael " as seen on an image of the USPS Express Mail envelope ( incorrectly printed as " Ismail " by The New York Times ) and apparently intended to be received on April 17 , was delayed because of an incorrect ZIP code and street address . The words " Ismail Ax " were scrawled in red ink on Cho 's arm . 
 = = = Release of material = = = 
 Upon receiving the package on April 18 , 2007 , NBC contacted authorities and made the controversial decision to publicize Cho 's communications by releasing a small fraction of what it received . After pictures and images from the videos were broadcast in numerous news reports , students and faculty from Virginia Tech , along with relatives of victims of the campus shooting , expressed concerns that glorifying Cho 's rampage could lead to copycat killings . The airing of the manifesto and its video images and pictures was upsetting to many who were more closely affected by the shootings : Peter Read , the father of Mary Read , one of the students who was killed by Cho during the rampage , asked the media to stop airing Cho 's manifesto . 
 Police officials , who reviewed the video , pictures and manifesto , concluded that the contents of the media package had marginal value in helping them learn and understand why Cho committed the killings . Dr. Michael <unk> , who also reviewed the materials , believed that Cho 's rantings offer little insight into the mental illness that may have triggered his rampage . Dr. <unk> stated that " These videos do not help us understand Cho . They distort him . He was meek . He was quiet . This is a PR tape of him trying to turn himself into a Quentin Tarantino character . " 
 During the April 24 , 2007 edition of The Oprah Winfrey Show , NBC News President Steve <unk> stated NBC decided to show 2 minutes of 25 minutes of video , 7 of 43 photographs , and 37 sentences of 23 pages of written material or 5 of the 23 PDF files that were last modified at 7 : 24 a.m. , after the first shooting . He also stated that the content not shown included " over the top profanity " and " incredibly violent images " . He expressed hope that the unreleased material would never be made public . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 In his manifesto , Cho mentioned the Columbine killers Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold and made frequent references to hedonism and Christianity while expressing anger about unspecified wrongs that were done to him . In one of the videos , Cho said : 
 I didn 't have to do this . I could have left . I could have fled . But no , I will no longer run . If not for me , for my children , for my brothers and sisters that you fucked ; I did it for them ... When the time came , I did it . I had to ... You had a hundred billion chances and ways to have avoided today , but you decided to spill my blood . You forced me into a corner and gave me only one option . The decision was yours . Now you have blood on your hands that will never wash off . 
 You sadistic snobs . I may be nothing but a piece of dogshit . You have vandalized my heart , raped my soul , and torched my conscience . You thought it was one pathetic boy 's life you were extinguishing . Thanks to you , I die like Jesus Christ , to inspire generations of the weak and defenseless people . 
 Do you know what it feels to be spit on your face and have trash shoved down your throat ? Do you know what it feels like to dig your own grave ? Do you know what it feels like to have your throat slashed from ear to ear ? Do you know what it feels like to be torched alive ? Do you know what it feels like to be humiliated and be impaled upon on a cross ? And left to bleed to death for your amusement ? You have never felt a single ounce of pain your whole life . Did you want to inject as much misery in our lives as you can just because you can ? You had everything you wanted . Your Mercedes wasn 't enough , you brats . Your golden necklaces weren 't enough , you snobs . Your trust fund wasn 't enough . Your Vodka and Cognac weren 't enough . All your debaucheries weren 't enough . Those weren 't enough to fulfill your hedonistic needs . You had everything . 
 ( unclear ) crucified me . You loved inducing cancer in my head , terrorizing my heart , and raping my soul all this time . 
 When the time came , I did it ... I had to . 
 Pete Williams , a MSNBC justice correspondent , said that Cho lacked logical governance , suggesting that Cho was under severe emotional distress . In the video , Cho also railed against deceitful charlatans on campus , rich kids , materialism , and hedonism while , in another video , he compared himself to Jesus Christ , explaining that his death will influence generations of " defenseless people " . 
 = = Writings = = 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 = = = = Richard McBeef = = = = 
 In 2006 , pursuant to a class assignment , Cho wrote a short one @-@ act play entitled Richard McBeef . The play focused on John , a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy whose father had died in a boating accident , and John 's stepfather , ex @-@ football player Richard McBeef ( whom John constantly refers to as " Dick " ) . When Richard touches John 's lap during an attempt at a ' father @-@ to @-@ son ' talk , the boy abruptly claims that his stepfather is molesting him . John then accuses his stepfather of having murdered his biological father and repeatedly says that he will kill Richard . John , Richard and Sue ( John 's mother ) are suddenly embroiled in a major argument . Richard then retreats to his car to escape the conflict , but John , despite claiming repeatedly that Richard was abusing him , joins his stepfather in the car and harasses him . The play ends with John trying to shove a banana @-@ flavored cereal bar into his stepfather 's throat ; Richard , hitherto a passive character , reacts " out of sheer desecrated hurt and anger " by " swinging a deadly blow " at the boy . 
 = = = = Mr. Brownstone = = = = 
 In a second play , Mr. Brownstone , written for another class assignment , Cho depicted three 17 @-@ year @-@ olds ( John , Jane , and Joe ) , who sit in a casino while discussing their deep hatred for Mr. Brownstone , their 45 @-@ year @-@ old mathematics teacher . The three characters claim — using the phrase " ass @-@ rape " — that Mr. Brownstone mistreats them . John wins a multimillion @-@ dollar jackpot from one of the slot machines , and Mr. Brownstone , amid volleys of profanity from the students , reports to casino officials that the three characters were underage and had illegally picked up the winning ticket . Mr. Brownstone tells the casino officials that it was he who had really won the jackpot , and that the minors had taken the ticket from him . " Mr. Brownstone " was also the name of a Guns N ' Roses song about heroin , and one page from Cho 's play consisted of lyrics from the song . 
 = = = Short fiction paper = = = 
 Approximately one year before the incident at Virginia Tech , Cho also wrote a paper for an assignment in the " Intro to Short Fiction " class that he took during the spring 2006 semester . In that paper , Cho wrote about a mass school murder that was planned by the protagonist of the story but , according to the story , the protagonist did not follow through with the killings . During the proceedings of the Virginia Tech panel , the panel was unaware of the existence of the paper written by Cho for his fiction writing class . 
 When information surfaced about the paper , the Virginia Tech panel learned at that time that only the Virginia State Police and Virginia Tech had copies of the unreleased paper in their possession . The Virginia State Police reported that , although it had a copy of the paper , Virginia law prevented them from releasing the paper to the panel because it was part of the investigative file in an ongoing investigation . 
 Virginia Tech , on the other hand , had known about the paper , and officials at the school discussed the contents of the paper among themselves in the aftermath of the shootings . According to Governor Kaine , " [ Virginia Tech ] was expected to turn over all of Cho 's writings to the panel " during the proceedings of the Virginia Tech panel . 
 After some members of the Virginia Tech panel complained about the missing paper , Virginia Tech decided to release a copy of the paper to the panel during the latter part of the week of August 25 , 2007 . Although the Virginia Tech panel has since received the paper written by Cho for the fiction writing class , the precise contents of that paper have not been released to the public . 
 = = = Reactions to writings = = = 
 Edward Falco , a playwriting professor at Virginia Tech , has acknowledged that Cho wrote both plays in his class . The plays are fewer than 12 pages long and have several grammatical and typographical errors . Falco believed that Cho was drawn to writing because of his speech difficulties . Falco said of the plays , " They 're not good writing , but at least they are a form of communication . " Another professor who taught Cho characterized his work as " very adolescent " and " silly " , with attempts at " slapstick comedy " and " elements of violence " . 
 Classmates believed " the plays were really morbid and grotesque . " Ian MacFarlane , Cho 's former classmate , stated that , " when we read Cho 's plays , it was like something out of a nightmare . The plays had really twisted , macabre violence that used weapons I wouldn 't have even thought of . " When Stephen Davis , a senior who was also in Cho 's class , read " Richard McBeef , " he turned to his roommate and said , " This is the kind of guy who is going to walk into a classroom and start shooting people . " Anna Brown , another student in the class , sometimes joked with her friends that Cho was " the kind of guy who might go on a rampage killing . " 
 According to CBS News , " Cho Seung @-@ Hui 's violent writing [ and ] loner status fit the Secret Service shooter profile , " referring to a 2002 U.S. Secret Service study that was conducted after the Columbine massacre , with violent writing cited as one of the most typical behavioral attributes of school shooters . The U.S. Secret Service concluded the study by saying that " [ t ] he largest group of [ school shooters ] exhibited an interest in violence in their own writings , such as poems , essays or journal entries , " while school shooters ' interest in other violent media was generally low . 
 Users of YouTube created filmed adaptations of " Richard McBeef " . Something Awful created a parody " <unk> " entry describing Richard McBeef . 
 = James Gwyn = 
 James Gwyn ( November 24 , 1828 - July 17 , 1906 ) was an officer in the Union Army during the American Civil War . He immigrated at a young age from Ireland in 1846 , initially working as a storekeeper in Philadelphia and later as a clerk in New York City . At the onset of the war , in 1861 , he enlisted and was commissioned as a captain with the 23rd Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry . He assumed command of the 118th Pennsylvania Regiment in the course of the war . Gwyn led that regiment through many of its 39 recorded battles , including engagements at Seven Pines , Fredericksburg , Shepherdstown , Five Forks , and Gettysburg . 
 Gwyn was wounded at the Battle of the Wilderness in 1864 , but returned to service after recuperating to take command of the Third , and eventually the First and Second Brigades of the First Division of the Union Army 's V Corps . Gwyn was brevetted as a brigadier general President Abraham Lincoln and then as a major general by President Andrew Johnson for his service . His men described him as " a handsome and accomplished officer , and a bold and aggressive leader " . After the war , Gwyn returned to Philadelphia , although later moving to New York , and resumed his business dealings . He died on July 17 , 1906 , and was honored with a military funeral and buried in Woodlands Cemetery , Philadelphia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gwyn was born in Derry , Ireland on November 24 , 1828 . He was one of ten children raised in the Protestant household of Alexander Gwyn and Catherine Garvin . His brother , Hugh Garvin Gwyn , would later serve in the Confederate States Army as a major with the 23rd Tennessee Infantry Regiment , as well as an adjutant to General John Hunt Morgan . 
 He lived in the rural Irish city until he enrolled in Foyle College . Like many Irish in the 1840s , Gwyn left Ireland for the United States during the Great Famine . He boarded the John R. <unk> , a packet ship from Liverpool , bound for New York City . On November 4 , 1846 , Gwyn arrived in America via the Port of New York , 22 days before his 18th birthday , although his immigration papers list him as 20 . 
 Upon arriving in the United States , Gwyn and many other Derry immigrants made their way to Philadelphia as was noted by an Emigration Officer Edward Smith at Derry that , " Nevertheless , the money that recent arrivals in America remitted for the passage of others was central to the whole link between Derry and Philadelphia " . 
 In August 30 , 1850 , Gwyn took up residence in the North Mulberry Ward where he owned a house . He married Pennsylvania native Margaretta E. Young in February . Although he worked as a clerk throughout the 1850s , he later formed a dried goods business with George H. Stewart , called " Gwyn & Stewart Dry Goods " . 
 Gwyn purchased a 141 square feet ( 13 m2 ) plot in the Woodlands Cemetery on October 12 , 1853 . Records show that on April 28 , 1857 ' James Gwyn & Lady ' from Philadelphia visited the Imperial Hotel Belfast until at least July 2 . Gwyn 's wife gave birth to his first child , Elizabeth Gailey Gwyn , on December 7 , 1858 , and their second daughter , Matilda Geddes , on January 2 , 1861 . 
 = = Military service = = 
 = = = Enlistment with the 23rd Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry = = = 
 Gwyn enlisted in Company G of the 23rd Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry on April 21 , 1861 , one week after the American Civil War began . He served in that company without interruption until July 31 , 1861 , when he transferred to Company F. He resumed duty with the new company on August 2 , 1861 . Gwyn served with the 23rd Volunteers for over one year ; in that time , he took part in the Battle of Seven Pines , where , on May 31 , 1862 , Gwyn led the 23rd in aiding other Union companies in collecting escaped fugitives . Gwyn resigned from the 23rd Volunteers on July 22 , 1862 where he accepted a promotion to lieutenant colonel in a new regiment . 
 = = = Lieutenant colonel , 118th Pennsylvania Infantry = = = 
 <unk> joined the 118th Pennsylvania Infantry , on July 25 , 1862 . The 118th , which was commissioned by the United States Department of War for three years of service , gathered recruits from the Philadelphia area during August 15 to 30th , 1862 . Gwyn was officially mustered into service on August 16 , 1862 . During this time , the 118th became known as the " Corn Regiment " , because the funds for raising the regiment were furnished by the Corn Exchange Association of Philadelphia . Having gathered 1 @,@ 296 volunteers during the two @-@ week period , the " Corn Regiment " left for Washington , D.C. , to be assigned a position in the Union Army on September 1 , 1862 . The regiment was embedded with the First Brigade , First Division , Fifth Army Corps under the regiment command of Colonel Charles Prevost , and brigade commander Colonel James Barnes . 
 The 118th Regiment moved out with the rest of the Fifth Army Corps marching towards Maryland . Upon reaching Maryland , the 118th along with the rest of the Fifth Army Corps , became involved in the Battle of Antietam . While that battle would become to be known as " the bloodiest day in American history " with over 22 @,@ 000 casualties , the 118th was not involved on the front lines . They instead assisted in artillery stocking . 
 The 118th Regiment returned to battle three days afterwards , taking part in the Battle of Shepherdstown . The regiment took heavy casualties during the battle , suffering 71 deaths , 75 wounded , and 67 captured . The Confederates also suffered heavy losses with approximately 262 casualties in the battle . Among the Union wounded was Prevost , colonel of the 118th Regiment , who was shot through the shoulder on the last day of the battle . Prevost resigned from active duty , and Gwyn , as second @-@ in @-@ command , took over the regiment as acting commander . Gwyn 's " courage and coolness " during that battle were praised by Colonel Barnes , the brigade commander , in a letter written five days after the battle ended . 
 On September 28 , 1862 , Gwyn sent a letter to Colonel Barnes stating that the 118th Regiment did not provide the Philadelphia Inquirer with information that the paper used to publish a map and a report of the incident . Two days later , Gwyn issued a report on the Battle of Shepherdstown , noting the efforts he made to rally troops to fight back against the Confederate troops , though his efforts were in vain , as Colonel Barnes ordered to regiment to fall back . 
 The 118th Regiment returned to the front lines on December 11 , 1862 , in the Battle of Fredericksburg . Barnes formed the First Brigade , First Division from the 118th Pennsylvania ( Gwyn ) , 22nd Massachusetts , 25th New York , 13th New York , 1st Michigan , and 2nd Maine Regiments . In a recorded incident during the battle , a house was discovered with hidden tobacco crates which the soldiers raided . Gwyn sharply criticized the men for breaking rank but " inwardly smiled at their enthusiasm " . 
 Following the unsuccessful Mud March of January 1863 , the regiment went into ' winter quarters ' until June . The Fifth Army Corps resumed activity on June 10 , 1863 , as it began to travel northward through enemy territory , with skirmishes frequently occurring . These travels ultimately led the Fifth Army Corps to Pennsylvania , where , on July 2 , 1863 , they arrived to aid the Union Army during the Battle of Gettysburg . Gwyn , still as acting commander of the regiment , was given the orders to position the 118th Regiment on Cemetery Hill and to hold the position . In the afternoon , the regiment was ordered to assist Major General Daniel Sickles on the left flank that same day . On July 3 , the second day of the battle , Gwyn led the 118th to Little Round Top where they held their position for two days until Union forces had achieved albeit a costly victory . Following Gettysburg , the 118th Regiment moved around the state to various positions . On August 6 , the regiment stationed at Warrenton , Virginia , received 109 new recruits , and on September 5 , another 185 . On September 30 , 1863 , Prevost officially retired , and Gwyn was promoted to colonel and the commanding officer of the 118th . During this time , Prevost had been stationed as commandant of a military prison in Elmira , New York . 
 = = = Colonel , 118th Pennsylvania Regiment = = = 
 During the autumn of 1863 and through the winter , the regiment engaged in " desultory fighting " . Gwyn served perfunctorily while in command of the 118th Regiment for the ensuing five months with no notable confrontations until the Battle of the Wilderness in May 1864 . On the first day of battle , May 5 , Gwyn was shot in the thigh , and put out of commission for at least one month . Gwyn would receive his promotion to colonel at Beverly Ford for his actions at Wilderness . Due to his injury , he was unable to lead the 118th Regiment into the multiple conflicts , including the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House , the Battle of North Anna , the Battle of <unk> Creek , the Battle of Bethesda Church , and the Battle of Cold Harbor . 
 Gwyn , having returned to active duty by this time , led the 118th in the Siege of Petersburg and Richmond campaign that lasted from June 9 , 1864 , to March 25 , 1865 . The exact date and orders where Gwyn received his commission as commander of the Third Brigade is unknown , although subsequent documents show Gwyn reporting to headquarters as the brigade commander . 
 On August 18 , 1864 , Gwyn led the Third Brigade to the Weldon Railroad , where he met with the First and Second Brigade . The First Brigade was ordered to New York City , and by Special Order No. 32 , he was ordered to also take command of Second Brigade and in the absence of Col. A. H. Grimshaw . The next day , the combined Union troops moved forward along the railroad until they joined the Second Division , led by General Romeyn Ayres . The Third Brigade remained at that station for the next eight days without incidence , with Gwyn submitting a report to the Headquarters of First Division concerning what transpired during those three days . 
 It was recorded in this time the regiment suffered heavy losses and according to Frank H. Taylor , " Grant was <unk> wearing out the besieged enemy . Regiments were used <unk> , and the " 118th " was accorded its full share of the work . " In particular , on the morning September 30 , 1864 in the Battle of Pegram 's Farm , and later the Battle of Peebles 's Farm , to capture Fort McRae , 118th along with 16th Michigan were in direct line of four artillery guns from a church and fired upon with " special severity " . At a two road junction in the afternoon , near Fort McRae , Gwyn 's leg was severely wounded when his horse fell upon him , though , did not permanently cripple him or lead to amputation . Captain Wilson , the 118th second @-@ in @-@ command assumed command and pressed on with Ayres offensive that eventually led to a Union victory late in that evening . 
 = = = Brevet Brigadier general , Third Brigade and 118th Pennsylvania Regiment = = = 
 Gwyn 's service during the Siege of Petersburg was noted by the commanding officer of the First Division , V Corps , General Charles Griffin as examples of Gwyn 's " gallantry " , " bravery " and " valor " . Charles Griffin informed the Department of War that Gwyn should receive the rank of brigadier general , and if that was not possible then he should be brevetted the rank . The Federal Government approved of the idea and issued Special Order 347 on October 14 , 1864 in which James Gwyn was awarded the grade of brevet brigadier general of volunteers , to rank from September 30 , 1864 , by President Abraham Lincoln . Gwyn was formally nominated by President Lincoln on December 12 , 1864 and his appointment was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on February 14 , 1865 . The First Division received word of Gwyn 's promotion on October 14 , and passed down to <unk> on the 17th . In a letter , Griffin wrote that Gwyn 's promotion was " evidence that the gallantry of our little command has been appreciated " . 
 Gwyn continued his military duties with service around the James River near City Point , Virginia . Feeling ill , he returned to Philadelphia on October 31 , 1864 . He was diagnosed with malaria fever and prescribed a seven @-@ day break to rest and recover . His leave was approved on November 4 , and he was permitted to recover for a week , resuming duty of November 7 , 1864 . At his return , Gwyn , by Special Orders No. 301 was assigned to the First Division , First Brigade under Brigadier General Griffin by Major General Fred T. Locke . On November 19 , 1864 , he was transferred from the First Division to the Second Division , which was under the command of General Romeyn Ayres . 
 Ayres ordered Gwyn to take command of the Third Brigade on November 21 . Two days later , Gwyn was notified that General Ayres would be absent for three days and would be fulfilling his role as acting commander of the Second Division . On December 14 , General Ayres sent a report praising Gwyn 's ' prompt ' and ' efficient ' service during the Battle of Globe Tavern , August 18 – 21 , 1864 , to the Fifth Army Corps . Gwyn led the Third Brigade without problems until December 21 , when he was informed that General Ayres would be on a leave of absence for the twenty days , and that he would lead the Second Division until Ayres ' return . 
 Gwyn took control of the Second Division , but soon went on a leave of absence from January 8 , 18 days into his 20 @-@ day service assignment , to January 21 , 1865 . On February 5 , he led the Third Brigade into the Battle of Hatcher 's Run . On February 6 , the Confederates engaged the Union army at 1 : 30PM . The Third Brigade engaged the Rebels and were eventually overwhelmed and were forced to retreat . The Assistant Adjutant , Major General Locke , ordered Gwyn to reform the Third Brigade and to take on stragglers from assorted Maryland regiments . The fighting continued into the next day ; by February 8 , the Union forces near Hatcher 's Run had retreated . On February 14 , Major General Ayres highlighted Gwyn 's leadership during the Battle of Hatcher 's Run by stating that Gwyn had " seconded me with zeal and energy " . Three days later , Gwyn wrote his own letter with names of soldiers whom he thought were deserving of merit for their exceptional service during the Battle of Hatcher 's Run . 
 = = = End of the Civil War = = = 
 The Third Brigade fell back for over a month engaging in skirmishes around Hatcher 's Run , Halifax road , and <unk> Creek as part of the Richmond Campaign . Major operations resumed on March 31 , 1865 , when Gwyn led the Third Brigade in the Battle of White Oak Road , and eventually on to Five Forks , Dinwiddie County , Virginia . The Third Brigade took part in the Battle of Five Forks on April 1 , 1865 . 
 A charge led by Gwyn resulted in the capture of two strategic positions and a large number prisoners . Gwyn was later appointed brevet major general for his efforts during the battle . On January 13 , 1869 , President Andrew Johnson nominated Gwyn for appointment to the grade of brevet major general of volunteers , to rank from April 1 , 1865 , and the U.S. Senate confirmed the appointment on February 16 , 1869 . 
 Gwyn and the 118th pushed onwards , pressing the retreating Confederate troops during the Battle of Appomattox Court House , one of the last major battles of the Civil War . At the Appomattox Court House , on April 9 , 1865 , Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant , thus ending the Civil War . The 118th was present to witness the surrender , and escorted the Confederate soldier that carried the flag of truce . With the hostilities subsided , Gwyn filed a report concerning the skirmish at White Oak Road on April 14 , 1865 . A few weeks later on April 27 , 1865 , Brevet Major General Ayres advocated that Gwyn receive a promotion on account of his " zeal and good conduct " from March 29 to April 9 of that year . 
 Gwyn led the Third Brigade to Washington , D.C. for the Grand Review , which took place on May 23 , 1865 . They arrived in Washington early by May 21 to attend roll @-@ call with the rest of the Fifth Army Corps . According to the New York Times , Gwyn was listed at the Headquarters Army of the Potomac as " Third Brigade , Brevet <unk> James Gwyn , commanding — 190th Pennsylvania , Col. W.R. Hartshorne ; 210th Pennsylvania , Major J.H. Graves ; 4th Delaware , Brevet Lieut @-@ Col. M.B. Gist ; 3d Delaware , Capt. D.D. Joseph ; 8th Delaware , Capt. John Richards ; 191st Pennsylvania , Col. James Carle . " 
 On June 5 , 1865 , the 118th Regiment was officially mustered out of service by the U.S. Department of War . On June 9 , a large banquet was prepared in their honor by the Corn Exchange , the same bank that had offered the initial payments for recruits to join years before , at Sansom Street Hall for the members of the former 118th Regiment who had returned to Philadelphia . According to his obituary , Gwyn was offered a position as a lieutenant in the regular army by President Andrew Johnson , but instead chose to return to civilian life . 
 = = Post Civil War = = 
 Following the conclusion of the Civil War , Gwyn resumed the life he had left behind in 1861 . He returned home to his wife Margaret and daughters Elizabeth and Matilda , now five years older than the last time he saw them . He applied for his military pension on October 6 , 1866 . Though Gwyn served in positions with a difficulty as high as major general , because he was only brevet , the payment he received would be reduced to the level of his highest non @-@ brevet rank ; which would be colonel , the position he effectively gave up on October 14 , 1864 . 
 His wife gave birth to a third daughter , Margaret , on December 7 , 1869 . Gwyn and his family later moved from Philadelphia to a home in New York City . Gwyn had become connected with the mercantile house , Stuart Bros and returned to that business . Later on he would take a new job as a clerk in New York . His daughter Margaret married Frank L. Rehn where they moved out of the Brooklyn area to No. 9 Grove Street Yonkers , New York . Gwyn 's middle daughter Matilda married in 1891 to a stockbroker , Andrew S. Brownell . They also moved away from the Brooklyn area to Matilda 's house in Yonkers . 
 = = Death = = 
 Gwyn died in the late evening of July 17 , 1906 while visited his daughter , Mrs. Frank L. Rehn ( Margaret ) , at her home in Yonkers , New York . News of his death was reported in The New York Times and The Washington Post as far away as Salt Lake City in the Deseret News . His body was taken back to Philadelphia , where he was interred in the Woodlands Cemetery following a military funeral on July 19 , 1906 . He was buried in the cemetery plot section E , Lot 33 that he bought over fifty years earlier . 
 = Hamilton Fish = 
 Hamilton Fish ( August 3 , 1808 – September 7 , 1893 ) , was an American statesman and politician who served as the 16th Governor of New York , a United States Senator and United States Secretary of State . Fish is recognized as the " pillar " of the Grant Administration and considered one of the best U.S. Secretaries of State by scholars , known for his <unk> and efforts towards reform and diplomatic moderation . Fish settled the controversial Alabama Claims with Great Britain through his development of the concept of international arbitration . Fish kept the United States out of war with Spain over Cuban independence by coolly handling the volatile Virginius Incident . In 1875 , Fish initiated the process that would ultimately lead to Hawaiian statehood , by having negotiated a reciprocal trade treaty for the island nation 's sugar production . He also organized a peace conference and treaty in Washington D.C. between South American countries and Spain . Fish worked with James Milton Turner , America 's first African American consul , to settle the Liberian @-@ Grebo war . President Grant said he trusted Fish the most for political advice . 
 Fish came from a prominent wealthy New York family and attended Columbia College of Columbia University . Upon graduation , Fish passed the bar , worked as New York 's commissioner of deeds , and ran unsuccessfully for New York State Assembly as a Whig candidate in 1834 . After his marriage , Fish returned to New York politics in 1843 and was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives . Fish ran for New York 's Lieutenant Governor in 1846 , however , he was defeated by a Democratic Anti @-@ Rent Party contender . When the office was vacated in 1847 , Fish ran and was elected Lieutenant Governor . In 1848 Fish ran and was elected Governor of New York having served only one term . In 1851 , Fish was elected U.S. Senator for the state of New York and served only one term . Fish gained valuable experience serving on the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . During the 1850s Fish became a Republican after the Whig party dissolved . In terms of the slavery issue , Fish was a moderate , having disapproved of the Kansas – Nebraska Act and the expansion of slavery . 
 After traveling to Europe , Fish returned to America and supported Abraham Lincoln as the Republican candidate for President in 1860 . During the American Civil War , Fish raised money for the Union war effort and served on Lincoln 's presidential commission that made successful arrangements for Union and Confederate troop prisoner exchanges . Fish returned to his law practice after the Civil War , and was thought to have retired from political life . When Ulysses S. Grant was elected President in 1868 , he appointed Fish as U.S. Secretary of State in 1869 . Fish took on the State Department with vigor , reorganized the office , and established civil service reform . During his 8 @-@ year tenure , Fish had to contend with Cuban belligerency , the settlement of the Alabama claims , Canadian border disputes , and the Virginius incident . Fish implemented the new concept of international arbitration , where disputes between countries were settled by negotiations , rather than military conflicts . Fish was involved in a political feud between Senator Charles Sumner and President Grant in the latter 's unsuccessful efforts to annex the Dominican Republic . Fish organized a naval expedition in an unsuccessful attempt to open trade with Korea in 1871 . Leaving office and politics in 1877 , Fish returned to private life and continued to serve on various historical associations . Fish 's male descendants would later serve in the U.S. House of Representatives for three generations . Fish died of old age in his luxurious New York State home in 1893 . 
 = = Early life , education , and career = = 
 Hamilton Fish was born on August 3 , 1808 at what is now known as the Stuyvesant – Fish House in Greenwich Village , New York City , to Nicholas Fish and Elizabeth Stuyvesant ( a great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter of New Amsterdam 's Peter Stuyvesant ) , and his parents named him after their friend Alexander Hamilton . Nicholas Fish ( 1758 – 1833 ) was a leading Federalist politician and notable figure of the American Revolutionary War . Col. Fish was active in the Yorktown Campaign that resulted in the surrender of Lord Cornwallis . Peter Stuyvesant was a prominent founder of New York , then a Dutch Colony , and his family owned much property in Manhattan . 
 Fish received his primary education at the private school of M. <unk> . In 1827 , Fish graduated from Columbia College of Columbia University , having obtained high honors . At Columbia , Fish became fluent in French , a language that would later help him as U.S. Secretary of State . After his graduation , Fish studied law for three years in the law office of Peter A. Jay , served as president of the Philolexian Society , and was admitted to the New York bar in 1830 , practicing briefly with William Beach Lawrence . Influenced politically by his father , Fish aligned himself to the Whig Party . He served as commissioner of deeds for the city and county of New York from 1832 through 1833 , and was an unsuccessful Whig candidate for New York State Assembly in 1834 . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 On December 15 , 1836 Hamilton Fish married Julia Kean ( a descendant of a New Yorker who was a New Jersey governor , William Livingston ) . The couple 's lengthy married life was described as happy and Mrs. Fish was known for her " sagacity and judgement " . The couple had three sons and five daughters . Hamilton Fish had multiple notable descendants and relatives . 
 = = New York political career = = 
 = = = U.S. Representative = = = 
 For eight years after his defeat as a Representative in the New York State Assembly , Fish was reluctant to run for office . However , Whig party leaders in 1842 convinced him to run for the House of Representatives . In November , Fish was elected to the House of Representatives ; having defeated Democrat John McKeon and serving in the 28th Congress from New York 's 6th District between 1843 and 1845 . The Whigs at this time were in the minority in the House ; however , Fish gained valued national experience serving on the Committee of Military Affairs . Fish failed to win a re @-@ election bid for a second term in the House . 
 = = = Lieutenant Governor = = = 
 Fish was the Whig candidate for Lieutenant Governor of New York in 1846 , but was defeated by Democrat Addison Gardiner who had been endorsed by the Anti @-@ Rent Party . Leasing farmers in New York refused to pay rent to large land tract owners and sometimes resorted to violence and intimidation . Fish had opposed the Anti @-@ Rent Party for the use of illegal tactics not to pay rent . Gardiner was elected in May 1847 a judge of the New York Court of Appeals and vacated the office of lieutenant governor . Fish was then in November 1847 elected to fill the vacancy , and was Lieutenant Governor in 1848 . Lieut . Gov. Fish had a favorable reputation for being " conciliatory " and for his " firmness " over the New York Senate . 
 = = = Governor = = = 
 In November 1848 , he was elected Governor of New York , defeating John A. Dix and Reuben H. Walworth , and served from January 1 , 1849 , to December 31 , 1850 . At 40 years of age , Fish was one of the youngest governors to be elected in New York history . Fish advocated and signed into law free public education facilities throughout New York state . He also advocated and signed into law the building of an asylum and school for the intellectually disabled . During his tenor the canal system in the state of New York was increased . In 1850 , Fish recommended that the state legislature form a committee to collect and publish the Colonial Laws of New York . None of the bills that Governor Fish vetoed were overturned by the New York legislature . In his annual messages Fish spoke out against the extension of slavery from land acquired from the Mexican American War , including California and New Mexico . His anti @-@ slavery messages gave Fish national attention and President Zachary Taylor , also a Whig , was going to nominate Fish to the Treasury Department in a cabinet shakeup . However Taylor died in office before he could nominate Fish . Despite his national popularity Fish was not renominated for Governor . 
 = = = U.S. Senator = = = 
 After Gov. Fish had retired from office he did not openly seek the nomination to be elected U.S. Senator . However , Fish 's supporters , the William H. Seward @-@ Thurlow Weed Whigs , in January 1851 nominated him as a candidate for U.S. Senator . A deadlock ensued over his nomination because one New York legislature Whig Senator was upset about Fish not publicly supporting the Compromise of 1850 . Before the election Fish had only stated government should enforce the laws . Although Fish did not favor the spread of slavery he was hesitant to support the free soil movement . Finally , when two Democratic Senators who were against Fish 's nomination were conspicuously absent , the Senate took action and voted . On March 19 , 1851 , Fish was elected a U.S. Senator from New York and he took his seat on December 1 , serving alongside future Secretary of State William H. Seward . 
 In the United States Senate , he was a member of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations until the end of his term on March 4 , 1857 . Fish became friends with President Franklin Pierce 's Secretary of State William L. Marcy and Attorney General Caleb Cushing . He was a Republican for the latter part of his term and was part of a moderately anti @-@ slavery faction . During the 1850s the Republican Party replaced the Whig Party as the central party against the Democratic Party . By 1856 , Fish privately considered himself a Whig although he knew that the Whig Party was no longer viable politically . Fish was a quiet Senator , rather than an orator , who liked to keep to himself . Fish often was in disagreement with Senator Sumner , who was firmly opposed to slavery and advocated equality for blacks . His policy was to vote for legislation on the side of " justice , economy , and public virtue . " He strongly opposed the repeal of the Missouri Compromise . Fish often voted with the Free Soil faction and was strongly against the Kansas @-@ Nebraska Bill . In February 1855 , merchants represented by Moses H. Grinnell , criticized Fish 's bill on immigration and maritime commerce . Fish 's bill was designed to protect Irish and German immigrants who were dying on merchant ships during oceanic passage to America . The merchants believed that Fish 's bill was oppressive to commercial interests over human interests . 
 During his tenure , the nation and Congress were in tremendous political upheaval over slavery , that included violence , disorder , and disturbances of the peace . In 1856 , pro slavery advocates invaded Kansas and used violent tactics against those who were anti @-@ slavery . In May 1856 , Senator Charles Sumner was viciously attacked by Preston Brooks in the Senate Chamber . At the expiration of his term , he traveled with his family to Europe and remained there until shortly before the opening of the American Civil War , when he returned to begin actively campaigning for the election of Abraham Lincoln . While in France , Fish studied foreign policy with diplomats and distinguished Americans ; having gained valuable experience that would eventually benefit his tenure as Secretary of State . 
 = = American Civil War = = 
 After Abraham Lincoln had been elected President in 1860 , Fish spent time with Brevet Lieutenant General Winfield Scott , commander of the Federal Army . Fish 's private secretary had aided the efforts of the Star of the West , an American merchant ship sent by President James Buchanan to bring relief supplies to Major Robert Anderson at Fort Sumter . While Fish was dining with General Scott in New York a telegram was received that announced the Confederates had attacked the Star of the West in Charleston Bay . When Fish stated that this meant war , Scott replied " Don 't utter that word , my friend . You don 't know what a horrid thing war is . " 
 In 1861 and 1862 Fish joined and participated on the Union Defense Committee of the State of New York , that from April 22 , 1861 , to April 30 , 1862 co @-@ operated with the New York City government in the raising and equipping troops , and disbursed more than $ 1 million for the relief of New York volunteers and their families . The committee included chairman John A. Dix , William M. Evarts , William E. Dodge , A.T. Stewart , John Jacob Astor and other New York men . Fish was appointed chairman of the committee after Dix joined the Union Army . 
 In 1862 Fish was appointed by President Lincoln on a commission to serve with Bishop Edward R. Ames to visit the Union Army prisoners being held in the Confederate States of America capital in Richmond , Virginia . The Confederate government , however , refused to allow the commission to enter the city . Instead , Fish and Rev. Ames were able to start a system of prisoner exchange that remained virtually unchanged throughout the American Civil War . After the war ended Fish went back to private practice as a lawyer in New York . 
 = = U.S. Secretary of State = = 
 Hamilton Fish was appointed Secretary of State by President Ulysses S. Grant and served between March 17 , 1869 and March 12 , 1877 . He was President Grant 's longest @-@ serving Cabinet officer . Upon assuming office in 1869 , Fish was initially underrated by some statesmen including former Secretaries of State William H. Seward and John Bigelow . Fish , however , immediately took on the responsibilities of his office with diligence , zeal , and intelligence . Fish 's tenure as Secretary of State was lengthy , almost eight years , and he had to contend with many foreign policy issues including the Cuban insurrection , the Alabama Claims , and the Franco @-@ Prussian War . 
 = = = Reformed U.S. State Department 1869 = = = 
 When Fish assumed office he immediately began a series of reforms in the Department of State . After appropriations were given to his office by Congress , Fish cataloged and organized 700 volumes of miscellaneous State Department documents and created the Bureau of Indexes and Archives . Fish introduced indexing of State Department files so subordinates could easily find documents . Fish implemented civil service reform by having State Department applicants be required to pass an entry examination before being appointed consultant . This policy was sometimes hampered , since President Grant could appoint any person to office without the person having to take an examination . However , the policy of testing overall improved the staff at the State Department . Fish 's methods of organization included disciplined staff and prompt copying of dispatches . 
 The method of record keeping , however , was cumbersome , having remained the same since John Quincy Adams . Rather than world regions , countries were listed in alphabetical order ; the correspondence was embedded in bound diplomatic and consular category archives , rather than by subject matter . Added to countries ' information was a miscellaneous category filed chronologically . This resulted in a tedious and time @-@ consuming process to make briefings for Congress . Diplomatic ministers , only 23 in 1877 , were not kept informed of current world events that took place in other parts of the world . 
 = = = Cuban belligerency and insurrection 1869 – 1870 = = = 
 By 1869 , Cuban nationals were in open rebellion against their mother country Spain , due to the unpopularity of Spanish rule . American sentiment favored the Cuban rebels and President Grant appeared to be on the verge of acknowledging Cuban belligerency . Fish , who desired settlement over the Alabama Claims , did not approve of recognizing the Cuban rebels , since Queen Victoria and her government had recognized Confederate belligerency in 1861 . Recognizing Cuban belligerency would have jeopardized settlement and arbitration with Great Britain . In February 1870 , Senator John Sherman authored a Senate resolution that would have recognized Cuban belligerency . Working behind the scenes Fish counseled Sherman that Cuban recognition would ultimately lead to war with Spain . The resolution went to the House of Representatives and was ready to pass , however , Fish , worked out an agreement with President Grant to send a special message to Congress that urged not to acknowledge the Cuban rebels . On June 13 , 1870 the message written by Fish was sent to Congress by the President and Congress , after much debate , decided not to recognize Cuban belligerency . President Grant continued the policy of Cuban belligerent non recognition for the rest of his two administrations . This policy , however , was tested in 1873 with the Virginius Affair . 
 = = = Dominican Republic annexation treaty 1869 – 1870 = = = 
 After President Grant assumed office on March 4 , 1869 one of his immediate foreign policy interests was the annexation of the Caribbean island nation of the Dominican Republic , at that time referred to as Santo Domingo , to the United States . President Grant believed the annexation of Santo Domingo would increase the United States ' mineral resources and alleviate the effects of racism against African Americans in the South . Hamilton Fish , though loyal to President Grant , did not desire annexation ; the divided island nation , run by mulatto leader President Buenaventura Báez , had been troubled with civil strife . Báez had imprisoned an American citizen , Davis Hatch , for speaking out against the Báez government . Fish told Grant that the Senate would not be ready to pass a Santo Domingo annexation treaty . In April 1869 Fish gave Grant 's private secretary Orville Babcock " special agent " status to search the island . In September 1869 , Babcock made a preliminary treaty that would annex Santo Domingo to the United States and give it the opportunity to apply for statehood . In October 1869 , Fish drew up a formal treaty that included : a $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 payment of the Dominican national debt ; Samaná Bay would be leased to the United States for $ 150 @,@ 000 yearly payment ; Santo Domingo would eventually be given statehood . 
 In a private conference with President Grant , Fish agreed to support the Santo Domingo annexation if President Grant sent Congress a non @-@ belligerency statement not to get involved with the Cuban rebellion against Spain . Charles Sumner , chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , was against the treaty , believing that Santo Domingo needed to remain independent , and that racism against U.S. black citizens in the South needed to be dealt with in the continental United States . Sumner believed that blacks on Santo Domingo did not share Anglo @-@ American values . On January 10 , 1870 Grant submitted the Santo Domingo treaty to the United States Senate . Fish believed Senators would vote for annexation only if statehood was withdrawn ; however , President Grant refused this option . The Senate took its time deliberating , and finally rejected the treaty on June 30 , 1870 . Eighteen Senators led by Charles Sumner defeated the treaty . Pres . Grant , angered at Sumner 's refusal to support the treaty , fired Sumner 's friend J. Lothrop Motley , Grant 's ambassador to England , for disregarding Fish 's instructions regarding the Alabama Claims . Grant believed that Sumner had in January 1870 stated his support for the Santo Domingo treaty . Sumner was then deprived of his chairmanship of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1871 by Grant 's allies in the Senate . 
 = = = Colombian inter @-@ oceanic canal treaty 1870 = = = 
 President Grant and Secretary Fish were interested in establishing an inter @-@ oceanic canal through Panama . Secretary Fish organized a treaty signing on January 26 , 1870 in Bogota between the United States and Colombia that established a Panama route for the inter @-@ oceanic canal . The Colombian Senate , however , amended the treaty so much that the strategic value of the inter @-@ oceanic canal construction became ineffective . As a result , the United States Senate refused to ratify the treaty . 
 = = = Treaty of Washington 1871 = = = 
 During the previous administration of President Andrew Johnson , Secretary of State Seward attempted to resolve the Alabama Claims with the Johnson @-@ Clarendon convention and treaty . The Alabama Claims had arisen out of the American Civil War , when Confederate raiding ships built in British ports ( most notably the C.S.S. Alabama ) had sunk a significant number of Union merchant ships . 
 The Johnson @-@ Clarendon treaty , presented to Congress by President Ulysses S. Grant , was overwhelmingly defeated by the Senate and the claims remained unresolved . Anglophobia led by Charles Sumner was at an all @-@ time high when Fish became Secretary of State . Sumner had demanded Britain cede Canada to the United States as payment for the Alabama Claims . In late 1870 , an opportunity arrived to settle the Alabama Claims under Prime Minister William E. Gladstone . Fish , who was determined to improve relations with Britain , along with President Grant and Senate supporters , had Charles Sumner removed by vote from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , and the door was open for renewed negotiations with Britain . 
 On January 9 , 1871 , Fish met with British representative Sir John Rose in Washington and an agreement was made , under much negotiations , to establish a Joint Commission to settle the Alabama Claims to be held in Washington under the direction of Hamilton Fish . At stake was the financing of America 's debt with British bankers during the Civil War , and peace with Britain was required . On February 14 , 1871 both distinguished High Commissioners representing Britain , led by the Earl of Ripon , George Robinson , and the United States , led by Fish , met in Washington D.C. and negotiations over settlement went remarkably well . Also representing Britain was Canadian Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald . After 37 meetings , on May 8 , 1871 the Treaty of Washington was signed at the State Department and became a " landmark of international conciliation " . The Senate ratified the treaty on May 24 , 1871 . On August 25 , 1872 , the settlement for the Alabama claims was made by an international arbitration committee meeting in Geneva and the United States was awarded $ 15 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in gold for damaged done by the Confederate warships . Under the treaty settlement over disputed Atlantic fisheries and the San Juan Boundary ( concerning the Oregon boundary line ) was made . The treaty was considered an " unprecedented accomplishment " , having solved border disputes , reciprocal trade , and navigation issues . A friendly perpetual relationship between Great Britain and America was established , with Britain having expressed regret over the Alabama damages . 
 = = = South American détente and armistice 1871 = = = 
 On April 11 , 1871 a peace conference , presided over by Hamilton Fish , was held in Washington D.C. between Spain and the South American republics of Peru , Chile , Ecuador , and Bolivia , which resulted in an armistice between the countries . These countries had been in a " technical " state of war since 1866 , and the United States in 1871 served as mediator under the direction of Hamilton Fish . Representing Spain was Mauricio Lopez Roberts ; Manuel <unk> represented both Peru and Bolivia ; Joaquín Godoy represented Chile ; and Antonio Flores represented Ecuador . President Grant gave Fish full powers to control negotiations at the détente meeting between the five countries . The signed armistice treaty consisted of seven articles ; hostilities were to cease for a minimum of three years and the countries would allow commercial trade with neutral countries . 
 = = = Korean expedition and conflict 1871 = = = 
 In 1871 , Korea was known as the " Hermit Kingdom " , a country determined to remain isolated from other nations , specifically from commerce and trade from Western nations , including the United States . In 1866 , U.S. relations with Korea were troubled when Christian missionaries were beheaded by the Korean <unk> , regent to King <unk> , and the crew of the General Sherman , a U.S. trading ship , were massacred . Secretary William H. Seward , under President Andrew Johnson , demanded redress for what was perceived as the outrageous actions of the Korean government . U.S. Naval warships were ordered to the Orient , however , when Seward 's term ended in 1869 , he was unable to organize a naval expedition . When Fish took office he organized the Korean naval expedition and broadened the purposes . In April 1871 , Fish ordered Frederick F. Low , minister to China , to take the Asiatic Fleet and voyage to Seoul . The purpose of the expedition was to seek retribution for the assaulted sailors and to open up a commercial treaty with the King of Korea . Fish had told the fleet not to use force unless the honor of the U.S. Flag was infringed by the Koreans . 
 On May 8 , 1871 , Low and Rear Admiral John Rodgers , commander of the Asiatic Squadron , voyaged to Korea with five warships , eighty @-@ five guns , and 1 @,@ 230 sailors and marines . On May 16 , the naval squadron reached Nagasaki Bay and a week later lowered anchor near the mouth of the Han . The Koreans sent unofficial representatives to stall for time and hope the American squadron would leave . In June , the American fleet while doing nautical survey was fired upon by the Korean forts on the Han River leading to Seoul . The American fleet fired back , damaging the forts . The Americans demanded an apology on the grounds that the honor of the American flag had been violated . On June 10 , a U.S. military expedition was launched after the Koreans failed to apologize for the attack ; the objective was to destroy the Korean forts on <unk> Island . The U.S.S. Monocacy pounded the forts with 9 inch guns while 546 sailors and 105 marines landed on the island and captured and destroyed the Korean forts . The " Citadel " fortress , on a steep 115 @-@ foot hillside , put up the stiffest resistance to the American troops , who fought in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with the Korean Tiger Hunters . All of the Korean forts taken , were destroyed and leveled on June 11 . Three hundred fifty Korean Tiger Hunters were killed , compared with only one American officer and two American sailors . Lieut . Hugh W. McKee was the first U. S. Navy officer to die in battle in Korea . 
 The Asiatic Squadron remained on the Han River for three weeks , but the Koreans would not open negotiations for a commercial treaty . As the American squadron left , the Koreans believed that they had won a great victory over the Americans . The attempt to open Korea up to trade was similar to how Commodore Matthew Perry in 1854 had approached the opening of Japan . Korea , however , proved to be more isolated than Japan . In 1881 , Commodore Robert W. Shufeldt , without using a naval fleet , went to a more conciliatory Korean government and made a commercial treaty . The U.S. was the first Western nation to establish formal trade with Korea . 
 = = = Virginius affair 1873 = = = 
 During the 1870s Cuba was in a state of rebellion against Spain . In the United States , Americans were divided on whether to militarily aid the rebel Cubans . Many <unk> believed the United States needed to fight for the Cuban rebels and pressured the Grant Administration to take action . A privately owned ship , the Virginius , was used to run guns , ammunition , and vital supplies to the Cuban rebels . The captain of the Virginius was Joseph Fry , former officer of the Confederate and Federal Navies . On October 31 , 1873 , the Virginius was run down in neutral waters by the Spanish warship , the Tornado , off of Morant Bay , Jamaica . After being hit , the Virginius took on water and was forced to surrender to the Spanish authorities . The 103 crew members consisted of Cuban rebel recruits and 52 American and British citizens . The Spanish hauled down and trampled the American flag , and brought the prisoners to Santiago . A total of 53 Virginius crew members were executed by the Spanish authorities . The Spanish finally stopped the carnage as a British warship appeared with guns ready to fire on Santiago . The American Navy , at this time , although formidable worldwide , was in decline after the American Civil War . 
 When news reached the United States of the executions , President Grant and Secretary Fish were forced to make an immediate response . Many Americans demanded a full @-@ scale war with Spain . Fish found out that the registration was falsified under American ownership , however , the executions of Americans demanded action . Fish , coolly handled the situation , called upon Spanish minister , Admiral José Polo de Bernabé in Washington D.C. and held a conference . A settlement was made where Spain relinquished the severely damaged Virginius to the U.S. Navy , while survivors were released that included 13 Americans . The Spanish Captain who ordered the executions was censured , and Spain paid $ 80 @,@ 000 reparations to American families whose family members were executed in Santiago . The national honor of both Spain and the United States was preserved and it was chiefly due to the restraint and moderation of Fish and Bernabé that a satisfactory settlement of the Virginius ' Affair was reached by the United States and Spain . 
 = = = Hawaiian reciprocal trade treaty 1875 = = = 
 Fish also negotiated the Reciprocity Treaty of 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii under the reign of King Kalākaua . Hawaiian sugar was made duty @-@ free , while the importation of manufactured goods and clothing was allowed into the island kingdom . By opening Hawaii to free trade the process for annexation and eventual statehood into the United States had begun . 
 = = = Liberian @-@ Grebo war 1876 = = = 
 The U.S. settled the Liberian @-@ Grebo war in 1876 when Hamilton Fish dispatched the USS Alaska , under President Grant 's authority , to Liberia . Liberia was in practice an American colony . U.S. envoy James Milton Turner , the first African American ambassador , requested a warship to protect American property in Liberia . Turner , bolstered by U.S. naval presence in harbor and support of the USS Alaska captain , negotiated the incorporation of Grebo people into Liberian society and the ousting of foreign traders from Liberia . 
 = = = Republican convention 1876 = = = 
 As the 1876 Republican convention approached during the U.S. Presidential Election , President Grant , unknown to Fish , had written a letter to Republican leaders to nominate Fish for the Presidential ticket . The letter was never read at the convention and Fish was never nominated . President Grant believed that Fish was a good compromise choice between the rival factions of James G. Blaine and Roscoe Conkling . Cartoonist Thomas Nast drew a caricature of Fish and Rutherford B. Hayes as the Republican Party ticket . Fish , who was ready to retire to private life , did not desire to run for President and was content at returning to private life . Fish found out later President Grant had written the letter to the convention . 
 = = = Nicaragua inter @-@ oceanic canal negotiations 1877 = = = 
 President Grant at the close of his second term , and Secretary Fish , remained interested in establishing an inter @-@ oceanic canal treaty . Fish and the State Department negotiated with a special envoy from Nicaragua in February , 1877 for an inter @-@ oceanic treaty . Negotiations , however , failed as the status of the neutral zone could not be established . 
 = = Later life and health = = 
 After leaving the Grant Cabinet in 1877 and briefly serving under President Hayes , Fish retired from public office and returned to private life practicing law and managing his real estate in New York City . Fish was revered in the New York community and enjoyed spending time with his family . 
 Fish resided in Glen <unk> , his estate near Garrison , New York , in Putnam County , New York , in the Hudson River Valley . His health remained good until around 1884 , having suffered from neuralgia . 
 = = Death , funeral , and burial = = 
 On September 6 , 1893 Fish had retired from the evening having played cards with his daughter . The following morning on September 7 , Fish , at the age of 85 , suddenly died . His death was attributed to advanced age . 
 On September 11 , 1893 Fish was buried in Garrison at St. Philip 's Church @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Highlands Cemetery under waving trees along on the hills by the Hudson River shoreline . He was buried next to his wife and oldest daughter . Fish was buried near the grave of Edwards Pierrepont , President Grant 's U.S. Attorney General . Many notable persons attended Fish 's funeral , while Bishop Potter conducted services . Julia Grant , widowed wife of Ulysses S. Grant , attended Fish 's funeral . 
 = = Historical reputation = = 
 Charles Francis Adams described Fish as " a quiet and easy @-@ going man ; but , when aroused , by being , as he thought , ' put upon ' , he became very formidable . Neither was it possible to placate him . " Fish 's 20th Century biographer , A. Elwood Corning , stated that Fish was free from " petty jealousies and prejudices which so often drag the reputation of statesmen down to the level of politicians " and that Fish " used the language and practiced the manners of a gentleman . " As an invaluable member of the Grant Administration , Fish commanded " men 's confidence , and respect by his firmness , candor , and justice . " 
 A survey of scholars in the December 1981 American Heritage Magazine ranked Fish number 3 on a list of top ten Secretary of States noting his settling of the Alabama Claims in 1871 , for his peaceful settlement of the Virginius Incident obtaining Spanish reparations , and for his Hawaiian treaty , ratified by the U.S. Senate in 1875 , starting the annexation process leading to the eventual statehood of Hawaii . 
 There is a memorial to Fish at the Cathedral of All Saints ( Albany , New York ) . The Hamilton Fish Newburgh @-@ Beacon Bridge , which spans the Hudson River 50 miles north of New York City between Dutchess and Orange Counties , is named after Fish . 
 = = Society of Cincinnati = = 
 Fish was a long time member of the New York Society of the Cincinnati by right of his father 's service as an officer in the Continental Army . Fish succeeded to his father 's " seat " in the Society upon his father 's death in 1833 . In 1848 , Fish became the Vice President General of the national Society and , in 1854 , he became its President General . In 1855 Fish was elected President of the New York Society . Fish served as both President General of the national Society and President of the New York Society until his death in 1893 . His 39 @-@ year tenure in office as President General is by far the longest in the Society 's history . 
 = = Notable descendants = = 
 Three of Fish 's direct descendants , all named Hamilton , served in the U.S. House of Representatives for the state of New York . Hamilton Fish II , Fish 's son , served one term as U.S. Representative from 1909 to 1911 . Fish II also served as assistant to Secretary of State Hamilton Fish . Hamilton Fish III , Fish 's grandson , served as U.S. Representative from 1920 to 1945 . Hamilton Fish IV , Fish 's great @-@ grandson , served as U.S. Representative from 1969 to 1995 . Another son Stuyvesant Fish was an important railroad executive . Another son , Nicholas Fish II , was a U.S. diplomat , who was appointed second secretary of legation at Berlin in 1871 , became secretary in 1874 , and was chargé d 'affaires at Berne in 1877 – 1881 , and minister to Belgium in 1882 – 1886 , after which he engaged in banking in New York City . Hamilton Fish , Fish 's grandson by Nicholas , was an 1895 graduate of Columbia College of Columbia University , saw service in the Spanish – American War as one of the storied Rough Riders . He was the first member of that regiment to be killed in action , at the Battle of Las <unk> , Cuba . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Corning , A. Elwood ( October 1918 ) . Hamilton Fish . New York , New York : The <unk> Publishing Company . 
 Doenecke , Justus D. ( 1981 ) . The Presidencies of James A. Garfield & Chester A. Arthur . Lawrence , Kansas : The Regents Press of Kansas . ISBN 0 @-@ 7006 @-@ 0208 @-@ 9 . 
 Fuller , Joseph V. ( 1931 ) . Dictionary of American Biography Fish , Hamilton . New York : Charles Scribner 's Sons. pp. 397 – 400 . 
 <unk> , Ari ( 1988 ) . The Presidency of Rutherford B. Hayes . University Press of Kansas . ISBN 0 @-@ 7006 @-@ 0338 @-@ 7 . 
 Kremer , Gary R. ( 1991 ) . James Milton Turner and the Promise of America : the Public Life of a Post- Civil War Black Leader . Columbia , Missouri : University of Missouri Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 McFeely , William S. ( 1981 ) . Grant A Biography . New York , New York : W.W. Norton & Company , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Nevins , Allan ( 1957 ) . Hamilton Fish : The Inner History of the Grant Administration . Volume : 1 . New York , New York : F. Ungar Pub . Co . 
 Smith , Jean Edward ( 2001 ) . Grant . Rockefeller Center New York , New York : Simon & Schuster Paperbacks . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 United States Department of State ( December 4 , 1871 ) . Foreign Relations of the United States . Washington D.C. : Washington : Government Printing Office . 
 = = = Journals and newspapers = = = 
 = = = = American Heritage = = = = 
 American Heritage Editors ( December 1981 ) . " The Ten Best Secretaries Of State … " . American Heritage 33 ( 1 ) . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 08 @-@ 22 . 
 <unk> , Andrew C. ( April 1968 ) . " our Little War With The Heathen " . American Heritage 19 ( 3 ) . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 08 @-@ 30 . 
 <unk> , Frederick D. ( October 1998 ) . " 1873 One Hundred And Twenty @-@ five Years Ago " . American Heritage 49 ( 6 ) . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 08 @-@ 22 . 
 = = = = New York Times = = = = 
 " Hamilton Fish 3d Joins Race for House " . New York , New York : New York Times . April 3 , 1988 . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 13 . 
 " The Merchants Denouncing Hamilton Fish " ( PDF ) . New York Times ( New York , New York ) . February 19 , 1855 . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 08 @-@ 24 . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 Bardsley , Marilyn ( 2011 ) . " Albert Fish " . Tru TV . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 18 . 
 Benz , Stephen ( June 26 , 1998 ) . " The Bull Pulpit " . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 <unk> , William Addams . " Ancestry of Albert Fish " . <unk> . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 19 . 
 " Fischetti to <unk> " . Political Graveyard . July 19 , 2011 . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 " Fish , Hamilton , ( 1849 – 1936 ) " . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 " Fish , Hamilton , ( 1888 – 1991 ) " . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 " Fish , Hamilton , Jr . , ( 1926 – 1996 ) " . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 17 . 
 " Governor Thomas H. Kean Biography " . Rutgers . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 15 . 
 " Kean , Hamilton Fish , ( 1862 – 1941 ) " . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 09 @-@ 18 . 
 = = = Purdue University = = = 
 Stover , John F. , The management of the Illinois Central Railroad in the 20th century . ( PDF ) , Purdue University 
 = I Am Tour ( Leona Lewis ) = 
 The I Am Tour was the third headlining concert tour by the British singer and songwriter Leona Lewis . It was launched in support of her fifth studio album , I Am ( 2015 ) . The tour was announced on 11 September 2015 with a run of fourteen dates across Great Britain . It began on 21 February 2016 at the Liverpool Empire Theatre and concluded on 11 March 2016 at the Plymouth Pavilions . The leg also included two nights at the London Palladium . The English singer @-@ songwriter Philippa Hanna served as the support act , and the English singer @-@ songwriter Joss Stone joined Lewis on stage as a special guest for the final show of the tour to perform a cover of " Sisters Are Doin ' It for Themselves " by Eurythmics and Aretha Franklin . 
 Lewis performed a nineteen @-@ song set list with a four @-@ piece band and two backup vocalists . Her vocals , stage presence and interaction with the crowds was lauded by the critics in attendance . Many singled out her performance of " Ave Maria " as the set 's highlight , while others also praised renditions of " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , " A Moment Like This " and " Run " . Several noted that nearly a third of the set list consisted of both official covers recorded by Lewis previously included on her albums , as well as cover songs intended just for the tour . Some were complimentary of the unofficial covers , most notably Lewis ' version of " Time After Time " by Cyndi Lauper , whereas others felt that there were too many and that they were too forgettable . 
 = = Background = = 
 To promote her fifth studio album , I Am ( 2015 ) , on 11 September 2015 Leona Lewis announced her third headlining concert tour , titled the I Am Tour , was to take place in February and March 2016 . It was her first concert tour since the Glassheart Tour in 2013 . Spanning fourteen shows visiting various concert halls and theatres in England , Scotland and Wales , the tour began at the Liverpool Empire Theatre on 21 February and concluded at the Plymouth Pavilions on 11 March ; it also included two dates at the London Palladium . Lewis announced the tour on 11 September 2015 and tickets went on sale a week later on 18 September . Speaking about touring again , Lewis said that she was " So so excited to announce a 2016 UK Tour ! I cannot wait to get out and perform all the new songs for you and some old favourites too ! " In an interview for What 's On magazine in December 2015 , Lewis revealed that she had originally planned for the tour to be longer , but decided to shorten it in order to spend time with family and friends and start writing songs for her sixth studio album sooner . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Katie Fitzpatrick of the Manchester Evening News reported that fans in attendance at the Manchester Bridgewater Hall show were impressed with Lewis ' performance , writing that many took to social media following the concert to describe her as " the best singer in the world " . Reporting on the show at The Sage Gateshead , the Chronicle Live critic Gordon Barr praised Lewis ' confidence and her band . He noted that the production was relatively simple compared to the big @-@ budget production values of her first concert tour in 2010 , The Labyrinth . With the tour featuring just two background vocalists and a four @-@ piece band , Barr wrote that it was " so refreshing to see an artist on stage just loving the music " . He singled out performances of " Ave Maria " , " Run " , and a cover of " Time After Time " by Cyndi Lauper as the show 's highlights . Barr described the performance of " Time After Time " as " stripped back to the core " which enabled the crowd to " really [ hear ] that incredible voice at its best " . Allan Jones of the Bournemouth Echo was also complimentary of Lewis ' performance during the show at the Bournemouth International Centre . Although he disapproved of the performance of " Ave Maria " ( but noted that it garnered a standing ovation from the crowd ) , he thought that standout performances included " Run " , " Bleeding Love " , and Lewis ' cover of " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " by Roberta Flack . He concluded his review by writing that Lewis has " that really big soul / pop voice that should see her continuing to pack venues for the next ten years " . 
 Adrian Caffery of the Birmingham Mail gave a mixed review of the show at the city 's Symphony Hall . While he was complimentary of Lewis ' vocals performances on most of the original tracks , most notably on " Ave Maria " , which he described as demonstrating " an amazing transformation to opera diva " , he was critical of Lewis ' decision to include seven cover songs on the set list . Although Caffery wrote that " Run " , " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , " Ave Maria " , and " A Moment Like This " – the last of which he described as " cheesy " – were to be expected , as Lewis had recorded them for previous albums . However , he disapproved of " Time After Time " , labelling it " ok " , and called the Sam Smith covers " instantly forgettable " . He concluded by writing : " There was enough evidence to suggest Leona is capable of staging an utterly mesmerising show from start to finish – just not this time " . A critic from The Bristol Post wrote that Lewis " dazzled " the audience who " [ enjoyed ] Leona 's impressive vocals and stunning songs " , placing emphasis on her rendition of " Time After Time " . 
 In a review of Lewis ' performance at the London Palladium on 5 March , William J Connolly of Gay Times praised the singer 's openness regarding her personal and private life throughout the show , which gave the audience an insight as to " why she 's remained quiet in previous months and why , as we all love , each album is full of emotion and honesty " . He singled out " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " , " Bleeding Love " , and " Thunder " as the show 's highlights , and described " Run " as " perfect " . Emma Noye of the Ipswich Star wrote that despite there being some Americanisms in the show , such as " horse @-@ riding , beach @-@ walking backing visuals with a voiceover talking about the ' journey ' she 's been on " , Lewis ' voice was " indisputably fantastic " . Noye went on to write that the singer " made everyone feel included and engaged " and praised her performance of " Ave Maria " as " stunning " . 
 In her review of the concert at the Plymouth Pavilions , Caroline Abbott of the Torquay Herald Express praised Lewis for her interaction with the crowd and her " down @-@ to @-@ earth " persona , as well as her performances of " Ave Maria " , " Thank You " , and " Sisters Are Doin ' It for Themselves " , a duet with the special guest Joss Stone . Noting that a third of the set @-@ list was made up of covers , she expressed dislike for Lewis ' interpretation of " Time After Time " . Abbott wrote that her " only real criticism " of the performance was for the stage production , which she described as " five strips of giant toilet paper hanging at the back , occasionally changing colour , and spaced a little too far apart to make for easy viewing of the video footage of Leona explaining why her music is so important to her " . Abbott did , however , note that the backdrop did not detract from the " high quality music " or her " incredible , effortless voice " . 
 = = Set list = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show in Liverpool at the Liverpool Empire Theatre on 21 February 2016 . It may not represent the setlist from all of the shows . 
 For the final show at the Plymouth Pavilions on 11 March , Lewis bought out the English singer @-@ songwriter Joss Stone as a special guest to perform a cover of " Sisters Are Doin ' It for Themselves " by Eurythmics and Aretha Franklin . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = Erez Lieberman Aiden = 
 Erez Lieberman Aiden ( born 1980 ) , formerly known as Erez Lieberman , is an American research scientist active in multiple fields related to applied mathematics . He is an assistant professor at the Baylor College of Medicine , and formerly a fellow at the Harvard Society of Fellows and visiting faculty member at Google . Using mathematical and computational approaches , he has studied evolution in a range of contexts , including that of networks through evolutionary graph theory and languages in the field of culturomics . He has published scientific articles in a variety of disciplines . 
 Lieberman Aiden has won awards including the Lemelson – MIT Student Prize and the American Physical Society 's Award for Outstanding Doctoral Thesis Research in Biological Physics . In 2009 , Lieberman Aiden was named as one of 35 top innovators under 35 by Technology Review and in 2011 he was one of the recipients of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Erez Lieberman Aiden grew up in Brooklyn with three siblings . He began computer programming at the age of seven . His father , Aharon Lieberman , was a technology entrepreneur and owned a factory in New Jersey . As a child Lieberman Aiden spoke Hebrew and Hungarian , making English his third language . 
 Lieberman Aiden studied mathematics , physics , and philosophy at Princeton , and earned a master 's degree in History at Yeshiva University . He proceeded to complete a joint PhD in mathematics and bioengineering at the Harvard – MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology , where he was advised by Eric Lander and Martin Nowak . 
 = = Research = = 
 Lieberman Aiden contributed to the founding of evolutionary graph theory along with his PhD supervisor Martin Nowak . He has since been involved in researching the three dimensional structure of the human genome and the field of culturomics . 
 = = = Three @-@ dimensional genome structure = = = 
 Lieberman Aiden was part of a team of scientists from the University of Massachusetts Medical School and MIT that first suggested human DNA folds into a fractal globule rather than an equilibrium globule . This finding explains how each cell 's genome is able to be heavily compacted without forming a knot . Lieberman Aiden and coworkers invented a variant of chromosome conformation capture called " Hi @-@ C " which produces a genome @-@ wide measure of contact probabilities that point to a 3 @-@ dimensional genome structure . This technique combines existing chromosome capture methodology with next @-@ generation sequencing , enabling an all @-@ versus @-@ all measure of chromatin contacts . 
 In 2009 this work was published in the journal Science and was featured as a cover illustration . Following the publication , Lieberman Aiden was quoted as saying : 
 We ’ ve long known that on a small scale , DNA is a double helix … But if the double helix didn ’ t fold further , the genome in each cell would be two meters long . Scientists have not really understood how the double helix folds to fit into the nucleus of a human cell , which is only about a hundredth of a millimeter in diameter . This new approach enabled us to probe exactly that question . 
 In 2014 , he served as a senior author on an article in Cell which described a refined method of Hi @-@ C which his team used to describe the fundamental organization of DNA . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Lieberman Aiden was involved in the analysis of a corpus of around 5 million digitised books , applying data mining techniques to advance the new field of culturomics . Leiberman Aiden was involved in a project to digitise Anglo @-@ Saxon texts in 2004 , the analysis of which led to the discovery of verb regularisation , a process whereby irregular verbs become increasingly regular over time . 
 After the announcement of Google Books , Lieberman Aiden approached Google 's Director of Research Peter Norvig and was permitted to statistically analyse their data . His work contributed to the Google <unk> Viewer , released in December 2010 , which makes use of culturomics ideas to produce normalized historical trends for any sequence of letters . This project published a number of findings in the journal Science , including the changing dynamic of fame and instances of literary censorship during the Second World War . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2008 Lieberman Aiden was awarded the Lemelson @-@ MIT Student Prize for his work on the <unk> , meant to assist elderly people with balance problems and prevent falls that could cause injury . The following year , the <unk> was listed as one of " 20 New Biotech <unk> that Will Change Medicine " by Popular Mechanics . A year later Lieberman Aiden was named as one of 35 top innovators under 35 ( <unk> ) by MIT 's Technology Review magazine . 
 In 2010 , the American Physical Society presented Lieberman Aiden with the Award for Outstanding Doctoral Thesis Research in Biological Physics for his thesis titled " Evolution and the emergence of structure " . His doctoral dissertation was also awarded the Hertz Thesis Prize . Lieberman Aiden is also the recipient of an NIH Director 's New Innovator Award and was named , along with 95 other American researchers , as a recipient of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers in 2011 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Erez Lieberman married Aviva Presser in 2005 ; following the marriage both husband and wife appended to their surnames " Aiden " , which means Eden in Hebrew and , in Gaelic , little fire . They have a son named Gabriel Galileo and a daughter . Outside of scientific interests , Lieberman Aiden participated in a modern art collaboration with Nicholas Kahn and Richard <unk> which was exhibited in galleries in the United States and Europe . 
 Lieberman Aiden and his wife founded Bears Without Borders , a nonprofit organisation which distributes stuffed toys to the developing world . 
 = Avitomyrmex = 
 Avitomyrmex is an extinct genus of bulldog ants in the subfamily Myrmeciinae which contains three described species . The genus was described in 2006 from Ypresian stage ( Early Eocene ) deposits of British Columbia , Canada . Almost all the specimens collected are queens , with an exception of a single fossilised worker . These ants are large , and the eyes are also large and well developed ; a sting is present in one species . The behaviour of these ants may have been similar to extant Myrmeciinae ants , such as foraging solitarily for arthropod prey and never leaving pheromone trails to food sources . Avitomyrmex has not been assigned to any tribe , instead generally being regarded as incertae sedis within Myrmeciinae . However , its identity as an ant has been challenged , although it is undoubtedly a hymenopteran insect . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 Avitomyrmex is an extinct genus of ants with three described species . Fossils of Avitomyrmex , along with other extinct Myrmeciinae ants were first studied and described by Bruce Archibald , Stefan Cover and Corrie Moreau of the Museum of Comparative Zoology in Cambridge , Massachusetts . They published their 2006 description of the genus and species in an Annals of the Entomological Society of America journal article . The genus name is a combination of the Latin " <unk> " meaning " ancient " or " grandfatherly " and the Greek myrmex , meaning " ant " . 
 Included with the genus description , the paper contained the description of Avitomyrmex mastax , Avitomyrmex systenus , and the type species Avitomyrmex elongatus . These fossil species date back to the Middle Ypresian . 
 Archibald and colleagues originally classified Avitomyrmex as incertae sedis ( Latin for " of uncertain placement " ) within the ant subfamily Myrmeciinae , as the specimens are unable to be properly identified . In 2008 , however , Cesare Baroni Urbani of the University of Basel , Switzerland , noted that no specimen in this genus allows a proper examination of the <unk> ( key diagnostic traits ) of the <unk> or familial characters . While Baroni Urbani excludes Avitomyrmex from Myrmeciinae and classifies it as incertae sedis in Hymenoptera , the morphological characters and wings show the specimens are undoubtedly a hymenopteran insect . A 2012 report by Russian palaeoentomologist Gennady M. Dlussky of the Moscow State University describing new myrmecines accepted the classification of Archibald and colleagues without mentioning the comments of Baroni Urbani . 
 The following cladograms generated by Archibald and colleagues show two possible phylogenetic positions of Avitomyrmex among some ants of the subfamily Myrmeciinae ; the cladogram on the right included three additional extinct genera compared to that on the left . It is suggested that Avitomyrmex may be closely related to other extinct Myrmeciinae ants such as Macabeemyrma and Ypresiomyrma , as well as the extant Nothomyrmecia macrops . 
 = = Description = = 
 There are several characters which separate Avitomyrmex from other ant genera . The most notable feature is the distinctly slender nature of the queens and workers morphology . This is shown clearly in the shape of the petiole connecting the thorax and the abdomen . While similar to the modern <unk> genus Nothomyrmecia of Southern Australia , the two genera are distinguishable by the structure of the petiole , with Avitomyrmex lacking the peduncle seen in Nothomyrmecia . The eyes are large and well developed , the mandibles are subtriangular but poorly preserved , and a sting is present on examined A. systenus fossils . As for A. elongatus and A. mastax , it is unknown if the two ants have a sting , due to either poor preservation or the sting has not been preserved at all . 
 = = = A. elongatus = = = 
 A. elongatus was described from a single side of a compression fossil found from the Middle Ypresian McAbee Fossil Beds , Kamloops Group , near Cache Creek , British Columbia . The incomplete specimen of a queen , numbered <unk> , is currently preserved in the paleontology collections housed at the Courtenay and District Museum , Courtenay , British Columbia . Archibald , Cover , and Moreau coined the specific epithet from the Latin " elongatus " meaning " prolonged " in reference to the elongated morphology of the type specimen . The species is discernible from the other two species of Avitomyrmex by its notably larger size , the preserved portion of the ant being over 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 inches ) . The forewings are almost as large as the specimen , measuring around 18 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 7 inches ) while the hindwings are too poorly preserved to be studied . The holotype is preserved with a partly disarticulated gaster and is missing her head . 
 = = = A. mastax = = = 
 The second species described from the McAbee Fossil Beds is A. mastax which , unlike A. elongatus , is known from two specimens . The holotype and paratype are both included in the Thompson Rivers University , Kamloops collections as UCCIPRL @-@ 18 F @-@ 850 and UCCIPRL @-@ 18 F @-@ 929 respectively . The holotype specimen is a partial queen which is incomplete , with one forewing and the head fairly preserved , and the other isolated body portions indistinct . The paratype is a mostly complete queen missing parts of her gaster , legs and hind wings . Overall the species is estimated to have been 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 inches ) long and has a forewing length of 13 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 5 inches ) . A. mastax is distinguishable from the other species in Avitomyrmex by its smaller mandible size , being less than half the length of the head with eight teeth , and additionally the shape of the head capsule . The specimen also has large compound eyes . The specific epithet mastax is from the Greek " mastax " meaning " jaw " or " mandible " , a reference to the small size of the mandibles compared to the other species of Avitomyrmex . 
 = = = A. systenus = = = 
 Of the three described species of Avitomyrmex found at the McAbee Fossil Beds , only A. systenus is known from worker caste specimens . The holotype is currently deposited in the Courtenay and District Museum paleontology collections as 2003 @.@ 2 @.@ 11 CDM 035 while the paratype , UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 989 , and an additional <unk> worker , UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 825 , which is tentatively assigned to the species are both deposited in Thompson Rivers University collections . Based on the mostly complete workers , mature specimens are estimated to have been 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 6 inches ) . Due to the size of adult workers they cannot be attributed to A. elongatus while the overall petiole , head capsule and mandible structure distinguish it from A. mastax . The eyes are large and one @-@ third the length of the head , and the legs are indistinctly preserved but long . The pronotum is almost flat , and the gaster is narrow . The shape of the head was the basis for Archibald , Cover and Moreau choosing the specific epithet systenus , which is from the Greek word <unk> meaning " tapering to a point " . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Archibald and colleagues suggested that the life habits of Avitomyrmex species may have been similar to that of extant Myrmeciinae ants . These ants may have nested in the soil or in trees , possibly being an arboreal nesting genus . This may be the case as one Myrmecia species is known to inhabit trees exclusively . Workers most likely preyed on arthropods , killing them with their sting and fed on nectar ; workers would have been found foraging onto trees or low vegetation without leaving any pheromone trails to food sources or recruit nestmates , as they were solitary foragers . Avitomyrmex ants most likely used their large eyes to locate prey and for navigational purposes . 
 = Hurricane Nora ( 2003 ) = 
 Hurricane Nora was the final of five tropical cyclones to make landfall in the 2003 Pacific hurricane season . The fourteenth named storm and fifth hurricane of the season , Nora developed on October 1 from a tropical wave . It slowly intensified as it moved northwestward , intensifying into a hurricane on October 4 . That day , Nora rapidly intensified to its peak of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , but the larger Hurricane Olaf to its east prevented further strengthening . An approaching trough turned the rapidly weakening system to the east toward Mexico . By October 7 , it was downgraded to a tropical depression . Although it no longer met the criteria for being a tropical cyclone , the National Hurricane Center continued issuing advisories due to the cyclone 's proximity with land . Nora unexpectedly redeveloped an area of thunderstorms and moved ashore near Mazatlán , Sinaloa on October 9 before dissipating . The depression dropped locally heavy rainfall in western Mexico , but there were no reports of damage . Later , the remnants combined with Olaf and an upper @-@ level low to produce flooding and a tornado in central Texas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Nora were from a tropical wave that exited the west coast of Africa on September 13 . It moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without developing . The wave axis crossed Central America on September 25 , with its convection tracking westward along the southern Mexican coastline . On September 29 , the system became better organized when it reached a position about 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of Acapulco . Although upper @-@ level wind shear was only marginally favorable , the National Hurricane Center first noted the potential for tropical cyclogenesis on September 30 over the subsequent few days . This verified on October 1 after the thunderstorms organized enough for the system to be classified as Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. At the time , it was located about 600 mi ( 975 km ) south of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . 
 Upon developing , the depression had a well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation , and with a ridge to the north , it moved south of due west . Conditions favored further development , including low wind shear and warm water temperatures . The convection gradually organized , and the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Nora early on October 2 . Its motion briefly became nearly stationary as Nora rounded the furthest extent of the ridge , although a steady motion to the northwest began on October 3 . That day , an eye feature developed in the center of the deep convection , and Nora attained hurricane status early on October 4 . Steady intensification continued to winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) by later that day , and favorable conditions were expected to allow the hurricane to reach major hurricane status , or winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . However , Nora did not intensify further , due to unfavorable increased wind shear from the developing Tropical Storm Olaf to its east . 
 By October 5 , the eye of Nora was no longer evident on satellite imagery , which indicated the beginning of a weakening trend . However , a Special Sensor Microwave / Imager observed a small eye that was open to the northwest . The convection became ragged , and on October 6 the winds decreased below hurricane @-@ force . Around the same time , a strong approaching mid @-@ level trough caused Nora to slow and turn to the east . Continued wind shear and the presence of dry air stripped the thunderstorms away from the center , and by October 7 all of the deep convection had dissipated . As a result , it was downgraded to a tropical depression , and Nora weakened to the extent that it barely met the criteria for being a tropical cyclone . The NHC maintained advisories due to the circulation 's proximity to western Mexico , as well as the unlikely potential for redeveloping thunderstorms due to its movement over warmer waters . Nora accelerated to the east @-@ northeast and later to the northeast due to the advancing trough . As it approached western Mexico , an area of curved convection unexpectedly developed over the center . Without additional redevelopment , the poorly defined circulation of Nora made landfall near Mazatlán , Sinaloa early on October 9 . It dissipated shortly thereafter over the high terrain of western Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Nora was expected to move ashore as a tropical depression , the National Hurricane Center did not issue any tropical storm warnings or watches . However , the Servicio Meteorológico Nacional , or Mexico 's National Weather Service , issued 46 advisories and 16 caution bulletins on the storm . As the storm moved parallel to the Mexican coastline , it produced high waves . Later , when Nora moved ashore in Sinaloa , it dropped locally heavy rainfall . The peak 24 ‑ hour total was 3 @.@ 75 in ( 95 @.@ 3 mm ) in Mazatlán , Sinaloa , recorded on October 8 . The rainfall maximum for the previous day was 3 @.@ 43 in ( 87 @.@ 0 mm ) in Gaviotas , Nayarit . Rainfall from Nora extended was also reported along the Baja California peninsula , and also extended from the coastline northward to near Texas . Its impact was minimal in western Mexico , and there were no reports of damage , deaths , or injuries . 
 Moisture from the remnants of Nora and Olaf interacted with an upper @-@ level low to produce heavy rainfall across Texas , producing flooding near Waco that forced a family to evacuate in McGregor . The floodwaters closed portions of Interstate 35 , U.S. Route 84 , and Texas State Highway 36 . The system also spawned a tornado in Sugar Land that damaged four buildings , including a school . 
 Nora was the final Pacific storm of the season to strike Mexico . The others were hurricanes Ignacio and Marty , and tropical storms Carlos and Olaf . 
 = Clan MacAulay = 
 Clan MacAulay , also spelt Macaulay or Macauley is a Scottish clan . The clan was historically centred on the lands of Ardincaple , which are today consumed by the little village of Rhu and burgh of Helensburgh in Argyll and Bute . The MacAulays of Ardincaple were located mainly in the traditional county of Dunbartonshire , which straddles the " Highland Line " between the Scottish Highlands and Lowlands . Clan MacAulay has been considered a " Highland clan " by writers and has been linked by various historians to the original Earls of Lennox and in later times to Clan Gregor . The MacAulays of Ardincaple , like Clan Gregor and several other clans , have traditionally been considered one of the seven clans which make up Siol Alpin . This group of clans were said to have claimed descent from Cináed mac Ailpín , King of the Picts , from whom later kings of Scotland traced their descent . The chiefs of Clan MacAulay were styled Laird of Ardincaple . 
 Clan MacAulay dates , with certainty , to the 16th century . The clan was engaged in several feuds with neighbouring clans . However , the clan 's fortunes declined in the 17th and 18th centuries . After the decline and fall of Clan MacAulay , which ended with the death of Aulay MacAulay in the mid @-@ 18th century , the clan became dormant . With the revival of interest in Scottish clans in the 20th century a movement was organised to revive Clan MacAulay . The modern organisation strove to unite the three unrelated groups of MacAulays , and all who bore the surname MacAulay , under one clan and chief . In 2002 , the clan appointed a potential chief of Clan MacAulay , but his petition for formal recognition was denied by the Lord Lyon King of Arms . The Lord Lyon ruled that the petitioner did not meet two criteria : anyone without a blood link to a past chief must be Clan Commander for ten years before being considered for recognition , and that the chiefship in question was of the MacAulays of Ardincaple and not of all MacAulays . To date , Clan MacAulay does not have a chief recognised by the Lord Lyon King of Arms , and therefore can be considered an <unk> clan . 
 There are many different families of MacAulays from both Ireland and Scotland which are not related and are considered to have no historical connection with Clan MacAulay . These include the Scottish Macaulays from the Western Isles ( the Macaulays of Lewis and possibly the MacAulays of Uist ) . Irish families of MacAulays with no connection with Clan MacAulay are the McAuleys of Co Offaly and Co Westmeath , the McAuleys in Ulster ( Co Fermanagh ) , and the ' MacAuleys of the Glens ' ( Co Antrim ) . The ' MacAuleys of the Glens ' , however , have been thought to have been originally Scottish . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Clan MacAulay , or the family of the MacAulays of Ardincaple , is first recorded within the lands of Dunbartonshire , which was controlled in the Middle Ages by the mormaers ( earls ) of Lennox . Within the kindred of the mormaers , forms of the Gaelic given name Amhlaíbh were used by family members ; and today the patronymic form of this name can be Anglicised as MacAulay . One such Amhlaíbh was a younger son of <unk> II , Earl of Lennox . This Amhlaíbh was the subject of a lay attributed to the poet <unk> Albanach Ó <unk> in which <unk> 's Lennox property was named Ard nan Each . The Gaelic <unk> means " high " ; and each means " horse " . Amhlaíbh and his descendants were the lords of Faslane and an extensive tract of land along the Gare Loch . The seat of Clan MacAulay was located at Ardincaple , which is situated on the shores of the Gare Loch in what is now the village of Rhu and town of Helensburgh . The place @-@ name Ardincaple has been stated to be derived the Gaelic form of " cape of the horses " and " height of the horses " . According to William Charles Maughan writing at the end of the 19th century , the Ardincaple estate had two main residences , one at Ardincaple , the other to the north at Faslane . Maughan stated that the site of the castle of Faslane could be distinguished , at the time of his writing , " by a small mound near the murmuring burn which flows into the bay " . Geoffrey Stell 's census of mottes in Scotland lists only four in Dunbartonshire ; one of which is Faslane ( grid reference <unk> ) , another listed as a " possible " is at Shandon ( grid reference <unk> ) ; Shandon being located between site of Faslane and the town of Helensburgh . Maughan wrote that at Faslane there stood an oak tree at place called in Scottish Gaelic <unk> @-@ na @-@ <unk> ( English : " knoll of the cock " ) . According to legend , when a cock crowed beneath the branches of the old oak upon the knoll , a member of Clan MacAulay was about to die . 
 The actual ancestry of Clan MacAulay is uncertain . The recorded chiefs of the clan were the lairds of Ardincaple and styled with the territorial designation : of Ardincaple . The early 18th century Scottish heraldist Alexander Nisbet claimed the clan descended from Morice de <unk> who was listed in the Ragman Rolls as swearing homage to Edward I in 1296 . According to Nisbet , " Maurice de <unk> is the ancestor of the Lairds of Ardincaple in Dumbartonshire , who were designed <unk> of that Ilk , till King James V. ' s time , that Alexander , then the head of the family , took a fancy and called himself Alexander Macaulay of Ardincaple , from a predecessor of his own of the name of Aulay , to humour a <unk> designation , as being more agreeable to the head of a clan than the designation of Ardincaple of that Ilk " . Later the 18th century antiquary ( and chief of Clan MacFarlane ) Walter MacFarlane stated that the MacAulays of Ardincaple derived their name from an Aulay MacAulay of that Ilk , who lived during the reign of James III ( reigned 1440 – 1488 ) . 
 According to George Fraser Black , the territorial designation Ardincaple did not become an ordinary surname until the 15th century . Several men with the surname Ardincaple or styled of Ardincaple are recorded in the Mediaeval Scottish records . Johannes de <unk> was a charter witness in Lennox in about 1364 . Arthur de <unk> witnessed a charter by Donnchadh , Earl of Lennox in about 1390 . In 1489 , a remission was granted to Robert <unk> for his part in the holding of Dumbarton Castle against the king of Scots . Later in 1513 , Aulay <unk> of that Ilk is mentioned in records . Later in 1529 , an escheat of goods of <unk> <unk> of that Ilk is recorded . According to the 19th @-@ century historian Joseph Irving , an early laird of Ardincaple was Alexander de Ardincaple , who in 1473 , served on the inquest of the Earl of Menteith . Another laird , Aulay de Ardincaple , was invested on a precept from John Stewart , 3rd Earl of Lennox , in the lands of Faslane adjoining Ardincaple in 1518 . Aulay and his wife , Katherine Cunningham , had sasine of the lands of Ardincaple in 1525 . Several historians have stated that the first Laird of Ardincaple to take the surname MacAulay was Alexander de Ardincaple , son of this Aulay de Ardincaple . Alexander lived during the reign of James V ( reigned 1513 – 1542 ) . There is record in 1536 of an <unk> <unk> of <unk> ; another <unk> <unk> was clerk of the watch of Queen Mary 's guard in 1566 . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 15th and 15th centuries in west Dumbartonshire , the clans MacFarlane , MacAulay , and Colquhoun raided and plundered each other 's lands and combined to sweep the lowlands of its flocks and herds . Other clans — among them the MacGregors , Campbells , Camerons and Buchanans — invaded the district later . In July 1567 , after Mary , Queen of Scots , was forced to abdicate the Scottish throne in favour of her infant son , James , Walter MacAulay of Ardincaple was one of the <unk> of the bond to protect the young prince . " The Laird of M <unk> of Ardincaple " appears in the General Band of 1587 as a principal vassal of the Duke of Lennox . In 1594 , the " M <unk> " appear in the Roll of Broken Clans . 
 = = = Feud with clans Buchanan and Galbraith = = = 
 During the 16th century members of Clan MacAulay were in conflict with members of clans Buchanan and Galbraith . On 1 August 1590 , Walter MacAulay , son of Allan MacAulay of Durling , was killed on the " Highway and street of Dunbarton " in a clash against a contingent of Buchanans , who were led by Thomas Buchanan , Sheriff Depute of Dunbarton . Also wounded in the encounter was Walter 's brother , Duncan MacAulay , who was wounded through the " <unk> pan " ( brain ) ; John <unk> MacGregor , who was wounded behind his shoulder blade so that " his lights and entrails might be seen " ( lungs ) ; James Colquhoun , who was wounded in the " <unk> " ( stomach ) ; and others including a MacAulay , Miller , and MacGibbon . When a complaint was registered on 29 September , the defenders failed to appear and were " put to the horn " ( denounced as rebels ) . On 6 October 1590 , Thomas Buchanan of <unk> , John Buchanan , his son John Buchanan Burgess of Dunbarton , and others were formally charged in Edinburgh with the murder of Walter MacAulay . The accused were ordered to appear before the Justice at Edinburgh on 21 December 1590 . The case was then deferred to March and again the accused failed to appear . The following May saw the Bond of <unk> between MacAulay of Ardincaple and MacGregor of Glenstrae , in which both chiefs swore to assist each other , their " kin and friends in all their honest actions against whatsoever person or persons the Kings Majesty being only excepted " . 
 In spring of 1593 , Robert Galbraith , Laird of Culcreuch , purchased a Commission of Justiciary ( or a " Letter of Fire and Sword " used to legally attack and destroy another clan ) to pursue Clan Gregor and " their <unk> and <unk> " . The MacAulays and Colquhouns were suspicious of Galbraith 's real intentions and on 3 May 1593 , the chiefs of the two clans complained to the Privy Council that Galbraith of Culcreuch had only purchased the commission under counsel from George Buchanan , and that Galbraith had no intentions of actually harassing the MacGregors . It seemed more likely that the Galbraiths , allied with the Buchanans , would direct their vengeance against the MacAulays and Colquhouns under the guise of hunting and clearing Clan Gregor from the Lennox . To complicate matters , the Laird of Ardincaple had married the Laird of Culcreuch 's widowed mother against his consent and Galbraith had " <unk> vp <unk> , and <unk> his <unk> @-@ will to him with solempne <unk> of revenge " ( given up kindness , and denounced his evil will to MacAulay with solemn vows of revenge ) . Due to the influence of the Duke of Lennox , the Letter of Fire and Sword were taken from the Galbraiths and Buchanans . Ardincaple had however been sparing of the entire truth . No mention was made of the bond of manrent between him and the MacGregor chief . According to Ronald Williams , it is unlikely the Privy Council was aware of this bond between . Even so , the Privy Council required securities of Ardincaple not to assist Clan Gregor . 
 = = = Siol Alpin : MacGregors and MacAulays = = = 
 Around the end of the 16th century Clan Gregor were in constant disputes and were at times outlawed . In order to strengthen its position the clan proceeded to enter in alliances with clans who were reputed to share a common ancestry . One such alliance was concluded on 6 July 1571 between James Macgregor of that Ilk and <unk> Mackinnon of <unk> . Another such alliance was formalised twenty years later while the MacGregors were outlawed , on 27 May 1591 with Clan MacAulay . This formal agreement , known as a Bond of <unk> , was between Aulay MacAulay of Ardincaple and Alasdair MacGregor of Glenstrae . In the bond , Ardincaple acknowledged Glenstrae as his chief , and of being a cadet of the House of MacGregor , and therefore promised to pay the MacGregor chief his <unk> . The giving of <unk> , a tribute of cattle or the best eighth of a part of goods to a superior lord or chief , was a significant custom in Gaelic society . The contract between Ardincaple and Glenstrae gave the MacGregors some temporary relief from the Buchanans and Galbraiths . Prior to this contract , Ardincaple does not appear to have been involved with Clan Gregor in any way . According to Irving , even though the Ardincaple was at feud with the Buchanans it is unclear how such an alliance would benefit his own clan . Irving wrote that Ardincaple must have known that any connection with Clan Gregor " would end ( as it actually did ) in a manner most disastrous to all connected with the turbulent <unk> " . 
 According to the 19th @-@ century historian William Forbes Skene , the contract is evidence of an ancestral connection between clans Gregor and MacAulay . Within the bond , both Ardincaple and Glenstrae stated that they were offshoots of the same family : " Alexander M <unk> of <unk> on the ane part and <unk> M <unk> of <unk> on the other part understanding <unk> and our name to be M <unk> of auld and to be our just and <unk> surname " . Skene was of the opinion that the MacAulays did not descend from the Mediaeval earls of Lennox , and further concluded that Clan MacAulay was a member of Siol Alpin – a group of clans which could claim descent from Kenneth MacAlpin ( Cináed mac Ailpín ) whom Scots considered to be their first king . Later historians have shown that such bonds were used by the MacGregors to secure allegiances with weaker clans , and that such a bond was may have been forced upon the MacAulays by the more powerful MacGregors . 
 Following the Battle of Glen <unk> , between Clan Gregor and Clan Colquhoun in February 1603 , there was much public outcry against the rebellious MacGregors . By an Act of the Privy Council , on 3 April 1603 , it was made an offence to bear the name MacGregor , or to give and shelter to a MacGregor . The Earl of Argyll , who was responsible to the Privy Council for the actions of the MacGregors , was entrusted to bring the force of the law against this lawless clan . Being deeply suspicious of Ardincaple 's dealings with Glenstrae , one of Argyll 's first moves was to bring acts against Ardincaple . On 17 March 1603 , Aulay MacAulay of Ardincaple and his sureties were ordered to appear and answer for aiding , supplying , and <unk> with Alasdair MacGregor of Glenstrae and other MacGregors . He was also to answer for not " rising ye fray " and pursuing the outlawed clan Gregor in the Lennox . Ardincaple was accused of bringing the MacGregor " <unk> and <unk> " to the Colquhoun lands of Luss and for their part in stealing from the Colquhouns of Luss . Again the influence of the Duke of Lennox saved Ardincaple and his clan from the same fate as Glenstrae and his . On 7 April 1603 , James VI wrote from Berwick to the Justice General and his deputies , declaring Ardincaple to be innocent of the alleged crimes and that he was to accompany the king to England with the Duke of Lennox . By the time the King 's letter was received , Ardincaple had already left the Lennox district as part of the Duke of Lennox 's train , which accompanied James VI on his way to England to be declared King James I of England . The outlawed Glenstrae was finally apprehended by Argyll on 18 January 1604 after almost a year in <unk> and brought to Edinburgh to stand trial . The illiterate Glenstrae consented to give a preliminary statement which was titled a ' confession ' and convicted him out of his own mouth . Within his ' confession ' , Glenstrae accused Argyll of trying to persuade him to kill the chief of the MacAulays : " I Confess , before God , that he did all his <unk> diligence to <unk> me to slay and destroy the Laird <unk> , <unk> , for <unk> <unk> <unk> or <unk> that he <unk> do or gif me . The quhilk I did <unk> , in respect of my faithfull <unk> maid to <unk> of <unk> " . 
 = = = Argyll 's feud with Ardincaple = = = 
 Archibald Campbell , 7th Earl of Argyll pursued a violent feud with Aulay MacAulay of Ardincaple during the late 16th and early 17th century . Argyll 's lieutenants in the area were Duncan Campbell , Captain of Carrick and Neil Campbell of <unk> , who led raids into Ardincaple 's lands attempting to slay the MacAulay chief . The Campbells of Carrick were seated at Carrick Castle on the shores of Loch Goil ( about 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) northwest of Ardincaple ) . In 1598 , Duncan Campbell the Captain of Carrick , registered a bond of 300 merks for each of his men in Rosneath to keep from harming Ardincaple . At the same time , Robert Sempill of <unk> registered a bond of 2 @,@ 000 merks for Campbell of Carrick to not harm Ardincaple and his followers . The following year , Lennox legally evicted Donald Campbell of Drongie and several of his followers from the lands of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> along the banks of the Gare Loch . The Campbells of Drongie were close supporters of the Campbells of Carrick , and in retaliation a combined force of Campbells of Carrick and Drongie assembled at Rosneath ( on opposite shore of the Gare Loch from Ardincaple ) and laid waste to the duke 's new acquisitions . When the case was presented to the Privy Council on 17 May 1600 , both Campbell of Carrick and Campbell of Drongie were denounced as rebels . 
 On 25 November 1600 , evidence was brought forth to the Privy Council of an attempt on Ardincaple 's life on 24 September 1600 . The evidence pointed to the Captain of Carrick 's men coming at night to Ardincaple and attacking followers of the laird and killing one , Malcolm Galbraith . A second attempt Ardincaple 's life was carried out at night as he was staying at Nether Greenock . Ardincaple , Patrick <unk> ( one of Ardincaple 's servants ) , and Archibald <unk> were all shot in the encounter . Again the Privy Council denounced the Captain of Carrick and his men as rebels . At the end of November 1600 , the Captain of Carrick and 100 followers invaded the lands of Ardincaple armed with " <unk> , <unk> , bows , <unk> and <unk> " . The force hid in the woods of Ardincaple for one night , taking several prisoners before fleeing . In the morning , a rider making towards the house of Ardincaple was presumed to be Ardincaple himself and nearly killed , before he was identified as a Campbell and servitor to the Earl of Argyll . Carrick 's force , for fear of being pursed from men of the district , left the area after destroying houses , <unk> animals , and making off with livestock belonging to other tenants of the duke . In the process the Carrick men " <unk> the <unk> of John Dow McAula in <unk> and Patrik <unk> in <unk> " . For their actions , the participating Campbells were again denounced as rebels . 
 As stated before , Alasdair MacGregor of Glenstrae claimed in his confession that Argyll had attempted to convince him to slay Ardincaple . A record in The Treasurer 's Books , dated November 1602 , record one such instance : " Item , to Patrik M <unk> , <unk> , <unk> of <unk> , with Lettres to charge Ard Earle of Argyle to <unk> <unk> <unk> the <unk> , the <unk> day of December <unk> , to <unk> to sic things as <unk> <unk> at him , <unk> his lying at await for the Laird of <unk> , <unk> set <unk> to have slain him , <unk> li " . 
 = = = After 1600 = = = 
 After the episode at Glen <unk> between clans Gregor and Colquhoun in 1603 , western Dumbartonshire slowly became more " settled " or peaceful . The MacGregors ceased to exist as a clan and the resident clans of MacAulay , MacFarlane , and Buchanan became less powerful as their lands slowly passed into the hands of strangers . In 1614 , Angus Og MacDonald of Dunyvaig seized Dunyvaig Castle , which had been held by the Bishop of the Isles . Sir Aulay MacAulay of Ardincaple , with twenty of his men , accompanied the Bishop to Islay to demand the surrender of the castle . 
 On 26 March 1639 , Covenanters captured Dumbarton Castle to prevent it from being used as a Royalist base in the event of an invasion from Ireland . Once secured , the Earl of Argyll placed Walter MacAulay , Laird of Ardincaple , as keeper of the castle with a garrison of forty men . In 1648 , the parish of Row ( modern Rhu ) was created at the instigation of Aulay MacAulay , Laird of Ardincaple , who wanted to separate from the parish of Rosneath on the opposite side of the Gare Loch . He built the first parish kirk a year later and provided land for the kirk , minster 's manse , and garden . 
 The Glorious Revolution of 1688 saw the overthrow of the Roman Catholic , James II of England , in favour of the Protestant , William III of Orange . Though most of the English accepted William , Jacobites within Ireland and Scotland opposed him in favour of the deposed James . In 1689 , the Earl of Argyll 's offer to raise a regiment of 600 men in aid of William was accepted . Argyll 's regiment was to consist of 10 companies of about 60 men each . That same year , Archibald MacAulay of Ardincaple raised a company of fencibles in aid of William . William and his wife Mary were crowned King and Queen of Scotland as William II and Mary II on 5 November 1689 . In 1690 , " <unk> 's Company " within the Earl of Argyll 's Regiment was commanded by Captain Archibald MacAulay of <unk> , Lieutenant John Lindsay , and Ensign Robert MacAulay " <unk> " ( ancient ) . Later in 1694 , Archibald 's younger brother , Robert , is listed as Captain Robert MacAulay in the Earl of Argyll 's Regiment of Foot . Even after the revolution had succeeded there was still a fear of invasion in Dumbartonshire by adherents to the expelled Jacobite king . Local parishes were required to muster their men . An example of the size of one particular muster around 1693 is as follows : in <unk> , fifty men and ten guns ; in Gleneagles , seventy @-@ four men and three @-@ score swords ; in Luss , seventy men " with arms <unk> " ; in Cardross , one hundred men and thirty stand of arms ; and in Rhu , there were eighty @-@ men and fifty @-@ six firelocks . At first the individual parishes selected their own officers , but at general musters they were divided into two companies — one containing those above Leven , and those living below in the other . At a shire mustering at Kilpatrick in 1696 , MacAulay of Ardincaple was selected as Captain of the company above Leven , with Noble of Ferme , Lieutenant , and Dugald MacFarlane of <unk> , Ensign . 
 At the beginning of the 18th century , a group of MacAulays migrated to the former counties of Caithness and Sutherland . William Buchanan of <unk> 's 18th @-@ century account of the surname MacAulay stated that a group of MacAulays in Caithness claimed to descend from the MacAulays of Ardincaple . 
 = = = = In Ireland = = = = 
 During the early 17th century , Clan MacAulay was involved in the Plantation of Ulster , as James VI began colonising regions of Ireland with English and Scottish settlers . Several MacAulays were transplanted from Scotland to Ulster during this era . One such region was the precinct of <unk> ( within the barony of <unk> , in Co Donegal ) which comprised 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 49 km2 ; 19 sq mi ) . In 1610 , Ludovic Stewart , 2nd Duke of Lennox was allotted 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 12 km2 ; 4 @.@ 7 sq mi ) of land within the precinct . There were eight other allotments ; one of which was of 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ; 1 @.@ 6 sq mi ) to Alexander MacAulay of Durling , gentleman . The king appointed various commissioners to visit the landlords to whom the allotments were made in order to take account of their progress . In July 1611 , on such inspection was made in the precinct of <unk> . The report stated of the duke 's allotment : " Duke of Lennox , chief undertaker of 2000 acres . Sir <unk> Aula , Knight , his agent , resident , with some British families ; no preparation for building , save some timber trees felled and squared " . For the allotment to Alexander MacAulay of Durling , the report stated : " Alexander McAula of <unk> ; 1000 acres ; appeared not , nothing done " . In 1619 , Nicholas <unk> surveyed the undertakers and recorded of the Duke of Lennox 's portion : " 3000 acres , Duke of Lennox : a very strong castle , built of lime and stone , but no freeholders . The well inhabited and full of people " . For the MacAulay portion the report stated : " 1000 acres , Alexander McAula : stone house and bawn ; 2 freeholders , 9 lessees ; able to produce 30 men with arms " . Later , Alexander MacAulay of Durling , also known as ' Alexander MacAulay , alias Stewart ' , sold his allotment to Alexander Stewart . According to Hill , Alexander Stewart was the ancestor of the Stewart Marquesses of Londonderry . Alexander MacAulay of Durling also succeeded Sir Aulay Macaulay as Laird of Ardincaple and chief of Clan MacAulay . 
 A branch of the MacAulays of Ardincaple settled in Co Antrim , with the leading member of the family owning the Glenarm estate for some time until it passed to the MacDougalls in 1758 . 
 = = = Fall of the clan and loss of Ardincaple = = = 
 The power of Clan MacAulay and the fortune of the Lairds of Ardincaple diminished from the 17th century into the 18th century . Successive lairds were forced to divide and sell , piece by piece , the lands once governed by the clan . As the laird 's resources dried up , their lands fell into decay , and the once expansive lands of Ardincaple shrank to only a few farms . 
 The last Macaulays seem to have been a perfect type of the true old Celtic school of men who thought much of their <unk> , of their old connection with Clan Gregor , and of the retainers whom they could send out to fight or <unk> in alliance with them , but who thought nothing of the acres under their own power which could be made to bear the fruits of industry and of peace . 
 By the early 1750s , even the roof of Ardincaple Castle , seat of the clan chief , had fallen in . The overall condition of the castle had deteriorated to such an extent that the next laird was forced to abandon it and live in nearby <unk> . The bulk of the Ardincaple estate ultimately passed into the hands of John Campbell , 4th Duke of Argyll . The last chief of the MacAulays , Aulay MacAulay , died at High <unk> ( now encompassed by the tiny village of Rhu ) landless and without an heir to succeed as chief in about 1767 . In 1794 , Lord Frederick Campbell ( brother of John , 5th Duke of Argyll ) supervised the draining of the marsh and bog @-@ ridden former lands of the Lairds of Ardincaple . The poor state of the lands of Ardincaple before that year is illustrated in the statement by George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll : that much of the land could not bear the weight of a cow , and local men of the time remembered when horses would be lost in the <unk> prevalent in the area . 
 = = = Modern era : clan associations = = = 
 Since the death of the last chief , in the 18th century , the MacAulays of Ardincaple have ceased to exist as a clan . There is currently no clan chief , and no member of the clan has been granted the undifferenced arms of the MacAulays of Ardincaple . However , with a revival of Scottish interest in the 20th century several MacAulays unsuccessfully attempted to prove a genealogical link to the last chief , and a movement was organised to revive the clan . In 1997 Iain McMillian MacAulay was made interim leader , or clan commander . Later in 1998 , during its first assembly , the organisation 's objectives were determined : to unite three unrelated groups of MacAulays under one chief – Clan MacAulay ( the MacAulays of Ardincaple ) , the Macaulays of Lewis , and the Macaulays of Wester Ross ; this new chief would then , in effect , be chief of all MacAulays . In 1999 MacAulay intended to petition the Lord Lyon King of Arms to be recognised as chief but was challenged by Iain Davidson MacAulay , originally a native of Helensburgh who claimed a direct bloodline to the chiefs of the clan . 
 In 2001 , an ad hoc derbhfine took place at Tulloch Castle , Dingwall in Easter Ross with the intention of nominating a person to petition Lyon Court to become a recognised clan chief . Prior to the derbhfine Ross Herald wrote to six armigers and ten landowners supplied by the Clan MacAulay Association , who would be involved in the voting . The derbhfine , which was supervised by Ross Herald , took place in front of 50 clan members , and the voting was carried out by only 11 members . The derbhfine ruled that Iain McMillan MacAulay , then an 80 @-@ year @-@ old armiger , should lead the clan . After being nominated as leader , MacAulay then petitioned the Lord Lyon King of Arms for the right to receive the undifferenced arms of the last chief of Clan MacAulay , legally making him clan chief . Later in 2002 , the Robin Blair , the Lord Lyon King of Arms rejected MacAulay 's petition . He ruled that a petitioner without a genealogical link to a past chief would have to rule as Commander of the Clan for ten years before being considered for recognition as a chief . Following this , The Scotsman reported that the reasoning behind his ruling was that recognising MacAulay as chief would discourage any further research into finding a blood link to the chiefs of the clan . And that such research was unnecessary . The Lord Lyon also stated , that with no historical evidence linking the Macaulays of Lewis and Clan MacAulay ( the MacAulays of Ardincaple ) , " there does not seem to be any firm basis for considering the present Petition other than in the context of the Ardincaple MacAulays alone . " Later in 2002 , clan members then decided on a democratic process to select a clan chief . It was decided that a potential chief would have to be elected by all clan members for a duration of five years at a time , before being re @-@ elected again . At the time it was also debated over whether a potential chief should have to be a resident in Scotland , however a decision on this could not be agreed upon . Following Iain McMillan MacAulay 's death in 2003 his son , <unk> Iain MacAulay , was elected by members as chief . 
 According to the website of the " Clan MacAulay Association in Scotland " , there was a " clan gathering " held in Edinburgh during the Homecoming Scotland 2009 festivities , which took place from 25 – 26 July 2009 . On 7 August 2011 , the Clan MacAulay Association elected Hector MacAulay as " Chief of the Clan MacAulay Association " , at the association 's AGM . A " Clan MacAulay International Gathering " took place in August 2011 , in <unk> , County Antrim , Northern Ireland . The event was the first such gathering outwith Scotland . 
 The Clan Gathering in Crieff was held in 2013 . The next International Clan Gathering of the Clan MacAulay will be in Oban in August 2015 . It expected that there will be around a hundred MacAulays descending in Oban for the weekend of 14 and 15 August . 
 = = Unrelated Irish MacAuleys = = 
 Today some of the McAuleys ( and other various spellings of the name ) living in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland descend from Clan MacAulay ( of Ardincaple ) . However , there are several different clans or septs of native Irish which bear exactly the same and similar names that are unrelated and have no connection at all with Clan MacAulay ( of Ardincaple ) . 
 The Mac <unk> sept originating from lands in Co Offaly and Co Westmeath derive its name from the Old Irish name <unk> ( just as Clan MacAulay ) . The sept is considered to be of native Irish origin , descending from Niall of the Nine Hostages . The chiefs of the sept are recorded in the Irish annals as ' chiefs of <unk> ' ; their lands were known in Elizabethan times as " <unk> Country " . 
 The Mac Amhlaoibh sept from Co Fermanagh in Ulster derive its name from Amhlaoibh , a Gaelic personal name derived from the Old Norse names <unk> and <unk> he sept traces its descent from Amlaíb ( <unk> ) , younger son of the first Maguire king of Fermanagh — Donn <unk> ( <unk> – 1302 ) . The family was one of the junior septs that dispossessed other non Maguire families in the area of the Maguire lordship . In consequence of their military actions the family left its mark on the area in the name of the barony of <unk> in Co Fermanagh . 
 The Mac Amhlaoibh sept of Co Cork are a branch of the <unk> . Today many members of the sept bear names like <unk> which is usually found within Co Cork and hardly ever found outside of Munster . The chiefs of the sept resided at Castle <unk> which was located near Newmarket , Co Cork . The territory of the sept was described in 1612 as " Clan <unk> " . 
 The ' MacAuleys of the Glens ' are thought to be of Scottish descent . Located in the Glens of Antrim , the MacAuleys were allies of the MacDonnells in the 16th century . The MacDonnells held parts of <unk> while the MacAuleys , <unk> , and <unk> occupied the northeast coast of Antrim . On the plain of Bun @-@ na @-@ <unk> , near <unk> , the MacDonnells ( led by Sorley Boy MacDonnell ) fought the MacQuillans . Before the battle , the MacQuillans appealed to the O 'Neills of Lower <unk> and to the MacAuleys and MacPhoils of the middle Glens of Antrim for assistance against the MacDonnells . The two small clans ( the MacAuleys and MacPhoils ) were two days late to the battle ; when they arrived , they were only spectators to a battle which was near its climax . Sorley Boy MacDonnell then rode out to the chief of the MacAuleys and persuaded him to join his ranks , as did the MacPhoils . Their combined force then drove the MacQuillans to the banks of the river Aura , where they were finally defeated and the chief of the MacQuillans slain in what is known as the Battle of Aura . Festivities lasted for several days after the battle and a cairn , called " <unk> Sorley Boy " , was raised on the mountain <unk> . 
 = = Clan profile = = 
 Etymology of the name : The clan has been thought by some people to descend from the family of the earls of Lennox . Within the family , the personal name Amhlaibh was given to several individuals . In the mid 20th century , George Fraser Black stated that the clan 's surname MacAulay ( and its numerous variations ) originated from the Gaelic patronymic name Mac <unk> ( meaning " son of <unk> / <unk> " ) . The Old Gaelic personal name <unk> / <unk> , pronounced almost like " Aulay " or " <unk> " , is of uncertain meaning . 
 Clan member 's crest badge : In most cases , crest badges are made up of a clan chief 's heraldic crest and heraldic motto . However , in the case of Clan MacAulay , no coat of arms of a chief of the clan has ever been matriculated by the Lord Lyon King of Arms , the head of the heraldic authority in Scotland . The crest badge appropriate for a clan member contains the crest : a boot couped at the ankle and <unk> a spur proper ; and the motto : dulce periculum ( translation from Latin : " danger is sweet " ) . In 1608 , Sir Aulay MacAulay of Ardincaple was a Shire Commissioner for Dumbartonshire ( prior to the Acts of Union 1707 , a Shire Commissioner was the equivalent of the English office of Member of Parliament ) . Sir Aulay was one of two commissioners who were tasked with regulating the price of boots and shoes . 
 Clan badge : There have been two clan badges ( or plant badges ) attributed to Clan MacAulay : cranberry and scots pine . Both clans MacAulay and MacFarlane have been attributed with a badge of cranberry . Clan MacFarlane , also a west @-@ Dumbartonshire clan , claims a descent from Alwyn II , Earl of Lennox . The badge of scots pine has been attributed to all seven clans of Siol Alpin : Clan Grant , Clan Gregor , Clan MacAulay , Clan Macfie , Clan Mackinnon , Clan Macnab , and Clan MacQuarrie . 
 = = = Heraldry = = = 
 No coat of arms of a chief of the clan has ever been matriculated by the Lord Lyon King of Arms . Even so , in the 19th century , several heraldists listed different arms for the MacAulays of Ardincaple . The 19th century Ulster King of Arms , Sir John Bernard Burke listed the ( undated ) arms of " Macaulay ( Ardincaple , co . Argyll ) " , blazoned : gules two arrows in saltire argent surmounted of a fess chequy of the second and first between three buckles Or . The 19th century heraldist Robert Riddle Stodart published an undated facsimile of a different coat of arms of " Mc : aula of <unk> " ( which is also pictured above within the article ) . The seal of Aulay Macaulay of Ardincaple , in 1593 bore : a fess chequy and in chief a buckle . An early grant of arms , to a member of the clan and descendant of the MacAulays of Ardincaple , was that of George M <unk> , merchant of Edinburgh . His coat of arms was registered by Lyon Court in 1672 and is blazoned : gules , two arrows in saltire argent surmounted of a fess <unk> of the second and first between three buckles or , a bordure indented of the last ; crest : a boot couped at the ankle thereon a spur all proper ; motto : dulce periculum . The celebrated 19th @-@ century historian Thomas Babington Macaulay , 1st Baron Macaulay was granted ( English ) arms that alluded to those of the MacAulays of Ardincaple . This was despite his having no connection at all with Clan MacAulay ; he was descended from the unrelated Macaulays of Lewis . 
 MacAulay heraldry 
 According to Stodart , the fess <unk> and buckles , prominent in ' MacAulay heraldry ' , are derived from the arms of the Stewarts . The basic Stewart coat of arms is blazoned : Or , a fess chequy azure and argent . The buckles utilised in ' Stewart heraldry ' are ultimately derived from the canting arms of Alexander <unk> ( d. by 1300 ) , blazoned : gules , three buckles Or . <unk> 's daughter ( who in time became his heiress ) married Sir John Stewart ( d . 1298 ) , younger son of Alexander Stewart , 4th High Steward of Scotland . Together the couple founded the ' <unk> ' Stewart branch of the clan , and their descendants tended to utilise the ' <unk> ' buckles as their heraldic differencing . One of the couple 's sons , Sir Allan Stewart of Dreghorn ( d . 1333 ) , founded the Stewart of Darnley branch of the clan , which in time became the earls and dukes of Lennox . 
 Non @-@ MacAulay heraldry 
 = = = Tartan = = = 
 There have been several published tartans associated with the surname MacAulay . 
 = = = Associated families = = = 
 One of the ' official ' Clan Campbell septs is <unk> — a name derived from <unk> , meaning " son of little <unk> " . The Gaelic Peadar is a cognate of the English Peter ; and both are forms of the Greek Petros , meaning " stone " , " rock " . William Buchanan of <unk> 's 18th @-@ century account of the surname MacAulay states that the original member of this sept was a MacAulay . This sept dwelt in the lands of <unk> , on Loch Awe , in what is largely Clan Campbell territory . The earliest account of the sept is in 1439 , when <unk> M <unk> was granted confirmation for the lands of <unk> by Sir Duncan Campbell of <unk> . According to David Sellar , the MacArthurs of <unk> descend from the MacAulays of Ardincaple . <unk> is located quite close to the old MacAulay seat at Ardincaple , about 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 A fictional " M 'Aulay " clan appeared in Walter Scott 's 1819 novel , A Legend of Montrose , which was set during the James Graham , 5th Earl of Montrose 's Highland campaign against the Covenanters in 1644 . One of the main characters within the novel is Allan M 'Aulay , a member of Montrose 's army , and the younger brother to Angus , the clan 's chief . Within the novel , Allan M 'Aulay feuds with the <unk> , who are also known as the " children of the mist " . Historically , the term " children of the mist " referred to the line of MacGregors who were disinherited in the 16th century . The character of Allan M 'Aulay was based upon the historical James Stewart of <unk> , sometimes called the " Mad Major " . 
 = The Diamond Smugglers = 
 The Diamond Smugglers is a non @-@ fiction work by Ian Fleming that was first published in 1957 in the United Kingdom and in 1958 in the United States . The book is based on two weeks of interviews Fleming undertook with John Collard , a member of the International Diamond Security Organisation ( IDSO ) , which was headed by Sir Percy Sillitoe , the ex @-@ chief of MI5 who worked exclusively for the diamond company De Beers . 
 The IDSO was formed by Sillitoe to combat the smuggling of diamonds from Africa , where , it was estimated , £ 10 million ( £ 217 @,@ 431 @,@ 365 in 2016 pounds ) worth of gems were being smuggled out of South Africa alone every year . The book expands upon articles Fleming wrote for The Sunday Times in 1957 . 
 Fleming was better known as the author of a series of books about his super @-@ spy creation , James Bond ; The Diamond Smugglers is one of two non @-@ fiction books he wrote . It was broadly well @-@ received , although some reviewers commented on the stories not being new . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The Diamond Smugglers is the account of Ian Fleming 's meeting with John Collard , a member of the International Diamond Security Organisation ( IDSO ) . The book takes the form of background narrative by Fleming of where the two men met , interspersed with the interview between Fleming and Collard , who is introduced under the pseudonym of " John Blaize " . 
 Collard relates how he was recruited into the IDSO by Sir Percy Sillitoe , the ex @-@ head of MI5 , under whom Collard had worked . The book goes on to look at the activities of the IDSO from the end of 1954 until the operation was closed down in April 1957 , when its job was complete . Collard explained that the IDSO was set up at the instigation of the Chairman of De Beers , Sir Philip Oppenheimer , after an Interpol report stated that £ 10 million of diamonds were being smuggled out of South Africa each year , as well as additional amounts from Sierra Leone , Portuguese West Africa , the Gold Coast and Tanganyika . 
 As well as providing a history of the IDSO 's operations , Collard relates a number of illustrative vignettes concerning the diamond smuggling cases he and the organisation dealt with . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fleming became interested in diamond smuggling after reading an article in The Sunday Times in 1954 concerning the Sierra Leone diamond industry . Philip Brownrigg , an old friend from Eton and a senior exec of De Beers , arranged for Fleming to visit the London Diamond Club to see diamonds being sorted and polished . In 1955 Brownrigg also introduced Fleming to Sir Percy Sillitoe , former head of MI5 , who was working for De Beers and investigating the illicit diamond trade through the International Diamond Security Organisation . Fleming met Sillitoe and used much of the research as background material for his fictional Bond novel , Diamonds Are Forever . 
 Fleming retained an interest in the subject and when Sillitoe suggested to the editor of The Sunday Times , Denis Hamilton , that the paper may want to write a story on the International Diamond Security Organisation , Hamilton offered the story to Fleming . Sillitoe also offered his deputy , retired MI5 officer John Collard , as liaison for Fleming to interview . During World War II , Collard had assisted in the planning of Operation Overlord as part of <unk> and had joined MI5 under Sillitoe at the war 's end . Whilst in MI5 he played a major role in the capture and conviction of the atomic spy Klaus Fuchs , before Sillitoe had approached him in 1954 to work for the International Diamond Security Organisation . 
 Fleming and Collard met in Tangiers on 13 April 1957 ; Fleming considered Collard to be a " reluctant hero , like all Britain 's best secret agents " . The pair spent two weeks discussing the issue of diamond smuggling , with Collard explaining what happened in South Africa and Sierra Leone . Fleming would then dictate an average of 5 @,@ 000 words a day to a secretary . 
 When the drafts of the books were shown to De Beers they objected to a number of areas and threatened an injunction against Fleming and The Sunday Times , which resulted in much material being removed . The Sunday Times serialised the book over six weeks , starting on 15 September 1957 and finishing on 20 October 1957 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Diamond Smugglers was published in the UK in November 1957 , by Jonathan Cape , was 160 pages long and cost 12 shillings 6d . The book was published in the US on 13 May 1958 , by Macmillan and cost $ 3 @.@ 50 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The book received largely positive reviews . Michael Crampton , writing for The Sunday Times considered it an " exciting and richly fascinating account " and thought Fleming authored a book that " ringing true as fact , is at the same time as highly entertaining as any fiction . " The Times Literary Supplement obtained the services of the Earl of Cardigan to review the book . He noted that " the book is put together with a skill one would expect from Mr. Fleming " , which leads to something that is " very entertaining reading " . 
 Reviewing for The Observer , Anthony Sampson thought the book had " sparkle " , adding that " it is often difficult to remember that we are not listening to his old hero Mr. James Bond . " Sampson noted that the book included " several yarns which are worthy of the best spy @-@ stories " . The reviewer for The Economist enjoyed the book , but considered that while many of the stories " make good reading ... they are not new " . For The New York Times , John Barkham thought that Fleming 's foray into non @-@ fiction produced " mixed results " . Although he found the subject interesting , the basis in interview resulted in a " choppy book " that was " no more than an interim report " . 
 = = Attempted film adaptation = = 
 Shortly after publication , The Rank Group offered £ 13 @,@ 500 ( £ 293 @,@ 532 in 2016 pounds ) for the film rights to the book , which Fleming accepted , telling them he would write a full story outline for an extra £ 1 @,@ 000 . Several contemporary newspaper reports referred to the project as " The Diamond Spy " . British producer George Willoughby subsequently obtained the rights for the book from Rank and tried to make a film with the actor Richard Todd , eventually commissioning a screenplay from Australian writer Jon Cleary , who finished a script in October 1964 that remained faithful in spirit to Fleming 's book while also featuring elements familiar from the James Bond films . Kingsley Amis was also hired as a story consultant ; in a letter to author Theo Richmond on 20 December 1965 Amis wrote he was having ' a horrible time ' of writing an outline for Willoughby . W.H. " Bill " <unk> , co @-@ author of the screenplay for The Ipcress File , was also hired to work on the script . At one point , film director John Boorman was involved . Despite interest from Anglo @-@ Amalgamated Film Distributors and Anglo Embassy Productions in early 1966 , the project was shelved later that year . 
 = The Boat Race 1951 = 
 The 97th Boat Race took place on 24 and 26 March 1951 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . After Oxford sank in the first race held on 24 March , a re @-@ row was ordered by the umpire and took place two days later . It was the first time one of the crews had sunk during the race since the 1925 race . In a race umpired by former Oxford rower Gerald Ellison , Cambridge won the re @-@ row by twelve lengths in a time of 20 minutes 50 seconds , taking the overall record in the event to 53 – 43 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1950 race by a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 52 victories to Oxford 's 43 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by W. T. Arthur ( who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1950 race ) , Roy Meldrum ( a coach for Lady Margaret Boat Club ) , James Owen and H. R. N. Rickett ( who rowed three times between 1930 and 1932 ) . Oxford 's coaches were T. A. Brocklebank ( who had rowed for Cambridge three times between 1929 and 1931 and who had also coached the Light Blues in the 1934 race ) , J. L. Garton ( who had rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1938 and 1939 races ) and J. A. MacNabb ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1924 race ) . The race was umpired for the first time by former Oxford rower and Bishop of Willesden Gerald Ellison who had competed in the 1932 and 1933 races . 
 The Light Blues were considered to be firm favourites , yet the rowing correspondent for The Times suggested that " the outcome is anything but certain " . The rowing correspondent writing in The Manchester Guardian stated that " if Oxford to @-@ day can make the most of their superiority in weight and good fighting spirit the race is by no means lost to them " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 0 @.@ 5 lb ( 82 @.@ 6 kg ) , 9 pounds ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw four rowers return with Boat Race experience , including their number six Charles Lloyd and stroke David Jennens . Oxford 's crew contained three rowers who had taken part in the previous year 's race . Five of Cambridge rowers were studying at St John 's College , thus rowed for Lady Margaret Boat Club under the supervision of Meldrum . Three participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British . Oxford 's number two A. J. Smith was Australian while their cox G. Carver was American ; Cambridge 's Lloyd was also Australian . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Ellison started the race at 1 : 45 p.m , with a strong wind blowing against the tide , creating " sizeable waves " . Oxford had already taken onboard a considerable amount of water from their row to the <unk> and had opted for less physical protection against the inclement conditions than their opponents . Both crews started at a relatively low stroke rate to cater for the conditions , with Cambridge moderately out @-@ rating their opponents . The Light Blues took an early lead and appeared to be coping with the conditions better than Oxford , and were over a length ahead by the time they passed the London Rowing Club boathouse . The Dark Blues shipped more water until they became entirely submerged , and were rescued by spectators on the Oxford launch <unk> . Cambridge continued , and headed for the relative protection of the Surrey shore but were caught by the umpire 's boat and informed that the race was void . 
 It was the first sinking in the Boat Race since the 1925 race in which Oxford went down . Since the umpire declared a " no row " and because the reason for the sinking was deemed to be " equipment failure before the end of the Fulham Wall " , it was agreed between the umpire , the boat club presidents and the Port of London Authority that a re @-@ row be arranged which would take place on Easter Monday , 26 March 1951 . 
 After the two @-@ day delay , Oxford once again won the toss and once again elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Ellison started the re @-@ row at 2 : 30 p.m , in light rain and a " dead smooth " river . Cambridge made the better start and although Oxford quickly drew level , the Light Blues were clear by the end of Fulham Wall . Poor steering from cox Carver allowed Cambridge to pull further ahead , passing the Mile Post more than two lengths clear , and Harrods Furniture Depository three lengths up . Jennens pushed on and by the time Cambridge passed below Hammersmith Bridge , they were four and a half lengths clear and seven ahead by Chiswick Steps . By Barnes Bridge , the lead was 11 lengths . 
 Cambridge won by a margin of 12 lengths in a time of 20 minutes 50 seconds , securing their fifth consecutive victory . It was the largest winning margin since the 1900 race and the slowest winning time since the 1947 race . Crowden later noted that while he believed the initially sinking to be more down to " inferior <unk> rather than an accident " , he was certain that his crew would have failed to finish the course had they been allowed to continue . The rowing correspondent of The Manchester Guardian suggested that " the 1951 race , with anti @-@ climax following disaster , is best forgotten as quickly as may be . " The victory took the overall record in the event to 53 – 43 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = Bill O 'Reilly ( cricketer ) = 
 William Joseph " Bill " O 'Reilly ( 20 December 1905 – 6 October 1992 ) , often known as Tiger O 'Reilly , was an Australian cricketer , rated as one of the greatest bowlers in the history of the game . Following his retirement from playing , he became a well @-@ respected cricket writer and broadcaster . 
 O 'Reilly was one of the best spin bowlers to ever play cricket . He delivered the ball from a two @-@ fingered grip at close to medium pace with great accuracy , and could produce leg breaks , googlies , and top spinners , with no discernible change in his action . A tall man for a spinner ( around 188 cm , 6 ft 2 in ) , he whirled his arms to an unusual extent and had a low point of delivery that meant it was very difficult for the batsman to read the flight of the ball out of his hand . When O 'Reilly died , Sir Donald Bradman said that he was the greatest bowler he had ever faced or watched . In 1935 , Wisden wrote of him : " O 'Reilly was one of the best examples in modern cricket of what could be described as a ' hostile ' bowler . " In 1939 , Wisden reflected on Bill O 'Reilly 's successful 1938 Ashes tour of England : " He is emphatically one of the greatest bowlers of all time . " 
 As a batsman , O 'Reilly was a competent left @-@ hander , usually batting well down the order . O 'Reilly 's citation as a Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1935 said : " He had no pretensions to grace of style or any particular merit , but he could hit tremendously hard and was always a menace to tired bowlers . " 
 As well as his skill , O 'Reilly was also known for his competitiveness , and bowled with the aggression of a paceman . In a short biographical essay on O 'Reilly for the Barclays World of Cricket book , his contemporary , the England cricketer Ian Peebles , wrote that " any scoring @-@ stroke was greeted by a testy demand for the immediate return of the ball rather than a congratulatory word . Full well did he deserve his sobriquet of ' Tiger ' . " 
 = = Youth and early career = = 
 Of Irish descent , O 'Reilly 's paternal grandfather Peter emigrated from Co Cavan , Ulster in 1865 . Arriving in Sydney , he had been a policeman for four years in Ireland and continued in this line of work in New South Wales . After a period , he was sent to Deniliquin in the Riverina , where he settled and married another Irish immigrant Bridget O 'Donoghue from <unk> , Co . Galway . O 'Reilly 's father , Ernest , was a schoolteacher and moved around the areas surrounding the Murray River to study and teach . O 'Reilly 's mother Mina was of mixed Irish and Welsh descent , of a third generation family from Adelaide . O 'Reilly was born in the opal mining town of White Cliffs , New South Wales . Ernest had been appointed to open the first school in the town , and had helped to build the school and its furniture himself . Bill was the fourth child in the family , with two elder brothers and a sister . 
 O 'Reilly 's cricket skills were largely self @-@ taught ; his family moved from town to town whenever his father was posted to a different school , he had little opportunity to attend coaching . He learned to play with his brothers , playing with a " gum @-@ wood bat and a piece of banksia root chiselled down to make a ball . " He learned to bowl because his older brothers dominated the batting rights . His bowling action was far from the classic leg spin bowler 's run @-@ up and delivery , indeed , according to Wisden , " he was asked to make up the numbers in a Sydney junior match and , with a method that at first made everyone giggle , whipped out the opposition " . From a young age , O 'Reilly was a tall and gangly player . 
 In January 1908 , a month after Bill had turned two , the family moved to <unk> , after Ernest was appointed the headmaster . O 'Reilly said in his autobiography Tiger that the move played no vital part in his cricket education . The area had much more vegetation than the desolate White Cliffs , and an Irish Australian majority . O 'Reilly later described the period as the happiest of his life . There the children played tennis on a court on their property and took up cricket . During this time , O 'Reilly 's mother gave birth to another son and two more daughters . In 1917 , at the age of twelve , the family moved to the town of Wingello . Ernest made the decision because there were no high schools near <unk> and his older children were about to finish primary school . Nevertheless , there was no high school in Wingello where Ernest had been appointed headmaster , so O 'Reilly had to catch a train to Goulburn — 50 km away — to study at the local public secondary school , where his elder brother Tom had been awarded a scholarship . Wingello was a cricket town and " everyone was a cricket crank " according to O 'Reilly . It was here that he developed a passion for the game . O 'Reilly played in the town 's team and also won the regional tennis championships . O 'Reilly bowled with an action reminiscent of the windmill that his family erected in the town . However , school life was difficult , especially in the winter , as the Southern Tablelands were harsh and cold . The O 'Reilly children had to leave Wingello at 7 @.@ 45 am by rail and caught a slow goods train that delivered them home at 7 pm ; these vehicles did not provide protection against the weather , and the boys did not participate in any school sport as the only train home left after the end of classes . 
 In the early 1920s , O 'Reilly 's eldest brother Jack moved to Sydney . One afternoon , Jack watched spin bowler Arthur Mailey in the North Sydney practice nets and managed to describe the famous bowler 's ' Bosie ' action in a letter to Bill . O 'Reilly claims to have perfected the action of changing the spin from anticlockwise to clockwise without any discernible hand movement within a couple of days . O 'Reilly said that " The bosie became my most prized possession . I practised day in , day out " . Ernest decided that the train journeys and frozen limbs were too much for his son , so he sent Bill to St Patrick 's College , Goulburn as a boarder in 1921 , where he quickly showed his athletic flair by becoming a member of the school 's rugby league , tennis , athletics and cricket teams . He held a state record for the triple jump . At the same time , he also represented the town team . During his time at St Patrick 's , O 'Reilly developed his ruthless and parsimonious attitude towards bowling . After three years at the Irish Catholic school , funded by a scholarship , O 'Reilly completed his Leaving Certificate . 
 = = Sydney Teachers College = = 
 O 'Reilly won a scholarship to the Sydney Teachers College at Sydney University , to train as a schoolmaster . However , the financial assistance was only for two years and merely sufficient for O 'Reilly 's rent at Glebe Point . When he was in Sydney , O 'Reilly received an invitation to join an athletics club based on his performances in Goulburn , but was only able to join after the secretary Dick Corish waived his membership fee . Jumping 47 feet , he came second in a triple jump competition behind Nick Winter , who went on to win gold in the event at the 1924 Summer Olympics with a world record of 50 ft . O 'Reilly also placed second in a high jumping competition , clearing six feet . Corish was also a cricket administrator and invited O 'Reilly to play in a David Jones Second XI . Not knowing anything of his new recruit 's abilities , Corish did not allow O 'Reilly to bowl until he explicitly complained of only being allowed to field . O 'Reilly promptly finished off the opposition 's innings by removing the middle and lower order . After an encounter with journalist Johnny Moyes , who wrote glowingly about O 'Reilly 's skills . 
 While training as a teacher , O 'Reilly joined the Sydney University Regiment , a unit of the Militia Forces ( Army Reserve ) . He did not enjoy his time in the military , and along with most of his peers , regarded the commanding officer as inept . O 'Reilly was a non @-@ conformist who did not enjoy taking orders , and was unimpressed with the firearm drills , because the recruits were armed only with wooden sticks . However , he signed up for a second year to raise money for his education . Fed up with military routines he considered to be pointless , O 'Reilly volunteered to be a kitchen hand . 
 During a vacation , O 'Reilly caught the train from Sydney back to Wingello , which stopped at Bowral mid @-@ journey . There , Wingello were playing the host town in a cricket match , and O 'Reilly was persuaded to interrupt his journey to help his teammates . This match marked his first meeting with Bowral 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old Don Bradman , later to become his Test captain . O 'Reilly himself later described thus : 
 How was I to know that I was about to cross swords with the greatest cricketer that ever set foot on a cricket field ? ... by the close of play , 17 @-@ year @-@ old Don Bradman was 234 not out . The match resumed a week later , according to the local custom ... I bowled him first ball with a leg @-@ break which came from the leg stump to hit the off bail . Suddenly cricket was the best game in the whole wide world . 
 The wicket ended a period of suffering for O 'Reilly at the hands of Bradman , who had hit many fours and sixes from him . Bradman 's counter @-@ attack came after he had been dropped twice from O 'Reilly 's bowling before reaching 30 by Wingello 's captain Selby Jeffery . On the first occasion , the ball hit Jeffery in the chest while he was lighting his pipe ; soon after the skipper failed to see the ball " in a dense cloud of bluish smoke " as he puffed on his tobacco . The match was the start of a long on @-@ field relationship between the pair , who were to regard one another as the best in the world in their fields . O 'Reilly recalled that Bradman " knew what the game was all about " . 
 O 'Reilly did not enjoy his time at the overcrowded Sydney Teachers College ( STC ) , decrying the lack of practical training and the predominance of pedagogical theory . Regarding it as a waste of time , he happily accepted an offer of work experience from Major Cook @-@ Russell , the head of physical education at STC , to help at <unk> College instead of attending lectures . This angered Professor Alexander Mackie , the head of STC , whom both Cook @-@ Russell and O 'Reilly regarded as incompetent . 
 O 'Reilly 's initial posting after abandoning his training was to a government school in Erskineville , a inner @-@ city suburb in Sydney . At the time , the suburb was slum @-@ like and impoverished , with many unruly students . Many of the pupils were barely clothed and tested O 'Reilly 's ability to discipline . He said that he learned more in three months there under Principal Jeremiah Walsh than he would have in ten years at STC . Major Cook @-@ Russell then started a military cadet program in New South Wales schools ; O 'Reilly started such a program at Erskineville and his students won the statewide competition " in a canter " . O 'Reilly 's time at Erskineville also marked the start of work @-@ sport conflicts that hampered his cricket career . He joined North Sydney Cricket Club in 1926 – 27 and was selected at short notice to play in an invitational match under retired Australian captain Monty Noble at the Sydney Cricket Ground . As the education department required a week 's notice for leave requests , O 'Reilly declined , but was then ordered by the Chief Inspector of Schools to play after turning up at school on the morning of the match . Having taken six wickets , the match was then washed out , and O 'Reilly then had his pay deducted , much to his chagrin . 
 = = First @-@ class career = = 
 = = = Debut = = = 
 O 'Reilly was selected for the New South Wales practice squad based on his performance in a single match for North Sydney against Gordon in 1927 – 28 . In this game , he bowled Moyes — a state selector — with a medium paced leg break . At state training , O 'Reilly 's new teammate and Test leg spinner Arthur Mailey advised him to adopt a more conventional grip , but the 19th century Test bowler Charles Turner , known as " Terror Turner " and famous for his unorthodox ways , told O 'Reilly to back his self @-@ styled technique . O 'Reilly decided to listen to Turner . 
 After taking a total of 3 / 88 in a Second XI match against Victoria , O 'Reilly made his first @-@ class debut in the 1927 – 28 season , playing in three matches and taking seven wickets . In his first match , against New Zealand , O 'Reilly took 2 / 37 and 1 / 53 . He then played in what would be his only Sheffield Shield match for several years , going wicketless against Queensland , before returning figures of 4 / 35 against Tasmania . 
 = = = Rural teaching post and absence from cricket = = = 
 In 1928 , O 'Reilly was transferred by the New South Wales Education Department to Griffith , New South Wales , an outback town in the south @-@ west of the state , and he was unable to play first @-@ class cricket . Over the next three years he moved around the country , including postings to Rylstone and Kandos . Teaching duties may have cost O 'Reilly an early entry into Test cricket , as many young players were introduced in the 1928 – 29 home series against England following a large number of retirements of older players . In the meantime , O 'Reilly taught English to primary school children in Griffith , as well as singing — most of the pieces were Irish . At Rylstone he taught book @-@ keeping and business , and he was promoted to the high school at Kandos . During this time he supplemented his income by travelling from town to town , playing in one @-@ off cricket matches at the expense of the host 's club . He worked on his bosie during the period and regularly dismissed outclassed opposition batsmen . O 'Reilly regarded his cricketing isolation as highly beneficial as he regarded coaches to be ill @-@ advised and detrimental to development . 
 = = = Return to Sydney = = = 
 In late @-@ 1930 , O 'Reilly was posted to Kogarah Intermediate High School in the southern Sydney suburb of Kogarah , where he taught English , history , geography and business . O 'Reilly resumed playing for North Sydney , confident that with an improved bosie , he was much more potent than before his rural teaching stint . As he only arrived back in Sydney in the second half of the 1930 – 31 season , O 'Reilly was not considered for first @-@ class selection , but he took 29 wickets at 14 @.@ 72 for North Sydney . 
 In the 1931 – 32 season he emerged as the successor to Mailey in the New South Wales side . Within half a dozen games , he was one of several young players introduced to the Australian cricket team for the Fourth Test in a badly one @-@ sided series against South Africa . However , matters could have been rather different . O 'Reilly had broken into the team for New South Wales ' away matches against South Australia and Victoria while the Test players were on international duty . He totaled only 2 / 81 in the first match and was then informed that he would be dropped after the second fixture . O 'Reilly responded by bowling with a more attacking strategy , taking 5 / 22 and 2 / 112 . At the end of the match , New South Wales ' stand @-@ in captain , the leg spinning all rounder Reginald <unk> , declared O 'Reilly " the greatest bowler in the world " , and although few agreed with this claim , <unk> made himself unavailable for selection so that O 'Reilly would not be dropped . The reprieved leg spinner took a total of 8 / 204 in his next two matches , and while the figures were not overwhelming , they were enough to ensure a Test berth ; with an unassailable 3 – 0 lead , the selectors wanted to blood new players . 
 O 'Reilly took four wickets on his debut at the Adelaide Oval , two in each innings , supporting the senior leg @-@ spinner , Clarrie Grimmett , who took 14 wickets in the match and with Bradman scoring 299 not out , Australia won the match . O 'Reilly retained his place when the selectors kept the winning side for the final match of the Test series at the MCG . On a pitch made treacherous by rain , he did not bowl at all when South Africa were bowled out for just 36 in the first innings , and came on only towards the end of the second innings , when he took three wickets as the touring side subsided to 45 all out . He ended his first Test series with seven wickets at 24 @.@ 85 . In Sheffield Shield cricket in the 1931 – 32 season , O 'Reilly took 25 wickets at an average of 21 runs per wicket , highlighted by his maiden ten @-@ wicket haul , 5 / 68 and 5 / 59 in a home match against South Australia after the Tests were over as New South Wales took out the title . The following year he was more successful , taking 31 wickets at just 14 runs each . New South Wales won the competition in both seasons . 
 = = = Test regular = = = 
 O 'Reilly became a regular member of the Australian Test side in the 1932 – 33 season and he played in all five Tests against England in the infamous Bodyline series . The Australian selectors perceived that O 'Reilly would be their key bowler , and as he had never played against the English , omitted him from the early tour matches so that the tourists would not be able to decode his variations . As a result , he missed the Australian XI match against the Englishmen in Melbourne . In two Shield matches ahead of the Tests , he took 14 wickets , including a total of 9 / 66 in an innings win over Queensland . Although the national selectors had hidden him from the Englishmen , New South Wales declined to do so , and he played for his state a week ahead of the Tests . The hosts were bombarded with short @-@ pitched bowling and heavily beaten by an innings ; O 'Reilly took 4 / 86 as the visitors amassed 530 , dismissing leading English batsman Wally Hammond in the first of many battles between the pair . 
 The Tests started at the SCG and O 'Reilly was the team 's leading wicket @-@ taker for the series with 27 wickets . O 'Reilly not only took most wickets but he also bowled by some distance the most overs on either side , and he achieved a bowling economy of less than two runs from each of his 383 eight @-@ ball overs . In the first match , he took 3 / 117 from 67 overs as England amassed 530 and took a ten @-@ wicket victory . While his figures suggested that he bowled poorly — none of his wickets were those of batsmen — he beat the batsmen repeatedly . Between Tests , O 'Reilly took 11 wickets in two Shield matches . 
 In the Second Test in Melbourne , O 'Reilly opened the bowling as Australia opted to use only one pace bowler on a turning pitch . After Australia had made only 228 , O 'Reilly trapped Bob Wyatt leg before wicket ( lbw ) before bowling both the Nawab of Pataudi and Maurice Leyland to leave England at 4 / 98 . He later took two tail @-@ end wickets to end with 5 / 63 and secure Australia a first innings lead . Defending a target of 251 , O 'Reilly bowled the leading English opener Herbert Sutcliffe for 33 with a textbook perfect leg break that pitched on leg stump and clipped the top of the off stump . According to English team manager Plum Warner , Sutcliffe had never been defeated so comprehensively . O 'Reilly also removed Hammond on the way to ending with 5 / 66 and securing a 111 @-@ run win . The ten @-@ wicket haul was O 'Reilly 's first at Test level and the start of his strong career record over the English . However , Australia were not to taste further success . The controversial " fast leg theory " bowling used by England under newly appointed captain Douglas Jardine brought the touring team victories in the last three matches : Australia were handicapped not only by the tactics , but also by a lack of quality fast bowlers ; O 'Reilly also opened the bowling in both the Third and Fourth Tests in Adelaide and Brisbane respectively due to the selection of only one paceman . He was hindered by a decline in the form of Grimmett , who was dropped after the Third Test . O 'Reilly took 2 / 83 and 4 / 79 in Adelaide , collecting the wicket of Sutcliffe for single figures in the first innings of a match overshadowed by near @-@ riots after captain Bill Woodfull was struck in the heart . Australia were crushed by 338 runs , and lost the series in Brisbane . After O 'Reilly had taken 4 / 101 — including Sutcliffe and Jardine — in the first innings to keep Australia 's first innings deficit to 16 , the hosts collapsed to be 175 all out . O 'Reilly took one wicket in the second innings of a six @-@ wicket loss . The final Test in Sydney took a similar course ; O 'Reilly took 4 / 111 in the first innings including Sutcliffe and Jardine again , as the tourists took a 14 @-@ run lead before completing an eight @-@ wicket win after another Australian collapse . O 'Reilly was wicketless in the second innings and bowled 72 overs in total in the match . Reflecting on the performance of O 'Reilly in the series , R Mason said " here we saw the first flexing of that most menacing genius " . 
 In the 1933 – 34 season , with no Test series in Australia , O 'Reilly finished top of the Sheffield Shield bowling averages , taking 33 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 30 , but he had an inconsistent run . He started the season with 6 / 58 and 7 / 53 in an innings win over Queensland . After managing only three wickets across two consecutive testimonial matches , O 'Reilly went wicketless against South Australia . He was angered by the subsequent comments in newspapers that he had already passed his zenith , and returned to form against Victoria at the MCG . After claiming 3 / 92 in the first innings , he took 9 / 50 in the second innings . The nine wickets included six Test players , including leading batsmen Woodfull and Bill Ponsford . Given his heavy workload in the previous season , it was decided to keep O 'Reilly fresh for the subsequent tour of England , so he played in only two of the last three matches , with a reduced bowling load , taking eight wickets . During the season , Bradman moved to North Sydney from St George Cricket Club to captain the team , and it was the only summer in which O 'Reilly played alongside Bradman at grade level . The following year , O 'Reilly moved to St George , which was near Kogarah , as they were obliged to play for a team in their area of residence . 
 O 'Reilly was selected for the tour of England in 1934 , where he and Grimmett were the bowling stars as Australia regained the Ashes . They began by taking 19 of the 20 England wickets to fall in a comfortable victory in the First Test at Trent Bridge . O 'Reilly 's match figures were 11 wickets for 129 runs , and taking seven for 54 in his second innings was to produce his best Test figures . 
 England then won the Second Test at Lord 's , aided by the weather and Australia 's inability to force the issue by avoiding the follow on . The hosts batted first and made 440 , O 'Reilly removing Walters . In reply , Australia were 2 / 192 when rain struck on the second evening and the sun turned the pitch into a sticky wicket the next day . When O 'Reilly came in at 8 / 273 , only 17 runs were needed to avoid the follow on , but he misjudged the flight of a Hedley Verity delivery and was bowled , thinking the ball to be fuller than it was and missing a lofted drive . Australia fell six runs short and were forced to bat again when the pitch was at its worst . They were bowled out again on the same afternoon as Verity took 14 wickets in a day . O 'Reilly always regretted his dismissal , as he believed that if he had helped to avoid the follow on , he would have taken " six wickets without removing his waistcoat " and that Australia could have then chased the target in better conditions on the fourth day . 
 O 'Reilly shook English confidence in the Third Test , played on a placid surface at Old Trafford , by taking three wickets in four balls . Cyril Walters , who up to that point had been untroubled , failed to pick the bosie and thus inside edged the ball to short leg . Bob Wyatt came in and was clean bowled for a golden duck , bringing Hammond in to face the hat @-@ trick ball . The new batsman inside edged the ball past the stumps and through the legs of wicket @-@ keeper Bert Oldfield , but the next delivery clean bowled him . This left England at 3 / 72 , and O 'Reilly removed Sutcliffe soon after , but the batsmen settled down and the next wicket did not come until Hendren fell just before the end of the first day 's play . England were 5 / 355 and O 'Reilly had taken each wicket . The next day , the hosts ended on 9 / 627 , despite a relentless 59 overs from O 'Reilly , who ended with 7 / 189 and was the only bowler to challenge the batsmen . The high @-@ scoring match never looked likely to produce a result , except when Australia were in danger of being forced to follow on . They were 55 runs away from the follow on mark of 478 at the end of the third day with two wickets in hand , and O 'Reilly was on one . The next day Arthur Chipperfield fell with 24 runs still needed and O 'Reilly and Wall saw them to 491 before the latter fell . O 'Reilly ended with 30 not out after an innings in which he was lucky not to be caught off an edge multiple times . 
 A further draw at Headingley , with England saved by rain after a Bradman triple century , set up a match to decide the series at The Oval . As the series was still alive , the match was timeless , rather than the customary five @-@ day contest . After Australia made 701 , O 'Reilly took 2 / 93 to help dismiss the hosts for 321 . The visitors then made 327 to set a target of 708 for victory . O 'Reilly claimed 2 / 58 , including Hammond , while Grimmett , with a total of eight wickets , proved the decisive bowler as Australia regained The Ashes with victory by 562 runs , which , more than 70 years on , is still the second largest margin of victory in terms of runs in any Test match . 
 O 'Reilly was the leading Australian bowler of the tour , taking 28 Test wickets at an average of less than 25 , while Grimmett took 25 wickets at just under 27 runs apiece . Australia 's other Test bowlers took only 18 wickets between them . On the tour as a whole , O 'Reilly headed the tourists ' averages , with 109 wickets at 17 @.@ 04 , which meant that he also topped the averages for the whole English cricket season . In the matches against the English counties , he took 11 wickets in each of the games against Leicestershire and Glamorgan , and in the match against Somerset , after Hans Ebeling took the first wicket , he took the remaining nine for 38 runs , and that proved to be the best innings figures of his career . He was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1935 for his deeds on tour . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches in Scotland against the hosts , and O 'Reilly top @-@ scored in a match for Australia for the only time , in the first of the two games . Having been allowed to open the innings after complaining about his lack of opportunities , he top @-@ scored with 47 ahead of McCabe 's 16 . He found the tour to be a happy and healing experience after the acrimony of the Bodyline series . 
 O 'Reilly played little state cricket for New South Wales in 1934 – 35 ; at the time , his first child was born and he took time off to ponder his future employment . He played in only one Shield match , against arch @-@ rivals Victoria , and in the testimonial match for the retiring Woodfull and Ponsford . He took a total of eight wickets at 31 @.@ 37 in these matches . 
 O 'Reilly played no Shield cricket the following season , when he was selected for the Australian tour to South Africa . Although Bradman had been vice @-@ captain under Woodfull in 1934 , he did not travel to South Africa on grounds of ill health , but played a full domestic season despite this . The team was captained by Victor Richardson , and O 'Reilly publicly described it as the happiest tour he had been on — he was one of several players who did not get along with Bradman . 
 The tour was another triumph for the leg @-@ spin attack of O 'Reilly and Grimmett , but O 'Reilly was slightly overshadowed by his team @-@ mate in the Tests . With 44 wickets , Grimmett set a new record for the number of wickets by an Australian in a Test series , and he raised his Test career total to 216 wickets , beating the then world record of 189 by Englishman Sydney Barnes . O 'Reilly took 27 Test wickets at an average of just over 17 runs each : the other bowlers in the Australian team took 27 wickets between them . On the tour as a whole , O 'Reilly came out ahead of Grimmett , with 95 wickets against Grimmett 's 92 , and an average of 13 @.@ 56 against 14 @.@ 80 . O 'Reilly also revealed hitherto undiscovered batting talents , making an undefeated 56 in the Fourth Test in Johannesburg , and putting on 69 for the last wicket with Ernie McCormick . It was the only time in his first @-@ class cricket career that he passed 50 . During the tour , O 'Reilly developed his leg trap ; the opening batsmen Jack Fingleton and Bill Brown were used in these positions . 
 = = = Senior bowler = = = 
 With Bradman 's appointment as captain of the Australian team after the South African tour , Clarrie Grimmett was dropped , leaving O 'Reilly as the hub of the Australian bowling attack for the MCC Ashes tour in 1936 – 37 . 
 O 'Reilly was strongly aggrieved by the removal of his long @-@ time bowling partner , and maintained that it was an " unpardonable " error that heavily weakened Australia 's bowling attack . However , he remained vague about why he thought Grimmett had been removed , even though suspicion dogged Bradman . Grimmett continued to dominate the wicket @-@ taking on domestic cricket , while his replacements struggled in the international arena . 
 O 'Reilly responded by becoming the leading Australian wicket @-@ taker in the series taking 25 , with Bill Voce taking 26 for England . However , he almost failed to take to the field ; O 'Reilly and several players had threatened to withdraw after vice @-@ captain Stan McCabe 's wife was forbidden from sitting in the Members ' Stand in the First Test . The Australian Board of Control backed down , but it was the start of a tumultuous season . 
 O 'Reilly 's wickets were at increased cost — his average increased to 22 runs per wicket — and he took five wickets in an innings only once , in the First Test at the ' Gabba in Brisbane , which England won convincingly . The circumstances of the series determined O 'Reilly 's role : after England won the first two Tests , O 'Reilly appeared to have been given the job not just of bowling the opposition out , but also of containing them , and he was criticised in Wisden for defensive bowling . Wisden even went as far as to describe it as " leg theory " . If the intention was to stifle England batsman Wally Hammond in particular , then it appears to have worked , but O 'Reilly 's figures for the series suggest he was consistent but not always penetrative . Morris Sievers , from fewer matches , outperformed his average ; Leslie Fleetwood @-@ Smith , a slow left @-@ arm spinner , got more eye @-@ catching individual figures , including 10 wickets in the victory at Adelaide . Whatever the methods , they were successful : having lost the first two Tests , Australia proceeded to win the final three to retain The Ashes they had regained in England in 1934 , and O 'Reilly 's five for 51 and three for 58 were the best figures in the decisive Fifth Test in Melbourne . 
 In the 1937 – 38 season , O 'Reilly returned to more regular state cricket , and New South Wales duly won the Sheffield Shield for the first time in five seasons . He took 33 wickets at an average of just over 14 runs each , and against South Australia at Adelaide he repeated his feat against Somerset in 1934 , taking the last nine wickets of the first innings at a cost of 41 runs . This time , he followed up with five for 57 in the second innings . 
 = = = 1938 : Final tour of England = = = 
 O 'Reilly 's second and final Ashes tour to England as a player in 1938 again saw him as the most effective bowler in the team . His final record of 22 wickets at an average of 27 @.@ 72 in the four Tests — the Third Test was rained off without a ball being bowled — was marginally less than 1934 , and in all matches he took 104 wickets at 16 @.@ 59 . In its report of the tour , however , Wisden 's 1939 edition noted that " it was nothing short of remarkable that despite the moderate support accorded to him he bowled so consistently well and so effectively . " Again , O 'Reilly was often used defensively where there was no help from the wicket , but , Wisden added , " when ... the wicket gave him the least encouragement he robbed the greatest batsmen of initiative , and was most destructive " . 
 O 'Reilly took 3 / 164 on a batting paradise in the First Test at Trent Bridge as England scored 8 / 658 and forced Australia to follow on and hold on for a draw . In the Second Test at Lord 's O 'Reilly took 4 / 93 in the first innings and trapped Eddie Paynter for 99 to end a 222 @-@ run partnership with Hammond . In reply to England 's 494 , Australia were in danger of being forced to follow on ; O 'Reilly came in and made 42 , featuring in a partnership of 85 in only 46 minutes with Bill Brown that enabled Australia to save the match : having been dropped by Paynter , he hit Hedley Verity for consecutive sixes to take Australia past the follow @-@ on mark . Brown recalled " It was a nice day , and a nice wicket . O 'Reilly came in , and I told him I 'd take the quicks — Wellard and Farnes — and Tiger [ O 'Reilly ] took Verity . " Australia reached 422 and O 'Reilly took 2 / 53 in the second innings as the match petered into a draw . 
 In an otherwise high @-@ scoring series , O 'Reilly 's greatest triumph was in the low @-@ scoring Fourth Test at Headingley , where he exploited a difficult pitch to take five wickets in each innings as Australia secured the victory that enabled them to retain the Ashes . With the series level at 0 – 0 , England captain Hammond elected to bat first ; O 'Reilly 's 5 / 66 was largely responsible for ending England 's innings at 223 . He removed Hammond , who had top @-@ scored with 76 , Bill Edrich and Denis Compton , all bowled in quick succession . England were 1 / 73 on the third day , an overall lead of 54 , when O 'Reilly began a new spell after Bradman had switched his ends . Joe Hardstaff junior hooked him for four and the next ball was no @-@ balled by the umpire . O 'Reilly was reported to have become visibly enraged ; he bowled Hardstaff next ball and then removed Hammond for a golden duck . This precipitated an English collapse to 123 all out , and O 'Reilly ended with 5 / 56 and a total of 10 / 122 . O 'Reilly effort proved to be crucial as Australia scraped home by five wickets just 30 minutes before black clouds brought heavy rain , which would have made batting treacherous . The victory ensured the retention of the Ashes , and O 'Reilly ranked it as his finest performance , alongside his ten wickets in the Second Bodyline Test of 1932 – 33 . 
 Australia had retained the Ashes , but England struck back at The Oval , where they posted the then @-@ record Test score of 7 / 903 . Early on , O 'Reilly trapped Edrich lbw for 12 , to secure his 100th Test wicket against England . In a timeless match , Len Hutton made a world record Test score of 364 in a fastidious and watchful innings of 13 hours , surpassing Bradman 's 334 . When he was on 333 , O 'Reilly deliberately bowled two no @-@ balls in an attempt to break Hutton 's concentration by tempting him to hit out , but the Englishman blocked them with a straight bat . 
 O 'Reilly eventually removed Hutton and ended with 3 / 178 off 85 overs . Nevertheless , these compared favourably with Fleetwood @-@ Smith 's 1 / 298 off 87 overs . O 'Reilly was the only Australia to take more than a solitary wicket , and rated Hutton 's knock as the finest innings played against him . Australia collapsed to lose by an innings and 579 runs , the heaviest defeat in Test history . O 'Reilly 's lack of success went with The Oval Test in 1934 , when he took a total of 4 / 151 . 
 O 'Reilly scaled back his participation in Sheffield Shield cricket in the 1938 – 39 season , making himself unavailable for most of the campaign to spend time with his newborn son after half a year in England ; he played in only two matches , against South Australia and arch @-@ rivals Victoria . He took a ten @-@ wicket haul in the latter match , but his figures of 6 / 152 and 4 / 60 were not enough to prevent defeat . Both teams were at full strength and eight of O 'Reilly 's victims were Test players , including batsman Lindsay Hassett twice . O 'Reilly 's only other match was for Bradman 's XI against Rigg 's XI in a match to commemorate the centenary of the Melbourne Cricket Club , in which he took a total of 7 / 129 , to end the season with 19 wickets at 23 @.@ 16 . 
 He resumed regular service for New South Wales in the next season , taking 55 wickets at 15 @.@ 12 in seven matches . He took 8 / 23 and 6 / 22 to set up an innings win over Queensland and 6 / 77 and 4 / 62 in another victory over South Australia . The two matches against Victoria were shared as O 'Reilly took 17 wickets . In the second of the matches , in Sydney , Hassett became the only person to score centuries in both innings of match involving O 'Reilly . Despite Hassett 's feat , New South Wales won the match ; O 'Reilly took a total of 8 / 157 . 
 O 'Reilly continued his strong run in 1940 – 41 , taking 55 wickets at 12 @.@ 43 in eight matches . He took nine wickets in three consecutive matches , once for McCabe 's XI in a match against Bradman 's XI , which his team won by an innings , and in both matches against Victoria , which were split between the two states . First @-@ class cricket was ended after one match in 1941 – 42 ; O 'Reilly took a total of 9 / 124 in a loss to Queensland before the attack on Pearl Harbor signalled the start of the Second World War in the Pacific . In the meantime , O 'Reilly continued to play for St George and topped the grade competition 's bowling averages for years from 1941 – 42 onwards . He averaged between 8 and 9 in all these seasons , and took more than 100 wickets in three consecutive summers , peaking with 147 in 1943 – 44 . O 'Reilly had tried to enlist in the military in 1941 , but after presenting himself for the medical , was informed that his employer was deemed a " protected undertaking " , so their workers were not allowed to enlist . 
 First @-@ class cricket resumed in Australia in 1945 – 46 after the end of the war , although the Shield competition was not held that season . O 'Reilly captained New South Wales at the age of 40 , and although the emergence of Ray Lindwall and Ernie Toshack in the state side indicated a shift in emphasis away from spin and towards faster bowling , O 'Reilly maintained his pre @-@ war standards . He took 33 wickets at 14 @.@ 36 in six matches and New South Wales were undefeated ; they won four matches and drew both fixtures against Victoria . He took at least two wickets in every innings and claimed his innings best of 6 / 43 against Queensland . O 'Reilly also took a match total of 7 / 94 in an innings win over the Australian Services team , which had drawn a series against a full @-@ strength England team . 
 O 'Reilly 's final first @-@ class cricket came on a four @-@ match tour by an Australian team to New Zealand in early 1946 . O 'Reilly was the vice @-@ captain of the team , which was led by Bill Brown . The main fixture during the tour was a four @-@ day match against a representative New Zealand side in Wellington , retrospectively designated as the first Test between the two countries in 1948 . The uncertain nature of the tour saw the Australians wear blazers labelled ABC for Australian Board of Control , rather than the usual coat of arms . New Zealand were outclassed ; after winning the toss and electing to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch , they made 42 in their first innings and 54 in their second to lose by an innings and 103 runs . O 'Reilly took 5 / 14 in the first innings , and 3 / 19 in the second , dominating with Toshack . It was his last Test and his last first @-@ class game . O 'Reilly dominated in the other tour games as well ; he took match totals of 9 / 103 and 8 / 128 against Auckland and Otago respectively , and ended with 28 wickets at 10 @.@ 60 for the tour . Having only decided to tour New Zealand after much consideration , O 'Reilly retired at the end of the Test , throwing his boots out of the dressing room window . 
 = = Conflict with Bradman = = 
 Despite the mutual admiration between Bradman and O 'Reilly for their cricket skills , personal relations between the pair were strained . In Australian society at the time , sectarian tension existed between Catholics , mostly of Irish descent , of whom O 'Reilly was one , and Protestants , like Bradman . Bradman was a non @-@ drinker and a reserved character , often preferring to read quietly , rather than socialise or drink with his team @-@ mates . Coupled with his on @-@ field dominance , this led to perceptions that Bradman was cocky and distant from his team @-@ mates . In the late 1930s , the Australian Board of Control summoned O 'Reilly , Stan McCabe , Leo O 'Brien and Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith , all Catholics of Irish descent to a meeting to discuss the apparent schism in the team . Jack Fingleton , a trained journalist , was not invited to the meeting , but after the deaths of both Fingleton and O 'Reilly , Bradman penned a letter in which he accused the former of being the ringleader . O 'Reilly 's eventual departure also raised speculation that a purge had occurred . In 1995 , after both Fingleton and O 'Reilly had died , Bradman wrote : " With these fellows out of the way , the loyalty of my 1948 side was a big joy and made a big contribution to the outstanding success of that tour " ; the Australians went through the 1948 English summer undefeated . 
 O 'Reilly became a journalist , and together with Fingleton , he often criticised Bradman . They were in the press box when Bradman was bowled for a duck in his final Test innings , when they were reported to have become hysterical with laughter . Nevertheless , O 'Reilly kept most of his strongest feelings about Bradman to himself and suppressed them from his autobiography ; he would say of Bradman that " You don 't piss on statues " . Before his death , O 'Reilly gave a series of interviews to the National Library of Australia , in which he accused Bradman of purging Grimmett from the team because Grimmett had joked that Bradman had ensured his own dismissal in a match against Victoria , to avoid facing the express pace of Ernie McCormick . 
 According to cricket historian Gideon Haigh , " O 'Reilly was a man of embedded prejudices " . In retirement , O 'Reilly complained to a board member that " You have to play under a Protestant to know what it 's like " . The Test umpire Col Egar recalled that O 'Reilly never talked to him in their decades in cricket until a third party informed the bowler that Egar was a Catholic . 
 Despite their conflicts , a few years before his death O 'Reilly wrote that , compared with Bradman , batsmen like Greg Chappell and Allan Border were mere " child 's play " . 
 = = Off @-@ field career , mentoring and legacy = = 
 In 1933 , O 'Reilly married Mary Agnes " Molly " Herbert , after less than six months of courtship . Of Irish stock , Molly had been introduced to O 'Reilly through one of his teaching colleagues at Kogarah , who married Molly 's elder sister the following year . The couple then moved to the southern Sydney suburb of Hurstville . The couple had two children , a girl followed by a boy . 
 O 'Reilly continued to work as a schoolteacher after he broke into international cricket , but at the end of 1934 , after missing more than six months of the year in England , he resigned from his government post , reasoning that his career could not progress if he was going to be overseas so often . However , he had not made any plans for his future employment . Soon after , O 'Reilly received an offer to work as a <unk> salesman for the department store David Jones with sporting leave entitlements . The Premier of New South Wales , Bertram Stevens , tried to coax O 'Reilly into staying in the government education system , offering him a post at Sydney Boys High School if he returned to STC to complete the Bachelor of Arts that he had abandoned a decade before . 
 In 1935 , O 'Reilly took up an appointment at Sydney Grammar School , one of the leading private schools in the state , having been offered 50 % paid leave for his cricket commitments . There he taught English , history and business . In 1939 he took a job in the sports store of close friend , teammate and fellow Irish Catholic Stan McCabe , which was located on George Street , the city centre 's main thoroughfare . O 'Reilly was a financial partner in the business , but following the outbreak of World War II , the sales revenue began to suffer and O 'Reilly left as the store would not be able to support two stakeholders . 
 O 'Reilly then accepted a position as a manager of the Lion Tile Company at Auburn , in Sydney 's western suburbs . He remained in the position until 1976 . O 'Reilly was responsible for the financial and accounting affairs of the firm , which expanded to employ more than 200 workers . He was held in high regard and granted full paid leave when he thrice went overseas for six months to cover tours of England as a journalist . Doc Evatt , a leading Australian Labor Party politician attempted to recruit O 'Reilly into politics , but was unsuccessful . 
 During the late @-@ 1930s , O 'Reilly mentored the then @-@ teenaged Arthur Morris and Ray Lindwall at St. George . He converted Morris from a left arm unorthodox spinner into an opening batsman , and exhorted Lindwall to become a specialist express paceman . Both had long Test careers and captained their country and are regarded as all @-@ time Australian greats in the fields that O 'Reilly chose for them — both were chosen with O 'Reilly in the ACB Team of the Century . The pair credited O 'Reilly as being the main influence in their careers , and Lindwall made his Test debut in O 'Reilly 's last Test in 1946 . 
 In 1956 – 57 , McCabe and O 'Reilly were given a testimonial match by the New South Wales Cricket Association . The match was between Harvey 's XI and Lindwall 's XI and acted as a trial for the non @-@ Test tour of New Zealand . It raised 7 @,@ 500 pounds , which was split between McCabe and O 'Reilly and would have bought two average @-@ sized homes in Sydney at the time . 
 On retirement as a player , O 'Reilly became a cricket columnist for The Sydney Morning Herald , remaining in that position until his health declined in 1988 . His first engagement was England 's tour of Australia in 1946 – 47 , and during this season he began a partnership with the Daily Express of London , going on to cover several Ashes series for them . O 'Reilly 's articles for The Sydney Morning Herald were reproduced in its sister publication , The Age of Melbourne . Later , his writing was syndicated to newspapers in India , South Africa and New Zealand . His style was described by Wisden as " muscular , very Australian ... flavoured with wit and imagery ( ' You can smell the gum @-@ leaves off him ' , he wrote of one country boy just starting with Queensland ) . " Jack <unk> said that " The clarity , wit and pungency of his writing , together with almost infallible judgment , never deserted him " , even as his health began to restrict him . He was a highly respected and forthright pundit , who hated one @-@ day cricket , describing it as " hit and giggle " . He condemned the omission of Keith Miller in 1949 – 50 and said that to call it " a complete surprise would be a cowardly way of describing a botch " . Reacting to the selection of the dour batting all rounder Ken Mackay , he wrote " words fail ... to express adequately my contempt for this howler " . In 1952 he had a falling @-@ out with Lindwall after condemning his protégé for bowling five consecutive bouncers at Everton Weekes in a Test . In comparison with his illustrious contemporary on @-@ field and on paper , " while Sir Donald walked the corridors of cricketing power O 'Reilly was the rumbustious backbencher . " In 1956 , O 'Reilly strongly criticised Australian captain Ian Johnson , a <unk> , for his leadership during the 1956 Ashes tour . The Age took exception to this and asked their sister publication to rein in their pundit . O 'Reilly refused to shy away from his opinions and was dropped by the Melbourne publication . In the 1980s , when Bob Simpson became the first coach of Australia , O 'Reilly , himself self @-@ taught , spoke out against the creation of such posts . He was a strong critic of the breakaway World Series Cricket , the commercialisation of the sport and the erosion of the social norms that were followed during his playing career . 
 Aside from his autobiography , O 'Reilly wrote two books ; Cricket Conquest : The Story of the 1948 Test Tour , published in 1949 , and Cricket Task Force , published in 1951 . They were accounts of the Invincibles tour of England in 1948 and England 's Ashes tour to Australia in 1950 – 51 . 
 Upon retiring from The Sydney Morning Herald , O 'Reilly wrote in a column 
 As a writer on the game it has always been my one consuming resolve to tell my readers … exactly what my personal reactions were to the events of the day . Not once did I ever spend time racking my brain on what was the nice thing to say or the thoughts I should not let come through on paper . In my opinion that would have been cheating . 
 O 'Reilly was honoured with several accolades late in his life . In 1980 , he was awarded an Order of the British Empire for his services to cricket as a player and writer . In 1985 , the oval in Wingello was renamed in his honour , and in 1988 , a grandstand at the SCG was named the Bill O 'Reilly Stand . In the same year , the oval in White Cliffs was renamed , and The Sydney Morning Herald renamed the medal they awarded to the best player in grade cricket in O 'Reilly 's honour . During the celebrations for the Australian Bicentenary , O 'Reilly was named among the 200 people , and only 21 living , who had contributed the most to the country since European settlement . 
 O 'Reilly 's later years were troubled with poor health , including the loss of a leg . In late 1988 , he suffered a major heart attack and was hospitalised for two months . He died in hospital in Sutherland in 1992 , aged 86 . O 'Reilly lamented the decline of spin during his twilight years , and in the 1980s he was often derided by younger people who felt that his advocacy of spin bowling — which they deemed to be obsolete — was misplaced . He died just months before Shane Warne revived the art of leg spin on the international stage . 
 In 1996 , O 'Reilly was posthumously inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame as one of the ten inaugural members . In 2000 , O 'Reilly was named in the Australian Cricket Board Team of the Century , and in 2009 he was named among the 55 inaugural inductees of the International Cricket Council 's Hall of Fame , being formally inducted in January 2010 . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In his 18 @-@ season first @-@ class career , O 'Reilly took 774 wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 60 . In his 27 Test matches , O 'Reilly took 144 wickets at 22 @.@ 59 , 102 of them in his 19 Ashes Tests against England . 
 = = = Test match performance = = = 
 = = = Career rankings and ratings = = = 
 It has been retrospectively calculated by the International Cricket Council 's LG Ratings that he was the best bowler in the world for much of his career . 
 = Arnos Grove tube station = 
 Arnos Grove is a London Underground station located in Arnos Grove in the London Borough of Enfield , London . It is on the Piccadilly line between Bounds Green and Southgate stations and is in Travelcard Zone 4 . The station opened on 19 September 1932 as the most northerly station on the first section of the Piccadilly line extension from Finsbury Park to Cockfosters . It was the terminus of the line until services were further extended to Oakwood on 13 March 1933 . When travelling from east of Barons Court and through Central London , Arnos Grove is the first surface station after the long tunnel section of the Piccadilly line . The station has four platforms which face three tracks . 
 The station was designed by architect Charles Holden , and has been described as a significant work of modern architecture . On 19 February 1971 , the station was Grade II listed . In 2005 , the station was refurbished with the heritage features also maintained . In July 2011 Arnos Grove 's listed status was upgraded to Grade II * . The station was awarded with the Best Newcomer and the Best Overall Garden in the Underground in Bloom 2011 competition and also in the London in Bloom competition . 
 = = Location = = 
 The station is located in Arnos Grove , near Arnos Park on Bowes Road . It is the first surface station after the long tunnel section which starts east of Barons Court and passes through Central London . The station and surrounding neighbourhood of Arnos Grove take their names from the Arnos Grove estate , which was to the north of the station . The station is part of the Arnos Grove group of stations , comprising all seven stations from Cockfosters to Turnpike Lane , and the management office for the group is in Arnos Grove station . Linked to the station by a lineside passageway is Ash House , which is a drivers ' depot . 
 = = History = = 
 The Great Northern railway ( GNR ) and its successor , the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) , for many years refused consent for any extension into the suburbs of Haringey and Enfield . Eventually , public opinion became strong enough to force the matter and in the 1930s the line was rapidly extended from Finsbury Park to Cockfosters via Arnos Grove . The station was opened on 19 September 1932 as the most northerly station on the first section of the Piccadilly line extension . It was the terminus of the line until services were further extended to Oakwood on 13 March 1933 . Its name was chosen after public deliberation : alternatives were " Arnos Park " , " Bowes Road " and " Southgate " . 
 On the night of 13 October 1940 , during the Blitz , a lone German aircraft dropped a single bomb on houses to the north of Bounds Green station . The destruction of the houses caused the north end of the westbound platform tunnel to collapse . As a result , train services between Wood Green and Cockfosters were disrupted for two months . On 11 August 1948 , a passenger train was derailed when the front and rear bogies of a carriage took different routes at a set of points at the station . On 7 July 2005 , a bomb was exploded on a train travelling between King 's Cross St. Pancras and Russell Square . As a result , train services between Hyde Park Corner and Arnos Grove were disrupted until 4 August of the same year . 
 = = Station building = = 
 Like the other stations Charles Holden designed for the extension , Arnos Grove was built in a modern European style using brick , glass and reinforced concrete and basic geometric shapes . A circular drum @-@ like ticket hall of brick and glass panels rises from a low single @-@ storey structure and is capped by a flat concrete slab roof . The design was inspired by the Stockholm City Library and Swedish architect Gunnar Asplund . The centre of the ticket hall is occupied by a disused ticket office ( a <unk> in London Underground parlance ) which houses an exhibition on the station and the line . 
 = = The station today = = 
 Three parallel train tracks pass through the station , with two double @-@ sided platforms between the central track and the outer tracks . The edges of the platforms are labelled platform 1 and 2 , and platform 3 and 4 , in such a way that the two outer tracks are accessible from platforms 1 and 4 , and the central track , usually used by trains that terminate and reverse at Arnos Grove station , is accessible from platforms 2 and 3 . Platforms 1 and 2 are designated for trains to Cockfosters while platforms 3 and 4 are for trains to Central London . 
 In July 2011 Arnos Grove became a Grade II * listed building . The building is one of the 12 " Great Modern Buildings " profiled in The Guardian during October 2007 . Arnos Grove Drivers ' Depot won Best Newcomer and Best Overall Garden in the Underground in Bloom 2011 competition for their new project which also got them an award in the London in Bloom competition . Their website tells the whole story with photographs of the garden and the awards ceremonies . 
 = = = Station improvements = = = 
 In 2005 the station underwent a refurbishment programme including improvements to signage , security and train information systems . General repairs and redecoration were carried out , flooring was renewed , and better lighting , an improved CCTV security system and Help Points were installed , with the latter being suitable for people with limited hearing . Some of the original signs are in a ' petit @-@ serif ' adaptation of the London Underground typeface , Johnston Delf Smith Sans . This typeface was designed by Charles Holden and Percy Delf Smith , a former pupil of Edward Johnston . 
 During the refurbishment programme , all these heritage features were maintained as well : 
 The circular ' Sudbury box ' red brick building with overhanging crenellated concrete roof and vestibule to front and left @-@ hand elevations 
 Dark red brick walls extending to either side of building and also on bridge parapet wall and also on the other side of Bowes Road 
 Bronze @-@ framed silhouette roundels with reinstated 1930s graphics on concrete backing panels on brick walls at either end of bus slip road 
 Flag pole mounted silhouette roundel with reinstated 1930s graphics on vestibule roof 
 Full height windows 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 A journey between Arnos Grove and Southgate typically takes slightly more than four minutes . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 3 @-@ 9 minutes between 07 : 07 and 01 : 07 eastbound , and every 2 @-@ 6 minutes between 05 : 19 and 00 : 06 westbound . When operational problems occur on the line , Arnos Grove station may act as a temporary terminus of a reduced service – either a shuttle service between Arnos Grove and Cockfosters or a truncated service from Central London . The station has a set of seven sidings to its south for stabling trains . 
 = = = Connections = = = 
 London Bus routes 34 , 184 , 232 , 251 , 298 and 382 and night route N91 serve the station . 
 New Southgate railway station is a ten @-@ minute walk from Arnos Grove . 
 = = Nearby places = = 
 Bounds Green 
 Muswell Hill 
 New Southgate 
 Palmers Green 
 Southgate 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The station building appears as " Marble Hill " tube station in the episode " Wasps ' Nest " of the Agatha Christie 's Poirot TV series with David Suchet as Hercule Poirot . 
 Arnos Grove is often noted for its station cat ( a rarity on the London Underground network ) , called Spooky , who now ( as of 2014 ) occupies the station car park after being evicted due to the introduction of <unk> gates . 
 = James Hargest = 
 Brigadier James Hargest , CBE , DSO & Two Bars , MC , ED ( 4 September 1891 – 12 August 1944 ) was an officer of the New Zealand Military Forces , serving in both the First and Second World Wars . He was a Member of New Zealand 's Parliament from 1931 to 1944 , representing firstly the Invercargill and then the Awarua electorates . 
 Born in Gore in 1891 , Hargest was a farmer when he volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 . Commissioned as an officer , he served in the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 and was seriously wounded . Following his recovery from his wounds , he returned to active duty on the Western Front . He commanded an infantry battalion during the later stages of the war and received several awards for his leadership . After the war , he returned to New Zealand to resume farming . In 1931 Hargest entered the Parliament of New Zealand as the member for Invercargill . Initially an independent , he was one of the strongest supporters of the National Party that was formed in 1936 , and held an executive role in the party hierarchy . From 1938 , he represented the Awarua electorate and had been considered for the party leadership , but he was no longer available once he volunteered for active service . 
 Upon the commencement of the Second World War in September 1939 , Hargest attempted to join the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force being raised for service . His application was initially declined for health reasons , but after intervention by Peter Fraser , the acting Prime Minister of New Zealand , he was accepted and appointed commander of the 5th Infantry Brigade , part of the 2nd New Zealand Division . He led his brigade during the Battle of Greece in April 1941 after an initial period performing garrison duty in England . During the Battle of Crete he displayed poor judgement in the positioning his forces around the vital Maleme airfield and in controlling their movements once the battle commenced . The loss of the airfield allowed the Germans to gain a foothold on the island and the Allied forces eventually were evacuated from Crete . Despite his own performance during the battle , he received a bar to the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) that he had been awarded in the First World War . The fighting now shifting to North Africa , Hargest led his brigade during Operation Crusader in November 1941 but was captured by German forces . Held in a prisoner of war camp in Italy , he eventually escaped and was able to make his return to England in late 1943 . He earned a second bar to his DSO for his efforts . He served as an observer with the British 50th Infantry Division for the Normandy landings in June 1944 and was killed by artillery just over two months later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Hargest was born on 4 September 1891 in Gore , a small town in Southland , New Zealand . His parents , James and Mary Hargest , were from Wales . His father was a labourer who later took up farming in Mandeville . Hargest was the fourth of nine children , and attended schools in Gore and Mandeville and after completing his education worked alongside his father . He joined the Territorial Force in 1911 and by 1914 had reached the rank of sergeant . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Hargest volunteered to serve in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Otago Mounted Rifles . He served in the Gallipoli Campaign and was severely wounded during the August Offensive . After several months of convalescence , he returned to active service in July 1916 with the New Zealand Division . Assigned to the 1st Battalion of the Otago Infantry Regiment , he commanded a company during the Battle of the Somme in September 1916 . His actions in restoring order in his battalion , when he assumed command of four companies that had suffered heavy casualties following a failed attack on 27 September , saw him rewarded with the Military Cross . By the end of the year he had been promoted to major . 
 Appointed to second @-@ in @-@ command of the battalion , Hargest was involved in the preliminary planning for the Battle of Messines in June 1917 . He carried out vital reconnaissance of the German front lines , penetrating the enemy communication trenches in the lead up to the battle . During the German Spring Offensive , launched in March 1918 , he was made acting battalion commander . In September 1918 , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and given command of the 2nd Battalion , Otago Infantry Regiment . He participated in the last offensive action of the war involving the New Zealand Division when on 4 November 1918 , his battalion attacked Germans positioned in a fortified house in the Mormal Forest . Having captured the house , it was made his temporary headquarters . It later received a direct hit from artillery fire and Hargest was fortunate to escape unhurt . His leadership of his battalion during the last few months of the war was recognised with an appointment to the Distinguished Service Order , a mention in despatches and the French Legion of Honour . In the immediate postwar period , he remained in command of his battalion while it performed occupation duties in Cologne until his departure to England on 4 February 1919 . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 Hargest returned to New Zealand in May 1919 with his wife , Marie Henrietta Wilkie . The couple had been married since 1917 , the ceremony taking place in England where Marie was serving as a nurse in the New Zealand military hospital at Brockenhurst . Hargest returned to farming , buying land near Invercargill . He retained an interest in the military and resumed his career with the Territorials in which he commanded firstly a regiment and then an infantry brigade . 
 An interest in local affairs soon developed and Hargest became involved with several local authorities including the Southland Education Board . In the 1925 election , he contested the Invercargill electorate standing for the Reform Party and came very close to beating Sir Joseph Ward . The former Prime Minister had a majority of 159 votes , which represented a 1 @.@ 5 % margin . The death of Sir Joseph triggered the August 1930 by @-@ election , which was contested by Hargest and Ward 's second son , Vincent Ward . Hargest was beaten in by Ward Jr . , who had a majority of 571 votes ( 5 @.@ 82 % ) , and Hargest had thus been beaten by both father and son . 
 Ward Jr. retired at the end of the term , and this allowed Hargest to enter the New Zealand Parliament in the 1931 general election on his third attempt , becoming the MP for the Invercargill electorate . In parliament , Hargest was an advocate for the interests of Southland but was also interested in defence and educational matters . He held this electorate until 1935 before successfully switching to the Awarua electorate for the 1935 election . Initially an Independent Reform MP , he was a supporter of the coalition between the United Party and the Reform Party . When the coalition combined to become the National Party , Hargest formally joined the new party and was " possibly the Reform MP most committed from the first to the formation of the National Party " . In its early period of the National Party , there was a lengthy discussion about its leadership , as the previous leaders of the constituent parties were not acceptable to the other . At the time , many South Island MPs would meet at the home of Christchurch property developer Henry G. Livingstone after arriving on Saturday mornings on the overnight ferry from Wellington ; Hargest , Adam Hamilton , and Sidney Holland belonged to that group . At the first official meeting of the party 's Dominion Council in October 1936 in Wellington , Hargest joined the executive committee . Following that meeting , the leadership question resulted in a contest between Hamilton and Charles Wilkinson . Former Reform Party leader Gordon Coates and other MPs sided with Hamilton and issued a press statement that bordered on blackmail , and Hargest wrote to Coates , rebuking him for his stance and pleading for unity , as the new party was still fragile . In the event , Hamilton won the election by one vote and became National 's first leader . 
 For much of the period that he was in charge of the National Party , Hamilton was regarded a conscientious but lack @-@ lustre leader . Although National 's performance had improved in the 1938 election election by winning an additional six electorates , Labour was still in government and there were discussions about replacing Hamilton . Hargest , who had retained his Awarua seat for National in the election , was one of two contenders for the party leadership ( the other was Keith Holyoake , but he had lost his Motueka electorate ) . With the outbreak of the Second World War , Hargest immediately volunteered for active service . The National Party leadership eventually went to Sidney Holland in November 1940 ; there was a view that this was a temporary situation that could be reassessed once Holyoake or Hargest returned to Parliament . Hargest remained a member of parliament during his time on active service and in the 1943 election , he was the sole candidate in the Awarua electorate whilst an internee in Switzerland ; he was thus returned unopposed . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 On volunteering for service in the war , Hargest sought to serve abroad in command of one of the infantry brigades of the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) . However , the newly appointed commander of the 2NZEF , Major General Bernard Freyberg was concerned about the age and command experience of some potential senior officers of the 2NZEF such as Hargest . A subsequent medical assessment deemed Hargest fit only for service on the Home Front as he was still prone to bouts of shell shock from his service during the First World War . Disappointed with this decision , he approached Peter Fraser , the acting Prime Minister of New Zealand , with a request for a brigade command in 2NZEF . Fraser disregarded official advice and arranged for Hargest to be appointed commander of the 5th Infantry Brigade . At the time , the Chief of the General Staff of the New Zealand Military Forces , Major @-@ General John Duigan , wrote to Freyberg , disassociating himself from the decision . 
 Hargest , with the rank of brigadier , left New Zealand with the Second Echelon , in which his brigade ( which comprised the 21st , 22nd and 23rd Battalions ) was the largest formation , in May 1940 . Originally intended to join the First Echelon of 2NZEF then in Egypt , it was diverted en route to England following the threat of a German invasion . The brigade carried out training and guard duties in the area around Dover before being shipped to Egypt in early 1941 . 
 = = = Greece and Crete = = = 
 Within a matter of weeks , the brigade , as part of the 2nd New Zealand Division , was in Greece and manning defences on the Aliakmon Line in preparation for the anticipated invasion of the country by the Germans . Following the invasion , Hargest 's brigade mounted a spirited defence of its positions at Olympus Pass from 14 to 16 April before it had to withdraw to provide cover neighbouring New Zealand brigades conducting their own retreat . The brigade was eventually evacuated on the night of 24 April to Crete . 
 Hargest and his brigade took part in the subsequent Battle of Crete in May . The 2nd New Zealand Division was under the command of Brigadier Edward Puttick due to Freyberg taking command of Creforce , which consisted of all the Allied troops on Crete . Puttick gave Hargest 's brigade the task of defending the airfield at Maleme and its easterly approaches . The 21st Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Leslie Andrew , guarded the airfield itself and a neighbouring hill , Point 107 , with the other two battalions of the brigade positioned further east while Hargest situated his headquarters at some distance from the airfield . Within days of arriving on Crete , the Allied positions began to be the subject of strafing and bombing attacks by German planes as a precursor to an airborne invasion mounted by German paratroopers of the 1st Parachute Division . The bombing triggered in Hargest an occurrence of his shell shock , rendering him lethargic and confused . 
 When gliders containing paratroopers began landing around and to the west of the airfield on 20 May , Andrew became cut off from several of his platoons and companies with some being overrun by the German forces . Unable to gauge how the situation was unfolding , his communications with Hargest back at brigade headquarters also became disjointed . Andrew stressed the seriousness of the situation to Hargest and requested reinforcements from the other battalions , which were more than holding their own . Hargest incorrectly advised that there were no available troops . This left Andrew with his own small platoon @-@ size reserve , which was used in a failed counter @-@ attack . Eventually , Andrew sought permission to withdraw from Point 107 ; Hargest replied " Well , if you must , you must . " Although well aware of the importance of Maleme Airfield to the defence of Crete , Hargest made no effort to dissuade Andrew or see the situation for himself . Despite the belated arrival of a reinforcing company of infantry sent by Hargest that evening , Andrew decided his position was not defensible in daylight and withdrew his units to join the other battalions of the brigade . The Germans took both the airfield and Point 107 early on the morning of 21 May . The capture of the airfield allowed German reinforcements to be landed directly on Crete and establish a strong foothold on their otherwise tenuous positions . 
 A counterattack to take back the airfield and Point 107 was organised for the following day at Hargest 's headquarters . He was exhausted and had to take a quick nap before a conference to work out detailed plans for the counter @-@ attack , much to the disgust of some of the other participants . Afterwards , he became pessimistic of the chances of success and unsuccessfully sought to have the attack called off . The attack did fail but Hargest , still well behind the frontlines , mistakenly believed it to be going well until he found that his brigade had returned to their starting positions . His pessimism began to affect Puttick , who asked Freyberg to allow the 5th Infantry Brigade to withdraw , which it duly did . This began an eventual retreat and evacuation from Crete on 31 May , with Hargest flying out for Egypt by seaplane , his brigade following by sea . 
 Once he was back in Egypt , Hargest was critical of Freyberg 's conduct of the fighting on Crete in a meeting with General Archibald Wavell , commander of the Allied forces in the Middle East . He expressed similar views in a meeting with the New Zealand Prime Minister , Peter Fraser , who was in Egypt at the time on a visit to the New Zealand forces . He also voiced concern over what he considered to be a lack of consultation by Freyberg with his senior commanders . He was able to resolve his differences with Freyberg and in later correspondence with Fraser expressed his satisfaction with the way Freyberg dealt with his subordinates . Hargest 's own performance on Crete escaped official scrutiny and he was awarded a bar to his DSO . He was also awarded the Greek War Cross for his services in the military campaigns in Greece and Crete . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 After the loss of Crete , the 2nd New Zealand Division underwent a period of refit and training before it was assigned to the British Eighth Army , which was then engaged in the North African Campaign . It took part in Operation Crusader in November 1941 where the Eighth Army attempted to break through to Tobruk . Hargest 's brigade was used to cover the movements of the other two brigades of the division , which were attempting to advance through to Tobruk . In the meantime , Generalleutnant ( lieutenant general ) Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps had outflanked the Allies and were approaching Hargest 's position , which was clustered with transport that made defending an attack difficult . He and 700 men of his brigade were captured on 27 November 1941 when his headquarters , situated on the edge of an airfield near Sidi Aziz , was overrun by German tanks . He had resisted moving his headquarters to a nearby escarpment and incorrectly insisted his orders did not allow him this latitude . After his capture he was taken to Rommel who , despite being irritated at Hargest 's refusal to salute him , was complimentary of the fighting performance of the New Zealanders . 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 Hargest was transported to Italy where he was initially held in a villa near Sulmona but was transferred , along with a fellow New Zealander , Brigadier Reginald Miles , who had been captured in December 1941 , to Castle <unk> , known as Campo 12 , near Florence . Campo 12 was a prison camp for officers of general and brigadier rank and the prisoners were held under more comfortable conditions than soldiers of lesser rank . In late March 1943 , a group of officers , including Hargest and Miles , managed to escape using a tunnel dug from a disused chapel within the castle walls . Of the six escapees , Hargest and Miles were the only two to reach safety in neutral Switzerland , where they split up to independently try to make their way to England . As Hargest later related " I was over in Lucerne when Miles rang up to say he was off , and to suggest I should follow him later " . Miles made it to Figueras , close to the Spanish frontier , but , overcome with depression , killed himself on 20 October . With the help of the French Resistance , Hargest travelled through France to Spain , where he reached the British Consulate in Barcelona . He flew to England in December 1943 . 
 Hargest was one of only three men ( Miles was one of the others ) known to British Military Intelligence to have escaped from an Italian prisoner of war camp and make their way to another country prior to the armistice with Italy . For his escape to Switzerland , Hargest was awarded a second bar to his DSO . He was later appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . He also wrote an account of his escape which was published as the book Farewell Campo 12 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 By early 1944 , the 2nd New Zealand Division was fighting in the Italian Campaign and with his former brigade commanded by Brigadier Howard Kippenberger , Hargest sought a new role . He was appointed New Zealand 's observer of the D @-@ Day landings in Normandy . He was attached to the British 50th Infantry Division , an infantry unit of the 21st Army Group , with which he landed in Normandy on 6 June . He was wounded later that month . 
 After D @-@ Day , a new role was found for Hargest . Now that the Allies were on mainland Europe , thought was turning to the issue of dealing with the expected arrival of newly released New Zealanders from liberated prisoner of war camps . The 2NZEF Reception Group was set up to help repatriate them . Hargest was appointed the commander of the group but on 12 August 1944 , was killed by shell fire during the Battle of Normandy , when he was making a farewell visit to the British 50th Division . Hargest is buried at the Hottot @-@ les @-@ Bagues War Cemetery in France . 
 Hargest was survived by his wife and three children . A fourth child , Geoffrey Robert Hargest , had been killed on 30 March 1944 , aged 22 years , during the fighting in Italy and is buried in the Cassino War Cemetery . Another son was killed in an accident in Malaya several years later while on active service during the Malayan Emergency . James Hargest High School , an educational facility in Invercargill , is named after him . 
 = 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) = 
 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) is the debut album of British band the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu ( The JAMs : Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty ) , later to be known as the KLF . 1987 was produced using extensive unauthorised samples which plagiarised a wide range of musical works , continuing a theme begun in the JAMs ' debut single " All You Need Is Love " ( included on the album ) . These samples provided a deliberately provocative backdrop for beatbox rhythms and cryptic , political raps . The album was released to mixed reviews , but was a commercial success . 
 Shortly after independent release in June 1987 , the JAMs were ordered by the Mechanical @-@ Copyright Protection Society to destroy all unsold copies of the album , following a complaint from ABBA . In response , The JAMs disposed of many copies of 1987 in unorthodox , publicised ways . They also released a version of the album titled " 1987 ( The JAMs 45 Edits ) " , stripped of all unauthorised samples to leave periods of protracted silence and so little audible content that it was formally classed as a 12 @-@ inch single . 
 A limited edition release subjected to recall and a destruction order , 1987 became something of a rarity and by 2000 , mint condition copies were trading for £ 60 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 On New Year 's Day 1987 , Bill Drummond decided to make a hip hop record under the pseudonym " The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu " . Despite his small knowledge about modern music technology , he invited Jimmy Cauty , a former member of the band Brilliant , to join him . Cauty reportedly agreed , and The JAMs ' debut single " All You Need Is Love " was independently released on 9 March 1987 as a limited edition one @-@ sided white label 12 @-@ inch . Cauty conceived the pseudonym " Rockman Rock " , and Drummond used the nickname " King Boy D " . 
 The reaction to " All You Need Is Love " was positive , with the record being made single of the week in the British music weekly Sounds Magazine , and The JAMs lauded as " the hottest , most exhilarating band this year " . " All You Need Is Love " ' s reliance on uncleared , often illegal samples made commercial release impossible . In response , The JAMs re @-@ edited the single , removing or doctoring the most antagonistic samples , and re @-@ released it as " All You Need Is Love ( 106 bpm ) " in May 1987 . According to Drummond , profits from this re @-@ release funded the recording of their first album . The JAMs had completed and pressed copies of the album by early May 1987 , but did not have a distributor . 
 Like " All You Need Is Love " , the album was made using an Apple II computer , a Greengate <unk> digital sampler peripheral card , and a Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine . Using portions from existing works and pasting them into new contexts , with the duo stealing " everything " and " taking ... plagiarism to its absurd conclusion , " several songs were liberally plagiarised . This mashup of samples was underpinned by rudimentary beatbox rhythms and overlaid with Drummond 's raps of social commentary , esoteric metaphors and mockery . Drummond would later say in an interview that : 
 We 'd just got ourselves a sampler , and we went sample @-@ crazy . We just ... went through my whole collection of records , sampling tons of stuff and putting it all together , and it ... was a real rush of excitement , when we were doing it .... When we put that record out , we knew what we were doing was illegal , but we thought it was gonna be such an underground record , nobody would ever hear about it . So the first thing that shocked us is that British rock papers gave a big review . 
 = = Composition = = 
 1987 is built around samples of other artists ' work , " to the point where the presence of original material becomes questionable " . The album is raw and unpolished , the sound contrasting sharply with the meticulous production and tight house rhythms of the duo 's later work as The KLF . The beatbox rhythms are basic ( " weedy " , according to Q Magazine ) , samples often cut abruptly , and distinctive plagiarised melodies are often played with a high @-@ pitched rasping accompaniment . The plagiarised works are arranged so as to juxtapose with each other as a backdrop for The JAMs ' rebellious messages and social comments . Lyrics include self @-@ referential statements of The JAMs ' agenda that clash with the fictional backstory adopted from The Illuminatus ! Trilogy . Several songs ( such as " The Queen and I " and " All You Need Is Love " ) have specific societal targets for Drummond 's satirical raps . 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 The album 's opening song , " Hey Hey We Are Not The Monkees " , begins with simulated human sexual intercourse noises arranged as a rhythm . The album 's first sample is " Here we come ... " from The Monkees ' theme . It progresses into a cryptic and bleak spoken verse from Drummond : " Here we come , crawling out of the mud , from chaos primeval to the burned out sun , dragging our bad selves from one end of time , with nothing to declare but some half @-@ written rhymes " . A <unk> of further samples from The Monkees ' theme and Drummond 's voice follow – " We 're not The Monkees , I don 't even like The Monkees ! " – before it gets interrupted by an original a cappella vocal line that later became The KLF 's " Justified and Ancient " – " We 're justified / And we 're ancient ... We don 't want to upset the apple cart / And we don 't wanna cause any harm " . 
 The track is followed by a long sample of a London Underground train arriving at and leaving a tube station , with its recorded warning to passengers , " Mind the gap ... " . " Don 't Take Five ( Take What You Want ) " follows , featuring The JAMs ' associates Chike ( rapper ) and DJ Cesare ( scratches ) . Built around The Dave Brubeck Quartet 's " Take Five " and Fred Wesley 's " Same Beat " , the lyrics are mostly unconventional , with the majority of the song containing references to food : " I was pushing my trolley from detergent to cheese when I first saw the man with antler ears . I tried to ignore but his gaze held my eyes when he told me the truth about the basket of lies " . Sounds considered the message of the song ( if any ) to be a modern version of Robin Hood : " This is piracy in action , with the venerable music industry figure , King Boy D , setting himself up as the Robin Hood of rap as he steals from the rich vaults of recording history " . 
 The first side of the LP closes with " Rockman Rock ( Parts 2 and 3 ) " , a homage to Jimmy Cauty that <unk> from an array of sources , including the " Bo Diddley Beat " and " Sunrise Sunset " from the Fiddler on the Roof soundtrack . Led Zeppelin 's " Whole Lotta Love " , " Since I 've Been Loving You " and " Houses of the Holy " can be also heard in this track . Side one would not close until " Why Did You Throw Away Your Giro ? " , a track consisting of a question in reference to a line from " Rockman Rock " from a female adult jokingly answered by a male person , ended in 20 seconds . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 The second side begins with " Mẹ Ru Con " , an emotive Vietnamese song originally titled " Ca Dao Mẹ " , written by Trịnh Công Sơn performed a cappella by The JAMs ' friend Duy Khiem . According to Drummond , it was a spontaneous recital by Khiem , who was in the studio contributing clarinet and tenor sax to the album . Khiem 's vocal performance was later sampled by The KLF on the ambient house soundtrack to their movie , The Rites of Mu . 
 " The Queen and I " features extensive samples from ABBA 's " Dancing Queen " , often overlain with a rasping detuned accompaniment . These lead into Drummond 's satirical and discontent rapping , a fictional account of his march into the British House of Commons and Buckingham Palace to demand answers . The song also protests the involvement of cigarette companies in sport ( " When cancer is the killer / John Player run the league " ) and lambasts the " tabloid mentality " ( " They all keep talking about Princess Di 's dress " ) . The Sex Pistols ' " God Save the Queen " is briefly sampled . After nearly three minutes of samples from the television show Top of the Pops , as well as sound clips from programmes and advertisements on other TV channels , Drummond cries " Fuck that , let 's have The JAMs ! " . The acerbic " All You Need Is Love ( 106 bpm ) " follows . A " stunning audio collage " featuring an AIDS public information film , a rerecording of glamour model Samantha Fox 's " Touch Me ( I Want Your Body ) " , and the nursery rhyme " Ring a Ring o ' Roses " , " All You Need Is Love " comments on sex and the British media 's reaction to the AIDS crisis . 
 The final track on the album is " Next " , which Drummond describes as " the only angst @-@ er on the album " , with " imagery of war and sordid sex " . The track samples Stevie Wonder 's " Superstition " , Scott Walker 's " Next " from Scott 2 , the Fall 's " Totally Wired , " and Julie Andrews ' " The Lonely Goatherd " from The Sound of Music , alongside Khiem 's original melancholy clarinet and tenor saxophone contributions ( " a saxophone of stupefying <unk> " , according to Danny Kelly ) . 
 Bill Drummond summed up The JAMs ' approach to composition in the first " KLF Information Sheet " , sent out in October 1987 : " We made [ the album ] not giving a shit for soul boy snob values or any other values , we just went in and made the noise we wanted to hear and the stuff that came out of our mouths .... Not a pleasant sound but it 's the noise we had . We pressed it up and stuck it out . A celebration of sorts . " Jimmy Cauty defended sampling as an artistic practice : " It 's not as if we 're taking anything away , just borrowing and making things bigger . If you 're creative you aren 't going to stop working just because there is a law against what you are doing . " 
 In 1991 , Drummond admitted : " We didn 't listen to 1987 What The Fuck 's Going On for a long time , and when we did we were embarrassed by it because it was so badly recorded . But I still felt we were able to get a lot out of ourselves through it . " 
 = = Release , reception and controversy = = 
 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) was released in June 1987 on The JAMs ' own record label , " The Sound of Mu ( sic ) " . 
 1987 was met with mixed reviews in most of the major British music publications , including Melody Maker , NME , Sounds , and Q , and the album came to the attention of the management of Swedish pop group ABBA : The JAMs had sampled large portions of the ABBA single " Dancing Queen " on the track " The Queen And I " . A legal showdown with ABBA and the Mechanical @-@ Copyright Protection Society ( MCPS ) followed , 1987 was forcibly withdrawn from sale , and The JAMs were ordered to " deliver up the master tape , mothers , <unk> and any other parts commensurate with manufacture of the record " . 
 King Boy D and Rockman Rock travelled to ABBA 's home country of Sweden , in the hope of meeting with ABBA personally , taking an NME journalist and photographer with them , along with most of the remaining copies of the LP and a gold disc of the album . Failing to find ABBA in residence at Polar Studios in Stockholm , they instead presented the gold disc to a blonde prostitute they pretended was <unk> " fallen on hard times . " Of the original LP 's stock , some copies were disposed overboard on the North Sea ferry trip across , and the remainder were burned in a field in Gothenburg before dawn ( as shown on the cover of their next album , Who Killed The JAMs ? ) . The JAMs also played a recording of " The Queen and I " loudly outside the offices of ABBA 's record label , Polar Music . The trip was unexpectedly eventful , the JAMs accidentally hitting and killing a moose , and later being shot at by a farmer , a bullet cracking the engine of their Ford Galaxie police car . They were , by their own account , towed back to England by the AA . 
 The JAMs were not entirely sure what they would have said to ABBA if they had been able to meet them . Rockman told NME : " We were hoping to explain [ our artistic justification ] to them and that maybe we 'd come out of it friends , you know , them producing our album and us producing theirs — the kind of thing that often happens at these meetings . " King Boy : " Yeah , we 'd have said , ' Look , you haven 't had many hits lately , you don 't really wanna bother with all this West End musical shit do you ? Come and do the new <unk> [ sic ] album . ' " In 1994 , The Guardian looked back on the Swedish sojourn as " a grand , futile , attention @-@ grabbing gesture , the kind that would come to characterise [ the duo 's ] collaborative career ... " We were being totally stupid about it " Drummond later acknowledged . " 
 The JAMs offered what they claimed were " the last five " copies of 1987 for sale at £ 1000 each in a full @-@ page advertisement in the April 1988 edition of The Face . Drummond argued that the offer exploited a loophole in The JAMs ' agreement with the MCPS : " We were browsing around this record shop and came across these five copies of 1987 .... We made it perfectly clear to the MCPS that we couldn 't actually force the shops to send our LPs back .... [ B ] ecause we bought them in a shop , these LPs don 't come into the agreement and we can do what we like with them and not break any laws . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Q magazine had mixed reactions to 1987 , saying that there are " too few ideas being spread too thin " . The magazine criticised some songs as " overlong " and questioned the overuse of sampling as " the impression of a random hotchpotch " . Q also unfavourably commented that The JAMs ' " use of the beatbox is altogether weedy " . It liked some of its tracks : " there are some wickedly amusing ideas and moments of pure poetry in the lyrics while some of the musical juxtapositions are both killingly funny and strong enough to stand repeated listenings " . 
 A reviewer for Melody Maker found 1987 " inspirational " , and " the most exciting , most original record [ he 'd ] heard in years " . He also argued that : " Some snatches [ of plagiarised music ] rather outstay their welcome , tugging tell @-@ tale glitz away from the clifftop and dangerously close to smug obviousness , but when the blows are kept short , sharp and very bloody , they make anything else you 're very likely to hear on the radio dull and desperately humourless . " " It 's easy to dismiss The JAMs frolics as little more than a brightly coloured sideshow to the <unk> circus in town " , a later article said , but " believe me , it 's far more than a gimmick " . 
 In awarding 1987 the highest rating , a maximum five stars , Sounds — a publication that offered the duo 's work consistent approval — mused , " Taking the sound of the moment ( hip hop ) as a backbone , 1987 steals sound artefacts from anywhere ... and meshes them together with King Boy 's hysterical ' Clydeside ' rap method with bewildering effect . ... [ Y ] ou could call this sampling technology 's answer to T. S. Eliot 's arch cut up work , The Wasteland . " " What 's so good about The JAMs " , the magazine said , " is the way they are capturing on disc the whole social and musical confusion and instability of 1987 Britain " . 
 NME 's Danny Kelly was not so impressed . He also felt that the record was underdeveloped and The JAMs were not the most skilled of practitioners . " Audacity , completely unfounded self @-@ confidence , utter ruthlessness and a fast car will , of course , be useful attributes to the go @-@ ahead noise @-@ pirate of the 90s , but skill , feel , instinct , vision — y 'know , boring old talent — will still be bottom line <unk> ... it 's in these latter commodities that the JAMs seem conspicuously <unk> . " Compared to the output of DJ Code Money or Cut Creator ( " all humour , vibrancy and colour ... – <unk> version [ s ] of The Book of Kells " ) Kelly felt Drummond 's efforts to be a " glitter @-@ crusted charity Christmas card " . A later NME item called 1987 " the best comment on sampling culture ever made " . 
 A retrospective review by Allmusic commented that 1987 is " a hilarious record " filled with " comments on music terrorism and [ The JAMs ' ] own unique take on the Run @-@ D.M.C. type of old @-@ school rapping " ; and The Penguin Price Guide for Record & CD Collectors called 1987 an " entirely brilliant example of the art of disc @-@ jockey @-@ as @-@ producer " . Giving another retrospective review from across the Atlantic , Trouser Press described 1987 as " energetic " and " a loopy dance album that isn 't unlike a lot of sampled records , but proceeds from an entirely different cultural understanding . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty were responsible for the concept and production of 1987 , its lyrics and the TR @-@ 808 beatbox rhythms . Drummond provided rap , and an additional rapper introduced as ' Chike ' appears on " Don 't Take Five ( Take What You Want ) " and " Rockman Rock ( Parts 2 and 3 ) " . Duy Khiem contributed lead vocals to " Mẹ Ru Con " , as well as clarinet and tenor sax to " Rockman Rock ( Parts 2 and 3 ) " and " Next " . Uncredited female vocalists on " Hey Hey We Are Not The Monkees " , " Rockman Rock ( Parts 2 & 3 ) " and " All You Need Is Love ( 106 bpm ) " are identified by one source as Cressida Cauty ( Jimmy 's wife ) and June Montana , the lead vocalists of the KLF Communications side project Disco 2000 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side one 
 Side two 
 = = " 1987 : The JAMs 45 Edits " = = 
 Following the enforced deletion of the 1987 album , the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu released an edited version as a 12 " single , with all of the unauthorised samples removed , leaving sparse instrumentation , Drummond 's social commentary and , in several cases , long periods of silence ; the " Top of the Pops " section of the original LP yielded three minutes of silence on 45 Edits , and the only sample remaining from the original was The Fall 's " Totally Wired . " 
 The edited single was sold through normal retail channels and also offered as a " reward " to anyone who returned a copy of the LP to The JAMs ' post office box . The single was released on 16 October 1987 , and on 31 October 1987 The JAMs announced that the case with ABBA " is now closed " . The sleevenotes to " 1987 : The JAMs 45 Edits " explain to the purchaser in a rather tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek fashion how to recreate the original 1987 album for themselves : 
 This record is a version of our now deleted and illegal LP ' 1987 , What The Fuck Is Going On ? ' with all of the copyright infringing ' samples ' edited out . As this leaves less than 25 minutes of music we are able to sell it as a 12 @-@ inch 45 . If you follow the instructions below you will , after some practice , be able to simulate the sound of our original record . To do this you will need 3 wired @-@ up record decks , a pile of selected discs , one <unk> set and a video machine loaded with a cassette of edited highlights of last weeks ' Top of the Pops ' . Deck one is to play this record on , the other two are to scratch in the missing parts using the selected records . For added authentic effect you could use a Roland 808 drum machine ( well cheap and what we used in the original recordings ) to play along behind your scratching . 
 By 2000 , a copy of the original version of 1987 in mint condition was worth £ 60 , whereas a mint copy of " 1987 : The JAMs 45 Edits " was worth a mere £ 10 . 
 = 2011 Coca @-@ Cola 600 = 
 The 2011 Coca @-@ Cola 600 , the 52nd running of the event , was a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series motor race held on May 29 , 2011 , at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord , North Carolina . Contested over 400 laps on the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) asphalt quad @-@ oval , it was the twelfth race of the 2011 Sprint Cup Series season . The race was won by Kevin Harvick for the Richard Childress Racing team . David Ragan finished second , and Joey Logano clinched third . 
 There were 14 cautions and 38 lead changes among 19 different drivers throughout the course of the race . The result moved Harvick to the second position in the Drivers ' Championship . He remained 36 points behind first place driver Carl Edwards and one ahead of Jimmie Johnson in third . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was first with 83 points , six ahead of Ford . Toyota was third with 64 points , 24 points ahead of Dodge . The race was extended to 402 laps and 603 miles ( 970 km ) , making it the longest race in NASCAR history . 145 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 10 @.@ 1 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Charlotte Motor Speedway is one of ten intermediate to hold NASCAR races . The standard track at Charlotte Motor Speedway is a four @-@ turn quad @-@ oval track that is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at twenty @-@ four degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is five degrees . The back stretch , opposite of the front , also had a five degree banking . The racetrack has seats for 140 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Before the race , Ford driver Carl Edwards led the Drivers ' Championship with 416 points ; Chevrolet driver Jimmie Johnson was second with 392 points , 24 points behind Edwards . Kyle Busch followed in third with 379 points , 15 ahead of Dale Earnhardt , Jr. and 17 ahead of Kevin Harvick in fourth and fifth . Matt Kenseth with 342 was two points ahead of Ryan Newman in seventh . Clint Bowyer , Kurt Busch and Tony Stewart rounded out the top ten positions . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was leading with 74 points , three points ahead of Ford . Toyota , with 60 points , was 37 points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third . Kurt Busch was the race 's defending champion . 
 The Coca @-@ Cola 600 was conceived by race car driver Curtis Turner , who built the Charlotte Motor Speedway . It was first held in 1960 in an attempt by NASCAR to stage a Memorial Day weekend race to compete with the open @-@ wheel Indianapolis 500 ; the two races were held together on the same day starting from 1974 . The race is the longest in terms of distance on the NASCAR calendar and is considered by several drivers to be one of the sport 's most important races alongside the Daytona 500 , the Brickyard 400 and the Southern 500 . The long distance makes it the most physically demanding event in NASCAR , and teams adapt to changing track conditions because the race occurs between late afternoon and evening . It was known as the World 600 until 1984 when The Coca @-@ Cola Company purchased the naming rights to the race and renamed it the Coca @-@ Cola World 600 in 1985 . It has been called the Coca @-@ Cola 600 every year since 1986 except for 2002 when the name changed to Coca @-@ Cola Racing Family 600 . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the race ; the first on Thursday , which lasted 90 minutes . The second and third were both on Saturday . The first Saturday practice lasted 45 minutes , while the second lasted 60 . Jeff Burton was quickest with a time of 28 @.@ 635 seconds in the first session , 0 @.@ 084 seconds faster than Edwards . Johnson was just off Edwards ' pace , followed by Denny Hamlin , Ryan Newman , and Brad Keselowski . Kasey Kahne was seventh , still within a second of Burton 's time . 
 Forty @-@ eight cars were entered for qualifying , but only forty @-@ three could qualify for the race because of NASCAR 's qualifying procedure . Keselowski clinched the second pole position of his career , with a time of 28 @.@ 112 seconds . He was joined on the front row of the grid by A. J. Allmendinger . Edwards qualified third , Hamlin took fourth , and Burton started fifth . Johnson , David Reutimann , David Ragan , Ricky Stenhouse , Jr. and Clint Bowyer rounded out the top ten . The five drivers that failed to qualify for the race were Andy Lally , T. J. Bell , Scott Wimmer , Tony Raines , and Scott Riggs . Once the qualifying session completed , Keselowski commented , " It ’ s an important weekend for Penske Racing and an important weekend for the country . The 600 is a big race for NASCAR , it has a lot of tradition and to add my name to the list of pole winners is pretty special but I ’ d like to add it to those who have won it . This is the first step to doing that . " 
