 In the second practice session , Paul Menard was fastest with a time of 28 @.@ 610 seconds , less than six @-@ hundredths of a second quicker than second @-@ placed Kurt Busch . Earnhardt , Jr. took third place , ahead of Hamlin , Kahne and Mark Martin . In the third and final practice , Reutimann was quickest with a time of 29 @.@ 271 seconds . Marcos Ambrose followed in second , ahead of Menard and Kyle Busch . Burton was fifth quickest , with a time of 29 @.@ 385 seconds . Hamlin , Greg Biffle , Martin Truex , Jr . , Kurt Busch , and Ragan rounded out the top ten positions . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the twelfth in the season , began at 6 : 00 p.m. EDT and was televised live in the United States on Fox . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race with the air temperature at 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) . Jim Daly , president of Focus on the Family , began pre @-@ race ceremonies , by giving the invocation . Capitol Nashville recording artist Darius Rucker performed the national anthem . Then , John <unk> , President of the USO , Master Sergeant Spanky Gibson , Gene Gibson and Mary Gibson gave the command for drivers to start their engines . 
 Keselowski retained his pole position lead through the first lap . By the end of the following lap , Edwards moved to up to second , as Clint Bowyer moved up to the eighth position . On the same lap , Stenhouse , Jr. collided into the wall , but sustained minor damage . Two laps later , Mike Skinner also collided into the wall . On the eighth lap , Edwards passed Keselowski to become the leader of the race . One lap later , Burton moved up to fourth , as Stenhouse , Jr. reported no damage to his car resulting from the collision . At lap 12 , Jeff Gordon moved up three positions to eighth , while Skinner retired from the race . Three laps later , Reutimann moved up to sixth after passing Johnson . On the 19th lap , Truex , Jr. moved to twelfth . On the 24th lap , Allmendinger passed Keselowski to move to the second position . Six laps later , Biffle reported that the cool box ( air conditioning box ) would have to be replaced during their first pit stop . By the 37th lap , Edwards had a 2 @.@ 6 second lead over Allmendinger . 
 On the 42nd lap , Jamie McMurray pitted , as Burton moved up to the third position . On the following lap , Reutimann and Truex , Jr. pitted , one lap before Allmendinger . Two laps later , Johnson , Gordon , and Earnhardt , Jr. pitted , as Edwards took the lead . Once the pit stop session completed , Edwards was the leader , ahead of Allmendinger and Kenseth . On the following lap , Hamlin passed Kenseth to take the third position . Johnson passed Keselowski to take over the fifth position at the 57th lap . On lap 60 , Earnhardt , Jr. passed Gordon to move up into tenth . By the 63rd lap , Edwards had expanded his lead over Allmendinger to 2 @.@ 7 seconds . Six laps later , Earnhardt , Jr. moved up to the eighth position , as Edwards continued to expand his over Allmendinger to 4 @.@ 4 seconds . On the 74th lap , the first caution was given because of debris on the track . During the caution , most of the race leaders pitted . At the lap 79 restart , Burton was the leader , ahead of Edwards , Hamlin , Kenseth and Johnson . 
 On the following lap , Hamlin passed Edwards to take over the second position , one lap before he would pass Burton to become the leader . On the 82nd lap , Johnson moved up to third after passing Edwards . Two laps later , Johnson passed Burton to take over the second position , as Robby Gordon drove to the garage . On lap 85 , Kenseth moved up to the third position . Burton , who restarted in the first position , had fell to the ninth position by the 89th lap . Three laps later , Earnhardt , Jr. moved up to the sixth position . Afterwards , McMurray passed Jeff Gordon to take over tenth . Five laps later , the second caution period began after Bobby Labonte spun sideways . Most of the race leaders decided to pit during the caution . At the lap 103 restart , Ragan became the leader , ahead of Reutimann and Juan Pablo Montoya in second and third . One lap later , Montoya passed Reutimann to move to the second position , a lap before Kenseth , who restarted fifth , overtook Montoya to take the position . 
 On the 108th lap , Kenseth passed Ragan to move into the first position . Four laps later , Edwards passed Montoya to claim the fourth position , as Kyle Busch passed Reutimann for ninth . By lap 125 , Kenseth had a 3 @.@ 7 second lead over Hamlin . Thirteen laps later , Edwards passed Hamlin to take over the second position , as Kyle Busch moved up to ninth . On lap 145 , Reutimann pitted , marking the beginning of the pit stop session . The session lasted four laps , and Kenseth remained the leader ahead of Edwards . On lap 151 , Ambrose moved up to the fourth position after passing Ragan . On the 160th , Kurt Busch reported a loose wheel , and immediately pitted . Eight laps later , McMurray moved up to the eighth position . On lap 171 , the third caution period began because of debris on the track . During the caution , most of the race leaders pitted . At the lap 175 restart , Ambrose became the leader , ahead of McMurray and Montoya . In the next two laps , McMurray moved to first , while Kenseth took over the second position . On lap 181 , Kenseth reclaimed the first position from McMurray , one lap before McMurray 's engine failed to cause the fourth caution . After the restart , the fifth caution was given after Casey Mears and Landon Cassill collided . 
 At the lap 193 restart , Kenseth remained the leader ahead of Ambrose . On the following lap , Ambrose took the lead from Kenseth , but would fall to second after he retook the position on lap 199 . By lap 213 , Kenseth had a 2 @.@ 5 second lead over Ambrose , as Johnson moved up to 11th . Eight laps later , Harvick pitted , two laps before Ambrose and three before Edwards . On lap 133 , the sixth caution was given after Mike Bliss stalled his car . Most of the race leaders pitted during the caution . At the lap 240 restart , Ambrose was the leader , as Menard collided into the wall to cause the seventh caution . Five laps later , the Ambrose restarted in the first position . On the 250th lap , Earnhardt , Jr. passed Johnson to take over the fifth position . Seven laps later , Kenseth moved up to the seventh position . Kenseth continued to move up , passing Hamlin for third by lap 275 . 
 Three laps later , another pit stop session began , as Ragan pitted . Pit stops continued until the caution was given for debris on lap 282 . At the lap 287 restart , Kyle Busch was the leader ahead of Ambrose and Ragan . Two laps later , the ninth caution was given because David Starr collided into the wall . Two laps after the restart , the tenth caution was given after Cassill ran through the grass on the front straightaway . During the caution , Hamlin pitted to replace a carburetor . At the lap 301 restart , Kyle Busch continued to lead as Martin , Newman , and Gilliland collided into each other , causing the 11th caution . Most of the race leaders pitted during the caution , as Jeff Gordon became the leader . 
 On the 314th lap , Biffle moved up to the seventh position , as Logano and Stenhouse , Jr. collided into the wall , but sustained minor damage . Four laps later , the 12th caution was given after Kyle Busch spun sideways . Some of the race leaders decided to pit during the caution . However , Kahne , Harvick , and Earnhardt , Jr. didn 't pit and became the race leaders on the restart . On lap 328 , Earnhardt , Jr. reclaimed the third position from Biffle . Two laps later , Biffle passed Earnhardt , Jr. for third , but lost the position to Harvick on the same lap . On the 333rd lap , Johnson moved up to the ninth position , as Keselowski moved up to fifth . Seven laps later , Ambrose made an unscheduled pit stop . Three laps later , the 13th caution was given after Kyle Busch spun for the second time . After pit stops , Gordon was the leader on the restart , as Kyle Busch drove to the garage . On lap 351 , Biffle became the leader after passing Gordon . 
 Four laps later , Gordon lost another position after being passed by Kahne . Afterwards , Gordon continued to lose positions as Ragan passed him on lap 360 . Three laps later , Hamlin claimed the fifth position after passing Kenseth . Thirteen laps later , Earnhardt , Jr. moved up to the third position , as Kenseth moved to fourth after passing Ragan . With seven laps remaining , Kenseth and Gordon pitted for fuel . On lap 396 , Johnson 's engine failed , causing the 14th caution . Biffle also pitted during the caution , while Kahne tried to race without refueling . At the lap 400 restart , Kahne was the leader , but was passed by Earnhardt , Jr. one lap later . On the final lap , Earnhardt , Jr. was able to drive to the fourth turn before running out of fuel . Harvick passed Earnhardt , Jr . ( who would drop to seventh ) to win his third race of the season , ahead of Ragan and Logano . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Harvick appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his third win of the season , in front of a crowd of 145 @,@ 000 people . The race also became the longest in NASCAR history after being extended by two laps . " Today we were lucky . We didn ’ t have a spectacular night , but to be in victory lane says a lot about this Budweiser team . I griped and griped and griped all day about how terrible it [ the car ] was , " said Harvick of his triumph . 
 Although Earnhardt , Jr. was leading the race on the final lap , Harvick passed him after he ran out of fuel in the final corner . Earnhardt , Jr . , who finished seventh , said , " We weren 't supposed to make it . We run out of gas and kind of knew it . We played our hand . I tried to save a ton of gas . I know I didn 't save enough but as much as I could . " He continued , " I 'm disappointed we didn 't win . I know all our fans are disappointed to come so close . But if we 'd have won that race , it 'd have been a gift . 
 At Harvick 's press conference after the race , Harvick gave a speech about how bad he felt for Earnhardt Jr. and Harvick 's car owner , Richard Childress commented , " We all want to see Dale Junior win , but not at our expense . When I saw him come down the backstretch [ on the last lap ] , I said , ' Dale is going to win this race . ' Then I heard our spotter start screaming [ about Junior running out of fuel ] . I said , ' We ’ re going to win it – great . ' " The race result Harvick Stewart into the second position in the Driver 's Championship with 409 points , 36 points behind Edwards and one ahead of Johnson in the third position . Earnhardt , Jr. and Kyle Busch followed in fourth and fifth with 402 and 392 points . Kyle Busch was 15 points ahead of his brother Kurt in sixth . Chevrolet maintained their lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship with 83 points . Ford and Toyota placed second and third with 77 and 64 points , while Dodge was fourth with 40 . 10 @.@ 1 million people watched the race on television . The race took four hours , thirty @-@ three minutes and fourteen seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 703 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Francis Folger Franklin = 
 Francis Folger Franklin ( October 20 , 1732 – November 21 , 1736 ) was the eldest son of Founding Father of the United States Benjamin Franklin by Deborah Read . 
 In 1736 , four @-@ year @-@ old Francis contracted the smallpox virus and died shortly thereafter . 
 Benjamin Franklin , who had been inoculated earlier in his own life , had intended for his son to be inoculated as well . However , due to an illness affecting Francis at the time planned for his inoculation , the procedure was postponed . 
 His death devastated both his parents , who doted upon Francis , and after this incident , Franklin became " the most eloquent advocate of smallpox inoculation . " 
 = = Life = = 
 Francis Folger Franklin was born on October 20 , 1732 , in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ( then a colony in British America ) . He was the eldest legitimate son of Benjamin Franklin , then the publisher of the Pennsylvania Gazette , and Deborah Read . Franklin also had an illegitimate son , William ( born c . 1730 – 31 ) , whose mother may have been a maid in the household , perhaps a woman named Barbara , or even Deborah Read herself . It has been suggested that William was Franklin 's son by Deborah , but was acknowledged as illegitimate because he had been conceived before the marriage of his parents . Some accounts argue that William 's birth was legitimized sometime after Francis ' death , possibly due to the lack of an heir . 
 The baby 's middle name , Folger , was the maiden name of Franklin 's mother , Abiah . Franklin was proud of his maternal family ( one of the first settlers of New England ) and thus , in an era when a middle name was unusual for ordinary people to receive , Francis was baptized as Francis Folger . Francis ' baptism took place on September 16 , 1733 , while Franklin was away , at the Anglican Christ Church in Philadelphia , which Deborah attended . 
 Francis , affectionately called " Franky " by his parents , was described as a " precocious , curious and special " child by Franklin , " a golden child , his smiles brighter , his <unk> more telling and his tricks more magical than all the other infants in the colonies combined " by historian of medicine Howard Markel and as " a most engaging child , of singular beauty and wonderful knowingness " by biographer James Parton . Given that Franklin considered Francis to be a " healthy child who thrived from the start , " and " very clever , " he advertised for a tutor for his two sons in December 1734 . By all accounts , Francis was doted on by his parents ; his portrait was painted while he was still a baby . By 1734 , Franklin 's business as a writer , publisher and founder of the Library Company of Philadelphia was going well enough that he was able to build a house for his family of four , at 318 Market Street . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 Franklin and his brother , James , criticized smallpox inoculation , which was performed by drawing a string , previously in contact with the pustules of a smallpox victim , through a small incision on the person being inoculated . At the time , inoculation offered a mortality chance of 2 % , while smallpox contracted naturally was fatal to 15 % of the infected . Later , while James still opposed inoculation , Franklin came to support it , believing it was a " safe and beneficial practice . " In 1736 , however , Francis contracted smallpox and died on November 21 of that year , without having been inoculated . Both Franklin and Deborah were devastated , and their devastation was compounded because they were unsure they could have another child . Ironically , Franklin had written his paper , " On the Death of Infants " , while Francis was still alive , and was inspired by his youngest son when writing about the beauty of babies . Francis was buried on the same day he died , his tombstone reading " The delight of all who knew him . " 
 Rumors quickly surfaced that Francis had died after being inoculated , and so , Franklin wrote in the Pennsylvania Gazette , on December 30 , that " [ he ] intended to get [ Francis ] inoculated as soon as he should have recovered sufficient strength from a flux with which he had been long afflicted , " and that the boy " received the distemper in the common way of infection . " However , the choice of having his son inoculated was a difficult one for Franklin , as Francis could die either way . Inoculation would become a real choice only if there was a high chance of smallpox being contracted naturally . In this case , the choice of having Francis inoculated was justified , even with its 2 % mortality rate . 
 After Francis ' death , Franklin became involved in promoting inoculation in Philadelphia : he published many studies on its value , working with several physicians , including the famed William Heberden at the Pennsylvania Hospital , which he helped found . In 1774 , he founded the " Society for <unk> the Poor <unk> " , in order to help the poor people of Philadelphia afford inoculation . In his autobiography , Franklin writes : 
 " In 1736 I lost one of my sons , a fine boy of four years old , by the smallpox taken in the common way . I long regretted bitterly and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation . This I mention for the sake of the parents who omit that operation , on the supposition that they should never forgive themselves if a child died under it ; my example showing that the regret may be the same either way , and that , therefore , the safer should be chosen . " 
 Seven years after Francis ' death , Deborah gave birth to Sarah , who was Franklin 's only surviving , legitimate child . In 1772 , Franklin 's sister Jane Franklin <unk> , wrote him with news of his grandsons . Franklin replied that it " brings often afresh to my mind the idea of my son Franky , though now dead thirty @-@ six years , whom I have seldom since seemed equaled in everything , and whom to this day I cannot think of without a sigh . " 
 = Geoff Horsfield = 
 Geoffrey Malcolm " Geoff " Horsfield ( born 1 November 1973 ) is an English former professional footballer and football coach . He made more than 300 appearances in the Football League playing as a striker . 
 He was a " strong and forceful " player , able to hold the ball up in order to bring other players into the game . Horsfield made his Football League debut with Scarborough as a teenager . Released by the club , he returned to part @-@ time football with Halifax Town , Guiseley and Witton Albion , before a second spell at Halifax saw him help the club regain their Football League status . He moved on to Fulham , with whom he achieved promotion to the First Division , before joining Birmingham City for a club record fee . He played in the final of the 2001 League Cup with Birmingham , and the following season helped them reach the Premier League . 
 After a short period at Wigan Athletic in 2003 , he joined West Bromwich Albion , with whom he again won promotion to the Premier League . In 2006 , he moved to Sheffield United , but much of his time there was spent on loan to other clubs , namely Leeds United , Leicester City and Scunthorpe United . Horsfield announced his retirement from football in 2008 after being diagnosed with testicular cancer , but after successful treatment he resumed his career , signing a six @-@ month contract for Lincoln City in January 2009 . In July of that year he was appointed player @-@ assistant manager at Port Vale under Micky Adams , and the following summer he took up coaching full @-@ time , before leaving the game completely in May 2012 . In March 2013 he returned to playing football for Alvechurch . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Horsfield was born in Barnsley , South Yorkshire , the son and grandson of coal miners . While still a schoolboy he started playing football for a men 's team , Athersley Recreation , in the Barnsley Sunday League , and had an unsuccessful trial with home @-@ town club Barnsley F.C. On leaving school , Horsfield took a college course in bricklaying . He continued playing football part @-@ time , with Athersley , with <unk> Bridge in the Northern Counties East League , and with Football League club Scarborough , where he turned professional in July 1992 . Given his league debut in March 1993 by manager Ray McHale , he was released after playing 12 league matches and returned to bricklaying and part @-@ time football . After a nine @-@ game spell with Halifax Town in 1994 , he rejoined manager McHale at Guiseley , where his 36 goals helped the club to reach third place in the Northern Premier League Premier Division in the 1994 – 95 season . He moved on to Witton Albion , where he sustained a potentially career @-@ threatening knee injury ; after making a full recovery he returned to Halifax for a fee reported as £ 4 @,@ 000 . 
 Horsfield made his second debut for Halifax in October 1996 . On the last day of the 1996 – 97 season , needing to beat Stevenage Borough to avoid relegation from the Conference , Horsfield scored the goal that clinched a 4 – 2 victory . The following season , Halifax won the Conference title by a nine @-@ point margin , thus regaining their Football League status . Horsfield 's 30 goals in 40 league games , including hat @-@ tricks against Yeovil Town , Telford United and Hereford United , made him that season 's Conference top scorer . Together with team @-@ mate Mark Bradshaw , Horsfield was selected for England 's semi @-@ professional representative team for a match against their Dutch counterparts , but injury prevented him from playing . In the Conference , Horsfield had still been working in the building trade while playing football part @-@ time , but promotion to the Football League meant he had to give up his job to become a full @-@ time footballer . Seven goals in his first ten games in the Third Division attracted a bid from Fulham , then in the Second Division and managed by Kevin Keegan . 
 = = = Fulham = = = 
 An initial fee of £ 300 @,@ 000 was agreed , plus an additional £ 50 @,@ 000 depending on appearances , and in October 1998 Horsfield joined Fulham . A clause was also included in the contract which would allow Halifax a share of the profits from any future sale . The remainder of his 1998 – 99 season produced 15 goals from 28 games as Fulham won the Second Division title by 14 clear points . He was also named in the PFA 's Second Division Team of the Year . According to Keegan , " Geoff 's your old @-@ fashioned centre forward and we love him . He will score goals in this division , he will score goals in the next divisions . He chases a lot of lost causes and is very important for us . " Though less prolific in the First Division , seven league goals and another seven in the cups still made him the club 's top scorer for the 1999 – 2000 season . After new manager Jean <unk> made it clear that Horsfield 's aggressive style and perceived lack of pace and mobility would not fit the way he wanted his new team to play , and brought in Louis Saha as his main striker , the player agreed to join Fulham 's First Division rivals Birmingham City . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 In July 2000 , Horsfield signed a five @-@ year contract with Birmingham , who paid a club record fee of £ 2 @.@ 25 million , £ 350 @,@ 000 of which went to Halifax Town under the sell @-@ on clause . He was their top scorer in his first season , finding the net on twelve occasions , and his two goals in the second leg of the League Cup semi @-@ final helped the club reach their first major final for nearly 40 years . In the starting eleven for the final against his boyhood heroes Liverpool , Horsfield had been substituted by the time Birmingham lost in a penalty shootout . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , Horsfield was chosen Player of the Year both by Birmingham 's fans and by his team @-@ mates . His strike partnership with Stern John proved crucial in the unbeaten run which helped Birmingham reach the First Division play @-@ offs , and he scored the equaliser against Norwich City in the play @-@ off final , which the club went on to win on penalties to earn promotion to the Premier League . Horsfield had promised a donation to his first club , Athersley Rec , if he ever reached the Premiership ; a few days after the play @-@ off victory he gave them £ 25 @,@ 000 towards improving their facilities . 
 Horsfield 's first Premier League goal came in the September 2002 local derby defeat of Aston Villa . He also scored in the return fixture at Villa Park , an eventful game in which he ended up keeping goal when Nico Vaesen was injured after Birmingham had used all their substitutes . Horsfield missed games through suspension and surgery , and was frustrated by manager Steve Bruce preferring to use him as a specialist substitute ; after he came on to score a late winner against local rivals West Bromwich Albion , Bruce described him as " a manager 's dream " , saying that " when you 're tiring , the last thing you need is Big Horse rampaging at you " . Starting alongside World Cup @-@ winner Christophe Dugarry late in the season , the pair formed " an unlikely combination , brilliance from Bordeaux alongside a <unk> from Barnsley , but Horsfield 's robust approach has complemented Dugarry 's more delicate touches " ; their partnership produced four wins and a draw from the last six games . 
 = = = Wigan Athletic = = = 
 Horsfield played in three Premier League matches for Birmingham City at the start of the 2003 – 04 season . When Bruce was unable to guarantee him a regular place in the team , Horsfield moved on to Wigan Athletic , signing a three @-@ year contract in September 2003 . A transfer fee of £ 500 @,@ 000 was agreed , though this could have risen to £ 1 million if the player had gone on to make enough appearances for Wigan . Horsfield said of the move , " I could easily have sat out the last two years of my contract at Birmingham , but that 's not my style – I just want to play football . " He scored on his debut for Wigan , in a 4 – 2 win against Wimbledon on 13 September 2003 . He continued to live in the West Midlands even after his transfer from Birmingham City , and after just three months at Wigan moved to West Bromwich Albion for £ 1 million . 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 Horsfield made his Albion debut in a 1 – 0 defeat away to Coventry City on 20 December 2003 . The following month he scored his first goal for the club , in a 2 – 0 win against Albion 's local rivals Walsall . It was the first of three goals he scored during January 2004 , earning him the PFA First Division Player @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month award . In all he scored seven goals for Albion during 2003 – 04 , helping the club to achieve promotion to the Premier League . 
 The team struggled in their first season back in the top division , while Horsfield scored just three goals in 29 league appearances . His contribution on the final day of the season against Portsmouth however , proved vital to the club 's survival . Coming on as a second @-@ half substitute , he scored with his first touch , before setting up a goal for team mate Kieran Richardson . Combined with results from other matches , the 2 – 0 win ensured Albion 's escape from relegation as the first club to survive in the Premier League after being bottom at Christmas . Horsfield said of the achievement , " Even though I have been promoted with every club I have been at this is the best moment of my career . " 
 Horsfield enjoyed a good start to 2005 – 06 , signing a new two @-@ year contract and scoring twice in each of Albion 's first two home games , but these proved to be the last goals he would score for the club . He made a total of 20 appearances in league and cup during his final season at West Bromwich Albion . 
 = = = Sheffield United and loans = = = 
 Horsfield signed for Sheffield United on loan in February 2006 , but appeared in just three games under manager Neil Warnock in the four @-@ month spell . Both Horsfield and Warnock wanted to terminate the loan prematurely , but West Bromwich Albion had already agreed to sell the player to United at the end of the season and refused to go back on the deal . The permanent transfer went through in May 2006 for a fee of £ 1 @.@ 2 million , with Horsfield commenting that he and Warnock had resolved their differences . 
 On 3 August 2006 , Horsfield signed for Championship club Leeds United on loan until Christmas with a view to a permanent move . He made his debut on the opening day of the season , against Norwich at Elland Road , and scored his first goal in a 2 – 2 draw away at Queens Park Rangers three days later . When Dennis Wise took over as Leeds manager , Horsfield was in and out of the side and his loan was terminated in January 2007 . At the end of the January 2007 transfer window , Leicester City took Horsfield on loan for the rest of the season . He made his debut for the club in their 1 – 1 draw with Luton Town on 3 February , and scored his first goals for them in their 3 – 0 victory over local rivals Coventry City two weeks later . 
 Horsfield 's former West Bromwich Albion manager Bryan Robson became manager at Sheffield United at the start of the 2007 – 08 season , but Horsfield remained out of the side . His only appearances came in the League Cup , playing against Chesterfield in the first round and scoring against Milton Keynes Dons in the second . On 31 January 2008 he moved to Championship club Scunthorpe United on loan for the remainder of the season . He went straight into the Scunthorpe squad and made his debut against Charlton Athletic at Glanford Park ; the team won 1 – 0 and Horsfield won the sponsors ' " Man of the match " award . He played twelve games while on loan and was released by Sheffield United at the end of the season . 
 Horsfield had a trial at Chesterfield during the summer of 2008 , but rejected a move to Saltergate because he wanted to join a club closer to his home in Leicester . He then had a trial with Kettering Town and in September began training with Walsall . 
 = = = Lincoln City = = = 
 On 10 October 2008 , Horsfield revealed that he had been diagnosed with testicular cancer , and was advised that his playing career was finished . By December , after receiving successful treatment , he was reported to be considering a return to football , either as a player or in a coaching role . He linked up with Lincoln City , managed by former Halifax Town team @-@ mate Peter Jackson , for a week 's training to assess his fitness levels , and after an extended trial period , signed a short @-@ term playing contract to run from 2 January 2009 until the end of the season . He would also be involved with coaching the reserve team . Horsfield made his debut on 12 January against Brentford , setting up the equaliser for fellow debutant Anthony Elding in a 2 – 2 draw . After the game he declared he was " glad to be back playing " . He scored his first goal for the club on 27 January 2009 , in a 2 – 1 win against Gillingham , describing the long range shot " one of my sweetest strikes " . Horsfield played regularly during his time with Lincoln , but scored only that one goal , and at the end of the season the club decided not to renew his contract . 
 = = = Port Vale = = = 
 In July 2009 , Port Vale 's Micky Adams appointed Horsfield as player @-@ assistant manager . He aimed to play a majority of Vale 's games in the 2009 – 10 season while learning the ropes of management . He played in the opening four games of the season despite needing painkillers for a cracked rib and a cracked bone in his hand , the first broken bones he had ever suffered . The club reached the third round of the League Cup , but after three consecutive defeats , Adams placed the entire squad on the transfer list . He suffered from niggling injuries , in addition to a torn hamstring , which limited his appearances . This caused him to consider his retirement in the summer of 2010 . Port Vale did not offer him a new playing contract , but retained him on the coaching staff . 
 = = = Alvechurch = = = 
 In March 2013 , he joined Midland Football Alliance side Alvechurch , after agreeing to an offer from the Alvechurch chairman to play until the end of the season . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Twelve months after he joined Port Vale as player @-@ assistant manager in July 2009 , Horsfield was offered a contract at the club as full @-@ time assistant manager . Adams said that Horsfield would have a heavier workload over the 2010 – 11 season , which would include many hours of scouting in order to " formulate a catalogue of players [ and ] get to know all the leagues at all levels " , and he would retain his playing registration for emergencies . 
 In December 2010 , he was made joint caretaker manager at Vale , along with Mark Grew , following the departure of Adams . Vale were beaten 5 – 0 by Rotherham United in his first game in charge , but rallied to beat Burton Albion 2 – 1 , before Jim Gannon was appointed manager . Gannon retained Horsfield as his assistant . On the way to a match at Aldershot on 25 February , Gannon left the team bus after an apparent bust @-@ up with Horsfield . The national media reported that Gannon granted Horsfield 's request for a day off for family reasons but then wrote to the board complaining about his conduct . Having been shown the letter by a director , Horsfield confronted Gannon over the issue . After an internal inquiry , during which Horsfield stayed away from the club , no disciplinary action was taken against either party . Gannon was sacked on 21 March , and Grew was appointed as caretaker @-@ manager with Horsfield as his assistant . 
 In July 2011 , Horsfield stepped down as assistant manager to concentrate on his coaching qualifications , remaining at Port Vale as a coach . Later in the month he scored in a friendly against Stone Dominoes , but dismissed speculation that he would make a return to the playing side of the game . In December 2011 , loan striker Guy Madjo celebrated his first goal for the club by running over to Horsfield on the touchline , " to say thank you for all the finishing ( practice ) that we have been doing . He has shown me a lot of things that I haven 't done in the past . In seven years , I have been so many places , to so many clubs and I haven 't done that with anyone else , so I just feel it was a good dedication for him . " Horsfield retired completely from football in May 2012 to pursue business interests . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He is married to Tina and has four children : Chris , Chloe , Leah and Lexie @-@ Brooke . 
 In October 2008 , Horsfield was diagnosed with testicular cancer , and advised that his playing career was over . As the disease was discovered in its early stages , no chemotherapy or radiotherapy was needed , surgery proved successful and less than two months later he was given the all @-@ clear . Horsfield decided to make his illness public to help spread awareness of the disease , and lent his support to a Premier League @-@ backed project launched in 2009 to promote men 's health issues . He said : " Getting cancer was something I had to get over . I got it , wanted to beat it and I did . Now I am just glad that I 've got another chance in football . " 
 Shortly before he joined Port Vale , Horsfield fell victim to the swine flu pandemic . In January 2013 , he received emergency treatment for blood clots on both lungs . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Halifax Town 
 Football Conference champions : 1997 – 98 
 Football Conference top scorer : 1997 – 98 
 Fulham 
 Football League Second Division champions : 1998 – 99 
 Birmingham City 
 Football League Cup runners @-@ up : 2001 
 Football League First Division play @-@ off winners : 2002 
 West Bromwich Albion 
 Football League First Division runners @-@ up : 2003 – 04 
 Individual 
 PFA Second Division Team of the Year : 1998 – 99 
 = Battle of Fort Anne = 
 The Battle of Fort Anne , fought on July 8 , 1777 , was an engagement between Continental Army forces in retreat from Fort Ticonderoga and forward elements of John Burgoyne 's much larger British army that had driven them from Ticonderoga , early in the Saratoga campaign of the American Revolutionary War . 
 Burgoyne , surprised by the American withdrawal from Fort Ticonderoga , hurried as many of his troops as possible forward in pursuit of the retreating Americans . The main body of the American forces had departed Fort Independence down the road to Hubbardton , and a smaller body of troops , accompanying the sick , wounded , and camp followers that had also evacuated the fort , had sailed up Lake Champlain to Skenesboro , moving from there overland to Fort Edward . This group , which included about 600 men under arms , paused at Fort Anne , where a smaller advance company from Burgoyne 's army caught up to them . The British , clearly outnumbered , sent for reinforcements . The Americans decided to attack while they had the numerical advantage , and succeeded in nearly surrounding the British position about three quarters of a mile ( 1 km ) north of the fort . The Americans retreated back to the fort when war whoops indicated the arrival of British reinforcements . While this was a ruse ( the reinforcements were a single officer ) , it saved the British force from probable capture . More of Burgoyne 's army soon came down the road , forcing the Americans to retreat from Fort Anne to Fort Edward . 
 It has been claimed that a flag was flown at Fort Anne that may have been the first instance of a flag consisting of stars and stripes ; this claim is supposedly false . 
 = = Background = = 
 On the night of July 5 – 6 , the Continental Army forces occupying Fort Ticonderoga were ordered to evacuate the fort by General Arthur St. Clair , following the approach of General John Burgoyne 's 8 @,@ 000 @-@ man army . Burgoyne 's men had placed a gun battery on top of Mount Defiance , overlooking the fort , and the American avenues of retreat were at risk of being cut off . 
 Most of the American forces left Ticonderoga and the surrounding defense works via Fort Independence and the road to Hubbardton . About 600 men under Colonel Pierse Long , most of them from New Hampshire , sailed up the lake in a flotilla consisting of 5 armed galleys and over 200 smaller transport vessels . These vessels were loaded with as many of the sick from the fort as they could take , stores and supplies , and armaments . Believing the log boom and pontoon bridge placed between Ticonderoga and Mount Independence to be sufficient to delay the British pursuit , Long began to sail up the lake toward Skenesboro , the southernmost navigable point on the lake , at a leisurely pace . 
 = = Pursuit = = 
 The British , however , were hardly slowed down by the water defenses . Burgoyne , once he learned of the American withdrawal on the morning of July 6 , ordered the defenses to be taken down . With well @-@ placed gunfire , the bridge and boom were eliminated as obstacles in the space of 30 minutes . At this point Burgoyne , breaking with rigid military discipline , ordered troops to follow southward as rapidly as possible , instead of remaining in formation , while he sailed southward in pursuit . Assisted by favorable winds , he was within three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of Skenesboro by the end of July 6 , where the Americans , who arrived only two hours earlier , had a small stockade fort . In an attempt to surround the position , Burgoyne landed about 200 men from the 9th , 20th , and 21st regiments , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel John Hill , at a point south of Skenesboro with the objective of cutting off the road to Fort Anne . 
 The Americans were in the process of <unk> around the falls at Skenesboro to Wood Creek when Burgoyne 's boats arrived and opened fire . Enterprise , Liberty , and Gates were destroyed by the Americans , and two ships , Trumbull and Revenge , were forced to surrender . In the process many of the American supplies were either destroyed or abandoned to the British . The Americans retreated toward Fort Anne in disarray , but not before starting a fire that eventually engulfed most of the structures at Skenesboro . When they reached Fort Anne they were met by 400 New York militia under Henry van Rensselaer , that had been sent by General Philip Schuyler from Fort Edward after he received news of the retreat from Ticonderoga . 
 The British pursuers under Hill , when they finally reached the road , captured more American supplies , sick and wounded , and camp followers that trailed behind the main body , and moved south until they were about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Fort Anne . Here they encountered an American reconnaissance party numbering about 170 under Captain James Gray ; in the ensuing skirmish one American was killed and three more wounded before the Americans retreated to the fort . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the morning of July 8 , a supposed American deserter , who was really a spy , informed Hill that the fort was occupied by nearly 1 @,@ 000 demoralized troops . Opting not to attack the numerically superior force , Hill sent a message back to Burgoyne outlining the situation . Burgoyne ordered the 20th and 21st regiments to quick @-@ march toward Fort Anne in support , but poor weather hampered their movement , and they did not arrive until after the battle . The " deserter " returned to Fort Anne and reported on the British position and troop strength . 
 Long , seeing how few British soldiers were following him , decided to attack their position . Moving as stealthily as possible , his force tried to surround the British while they were still on the road . However , Hill 's men heard the rebel movements on their flanks and retreated to a higher position , abandoning some wounded men , who were eventually captured by the Americans . When the Americans opened fire , it was " a heavy and well @-@ directed fire " , according to one British officer . The battle lasted for more than 2 hours , until both sides were nearly out of ammunition , and the British were virtually surrounded by Americans . The sound of Indian war whoops from the north prompted the Americans to retreat , and they retired to the fort with their wounded , including Van Rensselaer , who had taken a shot in the hip . 
 As it turned out , there were no Indians , but only a single British officer , John Money of the 9th regiment , Burgoyne 's deputy quartermaster . He had been leading a group of Indians , but when they seemed reluctant to fight the Americans , Money became impatient and ran ahead of them ; it was his war cries that brought an end to the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Back at the fort the Americans held a brief council . From a woman that the British had freed , they heard that 2 @,@ 000 or more British troops under the command of General Phillips were rapidly advancing . Long 's men , as they were nearly out of ammunition , withdrew toward Fort Edward , burning the stockaded fort . Both sides claimed victory in the battle , since the British had successfully stood their ground , and the Americans had very nearly forced them to surrender . Any American claim for victory was tempered by the fact that the force they had defeated was clearly the vanguard of a much larger British force . 
 A British officer recovered some regimental banners either during this engagement , or following the American retreat from Fort Anne . It is widely claimed that one of the flags captured was a new design of American flag with thirteen red and white stripes and a constellation of stars , representing the earliest known use of the stars and stripes motif . However , this story is likely untrue , as the time needed for news of the flag design approved by Congress to travel , followed by construction of such a flag and then its delivery to such a remote location render the story implausible , and the flags known to have been recovered bear no resemblance whatsoever to the United States flag . 
 = Puhoy = 
 " Puhoy " is the sixteenth episode of the fifth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich and Steve Wolfhard , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on April 8 , 2013 . The episode guest stars Mandy Siegfried as Roselinen , Jonathan Frakes as Adult Finn , and Wallace Shawn as Rasheeta . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn begins second @-@ guessing his relationship with Flame Princess , so he builds a giant pillow fort . While navigating it , Finn seemingly falls asleep and dreams that he ends up in a pillow world where he marries a pillow woman named Roselinen ( <unk> ) and has two children with her . In the pillow world , Finn grows old and dies , only to wake up in the real world . He soon receives a call from Flame Princess , reaffirming their relationship . 
 The appearance of Finn as an adult was based on Howard Keel 's character from the 1954 musical Seven Brides for Seven Brothers , which is a favorite of episode co @-@ storyboarder Wolfhard . The episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 75 million viewers and received a 0 @.@ 6 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club wrote positively of the way the episode focused on character development , noting that the episode bore similarities to both The Wizard of Oz and Captain America . Similarly , Colin O 'Boyle of Geek Smash compared the episode to the Chronicles of Narnia by C.S. Lewis . For his work on the episode 's character designs , Andy Ristaino won an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Individual Achievement In Animation " at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , making it the series ' first Emmy win . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a knife storm , Finn and Jake stay in and construct a massive pillow fort . Finn , however , is feeling down because Flame Princess did not laugh at his joke , which he takes as a sign that their relationship is over . Jake says Finn is imagining things , but Finn ventures into the pillow fort to let his mind " fester " . Inside , he passes through a portal into a magical pillow land . He saves a village from a " blanket dragon " , and the leader Quilton throws a celebration in his honor . Finn dances with Quilton 's daughter , Roselinen . However , no one knows how to get him home . 
 Years later , Finn and Roselinen have married and had two children , Bonnie and Jay . Quilton tells them that an ancient book has been discovered revealing that the door to Finn 's world appears periodically . Seeking more information , the family travels to the oracle Rasheeta , who says only that Finn will not remain in the land long . Finn thinks of Jake and decides he does not want to leave the pillow world . Eventually , he grows into an old man and dies surrounded by family . His spirit flies through a darkened realm and he emerges in the pillow fort , a child again . He starts to tell Jake about his other life , but gets a call from Flame Princess , who says she finally got his joke . After he hangs up , he cannot recall the life he just lived . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Puhoy " was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich and Steve Wolfhard , from a story developed by series creator Pendleton Ward , Patrick McHale , and Kent Osborne . According to Osborne , this is one of the few episodes that the writers successfully developed by playing the game exquisite corpse . The episode was co @-@ directed by Nate Cash and Nick Jennings ; the former was credited as " supervising director " , whereas the latter handled the art direction . The episode guest stars Mandy Siegfried as Roselinen , Jonathan Frakes as Adult Finn , and Wallace Shawn as the oracle Rasheeta . Herpich noted that he was very pleased to cast Shawn , noting , " Big thanks to [ Wallace Shawn ] … who I finally got to cast in the show , thus shortening my bucket list . " Wolfhard designed adult Finn to be reminiscent of Howard Keel 's character from the 1954 musical Seven Brides for Seven Brothers . Wolfhard explained that the allusion was due to the fact that the musical is one of his personal favorites . In addition , Roselinen 's design was based on Wolfhard 's wife , Leslie , according to both Wolfhard and former character designer Andy Ristaino . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Puhoy " aired on April 8 , 2013 on Cartoon Network . The episode was watched by 2 @.@ 75 million viewers , and received a 0 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic Nielsen household rating . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 0 @.@ 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds at the time of the broadcast . The episode was the 35th most @-@ watched cable program in the 18 – 49 demographic on the night it aired . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2013 Jake the Dad DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' fourth and fifth seasons . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , and praised the way the entry " focuses on building character " . He compared the episode stylistically to both The Wizard of Oz and Captain America , noting that all three deal with themes of traveling to distant lands and " teleport [ ing ] to … alternate dimension [ s ] " . In the end , Sava complimented the episode for dealing with the moral that , when in a relationship , people need to " slow down , don 't freak out , and communicate . " Colin O 'Boyle of Geek Smash compared the episode to the Chronicles of Narnia , a series of books by English author C.S. Lewis . He felt that the installment was " hilarious " and " pretty awesome " . He cited both " Adult Finn " and the " pillowy world " as highlights , noting that the former was a " badass " . 
 For his work on the episode , former lead character designer Ristaino won an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Individual Achievement In Animation " for his character designs , making it the series ' first Emmy win . 
 = USS Manhattan ( 1863 ) = 
 USS Manhattan was a single @-@ turreted Canonicus @-@ class monitor built for the Union Navy during the American Civil War . After commissioning in 1864 the ship was assigned to the West Gulf Blockading Squadron and participated in the Battle of Mobile Bay . At the end of the battle , Manhattan took the surrender of the Confederate casemate ironclad ram Tennessee . She bombarded Fort Morgan during the Siege of Fort Morgan and later blockaded the mouth of the Red River until the end of the war . 
 The ship was placed in reserve after the end of the war and Manhattan was only occasionally recommissioned before being sold for scrap in 1902 . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The ship was 223 feet ( 68 @.@ 0 m ) long overall , had a beam of 43 feet 4 inches ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) and had a maximum draft of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) . Manhattan had a tonnage of 1 @,@ 034 tons burthen and displaced 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) . Her crew consisted of 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 Manhattan was powered by a two @-@ cylinder horizontal vibrating @-@ lever steam engine that drove one propeller using steam generated by two Stimers horizontal fire @-@ tube boilers . The 320 @-@ indicated @-@ horsepower ( 240 kW ) engine gave the ship a top speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . She carried 140 – 150 long tons ( 140 – 150 t ) of coal . Manhattan 's main armament consisted of two smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading , 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Dahlgren guns mounted in a single gun turret . Each gun weighed approximately 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) . They could fire a 350 @-@ pound ( 158 @.@ 8 kg ) shell up to a range of 2 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 7 ° . 
 The exposed sides of the hull were protected by five layers of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) wrought iron plates , backed by wood . The armor of the gun turret and the pilot house consisted of ten layers of one @-@ inch plates . The ship 's deck was protected by armor 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick . A 5 @-@ by @-@ 15 @-@ inch ( 130 by 380 mm ) soft iron band was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent shells and fragments from jamming the turret as had happened during the First Battle of Charleston Harbor in April 1863 . The base of the funnel was protected to a height of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) by 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of armor . A " rifle screen " of 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 13 mm ) armor 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) high was installed on the top of the turret to protected the crew against Confederate snipers based on a suggestion by Commander Tunis A. M. Craven , captain of her sister ship Tecumseh . 
 The contract for Manhattan , named after the Manhattan tribe of Indians that inhabited the island of the same name , was awarded to <unk> , Secor & Co . ; the ship was laid down in 1862 by the primary subcontractor Joseph Colwell at his Jersey City , New Jersey shipyard . She was launched on 14 October 1863 and commissioned on 6 June 1864 with Commander J. W. A. Nicholson in command . The ship 's construction was delayed by multiple changes ordered while she was being built that reflected battle experience with earlier monitors . This included the rebuilding of the turrets and pilot houses to increase their armor thickness from 8 inches ( 203 mm ) to 10 inches and to replace the bolts that secured their armor plates together with rivets to prevent them from being knocked loose by the shock of impact from shells striking the turret . Other changes included deepening the hull by 18 inches ( 457 mm ) to increase the ship 's buoyancy , moving the position of the turret to balance the ship 's trim and replacing all of the ship 's deck armor . 
 The only known modification after the ship 's completion was the addition of a hurricane deck between the turret and the funnel sometime after the end of the Civil War . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 After commissioning , Manhattan steamed for the Gulf of Mexico and arrived at the Pensacola Navy Yard on 7 July , towed by the side @-@ wheel gunboat Bienville . She required nearly two weeks to resupply and to repair damage from two small fires that started after her arrival . The ship reached Mobile Bay on 20 July , again towed by Bienville , where it joined the West Gulf Blockading Squadron . 
 Shortly after Tecumseh 's arrival on 4 August , Rear Admiral David G. Farragut , the squadron commander , briefed his captains on his plan for the next day 's battle . Manhattan and Tecumseh were to keep the ironclad ram Tennessee away from the vulnerable wooden ships while they were passing the fort and then sink her . The river monitors Winnebago and Chickasaw were to engage Fort Morgan until all of the wooden ships had passed . The four monitors would form the starboard column of ships , closest to Fort Morgan , with Tecumseh in the lead , while the wooden ships formed a separate column to port . The eastern side of the channel closest to Fort Morgan was free of obstacles , but " torpedoes " , as mines were then known , were known to be present west of a prominent black buoy in the channel . 
 About 07 : 40 , Tecumseh attempted to close with the Tennessee by passing through the minefield , but struck a " torpedo " and capsized within 90 seconds . Manhattan continued to engage the fort until all but the last pair of wooden ships had cleared the obstacles . She closed to a range of about 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the Confederate ironclad and began firing with her one operable gun ; a flake of iron had fallen into the vent hole of one of her guns and was jammed in place . One of her shots hit the Tennessee and broke the armor and its wooden backing so that daylight was visible through the side of the casemate . The shot failed to penetrate , and netting laid on the inside of the backing caught all of the splinters so that no one was injured . During the battle Manhattan fired a total of 11 shots , six at Tennessee and five at Fort Morgan . Nicholson claimed four hits , including the shot that broke the Tennessee 's steering chains and another that jammed her stern gun port shutter in the closed position . The monitor was hit nine times during the battle , but sustained no significant damage or casualties . 
 Manhattan had closed to about 50 yards ( 46 m ) distance when Nicholson spotted a white flag of surrender hanging from a boat hook on top of the Tennessee 's casemate and ordered his gunners to cease fire . Nicholson confirmed the Confederate ship 's surrender verbally and ran the monitor alongside so that one of his officers could seize the ironclad 's colors , which was lying in her scuppers . Unbeknownst to Nicholson , Commander James D. Johnston , captain of the Tennessee , intended to surrender to the wooden gunboat Ossipee and ignored Manhattan and her captain . 
 The ship subsequently participated in the bombardment of Fort Morgan , which surrendered 23 August . In November , Manhattan sailed to New Orleans , Louisiana and later to the mouth of the Red River , where she remained until the end of the war . Manhattan then steamed to New Orleans where she was laid up in ordinary in August 1865 . On 15 June 1869 , the ship was renamed Neptune , although she resumed her original name on 10 August . 
 = = Post @-@ war service = = 
 In 1870 Manhattan was transferred to Key West , Florida and then sailed to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania where she was refitted in 1872 – 73 . Recommissioned on 19 November 1873 , the ship returned to Key West for fleet maneuvers and then proceeded to Pensacola , Florida . Manhattan departed the west coast of Florida and sailed to Port Royal , South Carolina on 25 April 1876 . The ship patrolled off the Carolinas until June 1877 , when she sailed to Norfolk , Virginia . The following year she was towed up the James River and moored at Brandon , Virginia . Manhattan was transferred to City Point , Virginia in 1881 and then to Richmond , Virginia . The ship was taken to Philadelphia and laid up at League Island in 1888 , where she remained for the rest of her career . Manhattan was struck from the Navy List on 14 December 1901 and sold on 24 March 1902 for breaking up . 
 = Italian ironclad Re Umberto = 
 Re Umberto ( " King Humbert " ) was a Re Umberto @-@ class ironclad battleship built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s , the lead ship of her class . She was laid down in July 1884 and launched in October 1888 ; work proceeded so slowly that she was not finished until February 1893 . She was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns and had a top speed of 20 @.@ 3 knots ( 37 @.@ 6 km / h ; 23 @.@ 4 mph ) , though this high speed came at the cost of armor protection . 
 Re Umberto carried out various duties during her service career , including large @-@ scale fleet maneuvers and diplomatic missions in Europe . She saw limited action during the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 – 12 , escorting convoys and bombarding Ottoman troops in North Africa . By the end of the year she was withdrawn from front @-@ line service . Decommissioned before World War I , she was used during the war as a depot ship and then as a floating battery . In 1918 her armament was exchanged for a number of 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) guns and trench mortars as part of her role as the lead ship in the planned Italian assault on the main Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Pola . The war ended before the Italians could carry out the attack and she was stricken again in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Re Umberto was 127 @.@ 6 meters ( 419 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 23 @.@ 44 m ( 76 @.@ 9 ft ) and an average draft of 9 @.@ 29 m ( 30 @.@ 5 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 673 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 457 long tons ; 15 @,@ 072 short tons ) normally and up to 15 @,@ 454 t ( 15 @,@ 210 long tons ; 17 @,@ 035 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of vertical compound steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eighteen coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) at 19 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 500 kW ) . Specific figures for her cruising radius have not survived , but the ships of her class could steam for 4 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 to 11 @,@ 100 km ; 4 @,@ 600 to 6 @,@ 900 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 733 officers and men . 
 Re Umberto was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 in ( 343 mm ) 30 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one on either end of the ship . She carried a secondary battery of eight 6 in ( 152 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns placed singly in shielded mounts atop the upper deck , with four on each broadside . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) guns in casemates in the upper deck , eight on each broadside . These were supported by sixteen 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 43 @-@ cal. guns and ten 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes in above @-@ water launchers . The ship was lightly armored for her size . She was protected by belt armor that was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick , an armored deck that was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick , and her conning tower was armored with 11 @.@ 8 in ( 300 mm ) of steel plate . The turrets had 4 in thick faces and the supporting barbettes had 13 @.@ 75 in ( 349 mm ) thick steel . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Re Umberto was named after the Italian King Umberto I of Italy . Re Umberto was built by the Castellammare Naval Shipyard in Castellammare di Stabia , Naples . Her keel was laid down on 10 July 1884 . After over four years of construction , she was launched on 17 October 1888 . Following sea trials , the battleship was formally commissioned into the Regina Marina on 16 February 1893 . 
 At the time the Re Umberto was commissioned into the Regina Marina , the navy maintained two battleship squadrons ; the Active Squadron and the Reserve Squadron . The ships alternated between the two in February of each year ; in 1895 , Re Umberto was assigned to the Reserve Squadron , along with the older battleships Ruggiero di Lauria , Italia , and Lepanto . In June 1895 , the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal in Germany was completed ; to celebrate , dozens of warships from 14 different countries gathered in Kiel for a celebration hosted by Kaiser Wilhelm II . Re Umberto was one of four battleships in the flotilla that represented Italy . All three ships of the class participated in the 1896 Naval Maneuvers in the Tyrrhenian Sea . 
 For 1903 , the Active Squadron was on active service for seven months , with the rest of the year spent with reduced crews . In 1904 – 05 , Re Umberto and her sisters were in service with the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for nine months of the year , with three months in reduced commission . The following year , the ships were transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with the three Ruggiero di Laurias and the ironclad Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . Re Umberto was still in the Reserve Squadron in 1908 , along with her two sisters and the two Ammiraglio di Saint Bon @-@ class battleships . By this time , the Reserve Squadron was kept in service for seven months of the year . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . At the time , Re Umberto and her two sisters were assigned to the Training Division , along with the old armored cruiser Carlo Alberto , under the command of Rear Admiral Raffaele Borea Ricci D 'Olmo . On 3 – 4 October , Re Umberto and her sisters were tasked with bombarding Fort Sultanje , which was protecting the western approach to Tripoli . The ships used their 6 @-@ inch guns to attack the fort to preserve their stock of 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shells . By the morning of the 4th , the ships ' gunfire had silenced the guns in the fort , allowing landing forces to go ashore and capture the city . The ships of the Training Division thereafter alternated between Tripoli and Khoms to support the Italian garrisons in the two cities . In November , Re Umberto , Sicilia , the torpedo cruiser Partenope , the destroyer Fulmine , and the torpedo boat <unk> bombarded the oasis at Taguira , though no Turkish forces were present . The Italians then sent a garrison to protect the oasis . 
 By December , the three ships were stationed in Tripoli , where they were replaced by the old ironclads Italia and Lepanto . Re Umberto and her sisters arrived back in La Spezia , where they had their ammunition and supplies replenished . In May 1912 , the Training Division patrolled the coast , but saw no action . The following month , Re Umberto and her sisters , along with six torpedo boats , escorted a convoy carrying an infantry brigade to Buscheifa , one of the last ports in Libya still under Ottoman control . The Italian force arrived off the town on 14 June and made a landing ; after taking the city , the Italian forces then moved on to Misrata . Re Umberto and the rest of the ships continued supporting the advance until the Italians had secured the city on 20 July . The Training Division then returned to Italy , where they joined the escort for another convoy on 3 August , this time to Zuara , the last port in Ottoman hands . The ships covered the landing two miles east of Zuara two days later , which was joined by supporting attacks from the west and south . With the capture of the city , Italy now controlled the entire Libyan coast . On 14 October the Ottomans agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 She was laid up in Genoa in 1912 and became a depot ship . Towed to La Spezia in June 1915 , after having been stricken from the Navy List on 10 May 1914 , she became a depot ship for the dreadnought Andrea Doria . She was reinstated on 9 December 1915 and became a floating battery at Brindisi and , later , Valona , Albania . In 1918 Re Umberto was tasked to lead the planned assault on the primary Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Pola and modified for the role by the removal of her armament and the addition of eight 3 @-@ inch guns with gun shields as well as a number of trench mortars . A special saw and cutters were also installed to deal with the harbor boom and net defenses . The war ended before the Italians could carry out the attack and she was again stricken on 4 July 1920 . 
 = Cyclone Hellen = 
 Very Intense Tropical Cyclone Hellen of March 2014 was one of the most powerful tropical cyclones in the Mozambique Channel on record , as well as the second most intense of the 2013 – 14 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season . It formed on March 27 in the northern portion of the channel , and in its formative stages brought rainfall to coastal Mozambique . While moving southeastward , it developed an organized area of convection over the center . Warm waters allowed Hellen to rapidly intensify while passing south of the Comoros , with a well @-@ defined eye forming in the middle of the thunderstorms . The cyclone attained peak intensity March 30 , with maximum sustained winds estimated 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) according to the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , Météo @-@ France in La Réunion . Subsequently , Hellen weakened quickly due to dry air and interaction with Madagascar , and the eye dissipated . On March 31 , the storm made landfall in northwestern Madagascar as a weakened cyclone , despite previous forecasts for the center to remain over water . By April 1 , Hellen was no longer a tropical cyclone after most of the convection dissipated . The remnants turned to the west , moving over Mozambique without redeveloping . 
 Early in its duration , Hellen 's rainfall in Mozambique destroyed hundreds of houses and a bridge . Flooding killed four people in the country , three of whom due to a home collapsing . Later , the cyclone passed south of the Comoros islands , causing flooding due to high storm surge and waves that killed one person . The storm forced 8 @,@ 956 people to evacuate their homes due to the threat for landslides , while 901 houses were damaged or destroyed . On nearby Mayotte , high rainfall flooded rivers , sweeping one car away . In northwestern Madagascar , Hellen damaged or destroyed 611 houses , leaving 1 @,@ 736 people homeless . The storm killed three people after capsizing a boat . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On March 25 , 2014 , a weak area of low pressure accompanied by broad , flaring convection became increasingly organized over Mozambique . Owing to favorable environmental conditions , featuring low wind shear , vorticity became more enhanced and symmetrical . A compact system , the low steadily organized as it emerged over the Mozambique Channel on March 26 . Though continued land interaction initially hindered development , enhanced outflow supported convective development as it straddled the Mozambique – Tanzania border . With high sea surface temperatures in the storm 's track , the JTWC anticipated further organization and issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert at 2000 UTC on March 26 . Once further offshore on March 27 , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center Météo @-@ France in La Réunion classified the system as Disturbance 14 . Drifting slowly east , a prominent feeder band developed along the system 's eastern side ; however , this band disrupted low @-@ level inflow of warm , moist air and suppressed convection over the circulation center . 
 Though convection later began to consolidate into a small central dense overcast ( CDO ) feature by March 28 , continued disruption of the low @-@ level inflow prevented much development . Météo @-@ France noted that despite forecasting the storm to peak as a moderate tropical storm , with winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) , there was potential for rapid intensification due to the storm 's small size . Conversely , the JTWC noted that proximity to land and dry mid @-@ level air , represented by surface outflow boundaries , could hamper significant development . Once further over the Mozambique Channel , the system became increasingly organized and the JTWC initiated advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 21S . Météo @-@ France followed suit at 0000 UTC on March 29 and classified the cyclone as a moderate tropical storm , with the tropical cyclone warning center in Madagascar assigning the name Hellen . Hellen soon assumed an east @-@ southeast track toward Madagascar as a ridge established itself to the northeast . Throughout March 29 , the storm became increasingly organized with an eye apparent on microwave satellite imagery . 
 Rapid to explosive intensification ensued during the later half of March 29 into March 30 at a rate Météo @-@ France later referred to as " astounding " . Deep convective banding wrapped around a ragged eye , which soon contracted to " pinhole " size . This prompted Météo @-@ France to upgrade Hellen to a tropical cyclone with winds estimated at 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) at 0000 UTC on March 30 . Six hours later , they further upgraded the storm to an intense tropical cyclone with winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . Hellen attained its peak intensity between 1100 and 1500 UTC as a very intense tropical cyclone , with winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 925 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) . This ranked it as one of the most powerful storms over the Mozambique Channel on record . The storm featured a 20 km ( 12 mi ) wide eye embedded within a symmetrical and intense CDO , spanning 240 km ( 150 mi ) across . The JTWC estimated Hellen to have attained one @-@ minute sustained winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , making it a high @-@ end Category 4 @-@ equivalent cyclone on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , although this was lowered to 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) in reanalysis . 
 After peak intensity , the cyclone 's eye soon began to fill and cool as weakening ensued . Defying previous forecasts , Hellen continued on a southeasterly track toward Madagascar and the likelihood of it making landfall became apparent . By the end of March 30 , Hellen 's eye had collapsed and disappeared from satellite imagery , as the combination of dry air and land interaction took their toll on the storm . At about 0800 UTC on March 31 , Hellen made landfall on northwestern Madagascar , and the previously unfavorable conditions coupled with land interaction to induce rapid weakening . The ridge to the east turned Hellen to a southwest drift over land . By early on April 1 , the convection largely dissipated as the center became difficult to locate , with peak winds dropping to 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . As a result , Météo @-@ France discontinued advisories that day , as did the JTWC . The remnants moved back over open waters , but were not expected to reorganize due to the poor nature of the convection . As the low continued to the west , the convection increased on April 4 while approaching the coastline of Mozambique , although the system failed to redevelop before moving onshore . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 During its formative stages , Hellen meandered around northern Mozambique and produced prolonged heavy rains over the region . The city of Pemba in Cabo Delgado Province was the hardest hit area , with the <unk> River over @-@ topping its banks . <unk> <unk> , mayor of Pemba , described the rains as the heaviest he had seen in 20 years . More than 100 poorly constructed homes collapsed in the floods while severe erosion exposed and destroyed water pipes . A major bridge connecting Pemba to surrounding areas was washed away by the <unk> river . This isolated the northern portion of Cabo Delgado Province from the rest of the country , forcing ferries to transport cars . Three people died in the district of <unk> when their home collapsed while a fourth drowned in <unk> . Distributing assistance following the storm was disrupted by damaged roads . 
 = = = Comoro Islands = = = 
 Heavy rains and storm surge caused significant damage on all three islands of the Comoros , with the worst occurring on Anjouan . There , 901 houses were damaged , of which about 20 % were destroyed . Flooding displaced 389 people in <unk> where 33 mud @-@ built homes were destroyed . Landslides isolated the villages of <unk> , <unk> , Koni @-@ <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , and damaged a road between <unk> and Domoni . On the island , 7 @,@ 879 people had to evacuate their houses due to the risk of further landslides , some of whom went to schools set up as shelters while others stayed with family or friends . Storm surge on Mohéli flooded parts of <unk> , Walla , and <unk> , resulting in one fatality . Several houses were damaged on the island , and <unk> lost power due to a damaged power line . The Prince Said Ibrahim International Airport in Moroni on Grande Comore was closed for about 24 hours due to the storm . Also on the island , a road was damaged , and one house was flooded . Shortly after the storm , workers began repairing roads and distributing aid . 
 Though the center of Cyclone Hellen remained south of Mayotte , it prompted an " orange alert " on March 30 for the area due to the potential for hurricane @-@ force gusts . The storm 's rapid intensification caught most residents on the island off @-@ guard , with widespread disruptions to traffic and electricity taking place . Wind gusts up to 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) downed trees and power lines , blocking off roads while heavy rains caused significant flooding . A peak 24 ‑ hour rainfall of 239 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) was measured in <unk> between March 29 and 30 . In M <unk> , cars were swept away by a swollen river . Along the coast , waves up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) damaged marinas in <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> where skiffs were smashed against rocks or stranded . 
 = = = Madagascar = = = 
 On March 31 , a boat capsized off the coast of northwest Madagascar , killing three and leaving nine others missing . High seas washed away 20 canoes along the coast . Initial assessments of damage across Madagascar were initially hampered by poor weather and inaccessibility . The storm flooded 7 @,@ 795 ha ( 19 @,@ 260 acres ) of rice fields across the country , as well as 114 ha ( 280 acres ) of other crops , threatening harvests after a locust outbreak had occurred in the months prior to the storm . The storm also killed 23 zebu and damaged two dams . Cyclone Hellen destroyed 437 houses and damaged or flooded 174 others , leaving 1 @,@ 736 people homeless during its passage . The storm also damaged two health facilities and five schools . Overall impact from Hellen was less than expected due to its weakening , with most telephone lines still intact . 
 Due to the storm affecting water access in northwestern Madagascar , there was concern for a disease outbreak , with a flu outbreak noted in Mahajanga . The national Red Cross utilized 54 volunteers to assist in the storm 's aftermath , such as distributing kitchen kits and agriculture units . Residents donated 2 million ariary ( $ 800 USD ) to the Red Cross , which were used to purchase medicines , while the government provided 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 300 lb ) of rice for affected residents . 
 = Gruban v Booth = 
 Gruban v Booth was a 1917 fraud case in England that generated significant publicity because the defendant , Frederick Handel Booth , was a Member of Parliament . Gruban was a German @-@ born businessman who ran several factories that made tools for manufacturing munitions for the First World War . In an effort to find money to expand his business he contacted a businessman and Member of Parliament named Frederick Handel Booth , who agreed to provide the necessary money . After stealing money Booth tricked Gruban into handing over the company and then had him interned under war @-@ time regulations to prevent the story coming out . 
 Gruban successfully appealed against his internment , and as soon as he was freed brought Booth to court . The case was so popular that the involved barristers found it physically difficult to get into the court each day due to the size of the crowds gathered outside . Although the barristers on both sides were noted for their skill the case went almost entirely one way , with the jury taking only ten minutes to find Booth guilty . This was one of the first noted cases of Patrick Hastings , and his victory in it led to him applying to become a King 's Counsel . 
 = = Background = = 
 John Gruban was a German @-@ born businessman , originally named Johann Wilhelm Gruban , who had come to England in 1893 to work for an engineering company , Haigh and Company . By 1913 he had turned the business from an almost bankrupt company to a successful manufacturer of machine tools , and at the outbreak of the First World War it was one of the first companies to produce machine tools used to make munitions . This made Gruban a major player in a now @-@ large market , and he attempted to raise £ 5 @,@ 000 to expand his business . On independent advice he contacted Frederick Handel Booth , a noted Liberal Member of Parliament who was chairman of the Yorkshire Iron and Coal Company and had led the government inquiry into the Marconi scandal . When Gruban contacted Booth , Booth told him that he could do " more for [ your ] company than any man in England " , claiming that David Lloyd George ( at the time Minister of Munitions ) and many other important government officials were close friends . With £ 3 @,@ 500 borrowed from his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Booth immediately invested in Gruban 's company . 
 The sinking of the RMS Lusitania in 1915 created a wave of anti @-@ German sentiment , and Gruban worried that he would find it difficult to find government work because of his nationality and thick German accent . He again contacted Booth , who again claimed to be friends with David Lloyd George and his secretary , Christopher Addison , and said that if Gruban put Booth on the Board of Directors he could " do with the Ministry of Munitions what I like " . Gruban immediately made Booth the chairman of his company , and over 3 months took £ 400 on expenses . He then claimed that this was not enough money for the work he did , and he should get a secret payment of 10 % of the value of a contract known as the " Birmingham Contract " . The contract was worth £ 6 @,@ 000 , and Booth wrote a memo saying that he should have £ 580 or £ 600 . Gruban refused , and Booth threw the note in the <unk> basket . From that point onwards Booth worked as hard as he could to undermine Gruban 's position , while outwardly appearing to be his friend . 
 Over the next few months a series of complaints came from the Ministry of Munitions about Gruban 's work and his German origins , ending in a written statement by David Lloyd George 's private secretary that it was " undesirable that any person of recent German nationality or association should at the present time be connected in an important capacity with any company or firm engaged in the production of munitions of war " . Booth showed this to Gruban and told him that the only way to save the company and prevent Gruban being interned was for him to transfer the ownership of the company to Booth . Gruban did this , and Booth immediately " came out in his true colours " , treating Gruban with contempt and refusing to help support his wife and family now that Gruban had no income . Eventually Booth wrote to the Ministry of Munitions saying that Gruban had " taken leave of his senses " , and the Ministry had Gruban interned . 
 Gruban appealed against the internment order , and was called before a court consisting of Mr Justice Younger and Mr Justice Sankey . After reviewing the facts of the case and the stories of Gruban and Booth the judges ordered the immediate release of Gruban , and recommended that he seek legal advice to see if he could regain control of his company . After he was released Gruban found a solicitor , W.J. <unk> , who gave the case to Patrick Hastings . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Hastings felt that their best chances lay in interviewing Christopher Addison about his contact with Booth ; as Addison was a government minister he could be relied on to tell the truth . The case of Gruban v Booth opened on 7 May 1917 at the King 's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice in front of Mr Justice Coleridge . Patrick Hastings and Hubert Wallington represented Gruban , while Booth was represented by Rigby Swift KC and Douglas Hogg . The trial attracted such public interest that on the final day the barristers found it physically difficult to get through the crowds surrounding the Law Courts . 
 As counsel for the prosecution , Hastings was the first barrister to speak . In his opening speech to the jury he criticised Booth for loving money rather than his country , saying that one of the things which the English prided themselves on was fair play , and " no matter how loudly the defendant raises the cry of patriotism , I feel sure that your sense of fair play , gentlemen , will ensure a verdict that the defendant is unfit to sit in the House of Commons , as he has been guilty of fraud " . Hastings then called Gruban to the witness stand , and asked him to tell the jury what had happened . Gruban described how Booth had claimed to have influence over David Lloyd George . Gruban was then cross @-@ examined by Rigby Swift . 
 Booth was then called to the witness stand , and initially claimed that Gruban had claimed to be " a very powerful man " and that it had been a case of Gruban using his power to help Booth , not the other way around . He was still in the witness box when the court day ended , and the next morning it was announced that Christopher Addison had come to the court . The judge allowed Addison to give his testimony before they continued with Booth , and during a cross @-@ examination by Hastings Addison stated that he had not been advising Booth in any way , and that " to say that Gruban 's only chance of escape from internment was to hand over his shares to Mr Booth was a lie " . 
 The final witness was Handel Booth himself . Booth stated that he would never have asked for a ten @-@ percent commission on the Birmingham contract , and that he had never claimed he could influence government ministers . Hastings showed the jury that both of these statements were lies , first by showing the piece of paper Booth had scribbled the " Birmingham contract " memo on and then by showing a telegram from Booth to Gruban in which Booth claimed that he " [ had ] already spoken to a Cabinet Minister and high official " . 
 In his summing up Mr Justice Coleridge was " on the whole unfavourable to Booth " . He also pointed out that the German nationality of Gruban might prejudice the jury , and asked them to " be sure that you permit no prejudice on their hand to disturb the balance of the scales of justice " . The jury decided the case in only ten minutes , finding Booth guilty and awarding Gruban £ 4 @,@ 750 . 
 = Dan Cocoziello = 
 Daniel F. " Dan " Cocoziello ( born August 8 , 1985 ) is a lacrosse defenseman who plays professional field lacrosse in the Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 2005 through 2008 where he started every game . He is the only defenseman to have earned the Men 's Ivy League Rookie of the Year . He was a three @-@ time United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American ( once first team and twice second team ) and three @-@ time All @-@ Ivy League selection ( twice first team and once second team ) . During his college career , Princeton earned an Ivy League championship and two NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitations . In high school , he won three state lacrosse championships . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in <unk> , New Jersey , Cocoziello was a baseball and soccer player in his youth . He attended elementary school at Gil St. Bernards in New Jersey . He met his middle school , high school and college teammate Alex Hewit taking an entrance exam for New Jersey 's Delbarton School in sixth grade . Even in seventh grade at Delbarton , Cocoziello was still a baseball player who was introduced to lacrosse during lunch and free periods with his classmates . He eventually got a lacrosse stick and started practicing as much as he could . In eighth grade , he joined the school team and made a New Jersey state eighth @-@ grade all @-@ star team along with Hewit that competed against all @-@ stars from other states . He eventually joined the varsity team and helped lead the team to a cumulative 63 – 4 record and three high school lacrosse state championships . He was regarded as the best high school lacrosse recruit in the nation in the 2003 , according to Inside Lacrosse . He played linebacker in high school football and was offered a scholarship to play for Hofstra University , but opted to play lacrosse at Princeton . 
 = = College career = = 
 He started every game of his career at Princeton , where he earned the 2005 Men 's Ivy League Rookie of the Year , the only defensemen to every to garner the award . That year he was an honorable mention All @-@ Ivy League selection . He was also the first defenseman to win the Ivy League Rookie of the Year award . He was a first team All @-@ Ivy League choice in 2006 & 2008 and second team choice in 2007 He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 2008 and second team selection in 2006 and 2007 . He served as co @-@ captain of the 2008 team along with longtime teammate Alex Hewit and Bob Schneider . The 2006 team was Ivy League co @-@ champion with Cornell . Princeton qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship in 2006 & 2007 . During Cocoziello 's junior year , while playing in a scrimmage against Towson University , broke his vehicular bone in his left foot . Originally diagnosed as a sprain , Cocoziello played his entire junior and senior season on the broken foot . Upon graduation in 2008 , he was correctly diagnosed and underwent reconstructive surgery following his 2008 MLL Season with the Denver Outlaws . The surgery was unsuccessful causing Cocoziello to discontinue playing lacrosse . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Cocoziello began his MLL career with the Denver Outlaws during the 2008 MLL season . On February 20 , 2009 , he was reassigned to the Toronto Nationals . In 2010 , he was a member of the Boston Cannons . 
 He has appeared in no National Lacrosse League games . However , his National Lacrosse League rights were acquired by the Philadelphia Wings in the 2010 Orlando Titans dispersal draft . 
 = = = MLL statistics = = = 
 The following are his MLL career stats : 
 = = Life after the MLL = = 
 Cocoziello currently lives in New York City where he works in real estate for New York @-@ based <unk> , Inc . He is also pursuing a Master 's in Real Estate from New York University . 
 = 2010 Singapore Grand Prix = 
 The 2010 Singapore Grand Prix ( formally the 2010 Formula 1 <unk> Singapore Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 26 September 2010 at the Marina Bay Street Circuit , Marina Bay , Singapore . It was the fifteenth race of the 2010 Formula One season , and the third Singapore Grand Prix held as part of the Formula One World Championship . The 61 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Fernando Alonso who started in pole position . Sebastian Vettel finished second for Red Bull , his teammate Mark Webber was third . 
 Alonso held off Vettel to maintain his start line advantage on the first lap . Lewis Hamilton , who started third , fought off teammate Jenson Button to retain his start position . The top two remained the same through the first and only round of pit stops . Webber 's team , Red Bull , opted to pit him early allowing him to move ahead of Hamilton . The race was neutralised by the deployment of the safety car after Kamui Kobayashi and Bruno Senna crashed on lap 31 . Hamilton retired after a collision with Webber shortly after the race restarted on lap 36 . Alonso maintained his lead throughout the remainder of the race despite pressure from Vettel . 
 The race was Alonso 's second consecutive victory and his fourth of the 2010 season ; he had started from pole position to win the Italian Grand Prix two weeks earlier . The win meant Alonso moved into second place in the World Drivers ' Championship , eleven points behind leader Webber . Hamilton 's retirement meant he slipped to third , while Vettel 's second @-@ place finish moved him into fourth ahead of Jenson Button . In the Constructors ' Championship Red Bull extended its lead to twenty @-@ four points ahead of McLaren . Ferrari was a further forty points behind , with four races remaining in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The 2010 Singapore Grand Prix was the fifteenth round of the 2010 Formula One season after taking a two @-@ week break from the previous race in Italy . The event was held at the Marina Bay Street Circuit in Marina Bay , Singapore on 26 September 2010 . The Grand Prix was contested by twelve teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were : McLaren , Mercedes , Red Bull , Ferrari , Williams , Renault , Force India , Toro Rosso , Lotus , Hispania , Sauber and Virgin . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought four different tyre types to the race : two dry compounds ( super soft " options " and medium " primes " ) and two wet @-@ weather compounds ( intermediate and full wets ) . The soft compounds were denoted by a green stripe on their side @-@ walls ; the wet compound tyres were identified by a green line at the bottom of their central groove . The rules of 2010 Grand Prix races stipulated that all cars should use both types of tyre during a race unless the driver used any one of two wet @-@ weather compounds . Each driver was limited to eleven sets of dry tyres for the weekend . 
 Before the race , Red Bull driver Mark Webber led the Drivers ' Championship with 187 points . He was ahead of Lewis Hamilton in second with 182 points and Fernando Alonso in third on 166 points . Hamilton 's teammate Jenson Button was fourth with 165 points , and Sebastian Vettel was fifth on 163 points . Red Bull was leading the Constructors ' Championship with 350 points ; McLaren and Ferrari were second and third with 347 and 290 points respectively , while Mercedes on 158 and Renault with 127 points contended for fourth position . Red Bull , McLaren , and Ferrari had won the previous fourteen races of the season ( with victories being taken by Alonso , Button , Vettel , Hamilton and Webber ) . Felipe Massa ( twice ) , Robert Kubica had finished in second place , and Nico Rosberg ( three times ) , Massa ( twice ) and Kubica ( once ) had all finished in third . 
 Singapore was a critical race in the championship as all five drivers had a chance to take the lead with a victory . The situation was made difficult for Alonso as he had used his allocation of eight engines following the Italian Grand Prix , and to replace one would incur a ten @-@ place grid penalty . His rivals each had at least one untouched engine in reserve ; Webber had two . Nevertheless , Alonso set himself the target to score points in Singapore . He also acknowledged that his car was not the fastest in the field and felt he needed five podiums in the season 's five remaining races . Webber stated that he was expecting Singapore to be a tough weekend for him after he had retired from the event in 2008 and 2009 , but felt there was still some time before a driver clinched the championship . After crashing out of the first lap of the Italian Grand Prix , Hamilton said he would push hard to stay in the running for the championship : " I 'll take each race as it comes , but I 'll also be making sure I get to the finish of the next five races , that 's more important than anything . I go to Singapore to win . " Hamilton felt Alonso was the favourite to win the Singapore Grand Prix and viewed the Spanish driver as his main rival for the Drivers ' Championship which was shared by Red Bull team principal Christian Horner . Button himself believed Alonso would have an extra advantage as the Spaniard 's teammate Massa was out of contention for the title . 
 The Marina Bay Street Circuit was resurfaced between turns three and seven , along with turns thirteen to seventeen , after drivers complained about its <unk> following the 2009 Singapore Grand Prix . The Singapore Sling chicane was adjusted to allow for a more gradual curve to exist which enabled a safer exit for drivers . The outside wall at turn 21 was brought closer towards the race track to cover up half of a drain which was previously exposed to cars , and the pit lane was resurfaced to allow for a smoother exit for drivers rejoining the circuit . Hamilton , a vocal critic of the circuit 's condition , described it as " dangerous " because it had remained uneven , and said the Singapore Sling chicane was " the worst corner I have ever driven in Formula One " despite the safety modifications made to it . The organisers of the Singapore Grand Prix introduced a new machine to clean the surface of the track after drivers had problems with a dusty and slippery track surface in the previous year 's race . Two days before the first practice session , drivers expressed concerns over low visibility caused by rain showers combined with the glare from the circuit lighting . 
 There were two driver changes heading into the Grand Prix . Hispania Racing announced that Sakon Yamamoto , one of the team 's drivers since the tenth race of the season , was to be replaced for the weekend by the team 's reserve driver Christian Klien because he was suffering from food poisoning . Several journalists noticed a seemingly healthy Yamamoto in the paddock , suggesting that he had been dropped for sponsorship reasons instead . Team principal Colin Kolles confirmed that the arrangement would be for one race and Yamamoto would return to the cockpit at Suzuka . Pedro de la Rosa was summarily dropped by Sauber and replaced by Pirelli test driver Nick Heidfeld , who last drove for the Sauber team in 2009 . The change was made because of de la Rosa 's poor performance relative to that of teammate Kamui Kobayashi , and Heidfeld 's knowledge of the Marina Bay Street Circuit and the Yas Marina Circuit . 
 Several teams made modifications to their cars in preparation for the event . McLaren , Red Bull , and Williams all revised their front wings . McLaren 's revision was designed to separate airflow into two separate channels , with both directing airflow around the outside of the car 's front tyres . Red Bull 's design , used in the Friday practice sessions , had two vertical slots to the rear of its endplate along with another to avoid creating a vortex when it operated with the planes and endplate . A previous design , debuted at the British Grand Prix , was used both in qualifying and in the race . In addition , the team used a revised diffuser to allow for better management of airflow to the top of the diffuser 's side section . Williams ' design debuted for the first time and was designed to make the tyre act like a diffuser which took air in to improve its efficiency . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying sessions = = = 
 Three practice sessions — two on Friday and a third on Saturday — were held before the main Sunday race . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted ninety minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . The first practice session was initially held on a wet track with a clear sky after rainstorms earlier in the day left standing water on parts of the circuit , and high humidity slowed the drying process . These conditions meant drivers used intermediate tyres first before dry tyres were utilised in the session 's closing minutes . Webber set the fastest time of the first session with a late lap of 1 : 54 @.@ 589 , one @-@ tenth of a second faster than Michael Schumacher in second who was briefly quickest before Webber set his lap . Adrian Sutil , with a lap of 1 : 58 @.@ 827 , was third fastest , ahead of Vettel and Jaime Alguersuari . Button , Vitantonio Liuzzi , Sébastien Buemi , Kubica , and Vitaly Petrov rounded out the session 's top ten fastest drivers . 
 In the second practice session , when the track was still damp in some sections , Vettel set the fastest time of the night , a lap of 1 : 46 @.@ 660 on super @-@ soft tyres ; Webber finished with the second fastest lap . Button drove aggressively and battled Vettel for the fastest time throughout before he ended with the third quickest lap , half a second off Vettel 's pace . Alonso , who was fourth fastest , ran wide at turn 17 while on a quick lap and slid down the access road at the next corner ; he stalled while attempting to rejoin the track and abandoned his car requiring marshals to push his Ferrari away from the track . Hamilton was fifth , with Barrichello and Massa in sixth and seventh places . The two Mercedes drivers were eighth and tenth ; with Nico Rosberg ahead of Schumacher , separated by Kubica . Sutil 's Force India was launched into the air when he hit a kerb at the Singapore Sling chicane and his front @-@ left suspension was broken upon landing requiring him to miss half the session , and Alguersuari 's left @-@ rear tyre made contact with a barrier but he avoided major damage to his car . Sutil was fined US $ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 6 @,@ 300 ) by the stewards because he attempted to drive back to the pit lane in his damaged car and did not stop at a safe position on the circuit . 
 Rain hit the circuit on Saturday afternoon , ending three hours before the session started , resulting in several damp patches on the circuit though the air temperature remained hot . Different sections of the circuit dried out at different rates making it difficult for drivers to tell precisely how wet or dry certain corners were . The teams ran intermediate tyres before switching to the super @-@ soft tyre as the session progressed . Some drivers ran deep into turn five . Vettel was the fastest driver of the session with a time of 1 : 48 @.@ 028 set in the last twenty minutes of the one @-@ hour period . The time was four @-@ tenths faster than championship rival Alonso . Hamilton was third fastest , two @-@ thousandths of a second in front of Massa . Rosberg was fifth , ahead of Webber and Nico Hülkenberg . Kubica , Sutil and Buemi completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . Hispania Racing driver Bruno Senna 's right @-@ rear tyre got onto a white line at the Singapore Sling chicane and spun . Senna later brushed a wall entering the Esplanade Bridge in the final minute and stopped his car , causing the yellow @-@ flags to be shown ; drivers were unable to improve on their lap times because of the limited time available . 
 The qualifying session held on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for twenty minutes and eliminated the cars that finished the session eighteenth or lower from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted fifteen minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions eleven to seventeen . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth and decided pole position . Cars which competed in the final qualifying session were not allowed to change tyres before the race ; these started the race fitted with the tyres with which they set their quickest lap times . It was held in dry weather conditions . Alonso was fastest in the first and third sessions , and clinched his second consecutive pole position with a lap time of 1 : 45 @.@ 390 which he set on his first run of the third session . He was restricted to one timed lap in the second session because of an engine mapping problem , which meant Ferrari immediately re @-@ programmed Alonso 's engine upon discovering the issue . Alonso was joined on the front row of the grid by Vettel , who recorded a lap 0 @.@ 067 seconds off Alonso 's pace , and felt he could have taken pole position as he misjudged a gap while following Schumacher and brushed the wall exiting the Singapore Sling chicane . Hamilton qualified third and was happy with his starting position despite losing downforce on the track 's final sector while running in teammate Button 's tow . Button secured fourth and pushed hard in the final session which meant he had slight damage to his rear tyres on his first run , and could not get the optimum tyre temperature in the first section on his second run . Webber managed fifth and admitted that he was struggling to find a good rhythm when driving the circuit . Barrichello qualified in sixth . The two Mercedes drivers took seventh and ninth ; Rosberg ahead of Schumacher . Rosberg believed that he should have performed better in qualifying than in the practice session , as he felt the soft tyres lacked grip ; Schumacher was satisfied with his qualifying performance . The Mercedes drivers were separated by Kubica , in the faster Renault , who was happy with his lap time despite his car sliding from a lack of grip . Kobayashi rounded out the top ten qualifiers . 
 Alguersuari , who qualified eleventh , was the fastest driver not advancing to the final session . His best time of 1 : 47 @.@ 666 was 1 @.@ 8 seconds slower than Vettel 's pace in the second session . Alguersuari 's time was followed by Hülkenberg , who was backed up by Sutil on his first run in the second session , and described his car 's balance like " night and day " . However , Hülkenberg was demoted five positions on the grid after the Williams team changed his gearbox after the race at Monza . As a consequence , Petrov inherited 12th position having pushed hard on a set of option tyres . He had lost control of his car after he went deep , under braking , heading for turn five ( a corner that was damp from the earlier rain shower ) , with his right @-@ rear wheel hitting the wall . Petrov 's crash meant he took no further part in qualifying . He was ahead of Buemi , in the slower of the two Torro Rossos , who lost a large amount of grip and got stuck in traffic . Heidfeld took 14th ahead of his fellow countryman Sutil in 15th . Liuzzi had a problem with his front brakes on the first run of the second session and managed 16th . Timo Glock , Heikki Kovalainen and Lucas di Grassi were the quickest drivers unable to advance beyond the first part of qualifying . The eleventh row of the grid was filled by Jarno Trulli and Klien . Senna took 23rd . Massa was unable to set a timed lap as his gearbox seized without warning forcing him to stop on the circuit ; Ferrari chose to replace his engine and gearbox as a precaution . Massa 's engine change was his ninth of the season which incurred a ten @-@ place grid penalty , but since he started from 24th position , the penalty was nullified . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race began at 20 : 00 SST ( UTC + 8 ) . The conditions on the grid were dry and cloudy before the race ; the air temperature ranged between 29 – 32 ° C ( 84 – 90 ° F ) and the track temperature was 31 ° C ( 88 ° F ) ; no rain was predicted during the race . Most drivers started on the super @-@ soft compound tyre . Alguersuari started from the pit lane as his team discovered a coolant leak in his car . As the five red lights went out to signal the start of the race , Alonso maintained his pole position advantage heading into the first corner and withstood Vettel 's attempt to pass him . Button got an early advantage over teammate Hamilton , but Hamilton fought him to retain third place . Barrichello fell from sixth to eighth place . Kubica passed Rosberg at the start but the German regained the sixth position in the same lap . Further down the field , the early momentum was broken when Heidfeld , attempting to overtake both Force India cars at turn seven , hit Sutil 's rear , damaging his front wing . Liuzzi subsequently went into Heidfeld 's rear @-@ end after the latter squeezed him towards the wall , causing front wing damage to his car . Heidfeld made a pit stop for a replacement front wing at the end of lap one , while Massa made his only pit stop of the race for the medium compound tyres . 
 Liuzzi pulled over to the inside of the circuit on the third lap , at turn ten , with left @-@ rear suspension damage resulting from contact with the wall . His retirement triggered the deployment of the safety car as marshals were required to push his car away from the track . Webber was the only top running driver to pit for the medium compound tyres during the safety car period on lap four . Red Bull had told Webber to enter the pit lane , assuring him that it was the right decision , though he questioned the move . Several drivers towards the rear also chose to pit . Racing resumed at the end of lap five when the safety car pulled into the pit lane . Webber immediately pushed hard and passed Glock for tenth position and a line of cars began to form behind Glock . Alonso began to pull away from Vettel as he set consecutive fastest laps . Webber passed Kobayashi at turn five to move into ninth on lap seven , and withstood an attempt to Kobayashi to reclaim ninth heading into turn seven . Hülkenberg and Petrov 's wheels made contact and both drivers went off the circuit on the same lap ; Hülkenberg managed to move ahead of Petrov with Massa taking advantage to pass the Renault driver . Webber caught Schumacher on lap 11 and passed the Mercedes driver on the same lap at turn five after Schumacher ran wide . Vettel was told by his team to cool his brakes on the same lap as Alonso continued to extend his lead . Sutil got ahead of Glock for eleventh place three laps later and started to pull away from the queue behind Glock . Hülkenberg ran wide at turn seven on the same lap but did not lose any positions . Hülkenberg passed Glock in the first sector of the track for twelfth on lap 16 . 
 Vettel and Alonso traded fastest laps as they pushed hard in their efforts to build up a sufficient lead over Webber to maintain first and second positions after their pit stops . Massa , Petrov , Buemi and Alguersuari all passed Glock on lap 17 thus eliminating the queue of cars . By lap 20 , Alonso was leading Vettel by 3 @.@ 2 seconds ; he in turn was a further 11 seconds in front of Hamilton . Button was in fourth , 20 seconds behind Alonso , with Rosberg 3 @.@ 3 seconds behind the World Champion in fifth . Webber changed his engine settings to give him a higher top speed in an attempt to get past Barrichello and decrease the time gap to Hamilton on lap 22 . He avoided colliding with an Armco barrier at the entry of turn eighteen one lap later . Hamilton was told to increase his pace on the 24th lap to try to stay ahead of Webber after the pit stop phase . But his car had a large amount of oversteer , as his rear , super @-@ soft , compound tyres began to deteriorate , causing his lap times to drop off the leader 's pace . Trulli drove to the pit lane and was pushed by his mechanics into the Lotus garage to retire with an hydraulic issue on lap 28 . Hamilton made the first scheduled stop for tyres on lap 29 and re @-@ emerged in eighth position behind Webber . Alonso and Vettel made simultaneous pit stops on the following lap ; Alonso retained his lead despite Vettel 's pit crew completing their pit stop first ; Vettel avoided stalling and drove away in second gear . With newer tyres which provided more grip , Vettel recorded faster lap times than Alonso to close the time gap as the two came across slower cars . 
 Kobayashi attempted to pass around the outside of Schumacher on lap 31 but the two made contact with Schumacher subsequently hitting a barrier . Kobayashi damaged his Sauber , losing control of his rear @-@ end , and crashed at the exit of turn 18 after his front wing was knocked off entering the corner . Senna was slow to react and buried his Hispania nose @-@ first into the barrier alongside Kobayashi . These incidents called for the race 's second safety car period to allow removal of both cars from the circuit which were on the racing line . Klien was pushed into his garage to retire with an hydraulic problem on lap 34 . The safety car pulled into the pit lane at the end of lap 35 and the race resumed with Alonso leading . Hamilton got a run on Webber who was caught behind di Grassi and lined up an overtaking manoeuvre on the Red Bull driver , and overtook him on the Raffles Boulevard straight . Webber 's front @-@ right tyre hit Hamilton 's left @-@ rear tyre at turn seven . He escaped without significant damage , while Hamilton had a punctured tyre and pulled off the circuit to retire for the second consecutive race . However , Webber did feel vibrations on the front @-@ end of his Red Bull . His tyre , which made contact with Hamilton 's , had been pushed 5 millimetres off its normal mounting on the rim , and Button drew closer to Webber who managed to maintain a good pace . On lap 37 , Schumacher went into Heidfeld 's rear @-@ end and limped back to the pit lane to replace his damaged front wing creating sparks as it was dragged along the surface of the track , while Heidfeld retired after hitting a barrier . Button was urged by his McLaren mechanics on lap 42 to push Webber whose tyres were older , while Vettel gradually closed the gap with Alonso . Hülkenberg , in ninth , made a mistake on lap 44 which allowed Massa to momentarily take advantage , but he fought back and retained ninth position . Kubica sustained a right @-@ rear puncture on lap 46 and made a pit stop on the same lap , rejoining in 13th . 
 Upfront , Vettel had reduced the gap between himself and Alonso to one second by lap 50 as the pair continued to trade the fastest lap time . Glock started to slow on the circuit and drove to the pit lane to retire . It was later confirmed that his retirement was the result of an issue with his car 's hydraulic system . With the advantage of having newer tyres which gave him more grip , Kubica was able to make short work of Alguersuari , Buemi , his teammate Petrov , Massa , Hülkenberg , and Sutil ( who was holding up a queue of five cars ) in the space of nine laps . Vettel continued to pressure race @-@ leader Alonso in the closing laps as the pair began to encounter slower cars . Kovalainen and Buemi made contact in the final sector of the lap , with the Lotus driver spinning around in front of the Toro Rosso , who was quick to avoid a head @-@ on collision . Kovalainen 's car suffered a cracked fuel tank pressure release valve and he limped back to the pit lane , the rear of his Lotus catching fire during the final few turns . Kovalainen aborted the pit entry , but did not make it much further as his car was consumed by the fire . Kovalainen stopped on the main straight and got out of his car to extinguish the fire himself after members of the Williams team handed him a fire extinguisher . As Kovalainen was off the racing line , yellow flags were waved in the final corners instead of a safety car deployment . 
 Vettel drew to within two @-@ tenths of a second behind Alonso as the final lap started , and came across Sutil , Hülkenberg , Petrov and Massa ; both drivers managed to get past Petrov , and Alonso maintained the first position heading into the final sector of the track . The yellow flag for Kovalainen 's car meant that Vettel 's final chance of an overtake , into the final corner , was denied , and Alonso took the checkered flag on lap 61 to win the race , 0 @.@ 293 seconds ahead of Vettel . Alonso secured the first , and , as of 2015 , the only Grand Chelem ( leading the entire race from pole position with fastest lap ) of his career as well as the first since Schumacher achieved the feat at the 2004 Hungarian Grand Prix . Webber was third , 1 @.@ 2 seconds ahead of Button in fourth . Rosberg , Barrichello and Kubica took the next three positions . Sutil held off Hülkenberg in the final sector of the track for eighth and ninth on the line with Massa in tenth . Petrov , Alguersuari , Schumacher and Buemi finished one lap behind Alonso , with di Grassi and Kovalainen ( despite his retirement ) the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and , in a later press conference , Alonso said that his victory " meant a lot " for him to remain in contention for the Drivers ' Championship and thanked his team for their efforts during the weekend . Alonso added that Ferrari would give " 100 per cent " in the season 's four remaining races and said the battle remained " very tight " despite scoring the most points out of all the drivers in the previous five races . Vettel said that he was hoping that Alonso would make a mistake but acknowledged that it was difficult to overtake on the circuit . He also said that attempting to overtake Alonso in the final stages of the race was " the only chance " that he had of winning the race and hoped that the remaining tracks would suit his Red Bull car . Webber stated that he was " very happy " with his third @-@ place finish and said the entire race weekend was the toughest of the year on him . He also said that he did not feel comfortable throughout the weekend and that he was staying composed through certain sections of the race . 
 Alonso 's win his been regarded as one of the best of his Formula One career . Former Formula One driver Martin Brundle described it as : " one of those races in which two drivers elevate themselves on to a separate plane from their rivals . " It reminded him of the 2000 Japanese Grand Prix where Schumacher won that year 's world championship from his main rival Mika Häkkinen . Will Saunders of <unk> said in 2014 that Alonso : " had little right to wrestle a performance of such magnitude out of either himself or the Ferrari , yet he found another level that day . " After the eventual conclusion of the championship in Vettel 's favour by four points , Saunders said : " Alonso 's performance in Singapore showed he would have been an equally deserving championship victor . " ESPN listed it as one of Alonso 's top ten races while driving for Ferrari . 
 The stewards immediately investigated the accident between Webber and Hamilton on lap 37 and took no further action . Hamilton later reviewed the incident on video and was adamant that he was not at fault saying that he was " unlucky " for the second consecutive Grand Prix . Webber stated the contact nearly forced him to retire and compared the accident to Hamilton 's collision with Massa at the Italian Grand Prix . Brundle felt Hamilton should have given Webber more space and agreed with the stewards ' decision . Bridgestone director of motorsport tyre development Hirohide Hamashima stated Webber was " very lucky " to make the finish and that if left hand high @-@ speed corners were installed on the track , the tyre would have moved more frequently and lost its pressure . Horner had also admitted that Webber had been lucky with his tyre lasting for a long distance . 
 Schumacher and Heidfeld 's accident on lap 37 was investigated by the stewards who took no further action after deciding it was a " racing incident " . Heidfeld felt Schumacher had braked too late and hoped that he would have had a better finishing position . Schumacher himself said that he was not happy with his first race in Singapore but enjoyed the second half of the race . BBC pundit , and former team principal , Eddie Jordan was highly critical of Schumacher arguing that the German driver should have been sacked by Mercedes to prevent him from being " slaughtered " in the event he was unable to win another race . Mercedes team principal Ross Brawn came to Schumacher 's defense and said his team was " happy " with his contribution . Motorsport pundits criticised Kovalainen 's decision to stop his car on the pit straight after it had caught fire and argued that he was " irresponsible " . Kovalainen defended his action arguing that it had not been safe to drive his Lotus into the pitlane . Nevertheless , Kovalainen 's fire was voted the Moment of the Year by readers of Autosport magazine in December 2010 at the Autosport Awards held in London . 
 Sutil was given a 20 @-@ second time penalty by the stewards as he was deemed to gain an advantage by taking the outside line at turn seven on the first lap . This demoted him from eighth to tenth , and promoted Hülkenberg from ninth to eighth and Massa from tenth to ninth . Following a protest from Force India , Hülkenberg was issued a 20 @-@ second time penalty after the stewards deemed him to have gained an advantage by corner cutting . This ruling meant Hülkenberg was demoted to tenth while Massa moved up to eighth and Sutil inherited ninth . Force India withdrew an appeal of Sutil 's penalty following the decision , and Williams technical director Sam Michael said that his team had accepted the stewards ' judgement . The stewards elected not to penalise Senna after examining a video of his collision with the stationary Kobayashi . Kobayashi admitted that he was at fault for his retirement and Senna believed the marshals were late reacting to Kobayashi 's accident and felt his own accident was unavoidable . 
 As a consequence of the race , Webber 's third @-@ place finish allowed him to increase his lead in the World Drivers ' Championship . Alonso 's victory allowed him to move up into second place , eleven points behind Webber . Hamilton 's retirement meant that he slipped to third place , nine points behind Alonso . Vettel 's second @-@ place finish resulted in him moving into fourth place ahead of Button . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Red Bull 's strong finish allowed them to draw further ahead of McLaren who were now twenty @-@ four points behind . Ferrari remained in third on 319 points , forty points behind McLaren . Mercedes increased their points advantage over Renault to thirty @-@ five with four races remaining in the season . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ – Nico Hülkenberg was given a five @-@ place grid penalty for changing his gearbox after the Italian Grand Prix . 
 ^ – Felipe Massa failed to set a lap time after stopping on the circuit in the first part of the qualifying session . 
 ^ – Ferrari replaced Massa 's gearbox and engine – his ninth for the season – after his stoppage in qualifying ; Massa could not be penalised because he had already qualified last after failing to set a time . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ – Adrian Sutil was penalised 20 seconds post @-@ race for illegally gaining an advantage at turn seven on the first lap . 
 ^ – Following a protest by Force India , Hülkenberg was penalised 20 seconds post @-@ race for illegally gaining an advantage . 
 ^ – Jaime Alguersuari started from the pit lane following a coolant leak before the race . 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Shale oil extraction = 
 Shale oil extraction is an industrial process for unconventional oil production . This process converts kerogen in oil shale into shale oil by pyrolysis , hydrogenation , or thermal dissolution . The resultant shale oil is used as fuel oil or upgraded to meet refinery feedstock specifications by adding hydrogen and removing sulfur and nitrogen impurities . 
 Shale oil extraction is usually performed above ground ( ex situ processing ) by mining the oil shale and then treating it in processing facilities . Other modern technologies perform the processing underground ( on @-@ site or in situ processing ) by applying heat and extracting the oil via oil wells . 
 The earliest description of the process dates to the 10th century . In 1684 , Great Britain granted the first formal extraction process patent . Extraction industries and innovations became widespread during the 19th century . The industry shrank in the mid @-@ 20th century following the discovery of large reserves of conventional oil , but high petroleum prices at the beginning of the 21st century have led to renewed interest , accompanied by the development and testing of newer technologies . 
 As of 2010 , major long @-@ standing extraction industries are operating in Estonia , Brazil , and China . Its economic viability usually requires a lack of locally available crude oil . National energy security issues have also played a role in its development . Critics of shale oil extraction pose questions about environmental management issues , such as waste disposal , extensive water use , waste water management , and air pollution . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 10th century , the Arabian physician <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( Mesue the Younger ) wrote of his experiments in extracting oil from " some kind of bituminous shale " . The first shale oil extraction patent was granted by the British Crown in 1684 to three people who had " found a way to extract and make great quantities of pitch , tarr , and <unk> out of a sort of stone " . Modern industrial extraction of shale oil originated in France with the implementation of a process invented by Alexander <unk> in 1838 , improved upon a decade later in Scotland using a process invented by James Young . During the late 19th century , plants were built in Australia , Brazil , Canada , and the United States . The 1894 invention of the <unk> retort , which was much less reliant on coal heat than its predecessors , marked the separation of the oil shale industry from the coal industry . 
 China ( Manchuria ) , Estonia , New Zealand , South Africa , Spain , Sweden , and Switzerland began extracting shale oil in the early 20th century . However , crude oil discoveries in Texas during the 1920s and in the Middle East in the mid 20th century brought most oil shale industries to a halt . In 1944 , the US recommenced shale oil extraction as part of its Synthetic Liquid Fuels Program . These industries continued until oil prices fell sharply in the 1980s . The last oil shale retort in the US , operated by Unocal Corporation , closed in 1991 . The US program was restarted in 2003 , followed by a commercial leasing program in 2005 permitting the extraction of oil shale and oil sands on federal lands in accordance with the Energy Policy Act of 2005 . 
 As of 2010 , shale oil extraction is in operation in Estonia , Brazil , and China . In 2008 , their industries produced about 930 @,@ 000 metric tonnes ( 17 @,@ 700 barrels per day ) of shale oil . Australia , the US , and Canada have tested shale oil extraction techniques via demonstration projects and are planning commercial implementation ; Morocco and Jordan have announced their intent to do the same . Only four processes are in commercial use : Kiviter , Galoter , Fushun , and Petrosix . 
 = = Processing principles = = 
 Shale oil extraction process decomposes oil shale and converts its kerogen into shale oil — a petroleum @-@ like synthetic crude oil . The process is conducted by pyrolysis , hydrogenation , or thermal dissolution . The efficiencies of extraction processes are often evaluated by comparing their yields to the results of a Fischer Assay performed on a sample of the shale . 
 The oldest and the most common extraction method involves pyrolysis ( also known as retorting or destructive distillation ) . In this process , oil shale is heated in the absence of oxygen until its kerogen decomposes into condensable shale oil vapors and non @-@ condensable combustible oil shale gas . Oil vapors and oil shale gas are then collected and cooled , causing the shale oil to condense . In addition , oil shale processing produces spent oil shale , which is a solid residue . Spent shale consists of inorganic compounds ( minerals ) and char — a carbonaceous residue formed from kerogen . Burning the char off the spent shale produces oil shale ash . Spent shale and shale ash can be used as ingredients in cement or brick manufacture . The composition of the oil shale may lend added value to the extraction process through the recovery of by @-@ products , including ammonia , sulfur , aromatic compounds , pitch , asphalt , and waxes . 
 Heating the oil shale to pyrolysis temperature and completing the endothermic kerogen decomposition reactions require a source of energy . Some technologies burn other fossil fuels such as natural gas , oil , or coal to generate this heat and experimental methods have used electricity , radio waves , microwaves , or reactive fluids for this purpose . Two strategies are used to reduce , and even eliminate , external heat energy requirements : the oil shale gas and char by @-@ products generated by pyrolysis may be burned as a source of energy , and the heat contained in hot spent oil shale and oil shale ash may be used to pre @-@ heat the raw oil shale . 
 For ex situ processing , oil shale is crushed into smaller pieces , increasing surface area for better extraction . The temperature at which decomposition of oil shale occurs depends on the time @-@ scale of the process . In ex situ retorting processes , it begins at 300 ° C ( 570 ° F ) and proceeds more rapidly and completely at higher temperatures . The amount of oil produced is the highest when the temperature ranges between 480 and 520 ° C ( 900 and 970 ° F ) . The ratio of oil shale gas to shale oil generally increases along with retorting temperatures . For a modern in situ process , which might take several months of heating , decomposition may be conducted at temperatures as low as 250 ° C ( 480 ° F ) . Temperatures below 600 ° C ( 1 @,@ 110 ° F ) are preferable , as this prevents the decomposition of lime stone and dolomite in the rock and thereby limits carbon dioxide emissions and energy consumption . 
 <unk> and thermal dissolution ( reactive fluid processes ) extract the oil using hydrogen donors , solvents , or a combination of these . Thermal dissolution involves the application of solvents at elevated temperatures and pressures , increasing oil output by cracking the dissolved organic matter . Different methods produce shale oil with different properties . 
 = = Classification of extraction technologies = = 
 Industry analysts have created several classifications of the technologies used to extract shale oil from oil shale . 
 By process principles : Based on the treatment of raw oil shale by heat and solvents the methods are classified as pyrolysis , hydrogenation , or thermal dissolution . 
 By location : A frequently used distinction considers whether processing is done above or below ground , and classifies the technologies broadly as ex situ ( displaced ) or in situ ( in place ) . In ex situ processing , also known as above @-@ ground retorting , the oil shale is mined either underground or at the surface and then transported to a processing facility . In contrast , in situ processing converts the kerogen while it is still in the form of an oil shale deposit , following which it is then extracted via oil wells , where it rises in the same way as conventional crude oil . Unlike ex situ processing , it does not involve mining or spent oil shale disposal aboveground as spent oil shale stays underground . 
 By heating method : The method of transferring heat from combustion products to the oil shale may be classified as direct or indirect . While methods that allow combustion products to contact the oil shale within the retort are classified as direct , methods that burn materials external to the retort to heat another material that contacts the oil shale are described as indirect 
 By heat carrier : Based on the material used to deliver heat energy to the oil shale , processing technologies have been classified into gas heat carrier , solid heat carrier , wall conduction , reactive fluid , and volumetric heating methods . Heat carrier methods can be sub @-@ classified as direct or indirect . 
 The following table shows extraction technologies classified by heating method , heat carrier and location ( in situ or ex situ ) . 
 By raw oil shale particle size : The various ex situ processing technologies may be differentiated by the size of the oil shale particles that are fed into the retorts . As a rule , gas heat carrier technologies process oil shale lumps varying in diameter from 10 to 100 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) , while solid heat carrier and wall conduction technologies process fines which are particles less than 10 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter . 
 By retort orientation : " Ex @-@ situ " technologies are sometimes classified as vertical or horizontal . Vertical retorts are usually shaft kilns where a bed of shale moves from top to bottom by gravity . Horizontal retorts are usually horizontal rotating drums or screws where shale moves from one end to the other . As a general rule , vertical retorts process lumps using a gas heat carrier , while horizontal retorts process fines using solid heat carrier . 
 By complexity of technology : In situ technologies are usually classified either as true in situ processes or modified in situ processes . True in situ processes do not involve mining or crushing the oil shale . Modified in situ processes involve drilling and fracturing the target oil shale deposit to create voids in the deposit . The voids enable a better flow of gases and fluids through the deposit , thereby increasing the volume and quality of the shale oil produced . 
 = = Ex situ technologies = = 
 = = = Internal combustion = = = 
 Internal combustion technologies burn materials ( typically char and oil shale gas ) within a vertical shaft retort to supply heat for pyrolysis . Typically raw oil shale particles between 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) and 75 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) in size are fed into the top of the retort and are heated by the rising hot gases , which pass through the descending oil shale , thereby causing decomposition of the kerogen at about 500 ° C ( 932 ° F ) . Shale oil mist , evolved gases and cooled combustion gases are removed from the top of the retort then moved to separation equipment . Condensed shale oil is collected , while non @-@ condensable gas is recycled and used to carry heat up the retort . In the lower part of the retort , air is injected for the combustion which heats the spent oil shale and gases to between 700 ° C ( 1 @,@ 292 ° F ) and 900 ° C ( 1 @,@ 650 ° F ) . Cold recycled gas may enter the bottom of the retort to cool the shale ash . The Union A and Superior Direct processes depart from this pattern . In the Union A process , oil shale is fed through the bottom of the retort and a pump moves it upward . In the Superior Direct process , oil shale is processed in a horizontal , segmented , doughnut @-@ shaped traveling @-@ grate retort . 
 Internal combustion technologies such as the <unk> Direct are thermally efficient , since combustion of char on the spent shale and heat recovered from the shale ash and evolved gases can provide all the heat requirements of the retort . These technologies can achieve 80 @-@ 90 % of Fischer assay yield . Two well @-@ established shale oil industries use internal combustion technologies : Kiviter process facilities have been operated continuously in Estonia since the 1920s , and a number of Chinese companies operate Fushun process facilities . 
 Common drawbacks of internal combustion technologies are that the combustible oil shale gas is diluted by combustion gases and particles smaller than 10 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) can not be processed . Uneven distribution of gas across the retort can result in blockages when hot spots cause particles to fuse or disintegrate . 
 = = = Hot recycled solids = = = 
 Hot recycled solids technologies deliver heat to the oil shale by recycling hot solid particles — typically oil shale ash . These technologies usually employ rotating kiln or fluidized bed retorts , fed by fine oil shale particles generally having a diameter of less than 10 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) ; some technologies use particles even smaller than 2 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 10 in ) . The recycled particles are heated in a separate chamber or vessel to about 800 ° C ( 1 @,@ 470 ° F ) and then mixed with the raw oil shale to cause the shale to decompose at about 500 ° C ( 932 ° F ) . Oil vapour and shale oil gas are separated from the solids and cooled to condense and collect the oil . Heat recovered from the combustion gases and shale ash may be used to dry and preheat the raw oil shale before it is mixed with the hot recycle solids . 
 In the Galoter and Enefit processes , the spent oil shale is burnt in a separate furnace and the resulting hot ash is separated from the combustion gas and mixed with oil shale particles in a rotating kiln . Combustion gases from the furnace are used to dry the oil shale in a dryer before mixing with hot ash . The <unk> II process uses ceramic balls instead of shale ash as the hot recycled solids . The distinguishing feature of the Alberta <unk> Process ( ATP ) is that the entire process occurs in a single rotating multi – chamber horizontal vessel . 
 Because the hot recycle solids are heated in a separate furnace , the oil shale gas from these technologies is not diluted with combustion exhaust gas . Another advantage is that there is no limit on the smallest particles that the retort can process , thus allowing all the crushed feed to be used . One <unk> is that more water is used to handle the resulting finer shale ash . 
 = = = Conduction through a wall = = = 
 These technologies transfer heat to the oil shale by conducting it through the retort wall . The shale feed usually consists of fine particles . Their advantage lies in the fact that retort vapors are not combined with combustion exhaust . The Combustion Resources process uses a hydrogen – fired rotating kiln , where hot gas is circulated through an outer annulus . The Oil @-@ Tech staged electrically heated retort consists of individual inter @-@ connected heating chambers , stacked atop each other . Its principal advantage lies in its modular design , which enhances its portability and adaptability . The Red Leaf Resources <unk> In @-@ Capsule Process combines surface mining with a lower @-@ temperature heating method similar to in situ processes by operating within the confines of an earthen structure . A hot gas circulated through parallel pipes heats the oil shale rubble . An installation within the empty space created by mining would permit rapid reclamation of the topography . A general drawback of conduction through a wall technologies is that the retorts are more costly when scaled @-@ up due to the resulting large amount of heat conducting walls made of high @-@ temperature alloys . 
 = = = Externally generated hot gas = = = 
 In general , externally generated hot gas technologies are similar to internal combustion technologies in that they also process oil shale lumps in vertical shaft kilns . Significantly , though , the heat in these technologies is delivered by gases heated outside the retort vessel , and therefore the retort vapors are not diluted with combustion exhaust . The Petrosix and <unk> Indirect employ this technology . In addition to not accepting fine particles as feed , these technologies do not utilize the potential heat of combusting the char on the spent shale and thus must burn more valuable fuels . However , due to the lack of combustion of the spent shale , the oil shale does not exceed 500 ° C ( 932 ° F ) and significant carbonate mineral decomposition and subsequent CO2 generation can be avoided for some oil shales . Also , these technologies tend to be the more stable and easier to control than internal combustion or hot solid recycle technologies . 
 = = = Reactive fluids = = = 
 <unk> is tightly bound to the shale and resists dissolution by most solvents . Despite this constraint , extraction using especially reactive fluids has been tested , including those in a supercritical state . Reactive fluid technologies are suitable for processing oil shales with a low hydrogen content . In these technologies , hydrogen gas ( H2 ) or hydrogen donors ( chemicals that donate hydrogen during chemical reactions ) react with coke precursors ( chemical structures in the oil shale that are prone to form char during retorting but have not yet done so ) . Reactive fluid technologies include the IGT <unk> ( high @-@ pressure H2 ) process , donor solvent processes , and the Chattanooga fluidized bed reactor . In the IGT <unk> oil shale is processed in a high @-@ pressure hydrogen environment . The Chattanooga process uses a fluidized bed reactor and an associated hydrogen @-@ fired heater for oil shale thermal cracking and hydrogenation . Laboratory results indicate that these technologies can often obtain significantly higher oil yields than pyrolysis processes . <unk> are the additional cost and complexity of hydrogen production and high @-@ pressure retort vessels . 
 = = = Plasma gasification = = = 
 Several experimental tests have been conducted for the oil @-@ shale gasification by using plasma technologies . In these technologies , oil shale is bombarded by radicals ( ions ) . The radicals crack kerogen molecules forming synthetic gas and oil . Air , hydrogen or nitrogen are used as plasma gas and processes may operate in an arc , plasma arc , or plasma electrolysis mode . The main benefit of these technologies is processing without using water . 
 = = In situ technologies = = 
 In situ technologies heat oil shale underground by injecting hot fluids into the rock formation , or by using linear or planar heating sources followed by thermal conduction and convection to distribute heat through the target area . Shale oil is then recovered through vertical wells drilled into the formation . These technologies are potentially able to extract more shale oil from a given area of land than conventional ex situ processing technologies , as the wells can reach greater depths than surface mines . They present an opportunity to recover shale oil from low @-@ grade deposits that traditional mining techniques could not extract . 
 During World War II a modified in situ extraction process was implemented without significant success in Germany . One of the earliest successful in situ processes was underground gasification by electrical energy ( <unk> method ) — a process exploited between 1940 and 1966 for shale oil extraction at <unk> in Sweden . Prior to the 1980s , many variations of the in situ process were explored in the United States . The first modified in situ oil shale experiment in the United States was conducted by Occidental Petroleum in 1972 at Logan Wash , Colorado . Newer technologies are being explored that use a variety of heat sources and heat delivery systems . 
 = = = Wall conduction = = = 
 Wall conduction in situ technologies use heating elements or heating pipes placed within the oil shale formation . The Shell in situ conversion process ( Shell ICP ) uses electrical heating elements for heating the oil shale layer to between 650 and 700 ° F ( 340 and 370 ° C ) over a period of approximately four years . The processing area is isolated from surrounding groundwater by a freeze wall consisting of wells filled with a circulating super @-@ chilled fluid . Disadvantages of this process are large electrical power consumption , extensive water use , and the risk of groundwater pollution . The process was tested since the early 1980s at the Mahogany test site in the <unk> Basin . 1 @,@ 700 barrels ( 270 m3 ) of oil were extracted in 2004 at a 30 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 by 12 @.@ 2 m ) testing area . 
 In the CCR Process proposed by American Shale Oil , superheated steam or another heat transfer medium is circulated through a series of pipes placed below the oil shale layer to be extracted . The system combines horizontal wells , through which steam is passed , and vertical wells , which provide both vertical heat transfer through <unk> of converted shale oil and a means to collect the produced hydrocarbons . Heat is supplied by combustion of natural gas or propane in the initial phase and by oil shale gas at a later stage . 
 The <unk> Fuels Cells Process ( IEP GFC ) proposed by Independent Energy Partners extracts shale oil by exploiting a high @-@ temperature stack of fuel cells . The cells , placed in the oil shale formation , are fueled by natural gas during a warm @-@ up period and afterward by oil shale gas generated by its own waste heat . 
 = = = Externally generated hot gas = = = 
 Externally generated hot gas in situ technologies use hot gases heated above @-@ ground and then injected into the oil shale formation . The Chevron <unk> process , which was researched by Chevron Corporation in partnership with Los Alamos National Laboratory , injects heated carbon dioxide into the formation via drilled wells and to heat the formation through a series of horizontal fractures through which the gas is circulated . General <unk> International has proposed the <unk> process involving injection of super @-@ heated air into the oil shale formation . Mountain West Energy 's In Situ Vapor Extraction process uses similar principles of injection of high @-@ temperature gas . 
 = = = ExxonMobil <unk> = = = 
 ExxonMobil 's in situ technology ( ExxonMobil <unk> ) uses electrical heating with elements of both wall conduction and volumetric heating methods . It injects an electrically conductive material such as calcined petroleum coke into the hydraulic fractures created in the oil shale formation which then forms a heating element . Heating wells are placed in a parallel row with a second horizontal well intersecting them at their toe . This allows opposing electrical charges to be applied at either end . 
 = = = Volumetric heating = = = 
 The Illinois Institute of Technology developed the concept of oil shale volumetric heating using radio waves ( radio frequency processing ) during the late 1970s . This technology was further developed by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . Oil shale is heated by vertical electrode arrays . Deeper volumes could be processed at slower heating rates by installations spaced at tens of meters . The concept presumes a radio frequency at which the skin depth is many tens of meters , thereby overcoming the thermal diffusion times needed for conductive heating . Its drawbacks include intensive electrical demand and the possibility that groundwater or char would absorb undue amounts of the energy . Radio frequency processing in conjunction with critical fluids is being developed by Raytheon together with CF Technologies and tested by Schlumberger . 
 Microwave heating technologies are based on the same principles as radio wave heating , although it is believed that radio wave heating is an improvement over microwave heating because its energy can penetrate farther into the oil shale formation . The microwave heating process was tested by Global Resource Corporation . Electro @-@ Petroleum proposes electrically enhanced oil recovery by the passage of direct current between cathodes in producing wells and anodes located either at the surface or at depth in other wells . The passage of the current through the oil shale formation results in resistive Joule heating . 
 = = Economics = = 
 The dominant question for shale oil production is under what conditions shale oil is economically viable . According to the United States Department of Energy , the capital costs of a 100 @,@ 000 barrels per day ( 16 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) ex @-@ situ processing complex are $ 3 – 10 billion . The various attempts to develop oil shale deposits have succeeded only when the shale @-@ oil production cost in a given region is lower than the price of petroleum or its other substitutes . According to a survey conducted by the RAND Corporation , the cost of producing shale oil at a hypothetical surface retorting complex in the United States ( comprising a mine , retorting plant , upgrading plant , supporting utilities , and spent oil shale reclamation ) , would be in a range of US $ 70 – 95 per barrel ( $ 440 – 600 / m3 ) , adjusted to 2005 values . Assuming a gradual increase in output after the start of commercial production , the analysis projects a gradual reduction in processing costs to $ 30 – 40 per barrel ( $ 190 – 250 / m3 ) after achieving the milestone of 1 billion barrels ( 160 × 10 ^ 6 m3 ) . The United States Department of Energy estimates that the ex @-@ situ processing would be economic at sustained average world oil prices above US $ $ 54 per barrel and in @-@ situ processing would be economic at prices above $ 35 per barrel . These estimates assume a return rate of 15 % . Royal Dutch Shell announced in 2006 that its Shell ICP technology would realize a profit when crude oil prices are higher than $ 30 per barrel ( $ 190 / m3 ) , while some technologies at full @-@ scale production assert profitability at oil prices even lower than $ 20 per barrel ( $ 130 / m3 ) . 
 To increase the efficiency of oil shale retorting and by this the viability of the shale oil production , researchers have proposed and tested several co @-@ pyrolysis processes , in which other materials such as biomass , peat , waste bitumen , or rubber and plastic wastes are retorted along with the oil shale . Some modified technologies propose combining a fluidized bed retort with a circulated fluidized bed furnace for burning the by @-@ products of pyrolysis ( char and oil shale gas ) and thereby improving oil yield , increasing throughput , and decreasing retorting time . 
 Other ways of improving the economics of shale oil extraction could be to increase the size of the operation to achieve economies of scale , use oil shale that is a by @-@ product of coal mining such as at Fushun China , produce specialty chemicals as by Viru Keemia Grupp in Estonia , co @-@ generate electricity from the waste heat and process high grade oil shale that yields more oil per shale processed . 
 A possible measure of the viability of oil shale as an energy source lies in the ratio of the energy in the extracted oil to the energy used in its mining and processing ( Energy Returned on Energy Invested , or EROEI ) . A 1984 study estimated the EROEI of the various known oil shale deposits as varying between 0 @.@ 7 – 13 @.@ 3 ; Some companies and newer technologies assert an EROEI between 3 and 10 . According to the World Energy Outlook 2010 , the EROEI of ex @-@ situ processing is typically 4 to 5 while of in @-@ situ processing it may be even as low as 2 . 
 To increase the EROEI , several combined technologies were proposed . These include the usage of process waste heat , e.g. gasification or combustion of the residual carbon ( char ) , and the usage of waste heat from other industrial processes , such as coal gasification and nuclear power generation . 
 The water requirements of extraction processes are an additional economic consideration in regions where water is a scarce resource . 
 = = Environmental considerations = = 
 Objections to its potential environmental impact have stalled governmental support for extraction of shale oil in some countries , such as Australia . Shale oil extraction may involve a number of different environmental impacts that vary with process technologies . Depending on the geological conditions and mining techniques , mining impacts may include acid drainage induced by the sudden rapid exposure and subsequent oxidation of formerly buried materials , the introduction of metals into surface water and groundwater , increased erosion , sulfur gas emissions , and air pollution caused by the production of particulates during processing , transport , and support activities . Surface mining for ex situ processing , as with in situ processing , requires extensive land use and ex situ thermal processing generates wastes that require disposal . Mining , processing , spent oil shale disposal , and waste treatment require land to be withdrawn from traditional uses . Depending on the processing technology , the waste material may contain pollutants including sulfates , heavy metals , and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , some of which are toxic and carcinogenic . Experimental in situ conversion processes may reduce some of these impacts , but may instead cause other problems , such as groundwater pollution . 
 The production and usage of oil shale usually generates more greenhouse gas emissions , including carbon dioxide , than conventional fossil fuels . Depending on the technology and the oil shale composition , shale oil extraction processes may also emit sulfur dioxide , hydrogen sulfide , carbonyl sulfide , and nitrogen oxides . Developing carbon capture and storage technologies may reduce the processes ' carbon footprint . 
 Concerns have been raised over the oil shale industry 's use of water , particularly in arid regions where water consumption is a sensitive issue . Above @-@ ground retorting typically consumes between one and five barrels of water per barrel of produced shale oil , depending on technology . Water is usually used for spent oil shale cooling and oil shale ash disposal . In situ processing , according to one estimate , uses about one @-@ tenth as much water . In other areas , water must be pumped out of oil shale mines . The resulting fall in the water table may have negative effects on nearby arable land and forests . 
 A 2008 programmatic environmental impact statement issued by the United States Bureau of Land Management stated that surface mining and retort operations produce 2 to 10 U.S. gallons ( 7 @.@ 6 to 37 @.@ 9 l ; 1 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 3 imp gal ) of waste water per 1 short ton ( 0 @.@ 91 t ) of processed oil shale . 
 = Typhoon Gay ( 1989 ) = 
 Typhoon Gay , also known as the Kavali Cyclone of 1989 , was a small but powerful tropical cyclone that caused more than 800 fatalities in and around the Gulf of Thailand in November 1989 . The worst typhoon to affect the Malay Peninsula in 35 years , Gay originated from a monsoon trough over the Gulf of Thailand in early November . Owing to favorable atmospheric conditions , the storm rapidly intensified , attaining winds of more than 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) by November 3 . Later that day , Gay became the first typhoon since 1891 to make landfall in Thailand , striking Chumphon Province with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The small storm emerged into the Bay of Bengal and gradually reorganized over the following days as it approached southeastern India . On November 8 , Gay attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 – equivalent cyclone with winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . The typhoon then moved ashore near Kavali , Andhra Pradesh . Rapid weakening ensued inland , and Gay dissipated over Maharashtra early on November 10 . 
 The typhoon 's rapid development took hundreds of vessels in the Gulf of Thailand by surprise , leading to 275 offshore fatalities . Of these , 91 occurred after an oil drilling ship , the Seacrest , capsized amid 6 – 11 m ( 20 – 36 ft ) swells . Across the Malay Peninsula , 588 people died from various storm @-@ related incidents . Several towns in coastal Chumphon were destroyed . Losses throughout Thailand totaled ฿ 11 billion ( US $ 497 million ) . Striking India as a powerful cyclone , Gay damaged or destroyed about 20 @,@ 000 homes in Andhra Pradesh , leaving 100 @,@ 000 people homeless . In that country , 69 deaths and ₹ 410 million ( US $ 25 @.@ 3 million ) in damage were attributed to Gay . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early November , a monsoon trough over the Gulf of Thailand showed signs of tropical cyclogenesis . A small , concentrated area of convection quickly developed over a low @-@ pressure area within the trough , and on November 2 it became sufficiently organized for the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Owing to its small size , the system began strengthening within the narrow gulf by taking advantage of warm waters and good outflow . Moving generally northwestward , it became a tropical depression later that day and underwent rapid intensification . As the newly named Tropical Storm Gay strengthened , it " presented a paradox to forecasters " according to Lieutenant Dianne K. Crittenden ; synoptic data from Malaysia and Thailand indicated decreasing wind speeds and increasing barometric pressures around the storm , but these observations were later interpreted as increased subsidence . 
 Strengthening faster than anticipated , Gay attained typhoon status early on November 3 . Later that day , the storm developed an eye before passing over the Seacrest , an oil drilling ship . On November 4 , Gay 's winds increased to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , before making landfall in Chumphon Province , Thailand , at 0600 UTC . The Japan Meteorological Agency assessed that the storm had ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a pressure of 960 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 35 inHg ) . Crossing the Kra Isthmus , Gay weakened to minimal typhoon status as it entered the Bay of Bengal . According to the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , Gay was the first typhoon since 1891 to form in the Gulf of Thailand and enter the Bay of Bengal . Responding to a ridge to its north , Gay maintained a west @-@ northwestward to northwestward track for the next four days . The storm gradually restrengthened as it moved through an area of low wind shear and warm waters ; however , this was limited by restrictions to the cyclone 's outflow . Early on November 6 , Gay passed near the Andaman Islands as a Category 2 @-@ equivalent cyclone . 
 After changing little in intensity for much of November 6 , Gay strengthened as the ridge to its north intensified and the previous restrictions to its outflow diminished . The storm moved due west through a small fetch of warmer waters , fueling the process of intensification over the next 42 hours . Based on estimates provided through the use of the Dvorak technique , the JTWC assessed Gay to have attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 @-@ equivalent cyclone with winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) early on November 8 . Around this time , the IMD estimated that the storm had three @-@ minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) , classifying Gay as a modern @-@ day Super Cyclonic Storm . Additionally , the agency estimated the cyclone 's central pressure to have decreased to 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) . Around 1800 UTC , Gay made landfall over a sparsely populated area near Kavali , India , in Andhra Pradesh . Upon coming ashore , the storm 's eye was about 20 km ( 12 mi ) wide , with gale @-@ force winds within 95 km ( 60 mi ) of the center . Now over land , Gay no longer had access to warm waters , causing it to weaken to a tropical storm less than 12 hours after landfall . The storm continued to deteriorate while moving across India , before it completely dissipated over Maharashtra on November 10 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Gulf of Thailand = = = 
 The most powerful storm to affect the Gulf of Thailand in more than 35 years , Gay produced 6 – 11 m ( 20 – 36 ft ) swells that caught many ships in the region off @-@ guard . At least 16 vessels were reported missing by November 5 , including the 106 m ( 348 ft ) Unocal Corporation oil drilling ship Seacrest . According to survivors , the vessel received no warning of the developing typhoon . Just when all crew members were about to abandon ship , the eye of Typhoon Gay passed over . Winds fluctuated violently and changed direction , preventing the ship from remaining stabilized despite being within safe operating limits . The vessel abruptly capsized with all 97 crew members on board during the overnight hours of November 3 , before any life boat could be deployed . Initial rescue attempts on November 4 were hampered by rough seas . Two days after the sinking , four rescue ships and two helicopters in the region were searching for survivors ; four people were rescued from the wreckage on November 6 . Divers from the Thai Navy were sent to search the capsized vessel for anyone trapped inside . Of the crew , only six survived ; 25 bodies were recovered , and the remaining 66 members were presumed dead . Losses from the sinking of the Seacrest totaled $ 40 million . Another 20 cargo and fishing ships sank during the storm , resulting in 140 fatalities . 
 = = = Thailand = = = 
 Striking Thailand with unprecedented strength , Typhoon Gay caused damage across many of its provinces . Areas between Chumphon and <unk> Provinces were severely affected by heavy rains , high winds and large swells . Rainfall amounts peaked at Chumphon , where 7 @.@ 64 inches ( 194 mm ) fell during the cyclone 's passage . Widespread disruption of communication and electricity occurred in most areas south of Bangkok ; many households remained without power for weeks . Damaging winds uprooted numerous trees and power poles and toppled wooden houses built on stilts . <unk> by deforestation , flash flooding triggered by the storm damaged or destroyed thousands of homes and caused at least 365 fatalities . Several towns and villages across Chumphon province were devastated , and one of the destroyed villages " looked like it had been bombed " according to the Bangkok Post . Entire districts were reportedly " flattened " within Chumphon and Prachuap Khiri Khan provinces . The typhoon destroyed many schools across Chumphon and Surat Thani provinces , many of which constructed from wood . All structures close to the storm 's path had their windows and doors blown out , and some multi @-@ story buildings lost their upper floors . A few schools constructed from reinforced concrete sustained little damage . Over 1 @,@ 000 roads and 194 bridges were damaged or washed away . At the height of the floods , over 250 @,@ 000 hectares ( 618 @,@ 000 acres ) of land was under water . Onshore , 558 fatalities were attributed to the storm , and another 44 took place just offshore . Throughout Thailand , approximately 47 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed , and over 200 @,@ 000 people were affected , of which about 153 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Monetary losses reached 11 billion <unk> ( $ 456 @.@ 5 million USD ) , ranking Gay as one of the costliest disasters in the country 's history . 
 Within a week of the storm 's passage , the Government of Thailand began distributing relief goods to residents throughout the affected provinces . Despite the effort by the government , 2 @,@ 500 people from Pa <unk> and Tha Sae demonstrated for additional and more intensive aid on November 9 . These protests were soon dispersed . Following considerable criticism for downplaying the impact of the typhoon , Prime Minister <unk> Choonhavan delayed his visit to the United States to personally oversee relief efforts . By November 15 , the United States pledged to donate $ 25 @,@ 000 for recovery operations . Telephone connection was restored from Bangkok to Prachuap Khiri Khan by this time ; however , areas further south remained disconnected . Generators were brought in to keep hospitals and government offices running since much of Chumphon province remained without electricity for more than two weeks . As the scale of damage became more apparent , a request for international aid was made by November 17 to the United Nations Disaster Relief Organization . Upon the announcement of the request , six countries pledged to provide nearly $ 510 @,@ 000 in funds collectively . Agriculture across Surat Thani Province was severely affected by the typhoon in the long @-@ term as well . In the four years following Typhoon Gay , land use for orchard , rubber and oil palm plantations decreased from 33 @.@ 32 percent to 30 @.@ 53 percent . Additionally , rice paddy coverage decreased from 22 @.@ 96 percent to 13 @.@ 03 percent . 
 Following post @-@ storm surveys , it was determined that most of the severely damaged schools were built improperly and the upper @-@ floors were not designed to bear typhoon @-@ force winds . According to building codes in Thailand , structures are mandated to be able to withstand up to 120 kgf / m2 of pressure from winds . In the years following the typhoon , studies by engineers were conducted in the hardest hit regions to determine how to best rebuild structures in the country . With many of the destroyed structures being constructed from wood , reinforced concrete structures were the suggested replacement . The new buildings could last up to 50 years with proper construction ; however , sub @-@ standard building would result in a need for repairs within 5 years . 
 = = = India = = = 
 After crossing the Malay Peninsula , Typhoon Gay moved through the Andaman Islands on November 6 . As a precautionary measure , all air and sea traffic were suspended to the region . Winds in excess of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) battered North Andaman Island , causing two structures to collapse . A few days before Typhoon Gay made landfall , officials in Andhra Pradesh began evacuating roughly 50 @,@ 000 residents along the coast and stockpiled relief goods . Some people were forced to leave vulnerable locations in the Visakhapatnam and Srikakulam districts . Local meteorologists warned that the storm was comparable to a cyclone in 1977 that killed more than 10 @,@ 000 people . Striking the southern coast of Andhra Pradesh , Typhoon Gay produced wind gusts estimated at 320 km / h ( 200 mph ) . Along the coast , a storm surge of 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) inundated areas up to 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) inland , washing away numerous structures . About 20 km ( 12 mi ) outside of Kavali , a 91 m ( 299 ft ) tall , steel lattice microwave tower collapsed after experiencing winds estimated at 142 km / h ( 88 mph ) . Transportation and communication across the region was disrupted and 20 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed , leaving at least 100 @,@ 000 people homeless . Nearly every structure in <unk> were severely damaged or destroyed . Offshore , 25 fishermen drowned near Machilipatnam after ignoring warnings to return to port . Throughout Andhra Pradesh , 69 fatalities and ₹ 410 million ( US $ 25 @.@ 3 million ) worth of damage was attributed to Typhoon Gay . In the months after the storm , concrete shelters were built to house displaced persons . 
 = Mike Gravel = 
 Maurice Robert " Mike " Gravel ( / <unk> / ; born May 13 , 1930 ) is an American politician who is a former Democratic United States Senator from Alaska , who served two terms from 1969 to 1981 , and a candidate in the 2008 U.S. presidential election . 
 Born and raised in Springfield , Massachusetts , by French @-@ Canadian immigrant parents , Gravel served in the U.S. Army in West Germany , and he later graduated from the Columbia University School of General Studies . He moved to Alaska in the late 1950s , becoming a real estate developer and entering politics . He served in the Alaska House of Representatives from 1963 to 1966 and also became Speaker of the Alaska House . Gravel was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1968 . 
 As a Senator , Gravel became nationally known for his forceful but unsuccessful attempts to end the draft during the War in Vietnam and for putting the Pentagon Papers into the public record in 1971 at some risk to himself . He conducted an unusual campaign for the Democratic nomination in 1972 for Vice President of the United States , and then played a crucial role in getting Congressional approval for the Trans @-@ Alaska pipeline in 1973 . He was re @-@ elected to the Senate in 1974 , but gradually alienated most of his Alaskan constituencies and his bid for a third term was defeated in a primary election in 1980 . 
 Gravel returned to business ventures and went through difficult times , suffering corporate and personal bankruptcies amid poor health . He has been a quixotic advocate of direct democracy and the National Initiative . In 2006 , Gravel began a run for the Democratic nomination for President of the United States to promote those ideas . His campaign gained an Internet following and national attention due to forceful , humorous , and politically unorthodox debate appearances during 2007 , but he found very little support in national polls or in 2008 caucuses and primaries . In March 2008 , he announced that he was switching to the Libertarian Party to compete for its presidential nomination and the inclusion of the National Initiative into the Libertarian Platform . At the Libertarian National Convention of 2008 he failed on both counts , and he announced that his political electoral career had ended . He subsequently became an executive for a marijuana products company and continued to speak out on various political issues including Democratic Party politics . 
 = = Early life , military service , education = = 
 Gravel was born in Springfield , Massachusetts , one of five children born to French @-@ Canadian immigrant parents , Alphonse and Marie ( née Bourassa ) Gravel . 
 His parents were part of the Quebec diaspora , and he was raised in a working @-@ class neighborhood during the Great Depression , speaking only French until he was seven years old . Calling him " Mike " from an early age , his father valued work above all else , while his mother stressed to him the importance of education . 
 Gravel was educated in parochial schools as a Roman Catholic . There he struggled – due to what he later said was undiagnosed dyslexia – and was left back in third grade . He completed elementary school in 1945 and his class voted him " most charming personality " . A summer job as a soda jerk led to Gravel handing out campaign fliers for local candidates on behalf of his boss ; Gravel was immediately impressed with " the awesomeness of political office . " 
 Gravel then boarded at Assumption Preparatory School in Worcester , Massachusetts , where his performance was initially mediocre . Then an English teacher , the <unk> Edgar Bourque , gave him personal attention , improving Gravel 's language skills and instructing him in public speaking . Gravel 's grades improved measurably in his final year , and he graduated in 1949 . He has a sister , Marguerite , who became a Holy Cross nun , but Gravel himself struggled with the Catholic faith . He studied for one year at Assumption College , a Catholic school in Worcester , then transferred for his sophomore year to American International College in Springfield . Journalist I. F. Stone and philosopher Bertrand Russell strongly influenced Gravel in their willingness to challenge assumptions and oppose social convention and political authority . 
 Around May 1951 , Gravel saw that he was about to be drafted and instead enlisted in the U.S. Army for a three @-@ year term so that he could get into the Counterintelligence Corps . After basic training and counterintelligence school at Fort Holabird in Maryland and in South Carolina , he went to Officer Candidate School at Fort Benning , Georgia . While he expected to be sent off to the Korean War when he graduated as a second lieutenant in early 1952 , he was instead assigned to Stuttgart , West Germany , as a Special Adjutant in the Army 's Communications Intelligence Service . There he had an adventurous time moving around the country , conducting surveillance operations on civilians , and paying off spies . After about a year he transferred to Orléans , France , where his French language abilities ( if not his Quebec @-@ American accent ) allowed him to infiltrate French communist rallies . He worked as a Special Agent in the Counterintelligence Corps until 1954 , eventually becoming a first lieutenant . 
 Following his discharge , Gravel entered the Columbia University School of General Studies in New York City , where he studied economics and received a B.S. in 1956 . He moved to New York " flat broke " , and supported himself by working as a bar boy in a hotel , driving a taxicab , and working in the investment bond department at Bankers Trust . During this time he left the Catholic religion . 
 = = Move to Alaska = = 
 Gravel " decided to become a pioneer in a faraway place , " and moved to pre @-@ statehood Alaska in August 1956 , without funds or a job , looking for a place where someone without social or political connections could be a viable candidate for public office . Alaska 's voting age of 19 , less than most other states ' 21 , played a role in his decision , as did its newness and cooler climate . Broke when he arrived , he immediately found work in real estate sales until winter arrived . Gravel then was employed as a brakeman for the Alaska Railroad , working the snow @-@ clearing train on the Anchorage @-@ Fairbanks run . Subsequently he opened a small real estate brokerage in Anchorage ( the Territory of Alaska not requiring a license ) and saved enough so as not to have to work the railroad again . Gravel joined the Anchorage Unitarian Universalist Fellowship , and would continue a sporadic relationship with the movement throughout his life . 
 Gravel married Rita Jeannette Martin , who had been Anchorage 's " Miss Fur Rendezvous " of 1958 , on April 29 , 1959 . They had two children , Martin Anthony Gravel and Lynne Denise Gravel , born c . 1960 and 1962 respectively . 
 Meanwhile , he went to Washington , D.C. in 1957 to campaign for Alaskan statehood via the " Tennessee Plan " : dressed as Paul Revere , he rode with a petition to the steps of the U.S. Capitol . Seeing Alaska as a wide @-@ open place with no political establishment or entrenched interests , and using the slogan " Gravel , the <unk> to Prosperity " , he ran for the territorial legislature in 1958 but lost . He went on a national speaking tour concerning tax reform in 1959 , sponsored by the Jaycees . He ran without avail for the City Council in Anchorage in 1960 . During this time , he had become a successful real estate agent ; after the 1960 election , he became a property developer in a mobile home park on the outskirts of Anchorage . A partner ran into financial difficulty , however , and the project went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy and Gravel was forced out in 1962 . 
 = = State legislator = = 
 With the support of Alaska wholesale grocer Barney <unk> and supermarket builder Larry Carr , Gravel ran for the Alaska House of Representatives representing Anchorage in 1962 , initially assigned the 10th and then 8th districts , and won . 
 Gravel served in the Alaska House of Representatives from January 28 , 1963 to January 22 , 1967 , winning re @-@ election in 1964 . In his first term , he served as a minority member on two House committees : Commerce , and Labor and Management . 
 He coauthored and sponsored the act that created the Alaska State Commission for Human Rights . Gravel was the chief architect of the law that created a regional high school system for rural Alaska ; this allowed Alaska Natives to attend schools near where they lived , instead of having to go to schools run by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in the lower 48 states . 
 During the half @-@ years that the legislature was not in session , Gravel resumed his real estate work . With <unk> and Carr 's backing , he became quite successful as a property developer on the Kenai Peninsula . 
 During 1965 and 1966 , he served as the Speaker of the House , surprising observers by winning that post . Gravel convinced former Speaker Warren A. Taylor to not try for the position against him by promising Taylor chairmanship of the Rules Committee , then reneged on the promise . Gravel denied later press charges that he had promised but not delivered on other committee chairmanships . As Speaker he antagonized fellow lawmakers by imposing his will on the legislature 's committees and feuded with Alaska State Senate president Robert J. <unk> . 
 Gravel did not run for re @-@ election in 1966 , instead choosing to run for Alaska 's seat in the U.S. House of Representatives , losing in a primary to four @-@ term incumbent Democrat Ralph Rivers by 1 @,@ 300 votes and splitting the Democratic party in the process . Rivers lost the general election that year to Republican state Senator Howard Wallace Pollock . 
 Following his defeat , Gravel returned to the real estate business in Anchorage . 
 = = U.S. Senator = = 
 = = = Election to Senate in 1968 = = = 
 In 1968 he ran against the 81 @-@ year @-@ old incumbent Democratic Senator Ernest Gruening , a popular former governor of the Alaska Territory who was considered one of the fathers of Alaska 's statehood , for his party 's nomination to the U.S. Senate . Gravel 's campaign was primarily based on his youth rather than issue differences . He hired Joseph <unk> , the first self @-@ described political consultant , in late 1966 . They spent over a year and a half planning a short , nine @-@ day primary election campaign that featured the slogans " Alaska first " and " Let 's do something about the state we 're in " , the distribution of a collection of essays entitled Jobs and More Jobs , and the creation of a half @-@ hour , well @-@ produced , glamorized biographical film of Gravel , Man for Alaska . The film was shown twice a day on every television station in Alaska and carried by plane and shown on home projectors in hundreds of Alaska Native villages . The heavy showings quickly reversed a 2 – to – 1 Gruening lead in polls into a Gravel lead . Gravel visited many remote villages by seaplane and showed a thorough understanding of the needs of the bush country and the fishing and oil industries . Gravel also benefited by being deliberately ambiguous about his Vietnam policy . Gruening had been one of only two Senators to vote against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and his opposition to President Lyndon B. Johnson 's war policies was harming him among the Democratic electorate ; according to Gravel , " ... all I had to do was stand up and not deal with the subject , and people would assume that I was to the right of Ernest Gruening , when in point of fact I was to the left of him . " 
 Gravel beat Gruening in the primary in a tight result with a margin of about 2 @,@ 000 votes . Gruening found " the unexpected defeat hard to take " and thought that some aspects of his opponent 's biographical film had misled viewers . In the general election , Gravel faced Republican Elmer E. Rasmuson , a banker and former mayor of Anchorage . College students in the state implored Gruening to run a write @-@ in campaign as an Independent , but legal battles prevented the senator from getting approval for it until only two weeks were left . A late appearance by anti @-@ war presidential candidate Eugene McCarthy could not offset Gruening 's lack of funds and endorsements ; meanwhile , Gravel and Rasmuson both saturated local media with their filmed biographies . On November 5 , 1968 , Gravel won the general election , gaining 45 percent of the vote against 37 percent for Rasmuson and 18 percent for Gruening . 
 = = = Senate assignments and style = = = 
 When Gravel joined the Senate in January 1969 , he requested and received a seat on the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee , which had direct relevance to Alaskan issues . He also got a spot on the Public Works Committee , which he held throughout his time in the Senate . Finally , he was a member of the Select Committee on Small Business . In 1971 he became chair of the Public Works Committee 's Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Grounds , then by 1973 he was chair of its Subcommittee on Water Resources , then later its Subcommittee on Environmental Pollution . Gravel was also initially named to the Joint Committee on Congressional Operations . By 1973 Gravel was off the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee and the Select Small Business Committee and instead a member of the Finance Committee , and by 1977 was chair of that body 's Subcommittee on Energy and Foundations . By 1973 he had also been on the ad hoc Special Committee to Study Secret and Confidential Government Documents . 
 By his own admission , Gravel was too new and " too abrasive " to be effective in the Senate by the usual means of seniority @-@ based committee assignments or negotiating deals with other senators , and was sometimes seen as arrogant by the more senior members . Gravel instead relied upon attention @-@ getting gestures to achieve what he wanted , hoping national exposure would force other senators to listen to him . As part of this he voted with Southern Democrats to keep the Senate filibuster rule in place , and accordingly supported Russell Long and Robert Byrd but opposed Ted Kennedy in Senate leadership battles . In retrospective assessment , University of Alaska Anchorage history professor Stephen Haycox would say , " Loose cannon is a good description of Gravel 's Senate career . He was an off @-@ the @-@ wall guy , and you weren 't really ever sure what he would do . " 
 = = = Nuclear issues and the Cold War = = = 
 In the late 1960s and early 1970s the U.S. Department of Defense was in the process of performing tests for the nuclear warhead for the Spartan anti @-@ ballistic missile . Two tests , the " Milrow " and " Cannikin " tests , were planned , involving the detonation of nuclear bombs under Amchitka Island in Alaska . The Milrow test would be a one megaton calibration exercise for the second , and larger five megaton , Cannikin test , which would measure the effectiveness of the warhead . Gravel opposed the tests in Congress . Before the Milrow test took place in October 1969 , he wrote that there were significant risks of earthquakes and other adverse consequences , and called for an independent national commission on nuclear and seismic safety to be created ; he then made a personal appeal to President Nixon to stop the test . 
 After Milrow was conducted , there was continued pressure on the part of environmental groups against going forward with the larger Cannikin test , while the Federation of American Scientists claimed that the warhead being tested was already obsolete . In May 1971 , Gravel sent a letter to U.S. Atomic Energy Commission hearings held in Anchorage , in which he said the risk of the test was not worth taking . Eventually a group not involving Gravel took the case to the U.S. Supreme Court , which declined to issue an injunction against it , and the Cannikin test took place as scheduled in November 1971 . Gravel had failed to stop the tests ( notwithstanding his later claims during his 2008 presidential campaign ) . 
 Nuclear power was considered an environmentally clean alternative for the commercial generation of electricity and was part of a popular national policy for the peaceful use of atomic energy in the 1950s and 1960s . Gravel publicly opposed this policy ; besides the dangers of nuclear testing , he was a vocal critic of the Atomic Energy Commission , which oversaw American nuclear efforts , and of the powerful United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy , which had a stranglehold on nuclear policy and which Gravel tried to circumvent . In 1971 , Gravel sponsored a bill to impose a moratorium on nuclear power plant construction and to make power utilities liable for any nuclear accidents ; in 1975 , he was still proposing similar <unk> . By 1974 , Gravel was allied with Ralph Nader 's organization in opposing nuclear power . 
 Six months before U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger 's secret mission to the People 's Republic of China ( P.R.C. ) in July 1971 , Gravel introduced legislation to recognize and normalize relations with China , including a proposal for unity talks between the P.R.C. and the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) regarding the Chinese seat on the U.N. Security Council . Gravel reiterated his position in favor of recognition , with four other senators in agreement , during Senate hearings in June 1971 . 
 = = = Vietnam War , the draft , and the Pentagon Papers = = = 
 President Richard Nixon had campaigned in 1968 on a promise to end the U.S. military draft , a decision endorsed by the February 1970 report of the Gates Commission . The existing draft law was scheduled to conclude at the end of June 1971 , and the Senate faced a contentious debate about whether to extend it as the Vietnam War continued . The Nixon administration announced in February 1971 that it wanted a two @-@ year extension to June 1973 , after which the draft would end ; Army planners had already been operating under the assumption of a two @-@ year extension , after which an all @-@ volunteer force would be in place . Skeptics such as Senate Armed Services Committee chairman John Stennis thought this unrealistic and wanted a four @-@ year extension , but the two @-@ year proposal is what went forward in Congress . By early May 1971 , Gravel had indicated his intention to filibuster the draft renewal legislation , halting conscription and thereby bringing U.S. involvement in the war to a rapid end . 
 By June 1971 , some Democratic senators opposed to the war wanted to limit the renewal to a one @-@ year extension , while others wanted to end it immediately ; Gravel reiterated that he was one of the latter , saying , " It 's a senseless war , and one way to do away with it is to do away with the draft . " A Senate vote on June 4 indicated majority support for the two @-@ year extension . On June 18 Gravel announced again his intention to counteract that by filibustering the renewal legislation , defending the practice against those who associated it only with blocking civil rights legislation . The first filibuster attempt failed on June 23 when , by three votes , the Senate voted cloture for only the fifth time since 1927 . 
 Protracted negotiations took place over House conference negotiations on the bill , revolving in large part around Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield 's eventually unsuccessful amendment to tie renewal to a troop withdrawal timetable from Vietnam ; during this time the draft law expired and no more were conscripted . On August 5 , the Nixon administration pleaded for a renewal before the Senate went on recess , but Gravel blocked Stennis 's attempt to limit debate , and no vote was held . Finally on September 21 , 1971 , the Senate invoked cloture over Gravel 's second filibuster attempt by one vote , and then passed the two @-@ year draft extension . Gravel 's attempts to stop the draft had failed ( notwithstanding Gravel 's later claims that he had stopped or shortened the draft , taken at face value in some media reports , during his 2008 presidential campaign ) . 
 Meanwhile , on June 13 , 1971 , The New York Times began printing large portions of the Pentagon Papers . The papers were a large collection of secret government documents and studies pertaining to the Vietnam War , of which former Defense Department analyst Daniel Ellsberg had made unauthorized copies and was determined to make public . Ellsberg had for a year and a half approached members of Congress – such as William Fulbright , George McGovern , Charles Mathias , and Pete McCloskey – about publishing the documents , on the grounds that the Speech or Debate Clause of the Constitution would give congressional members immunity from prosecution , but all had refused . Instead , Ellsberg gave the documents to the Times . 
 The U.S. Justice Department immediately tried to halt publication , on the grounds that the information revealed within the papers harmed the national interest . Within the next two weeks , a federal court injunction halted publication in The Times ; The Washington Post and several other newspapers began publishing parts of the documents , with some of them also being halted by injunctions ; and the whole matter went to the U.S. Supreme Court for arguments . Looking for an alternate publication mechanism , Ellsberg returned to his idea of having a member of Congress read them , and chose Gravel based on the latter 's efforts against the draft ; Gravel agreed where previously others had not . Ellsberg arranged for the papers to be given to Gravel on June 26 via an intermediary , Washington Post editor Ben <unk> . Gravel used his counter @-@ intelligence experience to choose a midnight transfer in front of the Mayflower Hotel in the center of Washington . 
 On the night of June 29 , 1971 , Gravel attempted to read the papers on the floor of the Senate as part of his filibuster against the draft , but was thwarted when no quorum could be formed . Gravel instead convened a session of the Buildings and Grounds subcommittee that he chaired . He got New York Congressman John Dow to testify that the war had soaked up funding for public buildings , thus making discussion of the war relevant to the committee . He began reading from the papers with the press in attendance , omitting supporting documents that he felt might compromise national security , and declaring , " It is my constitutional obligation to protect the security of the people by fostering the free flow of information absolutely essential to their democratic decision @-@ making . " 
 He read until 1 a.m. , until with tears and sobs he said that he could no longer physically continue , the previous three nights of sleeplessness and fear about the future having taken their toll . Gravel ended the session by , with no other senators present , establishing unanimous consent to insert 4 @,@ 100 pages of the Papers into the Congressional Record of his subcommittee . The following day , the Supreme Court 's New York Times Co. v. United States decision ruled in favor of the newspapers and publication in The Times and others resumed . In July 1971 , Bantam Books published an inexpensive paperback edition of the papers containing the material The Times had published . 
 Gravel , too , wanted to privately publish the portion of the papers he had read into the record , believing that " immediate disclosure of the contents of these papers will change the policy that supports the war . " After being turned down by many commercial publishers , on August 4 he reached agreement with Beacon Press , the publishing arm of the Unitarian Universalist Association , of which Gravel was a member . Announced on August 17 and published on October 22 , 1971 , this four @-@ volume , relatively expensive set became the " Senator Gravel Edition " , which studies from Cornell University and the Annenberg Center for Communication have labeled as the most complete edition of the Pentagon Papers to be published . The " Gravel Edition " was edited and annotated by Noam Chomsky and Howard Zinn , and included an additional volume of analytical articles on the origins and progress of the war , also edited by Chomsky and Zinn . Beacon Press then was subjected to a FBI investigation ; an outgrowth of this was the Gravel v. United States court case , which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled upon in June 1972 ; it held that the Speech or Debate Clause did grant immunity to Gravel for his reading the papers in his subcommittee , did grant some immunity to Gravel 's congressional aide , but granted no immunity to Beacon Press in relation to their publishing the same papers . 
 The events of 1971 changed Gravel in the months following from an obscure freshman senator in a far corner of the country to a nationally visible political figure . He became a sought @-@ after speaker on the college circuit as well as at political fundraisers , opportunities he welcomed as lectures were " the one honest way a Senator has to supplement his income . " The Democratic candidates for the 1972 presidential election sought out his endorsement . In January 1972 Gravel did endorse Maine Senator Ed Muskie , hoping his endorsement would help Muskie with the party 's left wing and in the ethnic French @-@ Canadian areas in first primary state New Hampshire ( which Muskie won , but not strongly , and his campaign faltered soon thereafter ) . In April 1972 , Gravel appeared on all three network nightly newscasts to decry the Nixon administration 's reliance on Vietnamization by making reference to the secret National Security Study Memorandum 1 document , which stated it would take 8 – 13 years before the Army of the Republic of Vietnam could defend South Vietnam . Gravel made excerpts from the study public , but his attempt to read <unk> 1 into the Congressional Record was blocked by Senators Robert P. Griffin and William B. Saxbe . 
 = = = Run for Vice President in 1972 = = = 
 Gravel actively campaigned for the office of Vice President of the United States during the 1972 presidential election , announcing on June 2 , 1972 , over a month before the 1972 Democratic National Convention began , that he was interested in running for the nomination should the choice be opened up to convention delegates . Towards this end he began soliciting delegates for their support in advance of the convention . He was not alone in this effort , as former Governor of Massachusetts Endicott Peabody had been running a quixotic campaign for the same post since the prior year . Likely presidential nominee George McGovern was in fact considering the unusual move of naming three or four acceptable vice @-@ presidential candidates and letting the delegates choose . 
 At the convention 's final day on July 14 , 1972 , presidential nominee McGovern selected and announced Senator Thomas Eagleton of Missouri as his vice @-@ presidential choice . Eagleton was unknown to many delegates and the choice seemed to smack of traditional ticket balancing considerations . Thus , there were delegates willing to look elsewhere . Gravel was nominated by Bettye <unk> , the Democratic National Committeewoman from Alaska . He then seconded his own nomination , breaking down in tears at his own words and maybe trying to withdraw his nomination . In any case he won 226 delegate votes , coming in third behind Eagleton and Frances " Sissy " <unk> of Texas , in chaotic balloting that included several other candidates as well . 
 For his efforts , Gravel attracted some attention : famed writer Norman Mailer would say he " provided considerable excitement " and was " good @-@ looking enough to have played leads in B @-@ films " , while Rolling Stone correspondent Hunter S. Thompson said Gravel " probably said a few things that might have been worth hearing , under different circumstances ... " Yet , the whole process had been doubly disastrous for the Democrats . The time consumed with the nominating and seconding and other speeches of all the vice @-@ presidential candidates had lost the attention of the delegates on the floor and pushed McGovern 's speech until 3 : 30 a.m. The haste with which Eagleton had been selected led to surprise when his past mental health treatments were revealed ; he withdrew from the ticket soon after the convention , to be replaced by Sargent Shriver . 
 = = = Re @-@ election to Senate in 1974 = = = 
 Several years earlier , Alaska politicians had speculated that Gravel would have a hard time getting both renominated and elected when his first term expired , given that he was originally elected without a base party organization and tended to focus on national rather than local issues . 
 Nonetheless , in 1974 Gravel was re @-@ elected to the Senate , winning 58 percent of the vote against 42 percent for Republican State Senator C. R. Lewis , who was a national officer of the John Birch Society . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 In September 1975 , Gravel was named as one of several Congressional Advisers to the Seventh Special Session of the United Nations , which met to discuss problems related to economic development and international economic cooperation . 
 In June 1976 , Gravel was the focus of a federal investigation into allegations that he was involved in a sex @-@ for @-@ vote arrangement . Congressional staff clerk Elizabeth Ray ( who was already the subject of a sex scandal that led to the downfall of Representative Wayne Hays ) stated that in August 1972 , she had sex with Gravel aboard a houseboat on the Potomac River , under the instruction of Representative Kenneth J. Gray , her boss at the time . Gray allegedly wanted to secure Gravel 's support for further funding for construction of the National Visitor Center in Washington , a troubled project that was under the jurisdiction of subcommittees that both members chaired . Another Congressional staffer said she witnessed the boat encounter , but Gravel said at the time that he had never met either of the women . Both Gravel and Gray strongly denied that they had made any arrangement regarding legislation , and neither was ever charged with any wrongdoing . Decades later , Gravel wrote that he had indeed had sex with Ray , but had not changed any votes because of it . 
 = = = Alaskan issues = = = 
 By 1971 , Gravel was urging construction of the much @-@ argued Trans @-@ Alaska pipeline , addressing environmental concerns by saying that the pipeline 's builders and operators should have " total and absolute " responsibility for any consequent environmental damage . Two years later , the debate over the pipeline came to a crux , with The New York Times describing it as " environmentalists [ in ] a holy war with the major oil companies . " In February 1973 the U.S. Court of Appeals blocked the issuance of permits for construction ; Gravel and fellow Alaskan Senator Ted Stevens reacted by urging Congress to pass legislation overturning the court 's decision . Environmentalists opposed to the pipeline , such as the Environmental Defense Fund and the Sierra Club then sought to use the recently passed National Environmental Policy Act to their advantage ; Gravel designed an amendment to the pipeline bill that would immunize the pipeline from any further court challenges under that law , and thus speed its construction . Passage of the amendment became the key battle regarding the pipeline . On July 17 , 1973 , in a dramatic roll call vote , the Gravel amendment was approved as a 49 – 49 tie was broken in favor by Vice President Spiro Agnew . The actual bill enabling the pipeline then passed easily ; Gravel had triumphed . 
 In opposition to the Alaskan fishing industry , Gravel advocated American participation in the formation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea . For two years he opposed legislation that established a 200 @-@ mile ( 320 km ) Exclusive Economic Zone for marine resources . He was one of only 19 senators to vote against Senate approval for the expanded zone in 1976 , saying it would undermine the U.S. position in Law of the Sea negotiations and that nations arbitrarily extending their fishing rights limits would " produce anarchy of the seas . " The legislation was passed , and the United States has signed but never ratified the Law of the Sea treaty . 
 During his first year in the Senate Gravel urged abolition of the Bureau of Indian Affairs . In the early 1970s Gravel supported a demonstration project that established links between Alaskan villages and the National Institute of Health in Bethesda , Maryland , for medical diagnostic communications . Gravel helped secure a private grant to facilitate the first Inuit Circumpolar Conference in 1977 , attended by Inuit representatives from Alaska , Canada , and Greenland . These conferences now also include representatives from Russia . In 1977 , Gravel helped lead an effort to have the U.S. Interior Department rename Mount McKinley to Denali ; this eventually led to Denali National Park being so named . Subsequently Gravel proposed a never @-@ built " Denali City " development above the <unk> River near the mountain , to consist of a giant Teflon dome enclosing hotels , golf courses , condominiums , and commercial buildings . 
 A key , emotional issue in the state at the time was " locking up Alaska " , making reference to allocation of its vast , mostly uninhabited land . In 1978 Gravel blocked passage , via procedural delays such as walking out of House @-@ Senate conference committee meetings , of a complex bill which represented a compromise on land use policy . The bill would have put some of Alaska 's vast federal land holdings under state control while preserving other portions for federal parks and refuges ; the action would earn Gravel the enmity of fellow Alaska Senator Ted Stevens . In 1980 , a new lands bill came up for consideration , that was less favorable to Alaskan interests and more liked by environmentalists ; it set aside 127 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 510 @,@ 000 km2 ) of Alaska 's 375 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 520 @,@ 000 km2 ) for national parks , conservation areas , and other restricted federal uses . Gravel blocked it , as not ensuring enough future development in the state . A new compromise version of the bill came forward , which reduced the land set aside to 104 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 420 @,@ 000 km2 ) . Gravel , in representation of Alaskan interests , tried to stop the bill , including staging a filibuster . The Senate , however , voted cloture and then passed the bill . Frustrated , Gravel said " the legislation denies Alaska its rights as a state , and denies the U.S. crucial strategic resources , " and commented that the Senate was " a little bit like a tank of barracudas . " 
 In 1978 , Gravel authored and secured the passage into law of the General Stock Ownership Corporation , that became <unk> U of the Tax Code under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 . While that was originally done as a prerequisite to a failed 1980 Alaskan ballot initiative that would have paid dividends to Alaskan citizens for pipeline @-@ related revenue , it also turned out to be significant in the development of binary economics . 
 = = = Loss of Senate seat in 1980 = = = 
 In 1980 , Gravel was challenged for the Democratic Party 's nomination by State Representative Clark Gruening , the grandson of the man Gravel had defeated in a primary 12 years earlier . Several factors made Gravel vulnerable . As an insurgent candidate in 1968 , Gravel had never established a firm party base . Not liking to hunt or fish , he was also always culturally suspect in the state . A group of Democrats , including future governor Steve Cowper , led the campaign against Gravel , with Gravel 's actions in respect to the 1978 and 1980 Alaskan lands bills a major issue , especially given that the latter 's dénouement happened but a week before the primary . The sources of Gravel 's campaign funds , some of which came from political action committees outside the state , also became an issue in the contest . Another factor may have been Alaska 's blanket primary system of the time , which allowed unlimited voting across party lines and from its many independents ; Republicans believed Gruening would be an easier candidate to defeat in the general election . 
 Gruening won the bitterly fought primary , with about 55 percent of the vote to Gravel 's 44 percent . Gravel would later concede that by the time of his defeat , he had alienated " almost every constituency in Alaska . " 
 Gruening lost the general election to Republican Frank <unk> . Gravel was the last Democrat to represent Alaska in Congress for 28 years , until Anchorage Mayor Mark Begich defeated Stevens , by now an aged , iconic figure who had just been convicted of seven felonies for taking unreported gifts , in a very close and protracted election result in mid @-@ November 2008 . ( The charges against Stevens were subsequently dropped due to prosecutorial misconduct . ) 
 = = Career after leaving the Senate = = 
 = = = A difficult transition = = = 
 Gravel took the 1980 defeat hard , recalling years later : " I had lost my career . I lost my marriage . I was in the doldrums for ten years after my defeat , " and " Nobody wanted to hire me for anything important . I felt like I was worthless . I didn 't know what I could do . " By his own later description , Gravel had been a womanizer while in the Senate , and in December 1980 he and his wife Rita separated . They filed for divorce in September 1981 ; she would later get all of his Senate pension income . 
 During the 1980s , Gravel was a real estate developer in Anchorage and Kenai , Alaska , a consultant , and a stockbroker . One of his real estate ventures , a condominium business , was forced to declare bankruptcy and a lawsuit ensued . During 1986 , Gravel worked in partnership with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets to buy losses that financially troubled Alaska Native Corporations could not take as tax deductions and sell them to large national companies looking for tax writeoffs . 
 Gravel married his second wife , Whitney Stewart Gravel , a former administrative assistant for Senator Jacob Javits , in 1984 . 
 = = = Return to politics = = = 
 In 1989 , Mike Gravel reentered politics . He founded and led The Democracy Foundation , which promotes direct democracy . He established the Philadelphia II corporation , which seeks to replicate the original 1787 Constitutional Convention in bringing direct democracy about . Around 2000 , David Parrish began helping Gravel on a technical level ; upon the former 's death in 2003 , Michael Grant took over the role of running Gravel 's websites and technology efforts . 
 Gravel led a quixotic effort to get a United States Constitutional amendment to allow voter @-@ initiated federal legislation similar to state ballot initiatives . He argued that Americans are able to legislate responsibly , and that the Act and Amendment in the National Initiative would allow American citizens to become " law makers " . 
 In 2001 , Gravel became director of the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution , where he admired institute co @-@ founder Gregory <unk> 's work on direct democracy in Switzerland . By 2004 , Gravel had become chair of the institute , and <unk> ( who in turn was a director of the Democracy Foundation ) gave the introduction at Gravel 's presidential announcement . 
 Mike and Whitney Gravel lived in Arlington County , Virginia , until 2010 and now reside in Burlingame , California . They have the two grown children from his first marriage , Martin Gravel and Lynne Gravel <unk> , and four grandchildren . Whitney Gravel 's income has sustained the couple since 1998 . In the 2000s ( decade ) , Gravel suffered poor health , requiring three surgeries in 2003 for back pain and neuropathy . Due to <unk> medical expenses and debts from his political causes , he declared personal bankruptcy in 2004 . He began taking a salary from the non @-@ profit organizations for which he was working ; much of that income was lent to his presidential campaign . In 2007 , he declared that he had " zero net worth . " 
 = = = Barnes Review controversy = = = 
 In June 2003 , Gravel gave a speech on direct democracy at a conference hosted by the American Free Press . The event was cosponsored by the Barnes Review , a journal that endorses Holocaust denial . In the wake of criticism for his appearance , Gravel has said repeatedly that he does not share such a view , stating , " You better believe I know that six million Jews were killed . I 've been to the Holocaust Museum . I 've seen the footage of General Eisenhower touring one of the camps . They 're [ referring to the Barnes Review and publisher Willis Carto ] nutty as loons if they don 't think it happened " . The newspaper had intended to interview Gravel about the National Initiative . Gravel later recounted the background to the event : 
 " He [ Carto ] liked the idea of the National Initiative . I figured it was an opportunity to discuss it . Whether it is the far right , far left , whatever , I 'll make my pitch to them . They gave me a free subscription to American Free Press . They still send it to me today . I flip through it sometimes . It has some extreme views , and a lot of the ads in it are even more extreme and make me want to <unk> . Anyways , sometime later , Carto contacted me to speak at that Barnes Review Conference . I had never heard of the Barnes Review , didn 't know anything about it or what they stood for . I was just coming to give a presentation about the National Initiative . I was there maybe 30 minutes . I could tell from the people in the room ( mainly some very old men ) that they were pretty extreme . I gave my speech , answered some questions and left . I never saw the agenda for the day or listened to any of the other presentations . " 
 The group invited Gravel to speak again , but he declined . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Gravel has stated that he is an advocate for " a national , universal single @-@ payer not @-@ for @-@ profit health care system " in the United States which would utilize vouchers and enable citizens to choose their own doctor . He has proposed to index veteran health care entitlements to take full account of increases in the costs of care and medicine . He supports a drug policy that <unk> and regulates all drugs , treating drug abuse as a medical issue , rather than a criminal matter . Gravel favors a guest worker program , supports the FairTax proposal that calls for eliminating the IRS and the income tax and replacing it with a progressive national sales tax of 23 percent on newly manufactured items and services , retaining <unk> via all taxes on spending up to the poverty level being refunded to every household . Gravel has advocated that carbon energy should be taxed to provide the funding for a global effort to bring together the world 's scientific and engineering communities to develop energy alternatives to significantly reduce the world ’ s energy dependence on carbon . 
 Gravel in principle does not object to the use of embryonic stem cells for medical research purposes . He is avowedly pro @-@ choice on the issue of abortion and women 's reproductive rights . He supports constitutional amendments towards direct democracy . His political leanings and convictions are also in his 1972 manifesto , Citizen Power : A People 's Platform . 
 = = 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 At the start of 2006 , Gravel decided the best way he could promote direct democracy and the National Initiative was to run for president . On April 17 , 2006 , Gravel became the first candidate for the Democratic nomination for President of the United States in the 2008 election , announcing his run in a speech to the National Press Club in Washington , D.C. Short on campaign cash , he took public transportation to get to his announcement . Other principal Gravel positions were the FairTax , withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq within 120 days , a single payer national health care system , and term limits . 
 Gravel campaigned almost full @-@ time in New Hampshire , the first primary state , following his announcement . Opinion polls of contenders for the Democratic nomination showed Gravel with 1 percent or less support . By the end of March 2007 , Gravel 's campaign had less than $ 500 in cash on hand against debts of nearly $ 90 @,@ 000 . 
 Because of his time in the Senate , Gravel was invited to many of the early Democratic presidential debates . During the initial one at South Carolina State University on April 26 , 2007 , he suggested a bill requiring the president to withdraw from Iraq on pain of criminal penalties . He also advocated positions such as opposing preemptive nuclear war . He stated that the Iraq War had the effect of creating more terrorists and that the " war was lost the day that George Bush invaded Iraq on a fraudulent basis . " Regarding his fellow candidates , he said , " I got to tell you , after standing up with them , some of these people frighten me – they frighten me . " Media stories said that Gravel was responsible for much of whatever " heat " and " <unk> " had taken place . Gravel gained considerable publicity by shaking up the normally staid multiple @-@ candidate format ; The New York Times ' media critic said that what Gravel had done was " steal a debate with outrageous , curmudgeonly statements . " The Internet was a benefit : a YouTube video of his responses in the debate was viewed more than 225 @,@ 892 times , ranking seventeenth in most views for week and first among news and politics clips ; his name became the fifteenth most searched @-@ for in the blogosphere ; and his website garnered more traffic than those of frontrunners Hillary Rodham Clinton , Barack Obama , or John Edwards . Gravel appeared on the popular Colbert Report on television on May 2 , and his campaign and career were profiled in national publications such as Salon . Two wordless , <unk> campaign videos , " Rock " and " Fire " , were released on YouTube in late May and became hits , and eventually gained over 760 @,@ 000 and 185 @,@ 000 views respectively . " Rock , " in turn , was given airtime during an episode of The Daily Show with Jon Stewart . Some thirty @-@ five years after he first achieved the national spotlight , he had found it again . 
 All this did not improve his performance in the polls ; a May 2007 CNN poll showed him with less than 0 @.@ 5 percent support among Democrats . Gravel was in the next several debates , in one case after CNN reversed a decision to exclude him . Gravel , as with some of the other second @-@ tier candidates , did not get as much time as the leaders ; during the June 2 , 2007 , New Hampshire debate , which lasted two hours , he was asked 10 questions and allowed to speak for five minutes and 37 seconds . 
 During the July 23 , 2007 , CNN @-@ YouTube presidential debate , Gravel responded to audience applause when he had complained of a lack of airtime and said : " Thank you . Has it been fair thus far ? " Detractors began to liken him to " the cranky uncle who lives in the attic , " or " the angry old guy that just seemed to want to become angrier . " Berkeley political scientist David <unk> found that moderator George Stephanopoulos directed roughly five percent of his questions to Gravel ; in a poll asking who did the best in the debate , Gravel placed seventh among the eight candidates . National opinion polls of contenders for the Democratic nomination continued to show Gravel with one percent or zero percent numbers . By the end of the third @-@ quarter 2007 , Gravel had about $ 17 @,@ 500 in cash on hand , had collected a total of about $ 380 @,@ 000 so far during the 2008 election cycle , and was continuing to run a threadbare campaign with minimal staff . 
 Beginning with the October 30 , 2007 , Philadelphia event , Gravel was excluded from most of the debates , with the debate sponsors or the Democratic National Committee saying Gravel 's campaign had not met fund @-@ raising , polling , or local campaign organizational thresholds . For the Philadelphia exclusion , Gravel blamed corporate censorship on the part of sponsor owner and alleged military @-@ industrial complex member General Electric for his exclusion and mounted a counter @-@ gathering and debate against a video screen a short distance away , but he had lost his easiest publicity . In reaction , supporters organized " mass donation days " to try to help the campaign gain momentum and funds , such as on December 5 , 2007 , the anniversary of the Repeal of Prohibition . 
 Gravel did not compete in the initial 2008 vote , the Iowa caucuses , but was still subjected to a false report from MSNBC that he had pulled out of the race afterward . Gravel did focus his attention on the second 2008 vote , the New Hampshire primary . There he received about 400 votes out of some 280 @,@ 000 cast , or 0 @.@ 14 percent , before taking time off to improve his health . He resumed campaigning , but fared no better in subsequent states . By the end of January 2008 , Hillary Clinton , Barack Obama , and Gravel were the only remaining Democrats from the initial debates still running ; Gravel vowed to stay in the presidential campaign until November . On March 11 , 2008 , Gravel continued to remain in the Democratic race but additionally endorsed a Green Party candidate for president , Jesse Johnson , saying he wanted to help Johnson prevail against Green Party rivals Cynthia McKinney and Ralph Nader . By late March , Gravel had almost no fundraising and was only on the ballot in one of the next ten Democratic primaries . 
 = = = Switch to Libertarian Party = = = 
 On March 25 , 2008 , Gravel announced that he would leave the Democrats and join the Libertarian Party , saying : " My libertarian views , as well as my strong stance against war , the military industrial complex and American imperialism , seem not to be tolerated by Democratic Party elites who are out of touch with the average American ; elites that reject the empowerment of American citizens I offered to the Democratic Party at the beginning of this presidential campaign with the National Initiative for Democracy . " The following day Gravel entered the race for the 2008 Libertarian presidential nomination , saying that he would have run as a third @-@ party candidate all along except that he needed the public exposure that came from being in the earlier Democratic debates . Gravel 's initial notion of running as a fusion candidate with other parties was met with skepticism and not pursued . 
 As a Libertarian candidate , Gravel faced resistance to his liberal past and unorthodox positions ; nevertheless , he garnered more support than he had as a Democrat , placing second and third in two April 2008 straw polls . In the May 25 balloting at the 2008 Libertarian National Convention in Denver , Gravel finished fourth out of eight candidates on the initial ballot , with 71 votes out of a total 618 ; he trailed former Congressman and eventual winner Bob Barr , author Mary <unk> , and businessman Wayne Allyn Root . Gravel 's position did not subsequently improve and he was eliminated on the fourth ballot . Afterwards he stated that " I just ended my political career , " but he vowed to continue promoting his positions as a writer and lecturer . 
 = = After the campaigns = = 
 In June 2008 , Gravel endorsed the NYC 9 / 11 Ballot Initiative , saying the measure would create a " citizens commission rather than a government commission " with subpoena power against top U.S. officials to " make a true investigation as to what happened " regarding the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks . Gravel subsequently said that , " Individuals in and out of government may certainly have participated with the obviously known perpetrators of this dastardly act . Suspicions abound over the analysis presented by government . Obviously an act that has triggered three wars , Afghan , Iraqi and the continuing War on Terror , should be extensively investigated which was not done and which the government avoids addressing . " 
 In August 2008 , Gravel was speaking to a crowd of supporters of Sami Al @-@ Arian ( who two years earlier had pleaded guilty and been sentenced to prison for a charge of conspiracy in helping Palestinian Islamic Jihad , a " specially designated terrorist " organization ) when he was caught on tape saying of Al @-@ Arian 's prosecutor , " Find out where he lives , find out where his kids go to school , find out where his office is : picket him all the time . Call him a racist in signs if you see him . Call him an injustice . Call him whatever you want to call him , but in his face all the time . " Gravel was criticized for potentially involving the children of the prosecutor , and Al @-@ Arian 's family disavowed the sentiments . 
 Gravel defended Alaska Governor Sarah Palin after she was chosen as Republican presidential nominee John McCain 's running mate in September 2008 . He praised Palin 's record in standing up to corruption among Alaskan Republicans , thought her national inexperience was an asset not a detriment , and predicted that the " Troopergate " investigation into whether she improperly fired a state official would " come out in her favor . " Gravel made clear he would not support or vote for either McCain @-@ Palin or Obama @-@ Biden in the general election . The following year , Gravel said that Palin 's politics were " terrible , but that doesn 't detract from the fact that she 's a very talented person " . He predicted that Palin would run for president in 2012 and that " she 's going to surprise a lot of people " Palin did not run , but Gravel 's prediction about " <unk> " was accurate as Palin was found not to have violated ethics laws . 
 From mid @-@ 2008 through October 2009 Gravel gave several lectures at South Korean universities about the Korean National Initiative , a Korean adaption of the National Initiative Gravel has proposed in the United States . 
 In December 2010 , Gravel praised WikiLeaks , in the news during the year for the Afghan War documents leak , Iraq War documents leak , and United States diplomatic cables leak , as the " most significant effort to save democracy ( which is slowly being eclipsed by the Military Industrial Complex ) since the release of the Pentagon Papers " . Gravel indicated in December 2010 that he might run for president again and possibly challenge President Obama for the Democratic nomination for the 2012 presidential election , but he did not . 
 Gravel attended the International Conference on <unk> in Tehran in February 2013 , noting that the conference was attended by " various elements of extremes " but saying that it was necessary to discuss how the U.S. film industry portrayed Iran in order to prevent " an insane war " between the two nations . In May 2013 , Gravel was one of several former members of Congress to accept $ 20 @,@ 000 from the Paradigm Research Group , an advocacy group for UFO disclosure , as part of holding what they termed a Citizen Hearing on Disclosure , modeled after congressional hearings , regarding supposed U.S. government suppression of evidence concerning UFOs . Gravel said , " Something is monitoring the planet , and they are monitoring it very cautiously , because we are a very warlike planet , " and , " What we 're faced with here is , in areas of the media , and the government too , an effort to marginalize and ridicule people who have specific knowledge . " 
 In December 2014 , he was announced as the new CEO of <unk> , a company which makes marijuana @-@ infused products for medicinal and recreational use , and a subsidiary of Cannabis Sativa , Inc . He also became an Independent Director of Cannabis Sativa . 
 During the Democratic Party presidential primaries , 2016 , Gravel spoke with high praise of Bernie Sanders , saying " Bernie is one of the most gifted politicians I have ever observed . He 's a person of great integrity and very clever . " He predicted that the Bernie Sanders presidential campaign , 2016 would end with Sanders being elected president , but that Sanders would be unable to get his key reforms through Congress and thus that Sanders and his supporters should back some of the proposals of the National Initiative . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 In 2008 , Gravel received the Columbia University School of General Studies ' first annual Isaac Asimov Lifetime Achievement Award . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Writings = = 
 Gravel , Mike . Jobs and More Jobs . Mt . McKinley Publishers , 1968 . 
 Gravel , Mike . Citizen Power : A People 's Platform . Holt , Rinehart and Winston , 1972 . ISBN 0 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 revised and reissued as Citizen Power : A Mandate for Change , <unk> , 2008 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Gravel , Mike and Lauria , Joe . A Political Odyssey : The Rise of American Militarism and One Man 's Fight to Stop It . Seven Stories Press , 2008 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 826 @-@ 8 . 
 Gravel , Mike and Eisenbach , David . The <unk> : How the Media <unk> Our Security and Our Democracy . Phoenix Books , 2008 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 586 @-@ X. 
 Gravel , Mike . Voice of a Maverick : The Speeches and Writings of Senator Mike Gravel . Brandywine House , 2008 . 
 Gravel , Mike . Foreword to " Poisoned Power : The Case Against Nuclear Power Plants . " [ John W. Goffman & Arthur R. <unk> , Rodale Press , Inc . , Emmaus , PA , June 1971 ] . 
 = Glen P. Robinson = 
 Glen Parmelee Robinson , Jr . ( September 10 , 1923 – January 16 , 2013 ) , called the " father of high @-@ tech industry in Georgia " , was an American businessman and founder of Scientific Atlanta , now a subsidiary of Cisco Systems . Robinson was the first employee of Scientific Atlanta , where he remained CEO then Chairman of the company until he retired . 
 Initially a ham radio enthusiast and subsequently a graduate of the Georgia Institute of Technology ( Georgia Tech ) with both bachelor 's and master 's degrees in physics , Robinson worked at the Georgia Tech Research Institute and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory before founding Scientific Atlanta . Later in life , he founded and invested in numerous Atlanta @-@ based science @-@ related companies . Robinson was named an IEEE Fellow and held at least 39 patents in fields including solar energy devices and antenna systems . 
 For his contributions , he was named Georgia 's Small Businessman of the Year in 1965 , the Georgia Business and Industry Association 's Entrepreneur of the Year in 1981 , and was elected to the Georgia Technology Hall of Fame in 1993 . In 2003 , Georgia Tech awarded him an honorary Ph.D. in Physics , and in 2007 , half of Georgia Tech 's Molecular Science and Engineering Building was named the Glen P. Robinson , Jr . Tower in his honor . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robinson was born in 1923 in Crescent City , Florida , an outskirt of Jacksonville , to Glen Parmelee and Laura Mae ( Lewis ) Robinson . His family moved to Valdosta , Georgia , in 1937 , and some time after , Robinson opened a small machine shop . He sold industrial products and metal tools to local industry . In 1942 , with the encouragement of his father , Robinson enrolled as a student at the Georgia Institute of Technology to study chemical engineering . However , his education was interrupted by his enlistment into the Naval Signal Corps and service in the Pacific Theatre of World War II where he installed telephones on recaptured American possessions during the war . 
 Robinson returned from the conflict as a junior and in 1948 he changed his major to physics , as the School of Physics started its degree program that year . He received a Bachelor of Science in Physics in 1948 , and a Master of Science in Physics ( also from Georgia Tech ) in 1950 . Robinson was also a member of Georgia Tech 's prestigious secret society , ANAK . Robinson had been a ham radio operator enthusiast since the age of 14 , and started a radio repair service to provide additional income while he was a student at Georgia Tech . 
 One of Robinson 's professors , James E. Boyd , convinced him to give up the radio repair business and work as a research assistant at the Georgia Tech Research Institute ( then known as the Engineering Experiment Station , or EES ) . One of his ham radio friends was actually his boss 's boss and EES director , Gerald Rosselot . Working after hours at EES , Robinson built a television set in the lab , which he and others claim was the first to be built in the state of Georgia . In 1950 , Robinson went to Tennessee to work in nuclear engineering for Oak Ridge National Laboratory , servicing radiology @-@ related equipment at local hospitals . 
 = = Scientific Atlanta = = 
 Robinson and six other Georgia Tech researchers ( including Robinson 's former professor James E. Boyd and EES director Gerald Rosselot ) each contributed $ 100 ( for a total of $ 700 ) and founded Scientific Associates on October 31 , 1951 , with the initial goal of marketing antenna structures being developed by the radar branch of the EES to the U.S. military . Robinson worked as the unpaid general manager for the first year . The relations between Scientific Associates and the EES were initially strained due to an unrelated dispute over station finances between EES director Gerald Rosselot and Georgia Tech vice president Cherry Emerson . Specifically , Emerson believed that surplus funds realized through research contracts should be returned to Georgia Tech , while the Georgia Tech Research Corporation and Rosselot felt they should be retained to foster additional research . 
 A strict conflict of interest policy was enacted , and researchers were forced to choose between the two entities ; the initial investors had all kept their faculty jobs , and most returned to them . After the fledgling company 's first contract resulted in a $ 4 @,@ 000 loss , Robinson bought out all but one of the original investors and paid them each back their original $ 100 . Robinson left EES and became president and CEO of the new company , which was renamed Scientific Atlanta . Boyd stayed on as a member of the board of directors ; Robinson 's friend Larry Clayton , previously involved in Robinson 's radio business and now having graduated from Georgia Tech with a degree in physics , became the head of the new company 's research and development . Years later , the school would promote Scientific Atlanta 's origins at Georgia Tech , and Scientific Atlanta has been a longtime financial contributor to Georgia Tech . 
 Scientific Atlanta helped NASA establish ground stations for communication with astronauts during the Mercury , Gemini and Apollo projects . When John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962 on Mercury @-@ Atlas 6 , his voice was transmitted and received by radio antennas designed and equipment built by Scientific Atlanta . In the 1970s , Robinson recognized the potential combination of communications satellites and cable television . Ted Turner purchased one of Scientific Atlanta 's first satellite systems , which formed the basis of Turner 's " Super Station " that was broadcast around the country to other cable providers . In 1975 , HBO and <unk> used Scientific Atlanta equipment to transmit the first live satellite @-@ delivered cable event , the " <unk> in Manila " heavyweight boxing championship bout between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier . Scientific Atlanta is perhaps best known for pioneering television cable set @-@ top boxes and equipment worldwide and the development of satellite Earth stations . 
 Robinson remained CEO of Scientific Atlanta for 20 years , and chairman of the board for an additional eight years , until he retired from the company in 1979 . Scientific Atlanta grew dramatically ; it earned $ 3 @.@ 1 million in revenue in 1962 , approximately $ 200 million in 1979 , and $ 1 @.@ 9 billion in yearly revenue by 2005 . Scientific Atlanta served as a regional business incubator , with hundreds of companies tracing their roots back to it . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Robinson founded E @-@ Tech in 1978 , which developed heat pump technology . Eight years later , in 1986 , E @-@ Tech merged with the <unk> Company to become Crispaire , which specialized in cooling equipment for telecommunications systems . Crispaire would later merge with other companies , and is now known as <unk> . Robinson retired from Crispaire in 1997 . 
 In 1994 , Robinson funded and co @-@ founded <unk> , which focused on applications of LIDAR such as radar guns and traffic enforcement cameras , and in 2006 was the world 's largest manufacturer of laser products for law enforcement . <unk> was acquired by Public Safety Equipment in June 2006 , which was in turn acquired by Stirling Square Capital Partners and Diamond Castle Holdings in February 2007 . 
 Robinson was an angel investor , particularly in the fields of digital communications and biotechnology . In 1999 , he funded <unk> and Mission Communications , two companies focused on AMPS cellular digital control channel and wireless <unk> communications . <unk> was acquired by Acorn Energy in 2012 . Mission is currently the leading provider of cellular <unk> for water and wastewater in North America . In 2000 , he invested $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Genomic Solutions Inc , which was acquired by <unk> , Inc. in 2007 . Most recently , Robinson was an investor in and co @-@ founder of the 2007 VentureLab startup , C2 Biofuels , which attracted additional funding from Chevron and aims to build several $ 100 million cellulosic ethanol plants throughout the United States . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Robinson held positions on numerous boards , including : Chairman of the Georgia Science and Technology Commission ; Chairman of the Georgia Tech Research Corporation ; Trustee of The Georgia Tech Foundation and Member of the Board of Visitors of Emory University ; the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce ; and the Georgia Business and Industry Association . 
 Robinson was selected as Georgia 's Small Businessman of the Year in 1965 , the Georgia Business and Industry Association 's ( now the Georgia Chamber of Commerce ) Entrepreneur of the Year in 1981 , and was elected to the Georgia Technology Hall of Fame in 1993 . Since 1995 , Scientific Atlanta has sponsored scholarships in Robinson 's name for children of its employees . In March 1998 , Robinson donated to create two endowed chairs at Georgia Tech : the Glen P. Robinson Chair in Non @-@ Linear Science ( in the School of Physics ) and the $ 1 @.@ 5 million Glen P. Robinson Chair in Electro @-@ Optics ( in GTRI ) . 
 In 2003 , Georgia Tech awarded him an honorary Ph.D. in physics , and in 2006 he was awarded the Joseph Mayo Pettit Alumni Distinguished Service Award . In 2007 , half of Georgia Tech 's Molecular Science and Engineering Building was named the Glen P. Robinson , Jr . Tower in his honor , due in part to his $ 5 million donation towards its construction . 
 Robinson continued working with startups and technology businesses throughout his later career . Near the end of his life , he and his wife , Jan Musgrove Robinson , had 5 children , 12 grandchildren , and 3 great @-@ grandchildren and lived in Atlanta . On Wednesday , January 16 , 2013 , Robinson died of apparent heart failure . The funeral was held at St. Anne ’ s Episcopal Church in Atlanta , and he was cremated by H.M. Patterson & Son , Arlington Chapel . 
 = The Tower House = 
 The Tower House , 29 Melbury Road , is a late @-@ Victorian townhouse in the Holland Park district of Kensington and Chelsea , London , built by the architect and designer William Burges as his home . Designed between 1875 and 1881 , in the French Gothic Revival style , it was described by the architectural historian J. Mordaunt Crook as " the most complete example of a medieval secular interior produced by the Gothic Revival , and the last " . The house is built of red brick , with Bath stone dressings and green roof slates from Cumbria , and has a distinctive cylindrical tower and conical roof . The ground floor contains a drawing room , a dining room and a library , while the first floor has two bedrooms and an armoury . Its exterior and the interior echo elements of Burges 's earlier work , particularly the McConnochie House in Cardiff and Castell Coch . It was designated a Grade I listed building in 1949 . 
 Burges bought the lease on the plot of land in 1875 . The house was built by the Ashby Brothers , with interior decoration by members of Burges 's long @-@ standing team of craftsmen including Thomas Nicholls and Henry Stacy Marks . By 1878 the house was largely complete , although interior decoration and the designing of numerous items of furniture and metalwork continued until Burges 's death in 1881 . The house was inherited by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Richard Popplewell Pullan . It was later sold to Colonel T. H. Minshall and then , in 1933 , to Colonel E. R. B. Graham . The poet John Betjeman inherited the remaining lease in 1962 but did not extend it . Following a period when the house stood empty and suffered vandalism , it was purchased and restored , first by Lady Jane Turnbull , later by the actor Richard Harris and then by the musician Jimmy Page . 
 The house retains most of its internal structural decoration , but much of the furniture , fittings and contents that Burges designed have been dispersed . Many items , including the Great Bookcase , the Zodiac settle , the Golden Bed and the Red Bed , are now in institutions such as The Higgins Art Gallery & Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum , while others are in private collections . 
 = = Location and setting = = 
 The Tower House is on a corner of Melbury Road , just north of Kensington High Street , in the district of Holland Park . It stands opposite <unk> Lodge and next to Woodland House , built for the artist Luke Fildes . The development of Melbury Road in the grounds of Little Holland House created an art colony in Holland Park , the Holland Park Circle . Its most prominent member , Frederic , Lord Leighton , lived at Leighton House , 12 Holland Park Road , and at the time of Leighton 's death in 1896 six Royal <unk> , as well as one associate member , were living in Holland Park Road and Melbury Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Design , construction and craftsmanship , 1875 – 78 = = = 
 In 1863 , William Burges gained his first major architectural commission , Saint Fin Barre 's Cathedral , Cork , at the age of 35 . In the following twelve years , his architecture , metalwork , jewellery , furniture and stained glass led Crook to claim that Burges rivaled Pugin as " the greatest art @-@ architect of the Gothic Revival " . But by 1875 , his short career was largely over . Although he worked to finalise earlier projects , he received no further major commissions , and the design , construction , decoration and furnishing of the Tower House occupied much of the last six years of his life . In December 1875 , after rejecting plots in Victoria Road , Kensington and Bayswater , Burges purchased the leasehold of the plot in Melbury Road from the Earl of Ilchester , the owner of the Holland Estate . The ground rent was £ 100 per annum . Initial drawings for the house had been undertaken in July 1875 and the final form was decided upon by the end of the year . Building began in 1876 , contracted to the Ashby Brothers of Kingsland Road at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 000 . 
 At the Tower House Burges drew on his own " experience of twenty years learning , travelling and building , " and used many of the artists and craftsmen who had worked with him on earlier buildings . An estimate book compiled by him , and now in the Victoria and Albert Museum , contains the names of the individuals and companies that worked at the house . Thomas Nicholls was responsible for the stone carving , including the capitals , corbels and the chimneypieces . The mosaic and marble work was contracted to Burke and Company of Regent Street , while the decorative tiles were supplied by WB Simpson and Sons Ltd of the Strand . John Ayres Hatfield crafted the bronze decorations on the doors , while the woodwork was the responsibility of John Walden of Covent Garden . Henry Stacy Marks and Frederick Weekes were employed to decorate the walls with murals , and Campbell and Smith of Southampton Row had responsibility for most of the painted decoration . Marks painted birds above the frieze in the library , and the illustrations of famous lovers in the drawing @-@ room were by Weekes . They also painted the figures on the bookcases in the library . The stained glass was by Saunders and Company of Long Acre , with initial designs by Horatio Walter Lonsdale . 
 = = = Burges to Graham , 1878 – 1962 = = = 
 Burges spent his first night at the house on 5 March 1878 . It provided a suitable backdrop for entertaining his range of friends , " the whole gamut of Pre @-@ Raphaelite London . " His dogs , Dandie , Bogie and Pinkie , are immortalised in paintings on various pieces of furniture such as the Dog Cabinet and the foot of The Red Bed . Burges displayed his extensive collection of armour in the armoury . The decoration of his bedroom hints at another of his passions : a fondness for opium . <unk> poppies cover the panels of a cupboard which was set next to his bed . 
 In 1881 , after catching a chill while overseeing work at Cardiff , Burges returned , half paralysed , to the house where he lay dying for some three weeks . Among his last visitors were Oscar Wilde and James Whistler . Burges died in the Red Bed on 20 April 1881 , just over three years after moving into the Tower House ; he was 53 years old . He was buried in West Norwood Cemetery . 
 The lease on the house was inherited by Burges 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Richard Popplewell Pullan . Pullan completed some of Burges 's unfinished projects and wrote two studies of his work . The lease was then purchased by Colonel T. H. Minshall , author of What to Do with Germany and Future Germany , and father of Merlin Minshall . Minshall sold his lease to Colonel E. R. B. and Mrs. Graham in 1933 . The Tower House was designated a Grade I listed building on 29 July 1949 . 
 = = = Betjeman to Turnbull , 1962 – 69 = = = 
 John Betjeman was a friend of the Grahams and was given the remaining two @-@ year lease on the house , together with some of the furniture , on Mrs. Graham 's death in 1962 . Betjeman , a champion of Victorian Gothic Revival architecture , was an early admirer of Burges . In 1957 the Tower House had featured in the fifth episode of his BBC television series , An Englishman 's Castle . In a radio interview of 1952 about Cardiff Castle Betjeman spoke of the architect and his foremost work : " a great brain has made this place . I don 't see how anyone can fail to be impressed by its weird beauty ... awed into silence from the force of this Victorian dream of the Middle Ages . " 
 Because of a potential liability for £ 10 @,@ 000 of renovation work upon the expiry of the lease , Betjeman considered the house too costly to maintain , and subsequently vacated it . From 1962 to 1966 , the house stood empty and suffered vandalism and neglect . A survey undertaken in January 1965 revealed that the exterior stonework was badly decayed , dry rot had eaten through the roof and the structural floor timbers , and the attics were infested with pigeons . Vandals had stripped the lead from the water tanks and had damaged the mirrors , fireplaces and carving work . The most notable loss was the theft of the carved figure of Fame from the Dining Room chimneypiece . Betjeman suggested that the owner 's agents had deliberately refused to let the house , and allowed it to decline , intending to demolish it and redevelop the site . Writing in Country Life in 1966 , Charles Handley @-@ Read took a different view saying that " the Ilchester Estate , upon which the house is situated , are anxious that it should be preserved and [ have ] entered into a long lease conditional upon the house being put into a state of good repair . " In March 1965 , the Historic Buildings Council obtained a preservation order on the house , enabling the purchaser of the lease , Lady Jane Turnbull , daughter of William Grey , 9th Earl of Stamford , to initiate a programme of restoration the following July . These renovations were supported by grants of £ 4 @,@ 000 from the Historic Buildings Council and £ 3 @,@ 000 from the Greater London Council . The lease was sold in 1969 . 
 = = = Harris and Page , 1969 onwards = = = 
 The actor Richard Harris bought the lease for £ 75 @,@ 000 in 1969 after discovering that the American entertainer Liberace had made an offer but had not put down a deposit . Reading of the intended sale in the Evening Standard , Harris bought it the following day , describing his purchase as the biggest gift he had ever given himself . In his autobiography , the entertainer Danny La Rue recalled visiting the house with Liberace , writing , " It was a strange building and had eerie murals painted on the ceiling ... I sensed evil " . Meeting La Rue later , Harris said he had found the house haunted by the ghosts of children from an orphanage that had previously occupied the site and that he had placated them by buying them toys . Harris employed the original decorators , Campbell Smith & Company Ltd . , to carry out restoration , using Burges 's drawings from the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
 Jimmy Page , the Led Zeppelin guitarist , bought the house from Harris in 1972 for £ 350 @,@ 000 , outbidding the musician David Bowie . Page , an enthusiast for Burges and for the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood , commented in an interview in 2012 : " I was still finding things 20 years after being there – a little beetle on the wall or something like that ; it 's Burges 's attention to detail that is so fascinating . " In 2015 Page successfully challenged a planning application lodged by the pop star Robbie Williams , who had purchased the adjacent Woodland House in 2013 and planned extensive renovations . Page argued that the alterations , particularly the intended underground excavations , would threaten the structure of the Tower House . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior and design = = = 
 The cultural historian Caroline <unk> wrote that the Tower House was a " pledge to the spirit of Gothic in an area given over to Queen Anne " . Burges loathed the Queen Anne style prevalent in Holland Park , writing that it : " like other fashions ... will have its day , I do not call it Queen Anne art , for , unfortunately I see no art in it at all " . His inspirations were French Gothic domestic architecture of the thirteenth century and more recent models drawn from the work of the nineteenth @-@ century French architect Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc . Architectural historians Gavin Stamp and Colin Amery considered that the building " sums up Burges in miniature . Although clearly a redbrick suburban house , it is massive , picturesquely composed , with a prominent <unk> for the staircase which is surmounted by a conical roofed turret . " Burges 's neighbour Luke Fildes described the house as a " model modern house of moderately large size in the 13th @-@ century style built to show what may be done for 19th @-@ century everyday wants " . 
 The house has an L @-@ shaped plan , and the exterior is plain , of red brick , with Bath stone dressings and green roof slates from Cumberland . With a floor plan of 50 feet by 50 feet ( 15 m ) square , 2 @,@ 500 square feet ( 230 m2 ) , Burges went about its construction on a grand scale . The architect R. Norman Shaw remarked that the concrete foundations were suitable " for a fortress " . This approach , combined with Burges 's architectural skills and the minimum of exterior decoration , created a building that Crook described as " simple and massive " . Following his usual pattern , Burges re @-@ worked many elements of earlier designs , adapting them as appropriate . The frontages come from the other townhouse he designed , the McConnochie House in Cardiff , although they have been reversed , with the arcaded , street front from the McConnochie House forming the garden front of the Tower House . The staircase is consigned to the conical tower , avoiding the error Burges made at the earlier house , where he placed the staircase in the middle of the hall . The cylindrical tower and conical roof derive from Castell Coch , and the interiors are inspired from examples at Cardiff Castle . The house has two main floors , with a basement below and a garret above . The ground floor contains a drawing room , a dining room and a library , while the first floor has two bedrooms and an armoury . 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The architectural writer Bridget Cherry wrote that " the sturdy exterior gives little hint of the fantasy [ Burges ] created inside " , interiors which the art historian and Burges scholar Charles Handley @-@ Read described as " at once opulent , aggressive , obsessional , enchanting , their grandeur border [ ing ] on grandiloquence " . Each room has a complex iconographic scheme of decoration : in the hall it is Time ; in the drawing room , Love ; in Burges 's bedroom , the Sea . Massive fireplaces with elaborate <unk> were carved and installed , described by Crook as " veritable altars of art ... some of the most amazing pieces of decoration Burges ever designed " . Handley @-@ Read considered that Burges 's decorations were " unique , almost magical [ and ] quite unlike anything designed by his contemporaries " . 
 = = = = Ground floor = = = = 
 A bronze @-@ covered door , with relief panels depicting figures , opens onto the entrance hall . In Burges 's time the door had a letterbox , in the form of Mercury , the messenger of the gods . The letterbox is now lost , but a contemporary copy is in the collection of The Higgins Art Gallery & Museum . The porch contains a white marble seat and column , and on the floor is a mosaic of Pinkie , a favourite poodle of Burges . <unk> by H.W. Lonsdale , it resembles the cave <unk> floor at Pompei . 
 The interior centres on the double @-@ height entrance hall , with the theme of Time . The painted ceiling depicts the astrological signs of the constellations , arranged in the positions they held when the house was first occupied . A large stained glass window contains four female figures representing Dawn , Noon , Twilight and Night . A mosaic floor in the entrance hall contains a labyrinth design , with the centre depicting the myth of Theseus slaying the Minotaur . The garden 's entrance door , also covered in bronze , is decorated with a relief of the Madonna and Child . As elsewhere , Burges incorporated earlier designs , the bronze doors echoing those at Cork Cathedral , and the maze floor recalling an earlier ceiling at Burges 's office at 15 Buckingham Street . Emblems adorn the five doors on the ground floor , each one relevant to their respective room . A flower marked the door to the garden , with the front door marked by a key . The library is indicated by an open book , the drawing or music room by musical instruments , and the dining room by a bowl and flask of wine . 
 The library , its walls lined with bookcases , features a sculptured mantelpiece resembling the Tower of Babel . The hooded chimneypiece represents the " dispersion of languages " , with figures depicting Nimrod ruling over the elements of speech . Two trumpeters represent the pronouns , a queen embodies the verb , a porter the noun , and numerous other gilded and painted figures are displayed . The ceiling is divided into eight compartments , with depictions of the six founders of law and philosophy , Moses , St. Paul , Luther , Mahomet , Aristotle and Justinian . An illuminated alphabet frieze of architecture and the visual arts running around the bookcases completes the scheme , with the letters of the alphabet incorporated , including a letter " H " falling below the cornice . Due to H @-@ dropping being a social taboo in Victorian times , Handley @-@ Read described it as the " most celebrated of all Burges 's jokes " . Artists and craftsmen are featured at work on each lettered door of the bookcases that surround the room . In a panel in one of the glazed doors which open onto the garden , Burges is shown standing in front of a model of the Tower House . He features as Architect , the A forming the first letter of the alphabet frieze . Both the Architecture Cabinet and the Great Bookcase stood in this room . The stained glass windows in the room represent painting , architecture and sculpture , and were painted by Weekes . 
 On the wall opposite the library fireplace is an opening into the drawing room . Inside there are three stained glass windows which are set in ornamented marble linings . Opposite the windows stood the Zodiac Settle , which Burges moved from Buckingham Street . Love is the central decorative scheme to the room , with the ceiling painted with medieval cupids , and the walls covered with mythical lovers . Carved figures from the Roman de la Rose decorate the chimneypiece , which Crook considered " one of the most glorious that Burges and Nicholls ever produced " . Echoing Crook , Charles Handley @-@ Read wrote , " Working together , Burges and Nicholls had transposed a poem into sculpture with a delicacy that is very nearly musical . The Roman de la Rose has come to life . " 
 The dining room is devoted to Geoffrey Chaucer 's The House of Fame and the art of story @-@ telling , Crook explaining that " tall stories are part of the dining room rite " . The hooded chimneypiece , of Devonshire marble , contained a bronze figure above the fireplace representing the Goddess of Fame ; its hands and face were made of ivory , with sapphires for eyes . It was later stolen . The tiles on the walls depict fairy stories , including Reynard the Fox , Jack and the Beanstalk and Little Red Riding Hood . The room also shows Burges 's innovative use of materials : Handley @-@ Read observed that the Victorians had " a horror of food smells " and therefore the room was constructed using materials that did not absorb odours and could be washed . The walls are covered with Devonshire marble , surmounted by glazed picture tiles , while the ceiling is of sheet metal . The ceiling is divided into coffered compartments by square beams , and features symbols of the Sun , the planets and the signs of the Zodiac . Burges designed most of the cutlery and plate used in this room , which display his skills as a designer of metalwork , including the claret jug and Cat Cup chosen by Lord and Lady Bute as mementos from Burges 's collection after his death . The panels of the wine cupboard were decorated by Dante Gabriel Rossetti . 
 = = = = First floor and garret = = = = 
 The windows of the stair turret represent " the Storming of the Castle of Love " . On the first floor are two bedrooms and an armoury . Burges 's bedroom , with a theme of sea creatures , overlooks the garden . Its elaborate ceiling is segmented into panels by gilded and painted beams , studded with miniature convex mirrors set in to gilt stars . Fish and eels swim in a frieze of waves painted under the ceiling , and fish are also carved in relief on the chimneypiece . On the fire @-@ hood , a sculpted mermaid gazes into a looking @-@ glass , with seashells , coral , seaweed and a baby mermaid also represented . Charles Handley @-@ Read described the frieze around the Mermaid fireplace as " proto @-@ Art Nouveau " and noted " the debt of international art nouveau to Victorian Gothic designers , Burges included " . In this room , Burges placed two of his most personal pieces of furniture , the Red Bed , in which he died , and the Narcissus washstand , both of which originally came from Buckingham Street . The bed is painted blood red and features a panel depicting Sleeping Beauty . The washstand is red and gold ; its tip @-@ up basin of marble inlaid with fishes is silver and gold . 
 " The Earth and its productions " is the theme of the guest room facing the street . Its ceiling is adorned with butterflies and fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis , and at the crossing of the main beams is a convex mirror in a gilded surround . Along the length of the beams are paintings of frogs and mice . A frieze of flowers , once painted over , has since been restored . The Golden Bed and the Vita Nuova Washstand designed for this room are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
 Burges designated the final room on the first floor an armoury and used it to display his large collection of armour . The collection was bequeathed to the British Museum upon his death . A carved chimneypiece in the armoury has three roundels carved with the goddesses Minerva , Venus and Juno in medieval attire . 
 The garret originally contained day and night nurseries , which the author James Stourton considers a surprising choice of arrangement for the " childless bachelor Burges " . They contain a pair of decorated chimneypieces featuring the tale of Jack and the Beanstalk and three monkeys at play . 
 = = = Garden = = = 
 The garden at the rear of the house featured raised flowerbeds which <unk> described as being " planned according to those <unk> depicted in medieval romances ; beds of scarlet tulips , bordered with stone fencing " . On a mosaic terrace , around a statue of a boy holding a hawk , sculpted by Thomas Nicholls , Burges and his guests would sit on " marble seats or on Persian rugs and embroidered cushions . " The garden , and that of the adjacent Woodland House , contain trees from the former Little Holland House . 
 = = Furniture = = 
 In creating the interior of the house , Burges demonstrated his skill as a jeweller , metalworker and designer . He included some of his best pieces of furniture such as the Zodiac Settle , the Dog Cabinet and the Great Bookcase , the last of which Charles Handley @-@ Read described as " occupying a unique position in the history of Victorian painted furniture " . The fittings were as elaborate as the furniture : the tap for one of the guest washstands was in the form of a bronze bull from whose throat water poured into a sink inlaid with silver fish . Within the Tower House Burges placed some of his finest metalwork ; the artist Henry Stacy Marks wrote , " he could design a chalice as well as a cathedral ... His decanters , cups , jugs , forks and spoons were designed with an equal ability to that with which he would design a castle . " 
 Many of the early pieces of furniture , such as the Narcissus Washstand , the Zodiac Settle and the Great Bookcase , were originally made for Burges 's office at Buckingham Street and were later moved to the Tower House . The Great Bookcase was also part of Burges 's contribution to the Medieval Court at the 1862 International Exhibition . Later pieces , such as the Crocker Dressing Table and the Golden Bed , and its accompanying Vita Nuova Washstand , were made specifically for the house . John Betjeman located the Narcissus Washstand in a junk shop in Lincoln and gave it to Evelyn Waugh , a fellow enthusiast for Victorian art and architecture , who featured it in his 1957 novel , The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold . Betjeman later gave Waugh both the Zodiac Settle and the Philosophy Cabinet . 
 Many of the decorative items Burges designed for the Tower House were dispersed following his death . Several pieces purchased by Charles Handley @-@ Read , who was instrumental in reviving interest in Burges , were acquired by The Higgins Art Gallery & Museum , Bedford . The museum also bought the Zodiac Settle from the Waugh family in 2011 . 
 = = = Dispersed furniture and locations = = = 
 The table below lists the known pieces of furniture originally in situ , with their dates of construction and their current location where known . 
 = = Architectural coverage = = 
 Richard Popplewell Pullan described the house in detail in the second of two works he wrote about his brother @-@ in @-@ law , The House of William Burges , <unk> , published in 1886 . The book contains photographs of the interior of the house by Francis Bedford . In 1893 , the building was the only private house to be recorded in an article in The Builder , which gave an overview of the architecture of the previous fifty years . It was then largely ignored , James Stourton describing its early twentieth @-@ century decline as " a paradigm of the reputation of the Gothic Revival " . 
 A renewed understanding and appreciation of the building , and of Burges himself , began with Charles Handley @-@ Read 's essay on Burges in Peter Ferriday 's collection Victorian Architecture , published in 1963 . In 1966 Handley @-@ Read followed this with a substantial article on the house for Country Life , " Aladdin 's Palace in Kensington " . His notes on Burges formed the basis of Mordaunt Crook 's centenary volume , William Burges and the High Victorian Dream , published in 1981 , in which Crook wrote at length on both the Tower House and its contents . 
 More recent coverage was given in London 3 : North West , the revision to the Buildings of England guide to London written by Nikolaus Pevsner and Bridget Cherry , published in 1991 ( revised 2002 ) . The house is referenced in Matthew Williams 's William Burges ( 2004 ) , and in <unk> of Lost London by Philip Davies , published in 2011 , which includes some of Francis Bedford 's photographs of the house from 1885 . In a chapter on the building in Great Houses of London ( 2012 ) , the author James Stourton called The Tower House " the most singular of London houses , even including the Soane Museum . " 
 = The Incredible Hulk ( roller coaster ) = 
 The Incredible Hulk is a launched roller coaster located in the Islands of Adventure theme park at Universal Orlando Resort . As the name suggests , the ride is themed after comic book superhero character , the Hulk . The ride was positively received when it opened on May 28 , 1999 . It is the first Bolliger & Mabillard roller coaster to feature a launch design , primarily implemented by Universal Creative and MTS Systems Corporation . The launched lift hill accelerates the train to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) in approximately two seconds and reaches a top speed of 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) . Riders experience seven inversions throughout the course of the 3 @,@ 700 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) ride . The roller coaster temporarily closed on September 8 , 2015 , for a major refurbishment and is expected to reopen in the summer of 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1991 , planning began for a new theme park adjacent to Universal Studios Florida . By the end of 1993 , it was decided that one area of the future Islands of Adventure theme park would be themed after Marvel Comics , with a Hulk theme being selected for a thrill ride . The designers of the ride wanted to simulate being fired out of a cannon and subsequently set about prototyping a launch system . Universal Creative and MTS Systems Corporation had a working prototype in January 1995 . Methods to achieve this acceleration were investigated into mid @-@ 1996 . On @-@ site construction of Islands of Adventure was underway in 1997 , with Superior Rigging & Erection being responsible for erecting the supports and track of the roller coaster . On May 28 , 1999 , Islands of Adventure officially opened to the public , with The Incredible Hulk being one of its debut attractions . 
 On August 14 , 2015 , Universal announced that the coaster would undergo major enhancement and refurbishment work . The ride closed on September 8 , 2015 , and is expected to reopen in the summer of 2016 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Incredible Hulk is a Sitting Coaster by Swiss firm Bolliger & Mabillard ( B & M ) . The 3 @,@ 700 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) ride features seven inversions including a zero @-@ g roll , a cobra roll , two vertical loops , and two corkscrews . The ride features a maximum height of 110 feet ( 34 m ) , and a first drop stretching 105 feet ( 32 m ) . Riders reach a top speed of 67 miles per hour ( 108 km / h ) on the 1 @-@ minute , 30 @-@ second ride . Each of The Incredible Hulk 's trains feature eight cars which seat riders four abreast , giving each train a maximum capacity of 32 riders . Riders , who must be at least 54 inches ( 140 cm ) tall , are restrained with ratcheting over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints . This train configuration allows the ride to achieve a theoretical hourly capacity of 1 @,@ 920 riders per hour . The ride features two subterranean dives , is partially built over water , and is illuminated green at night . 
 A unique launch system propels riders up the 110 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 34 m ) hill . The system was developed by Universal Creative and MTS Systems Corporation . A prototype launch system was designed by January 1995 . The prototype consisted of a series of boxcars welded together to form a launch tunnel . A track @-@ mounted dune buggy was then propelled inside the tunnel through the use of a weight drop launch mechanism . The designers then experimented with different rates of acceleration , each emitting between one and five times the force of gravity . The final system which was implemented on The Incredible Hulk sees trains launch from 0 to 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) in 2 seconds . Riders travel at an angle of 30 degrees through a 150 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 46 m ) tunnel , pulling 1 G. To power this launch the designers investigated a variety of systems ranging from hydraulic , pneumatic , cable , steam catapult , and conveyor belt . In the end a drive tire system was selected , where 230 electrical motors power a set of tires that pinch the train 's underside to provide propulsion . As this system required eight megawatts of power to launch a train , the park built several customized motor generator sets with large flywheels . Without these stored energy units , they would have had to build a whole substation and risk browning @-@ out the local energy grid with every launch . The launch system made The Incredible Hulk the only B & M ride to feature a launch , until Thunderbird opened at Holiday World in 2015 . Unlike The Incredible Hulk , Thunderbird uses a Linear Synchronous Motors ( LSM ) launch system that was designed by B & M. 
 = = Experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 Riders enter the science laboratory of Dr. Bruce Banner with many televisions showing the story of the Hulk . Bruce is now trying to find a way to reverse the effects , which the guests are about to take part in . While walking through the lab they encounter items including the generator , the gamma core and the towers of power . Riders are also able to watch the roller coaster through large holes in the walls as well as listen to the ride as it does a number of passes . 
 = = = Ride = = = 
 Once riders have boarded the train , it departs the station entering the gamma @-@ ray accelerator , where the anxious voice of Bruce Banner issues from speakers in the walls : " Everything looks good ... I think ... I think this time it 's ... going to work ! " On cue , a female voice announces that there has been a malfunction . Klaxons begin to sound inside the tube as Dr. Banner screams in terror : " No . No ! No ! ! ! " The last " No ! " is synchronized with the launch mechanism , which propels the train from 9 to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) in 2 seconds . Upon exiting the gamma @-@ ray accelerator , the train immediately goes into a zero @-@ g roll , down a 105 @-@ foot ( 32 m ) drop , and into a cobra roll over the park 's main lagoon . Riders complete a vertical loop , then enter a subterranean tunnel full of mist . The train encircles the gamma @-@ ray accelerator and is sent into the back area via corkscrew . A smaller vertical loop wraps around the mid @-@ course brake run , which is flanked by two over @-@ banked turns . The train is slowed down by the mid @-@ course brakes before being sent down another hill to a corkscrew and turn @-@ around . Riders then travel sideways through an on @-@ ride camera zone and then to the ride 's final brake run after a helix . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Incredible Hulk has been well received . In its debut year , the ride was voted the # 1 roller coaster by Discovery Channel viewers , appearing on the Thrills , Chills and Spills documentary . Amusement Business described The Incredible Hulk as one of Islands of Adventure 's two world @-@ class roller coasters ( the other being Dueling Dragons , now known as the Dragon Challenge ) . Dewayne Bevil of the Orlando Sentinel rated the ride as his eighth favorite attraction in Orlando . He states the ride is " too intense to take back @-@ to @-@ back trips . It rattles our nerves , in a good way . " Arthur Levine of About.com gave the ride 9 out of 10 stars . Levine describes the ride as " both terrifying and exhilarating " and " not for the faint of heart " . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , The Incredible Hulk was consistently ranked until 2013 . It debuted at position 19 in 1999 before reaching its peak ranking of 9 in 2001 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , The Incredible Hulk entered at position 3 in 1999 , before slowly declining to a low of 65 in 2013 . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = <unk> hodie = 
 " <unk> hodie " is a Christmas carol originally published in the 1582 Finnish song book Piae Cantiones , a volume of 74 Medieval songs with Latin texts collected by Jaakko <unk> , a Swedish Lutheran cleric , and published by T.P. <unk> . The song book had its origins in the libraries of cathedral song schools , whose repertory had strong links with medieval Prague , where clerical students from Finland and Sweden had studied for generations . A melody found in a 1360 manuscript from the nearby Bavarian city of <unk> in Germany is highly similar , and it is from this manuscript that the song is usually dated . 
 = = Textual origins = = 
 The Latin text is probably a musical parody of an earlier 12th century song beginning " <unk> hodie voces ecclesie " , written in honour of Saint Nicholas , the patron saint of Russia , sailors and children – to whom he traditionally brings gifts on his feast day , 6 December . Hugh <unk> and Andrew Parrott note that two of the verses have an unusual double repeat ( ' <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> ' ; ' <unk> vir- , vir- , vir- <unk> ' ) . In ' <unk> hodie ' , these were used to illustrate the three boys and three girls saved by St Nicholas from drowning and prostitution , respectively . The text was probably re @-@ written for the Feast of the Holy Innocents ( 28 December ) when choristers and their " boy bishop " traditionally displaced the senior clergy from the choir stalls . The carol is still often associated with Holy Innocents ' Day . 
 Songs from Piae Cantiones continued to be performed in Finland until the 19th century . The book became well known in Britain after a rare copy of Piae Cantiones owned by Peter of Nyland was given as a gift to the British Minister in Stockholm . He subsequently gave it to John Mason Neale in 1852 , and it was from this copy that Neale , in collaboration with Thomas Helmore published songs in two collections in 1853 and 1854 respectively . 
 = = Translations = = 
 The most common English translation of the text is by " James M. Joseph " , a pseudonym of the composer Jane M. Joseph ( 1894 – 1929 ) . She translates the title as " On this day earth shall ring " , although there are several other English translations . Other versions include Elizabeth Poston 's 1965 " Boys ' Carol " , which translates the first line of the text as " Let the boys ' cheerful noise / Sing today none but joys " and John Mason Neale 's " Let The Song be Begun " , which uses the melody but not the text of the carol . Aidan Oliver 's non @-@ verse translation renders the text as " Today let the voices of children resound in joyful praise of Him who is born for us . " 
 = = Arrangements = = 
 The carol became more prominent in England after being arranged for unison voices and orchestra in 1916 by Gustav Holst ( 1874 – 1934 ) , where in its organ reduction it is often used as a processional hymn in church and cathedral services . Holst 's version often forms part of the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols , and was last featured in the service broadcast by BBC2 from King 's College Chapel , Cambridge in 2011 following the sixth lesson . This arrangement is sometimes referred to as " Theodoric " in reference to the composer 's middle name ( Theodore ) . 
 In addition to Holst 's version , there is a harmonised choral arrangement by Hugh <unk> and Andrew Parrott in the New Oxford Book of Carols , an arrangement by Antony Pitts in the Naxos Book of Carols and two arrangements by John Rutter ; one for choir and full orchestra which emulates percussive medieval instrumentation , and another in his anthology Dancing Day for female or boys voices with harp or piano accompaniment . The <unk> Ensemble 's performance for Naxos Records pairs the piece with <unk> , another carol from Piae Cantiones . 
 Several recorded versions are arranged in a more folk @-@ oriented style : for example , a performance by Maddy Prior and The Carnival Band on their 1987 album A Tapestry of Carols , which utilises period instruments . The female a cappella quartet Anonymous 4 have also recorded the song with its original " <unk> hodie " text on their CD Legends of St. Nicholas . 
 The contemporary English cross @-@ disciplinary music ensemble North Sea Radio Orchestra have recorded a small @-@ ensemble instrumental version of the piece arranged for two violins , cello , clarinet , bassoon , oboe , piano , vibraphone , chamber organ and guitar . This appears on their 2008 album Birds . 
 Jazz musician Wayne Shorter recorded his arrangement of melody under the name 12th Century Carol on his 2003 album Alegria . 
 Robert Cummings , writing in the Allmusic guide , states that the " melody is glorious and ebullient in its lively , triumphant manner . It largely consists of bright , resolute three @-@ note phrases whose overall structure gradually rises , then descends . " 
 = = Text = = 
 In several versions , such as the Holst arrangement , the third verse has " parvulum <unk> , Bethlehem <unk> " in place in place of " munera <unk> , parvulum <unk> . " 
 = Barry Fuller = 
 Barry Marc Fuller ( born 25 September 1984 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for League One side AFC Wimbledon . He previously played for Stevenage Borough , forming part of the squad that won the 2006 – 07 FA Trophy in the first competitive final at the new Wembley Stadium after they beat Kidderminster Harriers 2 – 1 on 12 May 2007 in front of a record FA Trophy crowd of 53 @,@ 262 . Fuller has also made over 100 league appearances for Gillingham and was captain of the squad that beat Shrewsbury Town 1 – 0 in the League Two play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium on 23 May 2009 to win promotion to League One . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Born in Ashford , Kent , Fuller was spotted playing for his local club , Kennington Juniors FC , by Premier League side Charlton Athletic who signed him to their youth Academy at the age of thirteen . The full @-@ back progressed through the Addicks ' Academy up until the age of nineteen , signing his first professional contract on 1 July 2004 . On 17 July 2004 , he featured for Charlton Athletic in a pre @-@ season friendly win over Kent League side Sittingbourne ; he scored in the 83rd minute to confirm a 3 – 0 win following a brace by fellow youngster Lloyd Sam . The young right @-@ back was selected to captain Charlton Athletic 's Reserves side during the 2004 – 05 season , helping the club to finish as Champions of the Premier Reserve League Southern Division . He also represented Charlton in the first ever Premier Reserve League Shield national play @-@ off final on 12 May 2005 , which saw Northern Division champions Manchester United Reserves beat the Addicks 4 – 2 at The Valley . Despite his success with the Reserves , however , he failed to break into the first team and was subsequently loaned out to League Two side Barnet on an initial one @-@ month deal on 12 January 2006 . The 21 @-@ year @-@ old defender made his Football League debut on 14 January 2006 in a 4 – 1 defeat by Lincoln City . On 15 February 2006 , it was announced that he would remain with Barnet for a further month . On 18 March 2006 , he scored his first Football League goal in a 2 – 2 draw with Peterborough United . On 24 March 2006 , Barnet manager Paul Fairclough extended Fuller 's loan for a third and final time up until 22 April . He played his final game for the Bees on 22 April 2006 in a 0 – 0 draw with Chester City before subsequently returning to Charlton Athletic . In total , he made fifteen league appearances for Barnet during the 2005 – 06 season , which proved to be a vital contribution in helping the club avoid relegation from the Football League . Despite impressing on his loan spell , the 20 @-@ year @-@ old defender was released by Charlton Athletic manager Alan Curbishley at the end of the season . 
 = = = Stevenage Borough = = = 
 On 28 June 2006 , Fuller signed for Conference side Stevenage Borough . He made his debut for the Boro in a 2 – 1 defeat by York City on 15 August 2006 . The defender scored his only goal for the club in a 2 – 0 win over Grays Athletic on 17 February 2007 . He was ever @-@ present throughout the 2006 – 07 season , making thirty @-@ seven league appearances in all . He was also indispensable to the club 's FA Trophy success , featuring in both semi @-@ final legs which saw Stevenage Borough beat Grays Athletic 3 – 1 on aggregate . He was part of the squad that played in the 2007 FA Trophy Final against Kidderminster Harriers on 12 May 2007 in front of a record FA Trophy crowd of 53 @,@ 262 . Stevenage came back from 2 – 0 down to ultimately triumph 3 – 2 following an 88th @-@ minute goal by Steve Morison ; the victory was all the more significant for Fuller as he became a member of the first team to win a competitive final at the new Wembley Stadium . He would go on to make 24 league appearances for the Boro during the 2007 – 08 season before subsequently leaving the club to sign a two @-@ year deal with League One side Gillingham on 28 January 2008 along with team @-@ mate Stuart Lewis ; reuniting him with the manager who had previously recruited him at Stevenage Borough , Mark Stimson . 
 = = = Gillingham = = = 
 Fuller made his debut for Gillingham in the 2 – 0 defeat to Tranmere Rovers on 29 January 2008 . The defender would go on to make nine more appearances for the Gills in the 2007 – 08 season . On 10 October 2008 , despite having only been with the Gills for nine months , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old was appointed as club captain . He made forty league appearances in total during the 2008 – 09 season , making him integral to the club 's push for promotion . In spite of this level of consistency , however , his season was wrought with difficulty . The defender 's troubles began when he was sent off for a second yellow card offence after a foul on Sam Wood in the 88th minute of a 1 – 1 draw with Brentford on 20 December 2008 , resulting in a one match ban . His troubles did not end there however , as in January 2009 he was rushed to hospital after contracting bacterial pneumonia . He made a rapid recovery , however , and returned just five weeks later to play a full match in a 2 – 0 defeat by Rotherham United at Millmoor on 14 February 2009 . Despite these set @-@ backs , he was able to help Gillingham finish the season in 5th place , making them eligible for the League Two play @-@ offs . Gillingham faced Rochdale in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , drawing 0 – 0 in the first leg on 7 May 2009 , before securing a place in the play @-@ off final by beating Rochdale 2 – 1 at the Priestfield Stadium in the second leg on 10 May 2009 . Gillingham faced Shrewsbury Town in the 2009 League Two play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium on 23 May 2009 , in which Fuller captained his side to a 1 – 0 win over " The <unk> " in front of a crowd of 53 @,@ 706 to seal promotion to League One , a dramatic turn of events considering that he had been suffering with a life @-@ threatening illness just five months before . 
 Fuller made 36 league appearances for " The Gills " in their first season back in League One , however , once again the latter half of his season was blighted by injury . The 25 @-@ year @-@ old Gillingham captain suffered a broken arm after taking a kick on the forearm in a 1 – 1 draw with Leyton Orient on 23 February 2010 . A specialist subsequently confirmed that this injury would sideline him for approximately six weeks . By the time of his return the Gills were embroiled in a battle to avoid relegation and their fortunes took a turn for the worse when Fuller suffered a broken nose mere seconds after kick @-@ off after a clash of heads with team @-@ mate Darren Dennehy in what would go on to be a 3 – 2 win over Leeds United on 17 April 2010 ; he was substituted by Jack Payne in the fourth minute of play . Fuller was unable to prevent the Gills ' relegation slide back into League Two after he was sidelined for the rest of the season , undergoing surgery on his broken nose a few days after the incident . In spite of this , however , he was offered a two @-@ year contract extension , along with team @-@ mate Garry Richards , by new Gills manager Andy Hessenthaler on 25 March 2010 . He accepted the terms and on 4 June 2010 it was announced that he had signed a new contract along with striker Dennis Oli . 
 Gillingham began the 2010 – 11 season in poor form , winning just three of their first sixteen games of the season which brought the Gills captain under fire . However , the side quickly turned their form around by going on to win six of their next eight league games and were unbeaten for 16 league matches between a 2 – 1 win over Aldershot Town on 29 January 2011 and a 1 – 1 draw with Morecambe on 16 April 2011 . Fuller made his 100th league appearance for Gillingham on 30 October 2010 in a 2 – 1 defeat by Northampton Town . The Gills ultimately finished in 8th place , just missing out on the League Two play @-@ offs . He made forty @-@ two league appearances for Gillingham throughout the season . On 27 July 2011 , Gillingham announced that Fuller would be relieved of the captain 's armband , having worn it for three seasons , and would be replaced by new signing Andy Frampton . The right @-@ back once again found himself plagued by injury worries in the 2011 – 12 season , making just nine league appearances . He suffered an injury to his knee in a 6 – 1 win over Hereford United on 17 September 2011 . On further examination the injury was found to be serious and on 13 October 2011 it was announced that he would be out for the rest of the season and had to undergo a " career @-@ saving " knee operation immediately which would prevent him from playing again for nine months . This proved to be a devastating blow for Fuller , whose contract was due to expire at the end of the 2012 season , as his deal was not renewed by new Gillingham manager Martin Allen and he was subsequently released by the club on 28 July 2012 having made 137 league appearances . 
 = = = Barnet = = = 
 On 13 August 2012 , Fuller signed for League Two side Barnet on a free transfer , along with Gillingham team @-@ mate Curtis Weston . He made his debut for the Bees in a 1 – 1 draw with Bristol Rovers on 21 August 2012 . He would go on to make 39 league appearances , cementing his place as the club 's first choice right @-@ back . Barnet started the 2012 – 13 season poorly , failing to win any of their first 12 league matches and were ultimately relegated to the Conference on goal difference after finishing in 23rd place . Barnet 's relegation required manager Edgar Davids to release a number of players as an austerity measure to accommodate the fact that the club would be operating on a smaller wage budget in the 2013 – 14 season , and it was announced on 22 May 2013 that Fuller would be released along with 12 other players . 
 = = = AFC Wimbledon = = = 
 On 28 May 2013 , Fuller signed for League Two side AFC Wimbledon along with former Havant & Waterlooville midfielder Chris Arthur . Shortly after his signing , Fuller disclosed to the media that he hoped to establish himself as a key member of the squad and expressed his loyalty to the club by stating that he hoped to see out the rest of his professional career with AFC Wimbledon . A month later , he found himself reunited with former team @-@ mate and fellow ex @-@ Gillingham captain , Andy Frampton , when it was announced that he had also signed a contract with the South London club on 28 June 2013 . On 31 July 2013 , manager Neal Ardley appointed Alan Bennett as club captain and declared that Fuller would act as vice @-@ captain for the 2013 – 14 season . Fuller made his league debut for " The Dons " in a 1 – 1 draw with Torquay United on 3 August 2013 . He was an ever @-@ present for the club throughout the season , making forty five league appearances in total . Fuller 's consistently committed performances and dogged attitude quickly established him as a favourite with supporters , culminating in him being voted as Player of the Year at the end of season awards . He then went on to captain AFC Wimbledon to promotion from League Two in the 2015 – 16 season via the play @-@ offs after their highest ever finish in the Football League . After the play @-@ off final he signed a new contract to remain with the club for their first ever season in the third tier of English football . 
 = = International career = = 
 Fuller 's only appearance for a national team came when he was selected to represent the England C team , along with fellow Stevenage Borough team @-@ mates Ronnie Henry and Steve Morison , in an international friendly against Northern Ireland on 13 February 2007 which ended as a 3 – 1 win for England . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage Borough 
 FA Trophy Winners : 2006 – 07 
 Gillingham 
 Football League Two Play – off Winners : 2008 – 09 
 AFC Wimbledon 
 Football League Two Play @-@ off Winners : 2015 @-@ 16 
 = = Statistics = = 
 As of 3 May 2014 
 = Lockheed Martin F @-@ 22 Raptor = 
 The Lockheed Martin F @-@ 22 Raptor is a fifth @-@ generation , single @-@ seat , twin @-@ engine , all @-@ weather stealth tactical fighter aircraft developed for the United States Air Force ( USAF ) . The result of the USAF 's Advanced Tactical Fighter program , the aircraft was designed primarily as an air superiority fighter , but also has ground attack , electronic warfare , and signals intelligence capabilities . The prime contractor , Lockheed Martin , built most of the F @-@ 22 's airframe and weapons systems and did its final assembly , while Boeing provided the wings , aft fuselage , avionics integration , and training systems . 
 The aircraft was variously designated F @-@ 22 and F / A @-@ 22 before it formally entered service in December 2005 as the F @-@ 22A . After a protracted development and despite operational issues , the USAF considers the F @-@ 22 critical to its tactical air power , and says that the aircraft is unmatched by any known or projected fighter . The Raptor 's combination of stealth , aerodynamic performance , and situational awareness gives the aircraft unprecedented air combat capabilities . 
 The high cost of the aircraft , a lack of clear air @-@ to @-@ air missions due to delays in Russian and Chinese fighter programs , a ban on exports , and development of the more versatile F @-@ 35 led to the end of F @-@ 22 production . A final procurement tally of 187 operational production aircraft was established in 2009 and the last F @-@ 22 was delivered to the USAF in 2012 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1981 the U.S. Air Force developed a requirement for an Advanced Tactical Fighter ( ATF ) as a new air superiority fighter to replace the F @-@ 15 Eagle and F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon . Code named " Senior Sky " , this program was influenced by the emerging worldwide threats , including development and proliferation of Soviet Su @-@ 27 " Flanker " - and MiG @-@ 29 " Fulcrum " -class fighter aircraft . It would take advantage of the new technologies in fighter design on the horizon , including composite materials , lightweight alloys , advanced flight control systems , more powerful propulsion systems , and stealth technology . The request for proposals ( RFP ) was issued in July 1986 and two contractor teams , Lockheed / Boeing / General Dynamics and Northrop / McDonnell Douglas , were selected on 31 October 1986 to undertake a 50 @-@ month demonstration phase , culminating in the flight test of two technology demonstrator prototypes , the YF @-@ 22 and the YF @-@ 23 . 
 Each design team produced two prototype air vehicles , one for each of the two engine options . The Lockheed @-@ led team employed thrust vectoring nozzles on YF @-@ 22 for enhanced maneuverability in dogfights . The ATF 's increasing weight and cost drove out certain requirements during development . Side @-@ looking radars were deleted , and the dedicated infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) system was downgraded from multi @-@ color to single color and then deleted as well . However , space and cooling provisions were retained to allow for future addition of these components . The ejection seat requirement was downgraded from a fresh design to the existing McDonnell Douglas ACES II . 
 After the flight test demonstration and validation of the prototypes , on 23 April 1991 , Secretary of the USAF Donald Rice announced the YF @-@ 22 as the winner of the ATF competition . The YF @-@ 23 design was considered stealthier and faster while the YF @-@ 22 was more maneuverable . The aviation press speculated that the YF @-@ 22 was also more adaptable to the U.S. Navy 's Navalized Advanced Tactical Fighter ( NATF ) , but by 1992 , the Navy had abandoned NATF . 
 = = = Production and procurement = = = 
 Prime contractor Lockheed Martin Aeronautics manufactured the majority of the airframe and performed final assembly at Dobbins Air Reserve Base in Marietta , Georgia ; program partner Boeing Defense , Space & Security provided additional airframe components as well as avionics integration and training systems . F @-@ 22 production was split up over many subcontractors across 46 states to increase Congressional support , though this production split may have contributed to increased costs and delays . Many capabilities were deferred to post @-@ service upgrades , reducing the initial cost but increasing total program cost . Production supported over 1 @,@ 000 subcontractors and suppliers and up to 95 @,@ 000 jobs . 
 The F @-@ 22 had several design changes from the YF @-@ 22 . The swept @-@ back angle of the leading edge was decreased from 48 ° to 42 ° , while the vertical stabilizers were shifted rearward and decreased in area by 20 % . To improve pilot visibility , the canopy was moved forward 7 inches ( 18 cm ) , and the engine intakes moved rearward 14 inches ( 36 cm ) . The shapes of the wing and stabilator trailing edges were refined to improve aerodynamics , strength , and stealth characteristics . Increasing weight during development caused slight reductions in range and aerodynamic performance . 
 The first F @-@ 22 , an engineering and manufacturing development ( EMD ) aircraft named Raptor 4001 , was unveiled at Marietta , Georgia , on 9 April 1997 , and first flew on 7 September 1997 . In 2006 , the Raptor 's development team , composed of over 1 @,@ 000 contractors and the USAF , won the Collier Trophy , American aviation 's most prestigious award . The F @-@ 22 was in production for 15 years , at a rate of roughly two per month during peak production . 
 The USAF originally envisioned ordering 750 <unk> at a cost of $ 26 @.@ 2 billion , with production beginning in 1994 . The 1990 Major Aircraft Review led by Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney reduced this to 648 aircraft beginning in 1996 . By 1997 , funding instability had further cut the total to 339 , which was again reduced to 277 F @-@ 22s by 2003 . In 2004 , the Department of Defense ( DoD ) further reduced this to 183 operational aircraft , despite the USAF 's preference for 381 . In 2006 , a multi @-@ year procurement plan was implemented to save $ 15 billion but raise each aircraft 's cost . That year the program 's total cost was projected to be $ 62 billion for 183 F @-@ 22s distributed to seven combat squadrons . In 2007 , Lockheed Martin received a $ 7 @.@ 3 billion contract to increase the order to 183 production F @-@ 22s and extend manufacturing through 2011 . 
 In April 2006 , the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) assessed the F @-@ 22 's cost to be $ 361 million per aircraft , with $ 28 billion invested in development and testing ; the Unit Procurement Cost was estimated at $ 178 million in 2006 , based on a production run of 181 aircraft . It was estimated by the end of production , $ 34 billion will have been spent on procurement , resulting in a total program cost of $ 62 billion , around $ 339 million per aircraft . The incremental cost for an additional F @-@ 22 was estimated at about $ 138 million in 2009 . The GAO stated the estimated cost was $ 412 million per aircraft in 2012 . 
 = = = Ban on exports = = = 
 The F @-@ 22 cannot be exported under American federal law to protect its stealth technology and other high @-@ tech features . Customers for U.S. fighters are acquiring earlier designs such as the F @-@ 15 Eagle and F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon or the newer F @-@ 35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter , which contains technology from the F @-@ 22 but was designed to be cheaper , more flexible , and available for export . In September 2006 , Congress upheld the ban on foreign F @-@ 22 sales . Despite the ban , the 2010 defense authorization bill included provisions requiring the DoD to prepare a report on the costs and feasibility for an F @-@ 22 export variant , and another report on the effect of F @-@ 22 export sales on U.S. aerospace industry . 
 Some Australian politicians and defense commentators proposed that Australia should attempt to purchase F @-@ 22s instead of the planned F @-@ 35s , citing the F @-@ 22 's known capabilities and F @-@ 35 's delays and developmental uncertainties . However , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) determined that the F @-@ 22 was unable to perform the F @-@ 35 's strike and close air support roles . The Japanese government also showed interest in the F @-@ 22 for its Replacement @-@ Fighter program . The Japan Air Self @-@ Defense Force ( JASDF ) would reportedly require fewer fighters for its mission if it obtained the F @-@ 22 , thus reducing engineering and staffing costs . However , in 2009 it was reported that acquiring the F @-@ 22 would require increases to the defense budget beyond the historical 1 percent of GDP . With the end of F @-@ 22 production , Japan chose the F @-@ 35 in December 2011 . Israel also expressed interest , but eventually chose the F @-@ 35 because of the F @-@ 22 's price and unavailability . 
 = = = Production termination = = = 
 Throughout the 2000s , the need for F @-@ 22s was debated due to rising costs and the lack of relevant adversaries . In 2006 , Comptroller General of the United States David Walker found that " the DoD has not demonstrated the need " for more investment in the F @-@ 22 , and further opposition to the program was expressed by Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld , Deputy Secretary of Defense Gordon R. England , Senator John McCain , and Chairman of U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services Senator John Warner . The F @-@ 22 program lost influential supporters in 2008 after the forced resignations of Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force General T. Michael Moseley . Nevertheless , in 2008 , Congress passed a defense spending bill funding the F @-@ 22 's continued production and the Pentagon released $ 50 million of the $ 140 million for four additional aircraft , raising the total orders for production aircraft to 187 and leaving the program in the hands of the next administration . 
 In November 2008 , Secretary of Defense Robert Gates stated that the Raptor was not relevant in post @-@ Cold War conflicts such as in Iraq and Afghanistan , and in April 2009 , under the new Obama Administration , he called for ending F @-@ 22 production in fiscal year ( FY ) 2011 , leaving the USAF with 187 production aircraft . In July , General James Cartwright , Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , stated to the Senate Committee on Armed Services his reasons for supporting termination of F @-@ 22 production . They included shifting resources to the multirole F @-@ 35 to allow proliferation of fifth @-@ generation fighters for three service branches and preserving the F / A @-@ 18 production line to maintain the military 's electronic warfare ( EW ) capabilities in the Boeing EA @-@ 18G Growler . Issues with the F @-@ 22 's reliability and availability also raised concerns . After President Obama threatened to veto further production , the Senate voted in July 2009 in favor of ending production and the House subsequently agreed to abide by the 187 production aircraft cap . Gates stated that the decision was taken in light of the F @-@ 35 's capabilities , and in 2010 , he set the F @-@ 22 requirement to 187 aircraft by lowering the number of major regional conflict preparations from two to one . 
 In 2010 , USAF initiated a study to determine the costs of retaining F @-@ 22 tooling for a future Service Life Extension Program ( SLEP ) . A RAND Corporation paper from this study estimated that restarting production and building an additional 75 F @-@ 22s would cost $ 17 billion , resulting in $ 227 million per aircraft or 54 million higher than the flyaway cost . Lockheed Martin stated that restarting the production line itself would cost about $ 200 million . Production tooling will be documented in illustrated electronic manuals stored at the Sierra Army Depot . Retained tooling will produce additional components ; due to the limited production run there are no reserve aircraft , leading to considerable care during maintenance . Later attempts to retrieve this tooling found that the containers were empty . 
 Russian and Chinese fighter developments have fueled concern , and in 2009 , General John Corley , head of Air Combat Command , stated that a fleet of 187 F @-@ 22s would be inadequate , but Secretary Gates dismissed this concern . In 2011 , Gates explained that Chinese fifth @-@ generation fighter developments had been accounted for when the number of F @-@ 22s was set , and that the U.S. would have a considerable advantage in stealth aircraft in 2025 , even with F @-@ 35 delays . In December 2011 , the 195th and final F @-@ 22 was completed out of 8 test and 187 operational aircraft produced , the aircraft was delivered to the USAF on 2 May 2012 . 
 In April 2016 , the HASC Tactical Air and Land Forces Subcommittee proposed legislation that would direct the Air Force " to conduct a comprehensive assessment and study of the costs associated with resuming production of F @-@ 22 aircraft . " Defense Secretary Robert Gates had production halted at 187 F @-@ 22s ( at a cost of $ 67 billion ) to direct funds for ongoing irregular warfare operations in Iraq and Afghanistan . Since then , lawmakers and the Pentagon have noted that air warfare systems of Russia and China are catching up to U.S. air superiority capabilities . The bill notes that Air Combat Command has a stated requirement for 381 F @-@ 22s from initial program objectives of 749 aircraft , and would require reviewing of anticipated future air superiority capacity and capability requirements , estimated costs to restart F @-@ 22 production , and other measures . In addition to identifying the cost of building another 194 aircraft , the report must also consider the possibility of the 1998 prohibition on the export of the F @-@ 22 being repealed . Previous estimates of restarting production placed figures at around $ 2 billion , including $ 300 – 500 million in non @-@ recurring start @-@ up costs , with an estimated unit cost of $ 233 million for a production run of 75 aircraft over five years . Lockheed has proposed upgrading the 36 early training @-@ model Block 20 Raptors into combat @-@ coded Block 30 / 35 versions as a way to increase numbers available for deployment . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 The first combat @-@ capable Block 3 @.@ 0 aircraft first flew in 2001 . Increment 2 , the first F @-@ 22 upgrade program , was implemented in 2005 and enables the aircraft to employ Joint Direct Attack Munitions ( JDAM ) . Increment 3 @.@ 1 provides improved ground @-@ attack capability through synthetic aperture radar mapping and radio emitter direction finding , electronic attack and the GBU @-@ 39 Small Diameter Bomb ( SDB ) ; testing began in 2009 and the first upgraded aircraft was delivered in 2012 . Increment 3 @.@ 2 is a two @-@ part upgrade process ; <unk> focuses on electronic warfare , communications and identification , while <unk> will allow the F @-@ 22 to fully exploit the AIM @-@ 9X and AIM @-@ 120D missiles . The subsequent Increment 3 @.@ 3 may include the adoption of an open avionics platform and air traffic control updates . Upgrades due in 2015 will allow the F @-@ 22 to employ the AIM @-@ 9X and have full Link 16 reception and transmission capability , and an upgrade scheduled in 2018 will integrate the AIM @-@ 120D into the weapons suite . The F @-@ 22 fleet is planned to have 36 Block 20 training and 149 Block 30 / 35 combat aircraft by 2016 . The Increment <unk> upgrade planned for 2018 will include a new stores management system to show the correct symbols for the AIM @-@ 9X Sidewinder and AIM @-@ 120D AMRAAM and improved control of them . 
 To enable two @-@ way communication with other platforms , the F @-@ 22 can use the Battlefield Airborne Communications Node ( <unk> ) as a gateway . The originally planned <unk> integration was cut due to the lack of system maturity . In 2014 Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman were competing to connect the F @-@ 22 with other platforms while maintaining stealth . Other upgrades being developed include infra @-@ red search and track functionality for the AN / AAR @-@ 56 Missile Launch Detector ( MLD ) and integration of a helmet @-@ mounted cuing system ( HMCS ) to enable off @-@ boresight missile launches by 2020 . Until the F @-@ 22 gains a helmet mounted system it will use the AIM @-@ 9X 's <unk> high off @-@ boresight ( <unk> ) capabilities . In March 2010 , the USAF accelerated software portions of 3 @.@ 2 to be completed in FY 2013 . 
 In January 2011 , the USAF opened the Raptor enhancement , development and integration ( <unk> ) contract to bidders , with a $ 16 billion budget . In November 2011 , Lockheed Martin 's upgrade contract ceiling was raised to $ 7 @.@ 4 billion . Nearly $ 2 billion was allocated for structural repairs and to achieve fleet availability rate of 70 @.@ 6 % by 2015 . However , only 63 % was achieved . Some F @-@ 35 technology , such as more durable stealth coatings , have been applied to the F @-@ 22 . By 2012 , the update schedule had slipped seven years due to instability in requirements and funding . In 2014 the USAF moved to cut upgrade funding . 
 In 2012 the F @-@ 22 was upgraded with a backup oxygen system , software upgrades and oxygen sensors to address the frequent oxygen deprivation issues and normalize operations . In 2013 , the faulty flight vest valves were replaced and altitude restrictions lifted ; distance restrictions will be lifted once a backup oxygen system is installed . In April 2014 the USAF stated in Congressional testimony that installation of automatic backup oxygen systems on the F @-@ 22 fleet would be completed within twelve months . 
 The F @-@ 22 was designed for a lifespan of 30 years and 8 @,@ 000 flight hours , with a $ 100 million " structures retrofit program " . Investigations are being made for upgrades to extend their useful lives further . In the long term , the F @-@ 22 is expected to be superseded by a sixth @-@ generation jet fighter to be fielded in the 2030s . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The F @-@ 22 Raptor is a fifth @-@ generation fighter that is considered fourth generation in stealth aircraft technology by the USAF . It is the first operational aircraft to combine supercruise , <unk> , stealth , and sensor fusion in a single weapons platform . The Raptor has clipped delta wings with a reverse sweep on the rear , four empennage surfaces , and a retractable tricycle landing gear . Flight control surfaces include leading and trailing @-@ edge flaps , ailerons , rudders on the canted vertical stabilizers , and all @-@ moving horizontal tails ; these surfaces also serve as speed brakes . 
 The aircraft 's dual Pratt & Whitney F119 @-@ PW @-@ 100 afterburning turbofan engines are closely spaced and incorporate pitch @-@ axis thrust vectoring nozzles with a range of ± 20 degrees ; each engine has maximum thrust in the 35 @,@ 000 lbf ( 156 kN ) class . The F @-@ 22 's thrust to weight ratio in typical combat configuration is nearly at unity in maximum military power and 1 @.@ 25 in full afterburner . Maximum speed without external stores is estimated to be Mach 1 @.@ 82 during supercruise and greater than Mach 2 with afterburners . 
 The F @-@ 22 is among only a few aircraft that can supercruise , or sustain supersonic flight without using fuel @-@ inefficient afterburners ; it can intercept targets which subsonic aircraft would lack the speed to pursue and an afterburner @-@ dependent aircraft would lack the fuel to reach . The Raptor 's high operating altitude is also a significant tactical advantage over prior fighters . The use of internal weapons bays permits the aircraft to maintain comparatively higher performance over most other combat @-@ configured fighters due to a lack of aerodynamic drag from external stores . The F @-@ 22 's structure contains a significant amount of high @-@ strength materials to withstand stress and heat of sustained supersonic flight . Respectively , titanium alloys and composites comprise 39 % and 24 % of the aircraft 's structural weight . 
 The F @-@ 22 is highly maneuverable at both supersonic and subsonic speeds . Computerized flight control system and full authority digital engine control ( FADEC ) make the aircraft highly departure resistant and controllable . The Raptor 's relaxed stability and powerful thrust @-@ vectoring engines enable the aircraft to turn tightly and perform very high alpha ( angle of attack ) maneuvers such as the Herbst maneuver ( J @-@ turn ) and Pugachev 's Cobra . The aircraft is also capable of maintaining over 60 ° alpha while having some roll control . 
 The Raptor 's aerodynamic performance , sensor fusion , and stealth work together for increased effectiveness . Altitude , speed , and advanced active and passive sensors allow the aircraft to spot targets at considerable ranges and increase weapons range ; altitude and speed also complement stealth 's ability to increase the aircraft 's survivability against ground defenses such as surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 Key avionics include BAE Systems EI & S AN / ALR @-@ 94 radar warning receiver ( RWR ) , Lockheed Martin AN / AAR @-@ 56 infrared and ultraviolet Missile Launch Detector ( MLD ) and Northrop Grumman AN / APG @-@ 77 active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar . The MLD features six sensors to provide full spherical infrared coverage . The RWR is a passive radar detector with more than 30 antennas blended into the wings and fuselage for all @-@ round coverage . Tom Burbage , former F @-@ 22 program head at Lockheed Martin , described it as " the most technically complex piece of equipment on the aircraft . " The range of the RWR ( 250 + nmi ) exceeds the radar 's , and can cue radar emissions to be confined to a narrow beam ( down to 2 ° by 2 ° in azimuth and elevation ) to increase stealth . Depending on the detected threat , the defensive systems can prompt the pilot to release countermeasures such as flares or chaff . According to Bill Sweetman , experts had said the ALR @-@ 94 can be used as a passive detection system capable of searching targets and providing enough information for a radar lock on . 
 The AN / APG @-@ 77 radar features a low @-@ observable , active @-@ aperture , electronically scanned array that can track multiple targets under any weather conditions . Radar emissions can also be focused to overload enemy sensors as an electronic @-@ attack capability . The radar changes frequencies more than 1 @,@ 000 times per second to lower interception probability and has an estimated range of 125 – 150 miles , though planned upgrades will allow a range of 250 miles ( 400 km ) or more in narrow beams . Radar information is processed by two Raytheon Common Integrated Processor ( CIP ) s , each capable of processing up to 10 @.@ 5 billion instructions per second . In a process known as sensor fusion , data from the radar , other sensors , and external systems is filtered and combined by the CIP into a common view , reducing pilot workload . However , upgrading the aircraft 's avionics was reportedly very challenging due to their highly integrated nature . 
 The F @-@ 22 's ability to operate close to the battlefield gives the aircraft threat detection and identification capability comparative with the RC @-@ 135 Rivet Joint , and the ability to function as a " mini @-@ AWACS " , though the radar is less powerful than those of dedicated platforms . The F @-@ 22 can designate targets for allies , and determine whether two friendly aircraft are targeting the same aircraft . This radar system can sometimes identify targets " many times quicker than the AWACS " . The IEEE <unk> bus developed for the F @-@ 22 was derived from the commercial IEEE 1394 " FireWire " bus system . In 2007 , the F @-@ 22 's radar was tested as a wireless data transceiver , transmitting data at 548 megabits per second and receiving at gigabit speed , far faster than the Link 16 system . 
 The F @-@ 22 's software has some 1 @.@ 7 million lines of code , the majority involving processing radar data . Former Secretary of the USAF Michael Wynne blamed the use of the DoD 's Ada for cost overruns and delays on many military projects , including the F @-@ 22 . <unk> on subcontractors have reportedly raised doubts about the security of the F @-@ 22 's systems and combat @-@ effectiveness . In 2009 , former Navy Secretary John Lehman considered the F @-@ 22 to be safe from cyberattack , citing the age of its IBM software . 
 = = = Cockpit = = = 
 The F @-@ 22 has a glass cockpit with all @-@ digital flight instruments . The monochrome head @-@ up display offers a wide field of view and serves as a primary flight instrument ; information is also displayed upon six color liquid @-@ crystal display ( LCD ) panels . The primary flight controls are a force @-@ sensitive side @-@ stick controller and a pair of throttles . The USAF initially wanted to implement direct voice input ( DVI ) controls , but this was judged to be too technically risky and was abandoned . The canopy 's dimensions are approximately 140 inches long , 45 inches wide , and 27 inches tall ( 355 cm x 115 cm x 69 cm ) and weighs 360 pounds . 
 The F @-@ 22 has integrated radio functionality , the signal processing systems are virtualized rather than as a separate hardware module . There have been several reports on the F @-@ 22 's inability to communicate with other aircraft , and funding cuts have affected the integration of the <unk> Advanced Data Link ( <unk> ) . Voice communication is possible , but not data transfer . 
 The integrated control panel ( ICP ) is a keypad system for entering communications , navigation , and autopilot data . Two 3 in × 4 in ( 7 @.@ 6 cm × 10 @.@ 2 cm ) up @-@ front displays located around the ICP are used to display integrated caution advisory / warning data , communications , navigation and identification ( <unk> ) data and also serve as the stand @-@ by flight instrumentation group and fuel quantity indicator . The stand @-@ by flight group displays an artificial horizon , for basic instrument meteorological conditions . The 8 in × 8 in ( 20 cm × 20 cm ) primary multi @-@ function display ( <unk> ) is located under the ICP , and is used for navigation and situation assessment . Three 6 @.@ 25 in × 6 @.@ 25 in ( 15 @.@ 9 cm × 15 @.@ 9 cm ) secondary multi @-@ function displays are located around the <unk> for tactical information and stores management . 
 The ejection seat is a version of the ACES II ( Advanced Concept Ejection Seat ) commonly used in USAF aircraft , with a center @-@ mounted ejection control . The F @-@ 22 has a complex life support system , which includes the on @-@ board oxygen generation system ( OBOGS ) , protective pilot garments , and a breathing regulator / anti @-@ g ( <unk> ) valve controlling flow and pressure to the pilot 's mask and garments . The pilot garments were developed under the Advanced Technology Anti @-@ G Suit ( <unk> ) project and are to protect against chemical / biological hazards and cold @-@ water immersion , counter g @-@ forces and low pressure at high altitudes , and provide thermal relief . Suspicions regarding the performance of the OBOGS and life support equipment have been raised by several mishaps , including a fatal crash . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Raptor has three internal weapons bays : a large bay on the bottom of the fuselage , and two smaller bays on the sides of the fuselage , aft of the engine intakes . The main bay can accommodate six LAU @-@ 142 / A launchers for beyond @-@ visual @-@ range missiles and each side bay has an LAU @-@ 141 / A launcher for short @-@ range missiles . Four of the launchers in the main bay can be replaced with two bomb racks that can each carry one 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) or four 250 lb ( 110 kg ) bombs . Carrying armaments internally maintains the aircraft 's stealth and minimizes additional drag . Missile launches require the bay doors to be open for less than a second , during which hydraulic arms push missiles clear of the aircraft ; this is to reduce vulnerability to detection and to deploy missiles during high speed flight . 
 The F @-@ 22 can also carry air @-@ to @-@ surface weapons such as bombs with Joint Direct Attack Munition ( JDAM ) guidance and the Small @-@ Diameter Bomb , but cannot self @-@ designate for laser @-@ guided weapons . Internal air @-@ to @-@ surface ordnance is limited to 2 @,@ 000 lb . An internally mounted <unk> Vulcan 20 mm cannon is embedded in the right wing root with the muzzle covered by a retractable door to maintain stealth . The radar projection of the cannon fire 's path is displayed on the pilot 's head @-@ up display . 
 The F @-@ 22 's high cruise speed and altitude increase the effective ranges of its munitions , it has 50 % greater employment range for the AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM than prior platforms , and range will be further extended with the introduction of the AIM @-@ 120D . While specifics are classified , it is expected that JDAMs employed by F @-@ 22s will have twice or more the effective range of legacy platforms . In testing , an F @-@ 22 dropped a GBU @-@ 32 JDAM from 50 @,@ 000 feet ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) while cruising at Mach 1 @.@ 5 , striking a moving target 24 miles ( 39 km ) away . 
 While the F @-@ 22 typically carries weapons internally , the wings include four hardpoints , each rated to handle 5 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) . Each hardpoint can accommodate a pylon that can carry a detachable 600 @-@ gallon ( 2 @,@ 270 L ) external fuel tank or a launcher holding two air @-@ to @-@ air missiles ; the two inboard hardpoints are " plumbed " for external fuel tanks . The use of external stores degrades the aircraft 's stealth and kinematic performance ; after releasing stores the external attachments can be jettisoned to restore those characteristics . A stealthy ordnance pod and pylon was being developed to carry additional weapons in the mid @-@ 2000s . 
 = = = Stealth = = = 
 The F @-@ 22 was designed to be highly difficult to detect and track by radar . Measures to reduce radar cross @-@ section include airframe shaping such as alignment of edges , fixed @-@ geometry serpentine inlets that prevent line @-@ of @-@ sight of the engine faces from any exterior view , use of radar @-@ absorbent material ( RAM ) , and attention to detail such as hinges and pilot helmets that could provide a radar return . The F @-@ 22 was also designed to have decreased radio emissions , infrared signature and acoustic signature as well as reduced visibility to the naked eye . The aircraft 's flat thrust vectoring nozzle reduces infrared emissions to mitigate the threat of infrared homing ( " heat seeking " ) surface @-@ to @-@ air or air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . Additional measures to reduce the infrared signature include special paint and active cooling of leading edges to manage the heat buildup from supersonic flight . 
 Compared to previous stealth designs like the F @-@ 117 , the F @-@ 22 is less reliant on RAM , which are maintenance @-@ intensive and susceptible to adverse weather conditions . Unlike the B @-@ 2 , which requires climate @-@ controlled hangars , the F @-@ 22 can undergo repairs on the flight line or in a normal hangar . The F @-@ 22 features a Signature Assessment System which delivers warnings when the radar signature is degraded and necessitates repair . The F @-@ 22 's exact radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) is classified ; however , in 2009 Lockheed Martin released information indicating it has an RCS ( from certain angles ) of − 40 <unk> – equivalent to the radar reflection of a " steel marble " . Effectively maintaining the stealth features can decrease the F @-@ 22 's mission capable rate to 62 – 70 % . 
 The effectiveness of the stealth characteristics is difficult to gauge . The RCS value is a restrictive measurement of the aircraft 's frontal or side area from the perspective of a static radar . When an aircraft maneuvers it exposes a completely different set of angles and surface area , potentially increasing radar observability . Furthermore , the F @-@ 22 's stealth contouring and radar absorbent materials are chiefly effective against high @-@ frequency radars , usually found on other aircraft . The effects of Rayleigh scattering and resonance mean that low @-@ frequency radars such as weather radars and early @-@ warning radars are more likely to detect the F @-@ 22 due to its physical size . However , such radars are also conspicuous , susceptible to clutter , and have low precision . Additionally , while faint or fleeting radar contacts make defenders aware that a stealth aircraft is present , reliably vectoring interception to attack the aircraft is much more challenging . According to the USAF an F @-@ 22 surprised an Iranian F @-@ 4 Phantom II that was attempting to intercept an American UAV , despite Iran 's claim of having military VHF radar coverage over the Persian Gulf . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Designation and testing = = = 
 The YF @-@ 22 was originally given the unofficial name " Lightning II " , after the World War II Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning fighter , which persisted until the mid @-@ 1990s when the USAF officially named the aircraft " Raptor " . The name " Lightning II " was later given to the F @-@ 35 . The aircraft was also briefly dubbed " SuperStar " and " Rapier " . In September 2002 , USAF changed the Raptor 's designation to F / A @-@ 22 , mimicking the Navy 's McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet and intended to highlight a planned ground @-@ attack capability amid debate over the aircraft 's role and relevance . The F @-@ 22 designation was reinstated in December 2005 , when the aircraft entered service . 
