 Brown County was created in 1836 from portions of Monroe , Jackson , and Bartholomew counties , and is named after General Jacob Brown , a hero of the War of 1812 . Early settlers tried farming in Brown County 's hilly woodlands , leading them to clear the forests . Beginning in the 1840s and continuing for the rest of the century , most of Brown County 's forests were cleared . At first , the largest trees were cut for lumber used in the construction industry . In later years , smaller trees were cleared for furniture wood , barrels , railroad ties , and firewood . The rugged land eventually became difficult to farm because of poor quality soil . A combination of poor farming practices and erosion caused by deforestation depleted the soil 's nutrients . Many farmers abandoned the area . 
 = = = Beginning = = = 
 At least two people played major roles in the creation of Brown County State Park . Richard Lieber , an Indianapolis businessman who became the first director of the Indiana Department of Conservation , visited Brown County in 1910 . Lieber was so impressed with the beauty of the land that he built a cabin near Nashville and suggested that a portion of the county should be set aside for a state park . Lieber eventually became known as " the father of Indiana 's state parks " , and the state opened 10 state parks ( including Brown County ) during his tenure as director of the Indiana Department of Conservation . Lieber was not the only one from Indianapolis that was impressed with Brown County . In 1923 , the Order of Elks expressed interest in establishing a state park in Brown County . 
 Lee Bright lived in the small Indiana town of Nashville in Brown County . Bright believed that creation of a state park would restore the economic health of the region through tourism . His idea proved difficult to accomplish , since Indiana law did not allow purchasing land for a state park using state funds . The law did allow funds to be used for a game preserve . By 1926 , Bright , working as the state 's agent , purchased enough land to start a game reserve in Brown County . 
 = = = Game preserve = = = 
 Brown County 's game preserve was created in late 1924 . During November , 1924 , the Indiana Department of Conservation appointed a game warden to manage the preserve . The new manager was a resident of Nashville , and familiar with the area . It was also announced that much of the land would be reforested . A total of 7 @,@ 680 acres ( 31 @.@ 1 km2 ) of Brown County land was designated for the propagation of wildlife . Plans were made to surround the reserve with wire fencing , and game wardens patrolled the area . Deer and small game were brought in to propagate . Additional acreage was added in 1927 , increasing the reserve to over 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 km2 ) . During the same year , an observation tower was constructed on Weed Patch Hill , the highest point in the area . A dam was constructed in 1928 to create an artificial lake that was expected to cover 10 to 15 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 1 ha ) . It was planned to stock the lake with game fish then allow fishing after two or three years . The lake was completed by the spring of 1929 , and plans were announced to build a second ( and larger ) lake . By January 1929 , the preserve covered about 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 49 km2 ) . Funds from the sale of hunting and fishing licenses were used to acquire the additional land . 
 = = = State Park = = = 
 In 1927 , the Indiana state legislature passed a law allowing county commissioners to acquire land for the purpose of establishing a state park , and donate the land to the state conservation department . Brown County State Park was the fourth such park established after this legislation . In 1929 , Brown County commissioners gave the state conservation department 1 @,@ 129 acres ( 4 @.@ 57 km2 ) of land adjacent to the Brown County Game Preserve for the creation of a state park . Four parks had been donated using other means before the legislation , making Brown County State Park Indiana 's eighth state park . 
 In 1933 , eleven Civilian Conservation Corps groups were established for Indiana 's state forests , game preserves , and state parks . Each group had 200 workers involved in the construction of buildings , bridges , trails , roads , and water supplies . One project was a large shelter in the Brown County game preserve . After training , workers from the Corps arrived in Brown County in 1934 . The Corps began constructing much of the park 's extant infrastructure . They worked to prevent erosion by <unk> with walnut , pine , and spruce trees . A second camp for the Civilian Conservation Corps opened in the park in 1938 . The CCC Trail — the park 's Trail 2 — is one built by the Corps . 
 Beginning in 1941 , the Brown County Game Preserve and Brown County State Park were unified as a single state park . Since that time , two portions of the park have been designated as nature preserves — giving them additional protection from development . Ogle Hollow Nature Preserve was established in 1970 and consists of 41 acres ( 17 ha ) in Ogle Hollow containing the rare yellowwood tree . The second preserve is the 3 @,@ 349 @-@ acre ( 13 @.@ 55 km2 ) Ten O 'Clock Line Nature Preserve . This preserve was designated in 2010 , and is Indiana 's largest . It also contains yellowwood trees , and is the home of some of Indiana 's deep forest species , including the red bat , timber rattlesnake , and broad @-@ winged hawk . The term " Ten O 'Clock Line " refers to a treaty with the Miami Indians from the early 1800s . 
 = = = Kin Hubbard = = = 
 Frank McKinney " Kin " Hubbard ( 1868 – 1930 ) was an American humorist @-@ cartoonist whose humor and witticisms were expressed through fictional backwoods characters living in Brown County . His work ( usually a cartoon and a sentence or two ) appeared every day on the back page of the Indianapolis News , and was syndicated in about 200 newspapers throughout the country . Hubbard was named to the Ohio Journalism Hall of Fame in 1939 , and the Indiana Journalism Hall of Fame in 1967 . 
 In 1932 , Brown County State Park was dedicated in honor of Kin Hubbard . Abe Martin was Hubbard 's main character , and Brown County State Park 's Abe Martin Lodge is named in his honor . A picture of Hubbard hangs in the lounge of the lodge , and a collection of Hubbard memorabilia is in a room nearby . 
 = = Description = = 
 Brown County State Park is the largest of the 24 state parks managed by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources . It is in the center of Indiana 's southern half , " just minutes " from the town of Nashville , Indiana . The park occupies 15 @,@ 543 acres ( 6 @,@ 290 ha ) in Brown County . It has three entrances , adjacent to state roads 46 and 135 . The northern entrance is close to the Abe Martin Lodge , Saddle Barn , tennis courts and a swimming pool . Large trucks and recreational vehicles must use the western entrance . Campers bringing horses must use the southeast entrance , which leads to a specialized campground with hitching posts known as the Horsemen 's Camp . Interstate 65 's Columbus exit is about 13 mi ( 21 km ) east of the park . Indiana University and the city of Bloomington , Indiana , are less than 20 mi ( 32 km ) away . 
 Brown County is nationally known for its outdoor scenery and dramatic views from southern Indiana hilltops . Brown County State Park affords a number of vistas that overlook wide swaths of deciduous forest that display a large array of colors in the fall . Peak visitation is in the fall during the leaf @-@ changing season . In spring the dogwood , redbud , and serviceberry trees are in bloom . About 1 @.@ 3 million people come to the park each year , including overseas visitors . 
 Brown County State Park is sometimes called " the Little Smokies " because of similarities with the Smokey Mountains . Activities available in the park include camping , fishing , biking , hiking , and seasonal horseback riding . Many of these activities are available all year . Overnight visitors may stay in the campgrounds , rental cabins , or the Abe Martin Lodge . The park has a nature center and a nature preserve . Within the park boundaries are two manmade lakes : the 17 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) Ogle Lake , and 7 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) Strahl Lake . The park contains nine mountain bike trails totaling 25 miles ( 40 km ) . Four of the trails are rated as beginner trails , two are considered intermediate , and two advanced . The last trail is rated for experts and is 4 @.@ 1 miles ( 6 @.@ 6 km ) long . A total of slightly over 9 miles ( 14 km ) of hiking trails range from easy to rugged terrain . The park has over 20 miles ( 32 km ) of roads and 70 miles ( 110 km ) of bridle trails . The third highest point in Indiana is located on Trail 10 near a 100 feet ( 30 m ) high fire tower . This point , known as Weed Patch Hill , has an elevation of 1 @,@ 056 feet ( 322 m ) . When settlers first arrived at this hill , they found only a patch of weeds — a tornado had destroyed the trees — leading to the name . Hesitation Point is another vantage point for scenic views . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The most important tree in the park is the yellowwood ( <unk> lutea ) . This tree typically does not grow further north than central Kentucky , and has been designated as a state threatened species in Indiana . Other trees found in the park include at least four types of oak ( black , chestnut , red , and white ) and three types of hickory ( <unk> , pignut , and shagbark ) . The park also contains at least two types of maple trees : black and sugar . Patches of paw paw trees can be found throughout the park , and these trees produce an edible fruit . In areas with good moist soil , the black walnut tree grows , and this tree is an excellent source of wood for lumber or furniture . Among other trees growing in the park are the American beech , basswood , black cherry , black gum , and red elm . Also the sassafras , sycamore , white ash . The park also contains at least eight kinds of ferns and 20 types of wildflowers , including bloodroot and wild geranium . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Mammals typically found in Brown County State Park include white @-@ tailed deer , opossum , eastern gray squirrels , and chipmunks . The larger sycamore trees are sometimes the home of raccoons and flying squirrels . Red bats live in the park 's Ten O 'Clock Line nature preserve . Other animals include the American toad , the eastern box turtle , the spotted salamander , and the red @-@ backed salamander . At least two species of snakes live in the park : the timber rattler and the copperhead . The two lakes contain bass and bluegill . 
 The park has good bird viewing areas along the trails , near the two lakes , and at the Nature Center . The hooded warbler , pileated woodpecker , and ruffed grouse nest in the park . <unk> and northern cardinals can be seen at feeders near the Nature Center . The pileated woodpecker , Acadian flycatcher , eastern wood <unk> , white @-@ breasted nuthatch , wood thrush , and yellow @-@ billed cuckoo can all be observed in the park 's Ogle Hollow Nature Preserve . Owls and woodpeckers are known to occupy sycamore trees . The cerulean warbler , <unk> , and broad @-@ winged hawk all live in the Ten O 'Clock Nature Preserve . Wild turkeys can be seen ( and heard ) along the park 's Trail 10 , known as the Fire Tower Trail . Other bird species in the park include the blue jay , the crow , the junco , the white @-@ breasted nuthatch , and the robin . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Glaciers from the most recent ice ages did not reach south far enough to flatten the land in Brown County , though glacier meltwater helped deepen gullies in the region , and made hills steeper . Brown County State Park 's Weed Patch Hill is the highest point in the area , at 1 @,@ 058 feet ( 322 m ) above sea level . The region is part of the Knobstone Escarpment land form , which consists of steep hills and valleys located between northern Brown County and the Ohio River . The rocks in this area contain significant amounts of silica , and were part of a large delta system over 330 million years ago . Brown County 's minerals are part of the Borden Group , and are mostly siltstone . Limestone , dolostone , and chert are the Borden Group 's secondary minerals . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Brown County area has a humid subtropical climate , classified as " Cfa " in the Köppen climate classification system . Precipitation is somewhat evenly distributed throughout the year , and temperatures can be relatively high . The record high temperature over the last 99 years for county seat Nashville is 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) . The record low over the last 99 years is − 17 ° F ( − 27 ° C ) . May is the month with the most precipitation , and February has the least . Most of the area 's snowfall occurs in December , January , and February . 
 = = Recreation and facilities = = 
 = = = Places to stay = = = 
 The park ’ s Abe Martin Lodge , built in 1932 , has 30 guest rooms , two lobbies , a gift shop , and a full @-@ service restaurant . An annex to the lodge has 54 more rooms . An indoor water park was added recently . Rental cabins are available nearby . Each of 20 two @-@ story family cabins can accommodate up to 8 people , and 56 rustic cabins are available . Campers have the choice of two classes of campgrounds — all with restrooms and showers . The Class A campgrounds have electrical hook @-@ ups , while the Class B do not . A horseman ’ s campground is available with one portion having electrical hook @-@ ups , showers , and toilets — while the other portion is more primitive . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 Sight seeing , birdwatching , mountain biking , fishing , hiking and horse riding are all popular activities at Brown County State park . The park has over 25 miles ( 40 km ) of mountain bike trails , including trails endorsed by the International Mountain Bicycling Association and Bike Magazine . Four beginner trails are 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) to 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) long . The expert trail is 4 @.@ 1 miles ( 6 @.@ 6 km ) long . 
 Fishing is available at two lakes to holders of a state fishing license . Bass and bluegill are stocked at Ogle Lake and the smaller Strahl Lake . <unk> and electric trolling motors are permitted on Ogle Lake to holders of an Indiana Department of Natural Resources lake permit . Boats are not allowed on Strahl Lake . Licenses and permits are available at the park office , and bait at the park 's country store . 
 The park has 12 hiking trails that total over 18 miles ( 29 km ) . These trails can be used to access places of interest in the park , including the two lakes , the Ogle Hollow Nature Preserve , Hesitation Point , and lookout towers . The CCC Trail is a moderate difficulty 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) trail built by the Civilian Conservation Corps . This trail " crosses over impressive stone bridges , stairways , and retaining walls and passes by the Lower Shelter and the North Lookout Tower , both CCC projects " . 
 Horseback riding is one of the fastest growing forms of recreation . Brown County State Park has over 20 horse trails , and 11 are wide enough that riders can ride two abreast . These trails range from 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) to nearly 12 miles ( 19 km ) in length . Horseback riders have their own entrance to the park , in the park 's southeast corner , which leads to the horsemen 's campground — also in the southeast of the park . There are facilities typical of the park 's regular and primitive campgrounds and hitch rails . A maximum of six horses per campsite is allowed , and horse permits are mandatory . On the other side of the park , a saddle barn is open from late March through October . Trail rides with a guide , pony rides , and hayrides are available . The barn is located on the north side of the park , not far from the Abe Martin Lodge . 
 Winter sports include cross @-@ country skiing , sledding , and ice fishing . Cross @-@ country skiing can be done in open fields within the park , though the park does not maintain any trails specifically for skiing , and does not rent ski equipment . Some hills suitable for sledding are located near the park 's swimming pool . Ice fishing is allowed at both lakes for those with a state fishing license . Roads to the lakes sometimes closed due to ice or snow . 
 = = = Other facilities = = = 
 A country store is open during the warm season with food , firewood , souvenirs , and bait for fishing . The nature center has a bird observation window and nature exhibits . The country store and nature center are located in the southern portion of the park . A swimming pool and tennis courts are located on the north side near the Abe Martin Lodge . The Olympic @-@ size swimming pool is open from Memorial Day to no later than Labor Day . The park has at least 10 picnic areas , with tables and grills and some with nearby playgrounds and toilet facilities . Picnic shelters can be reserved for fees that vary by shelter . 
 = Pulmonary contusion = 
 A pulmonary contusion ( or lung contusion ) is a contusion ( bruise ) of the lung , caused by chest trauma . As a result of damage to capillaries , blood and other fluids accumulate in the lung tissue . The excess fluid interferes with gas exchange , potentially leading to inadequate oxygen levels ( hypoxia ) . Unlike pulmonary laceration , another type of lung injury , pulmonary contusion does not involve a cut or tear of the lung tissue . 
 A pulmonary contusion is usually caused directly by blunt trauma but can also result from explosion injuries or a shock wave associated with penetrating trauma . With the use of explosives during World Wars I and II , pulmonary contusion resulting from blasts gained recognition . In the 1960s its occurrence in civilians began to receive wider recognition , in which cases it is usually caused by traffic accidents . The use of seat belts and airbags reduces the risk to vehicle occupants . 
 Diagnosis is made by studying the cause of the injury , physical examination and chest radiography . Typical signs and symptoms include direct effects of the physical trauma , such as chest pain and coughing up blood , as well as signs that the body is not receiving enough oxygen , such as cyanosis . The contusion frequently heals on its own with supportive care . Often nothing more than supplemental oxygen and close monitoring is needed ; however , intensive care may be required . For example , if breathing is severely compromised , mechanical ventilation may be necessary . Fluid replacement may be required to ensure adequate blood volume , but fluids are given carefully since fluid overload can worsen pulmonary edema , which may be lethal . 
 The severity ranges from mild to deadly : small contusions may have little or no impact on the patient 's health , yet pulmonary contusion is the most common type of potentially lethal chest trauma . It occurs in 30 – 75 % of severe chest injuries . With an estimated mortality rate of 14 – 40 % , pulmonary contusion plays a key role in determining whether an individual will die or suffer serious ill effects as the result of trauma . Pulmonary contusion is usually accompanied by other injuries . Although associated injuries are often the cause of death , pulmonary contusion is thought to cause death directly in a quarter to half of cases . Children are at especially high risk for the injury because the relative flexibility of their bones prevents the chest wall from absorbing force from an impact , causing it to be transmitted instead to the lung . Pulmonary contusion is associated with complications including pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome , and it can cause long @-@ term respiratory disability . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Pulmonary contusion and laceration are injuries to the lung tissue . Pulmonary laceration , in which lung tissue is torn or cut , differs from pulmonary contusion in that the former involves disruption of the macroscopic architecture of the lung , while the latter does not . When lacerations fill with blood , the result is pulmonary hematoma , a collection of blood within the lung tissue . Contusion involves hemorrhage in the alveoli ( tiny air @-@ filled sacs responsible for absorbing oxygen ) , but a hematoma is a discrete clot of blood not interspersed with lung tissue . A collapsed lung can result when the pleural cavity ( the space outside the lung ) accumulates blood ( hemothorax ) or air ( pneumothorax ) or both ( <unk> ) . These conditions do not inherently involve damage to the lung tissue itself , but they may be associated with it . Injuries to the chest wall are also distinct from but may be associated with lung injuries . Chest wall injuries include rib fractures and flail chest , in which multiple ribs are broken so that a segment of the ribcage is detached from the rest of the chest wall and moves independently . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Presentation may be subtle ; people with mild contusion may have no symptoms at all . However , pulmonary contusion is frequently associated with signs ( objective indications ) and symptoms ( subjective states ) , including those indicative of the lung injury itself and of accompanying injuries . Because gas exchange is impaired , signs of low blood oxygen saturation , such as low concentrations of oxygen in arterial blood gas and cyanosis ( bluish color of the skin and mucous membranes ) are commonly associated . <unk> ( painful breathing or difficulty breathing ) is commonly seen , and tolerance for exercise may be lowered . Rapid breathing and a rapid heart rate are other signs . With more severe contusions , breath sounds heard through a stethoscope may be decreased , or rales ( an abnormal crackling sound in the chest accompanying breathing ) may be present . People with severe contusions may have <unk> ( the production of watery sputum ) . <unk> and coughing are other signs . Coughing up blood or bloody sputum is present in up to half of cases . Cardiac output ( the volume of blood pumped by the heart ) may be reduced , and hypotension ( low blood pressure ) is frequently present . The area of the chest wall near the contusion may be tender or painful due to associated chest wall injury . 
 Signs and symptoms take time to develop , and as many as half of cases are asymptomatic at the initial presentation . The more severe the injury , the more quickly symptoms become apparent . In severe cases , symptoms may occur as quickly as three or four hours after the trauma . Hypoxemia ( low oxygen concentration in the arterial blood ) typically becomes progressively worse over 24 – 48 hours after injury . In general , pulmonary contusion tends to worsen slowly over a few days , but it may also cause rapid deterioration or death if untreated . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Pulmonary contusion is the most common injury found in blunt chest trauma , occurring in 25 – 35 % of cases . It is usually caused by the rapid deceleration that results when the moving chest strikes a fixed object . About 70 % of cases result from motor vehicle collisions , most often when the chest strikes the inside of the car . Falls , assaults , and sports injuries are other causes . Pulmonary contusion can also be caused by explosions ; the organs most vulnerable to blast injuries are those that contain gas , such as the lungs . Blast lung is severe pulmonary contusion , bleeding , or edema with damage to alveoli and blood vessels , or a combination of these . This is the primary cause of death among people who initially survive an explosion . Unlike other mechanisms of injury in which pulmonary contusion is often found alongside other injuries , explosions can cause pulmonary contusion without damage to the chest wall . 
 In addition to blunt trauma , penetrating trauma can cause pulmonary contusion . Contusion resulting from penetration by a rapidly moving projectile usually surrounds the path along which the projectile traveled through the tissue . The pressure wave forces tissue out of the way , creating a temporary cavity ; the tissue readily moves back into place , but it is damaged . Pulmonary contusions that accompany gun and knife wounds are not usually severe enough to have a major effect on outcome ; penetrating trauma causes less widespread lung damage than does blunt trauma . An exception is shotgun wounds , which can seriously damage large areas of lung tissue through a blast injury mechanism . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The physical processes behind pulmonary contusion are poorly understood . However , it is known that lung tissue can be crushed when the chest wall bends inward on impact . Three other possible mechanisms have been suggested : the inertial effect , the spalling effect , and the implosion effect . 
 In the inertial effect , the lighter alveolar tissue is sheared from the heavier hilar structures , an effect similar to diffuse axonal injury in head injury . It results from the fact that different tissues have different densities , and therefore different rates of acceleration or deceleration . 
 In the spalling effect , lung tissue bursts or is sheared where a shock wave meets the lung tissue , at interfaces between gas and liquid . The alveolar walls form such a gas @-@ liquid interface with the air in the alveoli . The spalling effect occurs in areas with large differences in density ; particles of the denser tissue are spalled ( thrown ) into the less dense particles . 
 The implosion effect occurs when a pressure wave passes through a tissue containing bubbles of gas : the bubbles first implode , then rebound and expand beyond their original volume . The air bubbles cause many tiny explosions , resulting in tissue damage ; the <unk> of gas bubbles stretches and tears alveoli . This effect is thought to occur microscopically when the pressure in the airways increases sharply . 
 Contusion usually occurs on the lung directly under the site of impact , but , as with traumatic brain injury , a contrecoup contusion may occur at the site opposite the impact as well . A blow to the front of the chest may cause contusion on the back of the lungs because a shock wave travels through the chest and hits the curved back of the chest wall ; this reflects the energy onto the back of the lungs , concentrating it . ( A similar mechanism may occur at the front of the lungs when the back is struck . ) 
 The amount of energy transferred to the lung is determined in a large part by the compliance ( flexibility ) of the chest wall . Children 's chests are more flexible because their ribs are more elastic and there is less ossification of their intercostal cartilage . Therefore , their chest walls bend , absorbing less of the force and transmitting more of it to the underlying organs . An adult 's more bony chest wall absorbs more of the force itself rather than transmitting it . Thus children commonly get pulmonary contusions without fractures overlying them , while elderly people are more likely to suffer fractures than contusions . One study found that pulmonary contusions were accompanied by fractures 62 % of the time in children and 80 % of the time in adults . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Pulmonary contusion results in bleeding and fluid leakage into lung tissue , which can become stiffened and lose its normal elasticity . The water content of the lung increases over the first 72 hours after injury , potentially leading to frank pulmonary edema in more serious cases . As a result of these and other pathological processes , pulmonary contusion progresses over time and can cause hypoxia ( insufficient oxygen ) . 
 = = = Bleeding and edema = = = 
 In contusions , torn capillaries leak fluid into the tissues around them . The membrane between alveoli and capillaries is torn ; damage to this capillary – alveolar membrane and small blood vessels causes blood and fluids to leak into the alveoli and the interstitial space ( the space surrounding cells ) of the lung . With more severe trauma , there is a greater amount of edema , bleeding , and tearing of the alveoli . Pulmonary contusion is characterized by <unk> ( tiny bleeds ) that occur when the alveoli are traumatically separated from airway structures and blood vessels . Blood initially collects in the interstitial space , and then edema occurs by an hour or two after injury . An area of bleeding in the contused lung is commonly surrounded by an area of edema . In normal gas exchange , carbon dioxide diffuses across the endothelium of the capillaries , the interstitial space , and across the alveolar epithelium ; oxygen diffuses in the other direction . Fluid accumulation interferes with gas exchange , and can cause the alveoli to fill with proteins and collapse due to edema and bleeding . The larger the area of the injury , the more severe respiratory compromise will be . 
 = = = Consolidation and collapse = = = 
 Pulmonary contusion can cause parts of the lung to consolidate , alveoli to collapse , and atelectasis ( partial or total lung collapse ) to occur . Consolidation occurs when the parts of the lung that are normally filled with air fill with material from the pathological condition , such as blood . Over a period of hours after the injury , the alveoli in the injured area thicken and may become consolidated . A decrease in the amount of surfactant produced also contributes to the collapse and consolidation of alveoli ; inactivation of surfactant increases their surface tension . Reduced production of surfactant can also occur in surrounding tissue that was not originally injured . 
 Inflammation of the lungs , which can result when components of blood enter the tissue due to contusion , can also cause parts of the lung to collapse . Macrophages , neutrophils , and other inflammatory cells and blood components can enter the lung tissue and release factors that lead to inflammation , increasing the likelihood of respiratory failure . In response to inflammation , excess mucus is produced , potentially plugging parts of the lung and leading to their collapse . Even when only one side of the chest is injured , inflammation may also affect the other lung . <unk> lung tissue may develop edema , thickening of the septa of the alveoli , and other changes . If this inflammation is severe enough , it can lead to dysfunction of the lungs like that seen in acute respiratory distress syndrome . 
 = = = Ventilation / perfusion mismatch = = = 
 Normally , the ratio of ventilation to perfusion is about one @-@ to @-@ one ; the volume of air entering the alveoli ( ventilation ) is about equal to that of blood in the capillaries around them ( perfusion ) . This ratio is reduced in pulmonary contusion ; fluid @-@ filled alveoli cannot fill with air , oxygen does not fully saturate the hemoglobin , and the blood leaves the lung without being fully oxygenated . Insufficient inflation of the lungs , which can result from inadequate mechanical ventilation or an associated injury such as flail chest , can also contribute to the ventilation / perfusion mismatch . As the mismatch between ventilation and perfusion grows , blood oxygen saturation is reduced . Pulmonary hypoxic vasoconstriction , in which blood vessels near the hypoxic alveoli constrict ( narrow their diameter ) in response to the lowered oxygen levels , can occur in pulmonary contusion . The vascular resistance increases in the contused part of the lung , leading to a decrease in the amount of blood that flows into it , directing blood to better @-@ ventilated areas . Although reducing blood flow to the unventilated alveoli is a way to compensate for the fact that blood passing unventilated alveoli is not oxygenated , the oxygenation of the blood remains lower than normal . If it is severe enough , the hypoxemia resulting from fluid in the alveoli cannot be corrected just by giving supplemental oxygen ; this problem is the cause of a large portion of the fatalities that result from trauma . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 To diagnose pulmonary contusion , health professionals use clues from a physical examination , information about the event that caused the injury , and radiography . Laboratory findings may also be used ; for example , arterial blood gasses may show insufficient oxygen and excessive carbon dioxide even in someone receiving supplemental oxygen . However , blood gas levels may show no abnormality early in the course of pulmonary contusion . 
 = = = X @-@ ray = = = 
 Chest X @-@ ray is the most common method used for diagnosis , and may be used to confirm a diagnosis already made using clinical signs . Consolidated areas appear white on an X @-@ ray film . Contusion is not typically restricted by the anatomical boundaries of the lobes or segments of the lung . The X @-@ ray appearance of pulmonary contusion is similar to that of aspiration , and the presence of hemothorax or pneumothorax may obscure the contusion on a radiograph . Signs of contusion that progress after 48 hours post @-@ injury are likely to be actually due to aspiration , pneumonia , or ARDS . 
 Although chest radiography is an important part of the diagnosis , it is often not sensitive enough to detect the condition early after the injury . In a third of cases , pulmonary contusion is not visible on the first chest radiograph performed . It takes an average of six hours for the characteristic white regions to show up on a chest X @-@ ray , and the contusion may not become apparent for 48 hours . When a pulmonary contusion is apparent in an X @-@ ray , it suggests that the trauma to the chest was severe and that a CT scan might reveal other injuries that were missed with X @-@ ray . 
 = = = Computed tomography = = = 
 Computed tomography ( CT scanning ) is a more sensitive test for pulmonary contusion , and it can identify abdominal , chest , or other injuries that accompany the contusion . In one study , chest X @-@ ray detected pulmonary contusions in 16 @.@ 3 % of people with serious blunt trauma , while CT detected them in 31 @.@ 2 % of the same people . Unlike X @-@ ray , CT scanning can detect the contusion almost immediately after the injury . However , in both X @-@ ray and CT a contusion may become more visible over the first 24 – 48 hours after trauma as bleeding and edema into lung tissues progress . CT scanning also helps determine the size of a contusion , which is useful in determining whether a patient needs mechanical ventilation ; a larger volume of contused lung on CT scan is associated with an increased likelihood that ventilation will be needed . CT scans also help differentiate between contusion and pulmonary hematoma , which may be difficult to tell apart otherwise . However , pulmonary contusions that are visible on CT but not chest X @-@ ray are usually not severe enough to affect outcome or treatment . 
 = = = Ultrasound = = = 
 Pulmonary ultrasound , performed at the bedside or on the accident scene , is being explored as a diagnosis for pulmonary contusion . Its use is still not widespread , being limited to facilities which are comfortable with its use for other applications , like pneumothorax , airway management , and hemothorax . Accuracy has been found to be comparable to CT scanning . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Prevention of pulmonary contusion is similar to that of other chest trauma . <unk> in combination with seat belts can protect vehicle occupants by preventing the chest from striking the interior of the vehicle during a collision , and by distributing forces involved in the crash more evenly across the body . However , in rare cases , an airbag causes pulmonary contusion in a person who is not properly positioned when it deploys . Child restraints such as <unk> protect children in vehicle collisions from pulmonary contusion . Equipment exists for use in some sports to prevent chest and lung injury ; for example , in softball the catcher is equipped with a chest protector . Athletes who do not wear such equipment , such as basketball players , can be trained to protect their chests from impacts . Protective garments can also prevent pulmonary contusion in explosions . Although traditional body armor made from rigid plates or other heavy materials protects from projectiles generated by a blast , it does not protect against pulmonary contusion , because it does not prevent the blast 's shock wave from being transferred to the lung . Special body armor has been designed for military personnel at high risk for blast injuries ; these garments can prevent a shock wave from being propagated across the chest wall to the lung , and thus protect wearers from blast lung injuries . These garments alternate layers of materials with high and low acoustic impedance ( the product of a material 's density and a wave 's velocity through it ) in order to " decouple " the blast wave , preventing its propagation into the tissues . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 No treatment is known to speed the healing of a pulmonary contusion ; the main care is supportive . Attempts are made to discover injuries accompanying the contusion , to prevent additional injury , and to provide supportive care while waiting for the contusion to heal . Monitoring , including keeping track of fluid balance , respiratory function , and oxygen saturation using pulse oximetry is also required as the patient 's condition may progressively worsen . Monitoring for complications such as pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome is of critical importance . Treatment aims to prevent respiratory failure and to ensure adequate blood oxygenation . Supplemental oxygen can be given and it may be warmed and humidified . When the contusion does not respond to other treatments , extracorporeal membranous oxygenation may be used , pumping blood from the body into a machine that <unk> it and removes carbon dioxide prior to pumping it back in . 
 = = = Ventilation = = = 
 Positive pressure ventilation , in which air is forced into the lungs , is needed when oxygenation is significantly impaired . Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation including continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) and bi @-@ level positive airway pressure ( <unk> ) , may be used to improve oxygenation and treat atelectasis : air is blown into the airways at a prescribed pressure via a face mask . Noninvasive ventilation has advantages over invasive methods because it does not carry the risk of infection that intubation does , and it allows normal coughing , swallowing , and speech . However , the technique may cause complications ; it may force air into the stomach or cause aspiration of stomach contents , especially when level of consciousness is decreased . 
 People with signs of inadequate respiration or oxygenation may need to be intubated and mechanically ventilated . Mechanical ventilation aims to reduce pulmonary edema and increase oxygenation . Ventilation can reopen collapsed alveoli , but it is harmful for them to be repeatedly opened , and positive pressure ventilation can also damage the lung by <unk> it . Intubation is normally reserved for when respiratory problems occur , but most significant contusions do require intubation , and it may be done early in anticipation of this need . People with pulmonary contusion who are especially likely to need ventilation include those with prior severe lung disease or kidney problems ; the elderly ; those with a lowered level of consciousness ; those with low blood oxygen or high carbon dioxide levels ; and those who will undergo operations with anesthesia . Larger contusions have been correlated with a need for ventilation for longer periods of time . 
 Pulmonary contusion or its complications such as acute respiratory distress syndrome may cause lungs to lose compliance ( stiffen ) , so higher pressures may be needed to give normal amounts of air and oxygenate the blood adequately . Positive end @-@ expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) , which delivers air at a given pressure at the end of the expiratory cycle , can reduce edema and keep alveoli from collapsing . PEEP is considered necessary with mechanical ventilation ; however , if the pressure is too great it can expand the size of the contusion and injure the lung . When the compliance of the injured lung differs significantly from that of the uninjured one , the lungs can be ventilated independently with two ventilators in order to deliver air at different pressures ; this helps avoid injury from <unk> while providing adequate ventilation . 
 = = = Fluid therapy = = = 
 The administration of fluid therapy in individuals with pulmonary contusion is controversial . Excessive fluid in the circulatory system ( <unk> ) can worsen hypoxia because it can cause fluid leakage from injured capillaries ( pulmonary edema ) , which are more permeable than normal . However , low blood volume ( hypovolemia ) resulting from insufficient fluid has an even worse impact , potentially causing hypovolemic shock ; for people who have lost large amounts of blood , fluid resuscitation is necessary . A lot of the evidence supporting the idea that fluids should be withheld from people with pulmonary contusion came from animal studies , not clinical trials with humans ; human studies have had conflicting findings on whether fluid resuscitation worsens the condition . Current recommendations suggest giving enough fluid to ensure sufficient blood flow but not giving any more fluid than necessary . For people who do require large amounts of intravenous fluid , a catheter may be placed in the pulmonary artery to measure the pressure within it . Measuring pulmonary artery pressure allows the clinician to give enough fluids to prevent shock without exacerbating edema . Diuretics , drugs that increase urine output to reduce excessive fluid in the system , can be used when fluid overload does occur , as long as there is not a significant risk of shock . Furosemide , a diuretic used in the treatment of pulmonary contusion , also relaxes the smooth muscle in the veins of the lungs , thereby decreasing pulmonary venous resistance and reducing the pressure in the pulmonary capillaries . 
 = = = Supportive care = = = 
 Retaining secretions in the airways can worsen hypoxia and lead to infections . Thus , an important part of treatment is pulmonary toilet , the use of suction , deep breathing , coughing , and other methods to remove material such as mucus and blood from the airways . Chest physical therapy makes use of techniques such as breathing exercises , stimulation of coughing , <unk> , percussion , movement , vibration , and drainage to rid the lungs of secretions , increase oxygenation , and expand collapsed parts of the lungs . People with pulmonary contusion , especially those who do not respond well to other treatments , may be positioned with the uninjured lung lower than the injured one to improve oxygenation . Inadequate pulmonary toilet can result in pneumonia . People who do develop infections are given antibiotics . No studies have yet shown a benefit of using antibiotics as a preventative measure before infection occurs , although some doctors do recommend prophylactic antibiotic use even without scientific evidence of its benefit . However , this can cause the development of antibiotic resistant strains of bacteria , so giving antibiotics without a clear need is normally discouraged . For people who are at especially high risk of developing infections , the sputum can be cultured to test for the presence of infection @-@ causing bacteria ; when they are present , antibiotics are used . 
 Pain control is another means to facilitate the elimination of secretions . A chest wall injury can make coughing painful , increasing the likelihood that secretions will accumulate in the airways . Chest injuries also contribute to hypoventilation ( inadequate breathing ) because the chest wall movement involved in breathing adequately is painful . Insufficient expansion of the chest may lead to atelectasis , further reducing oxygenation of the blood . Analgesics ( pain medications ) can be given to reduce pain . Injection of anesthetics into nerves in the chest wall , called nerve blockade , is another approach to pain management ; this does not depress respiration the way some pain medications can . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Pulmonary contusion usually resolves itself without causing permanent complications ; however it may also have long @-@ term ill effects on respiratory function . Most contusions resolve in five to seven days after the injury . Signs detectable by radiography are usually gone within 10 days after the injury — when they are not , other conditions , such as pneumonia , are the likely cause . Chronic lung disease correlates with the size of the contusion and can interfere with an individual 's ability to return to work . Fibrosis of the lungs can occur , resulting in dyspnea ( shortness of breath ) , low blood oxygenation , and reduced functional residual capacity for as long as six years after the injury . As late as four years post @-@ injury , decreased functional residual capacity has been found in most pulmonary contusion patients studied . During the six months after pulmonary contusion , up to 90 % of people suffer difficulty breathing . In some cases , dyspnea persists for an indefinite period . Contusion can also permanently reduce the compliance of the lungs . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Pulmonary contusion can result in respiratory failure — about half of such cases occur within a few hours of the initial trauma . Other severe complications , including infections and acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) occur in up to half of cases . Elderly people and those who have heart , lung , or kidney disease prior to the injury are more likely to stay longer in hospital and have complications from the injury . Complications occur in 55 % of people with heart or lung disease and 13 % of those without . Of people with pulmonary contusion alone , 17 % develop ARDS , while 78 % of people with at least two additional injuries develop the condition . A larger contusion is associated with an increased risk . In one study , 82 % of people with 20 % or more of the lung volume affected developed ARDS , while only 22 % of people with less than 20 % did so . 
 Pneumonia , another potential complication , develops in as many as 20 % of people with pulmonary contusion . <unk> lungs are less able to remove bacteria than uninjured lungs , predisposing them to infection . Intubation and mechanical ventilation further increase the risk of developing pneumonia ; the tube is passed through the nose or mouth into the airways , potentially tracking bacteria from the mouth or sinuses into them . Also , intubation prevents coughing , which would clear bacteria @-@ laden secretions from the airways , and secretions pool near the tube 's cuff and allow bacteria to grow . The sooner the endotracheal tube is removed , the lower the risk of pneumonia , but if it is removed too early and has to be put back in , the risk of pneumonia rises . People who are at risk for pulmonary aspiration ( e.g. those with lowered level of consciousness due to head injuries ) are especially likely to get pneumonia . As with ARDS , the chances of developing pneumonia increase with the size of the contusion . Children and adults have been found to have similar rates of complication with pneumonia and ARDS . 
 = = = Associated injuries = = = 
 A large amount of force is required to cause pulmonary contusion ; a person injured with such force is likely to have other types of injuries as well . In fact , pulmonary contusion can be used to gauge the severity of trauma . Up to three quarters of cases are accompanied by other chest injuries , the most common of these being hemothorax and pneumothorax . <unk> chest is usually associated with significant pulmonary contusion , and the contusion , rather than the chest wall injury , is often the main cause of respiratory failure in people with these injuries . Other indications of thoracic trauma may be associated , including fracture of the sternum and bruising of the chest wall . Over half of fractures of the scapula are associated with pulmonary contusion . The contusion is frequently found underlying fracture sites . When accompanied by a fracture , it is usually concentrated into a specific location — the contusion is more diffuse when there is no fracture . Pulmonary lacerations may result from the same blunt or penetrating forces that cause contusion . <unk> can result in pulmonary hematomas ; these are reported to develop in 4 – 11 % of pulmonary contusions . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Pulmonary contusion is found in 30 – 75 % of severe cases of chest injury , making it the most common serious injury to occur in association with thoracic trauma . Of people who have multiple injuries with an injury severity score of over 15 , pulmonary contusion occurs in about 17 % . It is difficult to determine the death rate ( mortality ) because pulmonary contusion rarely occurs by itself . Usually , deaths of people with pulmonary contusion result from other injuries , commonly traumatic brain injury . It is controversial whether pulmonary contusion with flail chest is a major factor in mortality on its own or whether it merely contributes to mortality in people with multiple injuries . The estimated mortality rate of pulmonary contusion ranges from 14 – 40 % , depending on the severity of the contusion itself and on associated injuries . When the contusions are small , they do not normally increase the chance of death or poor outcome for people with blunt chest trauma ; however , these chances increase with the size of the contusion . One study found that 35 % of people with multiple significant injuries including pulmonary contusion die . In another study , 11 % of people with pulmonary contusion alone died , while the number rose to 22 % in those with additional injuries . Pulmonary contusion is thought to be the direct cause of death in a quarter to a half of people with multiple injuries ( <unk> ) who die . An accompanying flail chest increases the morbidity and mortality to more than twice that of pulmonary contusion alone . 
 Pulmonary contusion is the most common cause of death among vehicle occupants involved in accidents , and it is thought to contribute significantly in about a quarter of deaths resulting from vehicle collisions . As vehicle use has increased , so has the number of auto accidents , and with it the number of chest injuries . However an increase in the number of airbags installed in modern cars may be decreasing the incidence of pulmonary contusion . Use of child restraint systems has brought the approximate incidence of pulmonary contusion in children in vehicle accidents from 22 % to 10 % . 
 Differences in the bodies of children and adults lead to different manifestations of pulmonary contusion and associated injuries ; for example , children have less body mass , so the same force is more likely to lead to trauma in multiple body systems . Since their chest walls are more flexible , children are more vulnerable to pulmonary contusion than adults are , and thus suffer from the injury more commonly . Pulmonary contusion has been found in 53 % of children with chest injuries requiring hospitalization . Children in forceful impacts suffer twice as many pulmonary contusions as adults with similar injury mechanisms , yet have proportionately fewer rib fractures . The rates of certain types of injury mechanisms differ between children and adults ; for example , children are more often hit by cars as pedestrians . Some differences in children 's physiology might be advantageous ( for example they are less likely to have other medical conditions ) , and thus they have been predicted to have a better outcome . However , despite these differences , children with pulmonary contusion have similar mortality rates to adults . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1761 , the Italian anatomist Giovanni Battista Morgagni was first to describe a lung injury that was not accompanied by injury to the chest wall overlying it . Nonetheless , it was the French military surgeon Guillaume Dupuytren who is thought to have coined the term pulmonary contusion in the 19th century . It still was not until the early 20th century that pulmonary contusion and its clinical significance began to receive wide recognition . With the use of explosives during World War I came many casualties with no external signs of chest injury but with significant bleeding in the lungs . Studies of World War I injuries by D.R. Hooker showed that pulmonary contusion was an important part of the concussive injury that results from explosions . 
 Pulmonary contusion received further attention during World War II , when the bombings of Britain caused blast injuries and associated respiratory problems in both soldiers and civilians . Also during this time , studies with animals placed at varying distances from a blast showed that protective gear could prevent lung injuries . These findings suggested that an impact to the outside of the chest wall was responsible for the internal lesions . In 1945 , studies identified a phenomenon termed " wet lung " , in which the lungs accumulated fluid and were simultaneously less able to remove it . They attributed the respiratory failure often seen in blunt chest trauma in part to excessive fluid resuscitation , and the question of whether and how much to administer fluids has remained controversial ever since . 
 During the Vietnam War , combat again provided the opportunity for study of pulmonary contusion ; research during this conflict played an important role in the development of the modern understanding of its treatment . The condition also began to be more widely recognized in a non @-@ combat context in the 1960s , and symptoms and typical findings with imaging techniques such as X @-@ ray were described . Before the 1960s , it was believed that the respiratory insufficiency seen in flail chest was due to " paradoxical motion " of the flail segment of the chest wall ( the flail segment moves in the opposite direction as the chest wall during respiration ) , so treatment was aimed at managing the chest wall injury , not the pulmonary contusion . For example , positive pressure ventilation was used to stabilize the flail segment from within the chest . It was first proposed in 1965 that this respiratory insufficiency is most often due to injury of the lung rather than to the chest wall , and a group led by J.K. Trinkle confirmed this hypothesis in 1975 . Hence the modern treatment prioritizes the management of pulmonary contusion . Animal studies performed in the late 1960s and 1970s shed light on the pathophysiological processes involved in pulmonary contusion . Studies in the 1990s revealed a link between pulmonary contusion and persistent respiratory difficulty for years after the injury in people in whom the injury coexisted with flail chest . In the next decade studies demonstrated that function in contused lungs improves for years after the injury . 
 = The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra = 
 The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra is a 1928 American silent experimental short film co @-@ written and co @-@ directed by Robert Florey and Slavko Vorkapić . Considered a landmark of American avant @-@ garde cinema , it tells the story of a man ( Jules Raucourt ) who comes to Hollywood with dreams of becoming a star , only to fail and become dehumanized , with studio executives reducing him to the role of extra and writing the number " 9413 " on his forehead . 
 The film 's visual style includes abrupt cuts , rapid camera movement , extensive superimposition , dim lighting , and shapes and forms in twisted and disoriented angles . Filmed with a budget of only $ 97 ( $ 1 @,@ 337 in today 's dollars ) , it includes a combination of close @-@ ups of live actors and long shots of miniature sets , which were made from such items as cardboard , paper cubes , tin cans , cigar boxes , and toy trains . With no access to Hollywood studios or equipment , most of the filming took place in the filmmakers ' residences , with walls painted black for use as a background . 
 The story was inspired by Florey 's own experiences in Hollywood , as well as the George Gershwin composition Rhapsody in Blue . It was one of the first films shot by Gregg Toland , who later received acclaim for his work on such films as The Grapes of Wrath ( 1939 ) and Citizen Kane ( 1941 ) . The film serves as a satire of the social conditions , dominant practices , and ideologies of Hollywood , as well as the film industry 's perceived mistreatment of actors . Douglas Fairbanks assisted with the development of the film , and Charlie Chaplin and Joseph M. Schenck helped promote it . 
 Unlike most experimental films , it received a wide public exhibition , released by FBO Pictures Corporation into more than 700 theaters in North America and Europe . The film was well received by critics , both in its time period and in modern day ; film historian Brian Taves said " more than any other American film , it initiated the avant @-@ garde in this country " . The entirety of the film has not survived . It has been selected for preservation by the National Film Registry , and Florey co @-@ wrote and directed a remake , Hollywood Boulevard ( 1936 ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Jones ( Jules Raucourt ) , an artist and aspiring movie star , arrives in Hollywood and is immediately star @-@ struck by the glitz and glamour of the film industry . He speaks with a film studio representative , presenting a letter of recommendation and attempting to speak on his own behalf , but the representative cuts him off and writes the number " 9413 " on his forehead . From this point on , 9413 speaks only in unintelligible gibberish and moves in a mechanical fashion , mindlessly following the instructions of film directors and studio representatives . He goes on a series of casting calls , but is unable to find any success , constantly being confronted with signs that read , " No Casting Today " . A series of images are interspersed throughout these scenes , including shots of Hollywood , cameras filming , the word " <unk> " written in the stars , and an endlessly repeating loop of a man walking up a stairway toward the word " SUCCESS " , without ever reaching the top . 
 Unlike 9413 , other extras around him begin to find success . A woman ( Adriane Marsh ) with the number " 13 " on her head constantly kneels and stands back up at the behest of a film director , and eventually succeeds in landing a part , greeted by a " Casting Today " sign . Another extra ( Voya George ) with the number " 15 " , who unlike 9413 has expressionless and unenthusiastic facial expressions , holds paper masks in front of his face , symbolizing his performances . He is greeted with enthusiasm by the cheering masses , all of whom speak in the same gibberish as 9413 . His number 15 is replaced with a star and he achieves tremendous success . 9413 admires this new movie star and attempts to mimic him , presenting his own , much more impressive @-@ looking mask . But the star is unimpressed and disregards 9413 , who sadly cradles his mask like a baby , lamenting his inability to achieve success . 
 Time passes and 9413 remains unable to find work in Hollywood . Despite constant phone calls to studio representatives begging for work , he is repeatedly confronted by " No Casting Today " signs . He cannot afford to buy food , and bills that he is unable to pay are constantly slipped under his door . A series of images symbolizing his mental anguish are shown , including twisted trees blowing in the wind , and a man laying on the stairway leading to " SUCCESS " , still unable to reach the top . He falls to the ground , starving , exhausted , and in a state of despair over his failures . Finally , he dies , and after images are shown of the other actors laughing at him , his tombstone is revealed to read " Here Lies No. 9413 , a Hollywood Extra " , next to the words " No Casting Today " . 
 After his death , 9413 's spirit leaves his body and is pulled by a platform into the sky . As he gets higher , he grows angel wings and ascends into heaven , a place with glittering crystal towers and bright blinking lights . A hand removes the " 9413 " from his forehead , and he smiles happily before flying further into heaven . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Robert Florey and Slavko Vorkapić , who met after Florey attended one of Vorkapić 's American Society of Cinematographers lectures , are credited as co @-@ writers and co @-@ directors of The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra . Accounts differ as to the level of involvement the two men had in the creation of the film , but most identify Florey as primarily responsible . Film historian Brian Taves has claimed Vorkapić was not involved in the writing or direction of the film , and that his contribution was limited to set design and miniature lighting , but that Florey nevertheless insisted on sharing equal credit with him for his role in bringing the film to fruition . Some early journalistic stories about the film uphold this viewpoint , including a 1928 article about Florey in Hollywood Magazine . Taves further claims that while Vorkapić did nothing to promote the film when it was first released , he later exaggerated his role in the production of the film when it became so esteemed . Paul Ivano , who did camerawork on the film , echoed these sentiments , saying : " Vorkapić tries to get credit , but he didn 't do much . " For his part , Vorkapić himself has said the initial idea was Florey 's , and that they discussed it and drafted a rough one @-@ page synopsis together . But Vorkapić said " all the effects were devised , designed , photographed , and added by me " , and that " at least 90 percent of the editing and montage " was his work . He claims to have directed most of the opening and ending sequences himself , while he credits Florey with filming the casting scene and shots of laughing extras , and said the rise of Voya George 's character to stardom was filmed jointly . 
 Within a few years of his first arrival in Hollywood , Florey conceived the idea of making a film about the common actor 's dreams of becoming a star , and subsequent failure to achieve his hopes . Florey 's work as a publicist and journalist covering the film industry gave him familiarity with the struggles of aspiring actors and their disappointment at failing to achieve their dreams , which informed the writing of A Hollywood Extra . But the final inspiration for the film came after Florey attended a performance of the George Gershwin composition Rhapsody in Blue . Florey had been working in Hollywood for only a few months when he heard the music , and it inspired him to incorporate the rhythm of the blues into a film . He would later describe the film as a " continuity in musical rhythm of the adventures of my extra in Hollywood , the movements and attitudes of which appeared to synchronize themselves with Gershwin 's notes " . Although most avant @-@ garde films of the time emphasized moods rather than emotion , he wanted his script to merge both abstraction and narrative in equal parts . Florey wrote the script in precise detail , describing each shot in proportion to the length of film it would take to shoot it , which was necessary due to the high cost of film stock . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Florey owned no camera at the time , and his efforts to obtain one were unsuccessful until he met Vorkapić . Florey said of their discussion : " I say to Slav , ' Slav , I have an idea but not much money . You have a camera and are a clever painter . Let 's make the picture in collaboration and we split the benefit . ' " Vorkapić himself claimed to have said : " Florey , you get me 100 dollars and I 'll make you a picture in my own kitchen . " Vorkapić allowed Florey to borrow a small box camera that he had purchased with the proceeds from the sale of one of his oil paintings . It was a DeVry camera with one lens , a type that Florey said was sold as a " toy " . Florey also had trouble obtaining film , as he found it cost @-@ prohibitive to purchase negative and positive film from film laboratories . However , Florey knew that " film ends " , scraps of leftover unexposed film stock , were often discarded after shooting on big budget Hollywood films , so he attempted to persuade filmmakers to give them to him . Camera work had just been completed on The Gaucho , a film starring Douglas Fairbanks , and he was able to obtain more than 1 @,@ 000 feet of film from the production in 10- and 20 @-@ foot strips . Florey then spliced the film ends together by hand , a process he found time @-@ consuming and frustrating , but one that resulted in the equivalent of a full reel of negative film . Fairbanks , who had previously hired Florey to handle his European public relations , provided financial assistance for the production of A Hollywood Extra . He also gave Florey access to his editing rooms and helped provide him with film ends . 
 The film was shot by Gregg Toland , credited simply as " Gregg " , who was simultaneously working as an assistant to cinematographer George Barnes at the Samuel Goldwyn Studio . It was one of the first films for Toland , who later received acclaim for his cinematography on such films as The Grapes of Wrath ( 1939 ) and Citizen Kane ( 1941 ) . The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra cost $ 97 ( $ 1 @,@ 337 today ) to make , which was covered entirely by Florey . The budget was composed of $ 55 ( $ 758 today ) for development and printing , $ 25 ( $ 345 today ) for negatives , $ 14 ( $ 193 today ) for transportation , and $ 3 ( $ 41 today ) for store props , most of which cost five or ten cents individually . From the development costs , the salary expenses for everyone involved in the film totaled $ 3 . Toland had use of a Mitchell camera during filming , which allowed for some shots that would have been impossible with the DeVry <unk> , including about 300 feet of closeups . Additional camerawork was done by Paul Ivano , and Taves has in fact argued that Ivano was primarily responsible for much of the film 's camerawork , with Toland handling primarily the close @-@ ups . The film was shot on 35 mm film , over a period of three weeks in late 1927 , filmed mostly on weekends . No subtitles are used in the film . Only two captions are used , each with one word – " <unk> " and " SUCCESS " – but they are created not through subtitles , but by reflecting moving light through cardboard cutouts , creating words among the shadows . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The role of extra 9413 was played by Jules Raucourt , credited in the film simply as " Raucourt " . Although Raucourt started his career as a leading man of silent action films , he ironically became a film extra himself after cinema transitioned into the sound era . Raucourt later wrote a novel using the title of the film . The role of Extra # 13 was played by Adriane Marsh , herself a film extra , who never again obtained a named role in cinema . Extra # 15 , who then becomes a movie star , was portrayed by Voya George , a personal friend of Vorkapić , who went on to a career in European films . Robert Florey also himself appears in the film as a casting director , although only his disembodied mouth and hand are visible , shaking his finger at the protagonist . Slavko Vorkapić also had a brief role in the film as the man constantly walking up the stairs toward the words " SUCCESS " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The filmmakers had no access to a studio , so shooting took place in rooms at their homes , with the walls painted black for use as a background . Herman G. Weinberg , a writer for Movie Makers , and Jack Spears of Films in Review , said it was filmed mostly at Florey 's residence , while film historian David E. James claimed it was filmed in Vorkapić 's kitchen . In an interview , Florey claimed the filming took place both in his kitchen and in Vorkapić 's living room . Some scenes were also filmed in Toland 's garage . The film is shot in three basic types of compositions : miniature sets , close @-@ ups of live actors , and newsreel @-@ like scenes of Hollywood and film studios . The film 's visual motif includes abrupt cuts , rapid camera movement , extensive superimposition , dim lighting , and shapes and forms in twisted and disoriented angles . In this way , it shares some similarities with German Expressionism , particularly the film The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( 1920 ) . The opening credits , in particular , are angular and expressionistic . A single 400 @-@ watt lamp was used as lighting in the film ; they originally planned to use two lamps , but one of them burned out before filming began . During close @-@ up shots , the actors would hold the light bulb in their hands so their faces would be lit . When an actor changed position , he or she would switch the bulb from one hand to another . As a result , the faces of the actors are often kept in partial shadow , keeping their features obscured . Toland also used small reflectors that he borrowed from film studios , which included a light bulb hung inside a mirror shaped like a cone . The film 's acting is heavily abstract and stylized , with the actors mouthing gibberish instead of speaking actual words . A record of Rhapsody in Blue was played constantly during filming , so that the actors would , in Florey 's words , become " saturated " with the rhythm of the " blues " . This was a source of aggravation for Florey 's neighbors and landlord . 
 Scenes of Hollywood cityscapes , as well as shots of heaven at the end of the film , were achieved through the creation of miniature sets that were filmed in long shots to give the appearance that they were large and expansive . A total of 45 sets were built in total , none larger than about two square feet , with the most expensive costing $ 1 @.@ 67 . It took days to prepare these sets . Florey cut cardboard from laundered shirts and shaped them into squares while Vorkapić painted them <unk> to resemble buildings . The elevated trains in the cityscape scenes were actually toy trains Florey purchased and mounted on <unk> runaways . He would pull them along the track on a string with one hand while he shot the scene with the other . Movement on the miniature sets was simulated by moving lamps and casting shadows . To make the miniature sets look more realistic and to conceal defects , prisms and <unk> were placed in front of the camera lens and moved during filming , and cylinder lens systems were used and rotated during shooting to magnify the image to the desired diameter . Florey said this was useful in " giving the scenes the rhythms which we thought they required " . 
 Skyscrapers in the sets were oblong cubes that were shot from an angle that exaggerated their height . To create the effect of sunlight glimmering off the buildings , one person would stand on one side of the cubes with a mirror , and another would stand on the opposite side with a light bulb and swing it back and forth , so the mirror could catch reflections of the swinging light and throw it back onto the skyscrapers . To create a sense of hysteria and excitement surrounding an opening night performance , a skyscraper was photographed with the camera swinging quickly up and down from side to side . While scenes from miniature sets were composed of long shots , scenes were actors were shot entirely in close @-@ ups , which make up about 300 feet of the final film reel . Rather than attempting to put the actor into the miniature backgrounds through trick photography , the scenes were cut rapidly and successively , so the viewer first sees the actor and then the set , creating the impression they are in the same place . Sets involving actors were minimalistic , with some consisting of only a few elements like a table , telephone , two chairs , and a cigar . 
 A film studio set was created by photographing several reel spools with strips of film dangling against a background of blinking lights . The casting office was created by silhouetting strips of cardboard against a white background . To portray the mental anguish of the protagonist , strips of paper were cut into the shape of twisted trees , which were silhouetted against a background of moving shadows and set in motion with an electric fan . To create a scene near the end of the film , when the protagonist starts becoming delirious , the camera moves through a maze of different sized cubes , with geometric designs inside them , all placed on a flat , shiny service . The heaven setting was also a miniature set created from paper cubes , tin cans , cigar boxes , toy trains , and a motorized <unk> Set . No still photos were taken for the film , but illustrations showing prism and kaleidoscope effects have been made by enlarging frames of negative . The paper prints were considerably softer than the movie print in order to avoid graininess . The final film was edited to a one @-@ reel length of 1 @,@ 200 feet of film strip , featuring about 150 scenes . Florey said it featured the same number of angles as full @-@ length feature films of the time . Although the film was carefully edited to be synchronized with Rhapsody in Blue , much of the original lyrical quality has been lost in shortened and modified versions of the film . 
 = = Themes and interpretations = = 
 The film serves as a satire of the social conditions , dominant practices , and ideologies of Hollywood , as well as the film industry 's perceived mistreatment of actors . Filmmaking was becoming more expensive and requiring larger technical resources , particularly with the rise of sound production , making it increasingly difficult for amateur filmmakers to enter the profession . This deepened a divide between amateurs and Hollywood professionals , and as a result , a growing number of amateurs started lampooning Hollywood in their films , including A Hollywood Extra . The subject of the film is an extra who starts his Hollywood career with hopes and dreams , but ultimately finds himself used and discarded by the industry , and his artistic ambitions destroyed . At the start of the film , the protagonist has a name ( Mr. Jones ) and a letter of recommendation outlining his talents , but his abilities are ignored and he is reduced to a number , symbolizing his dehumanization . 
 The movie star served as an illustration of hero worship in American culture , and the painted masks he dons represent his performances . Actors and spectators alike are portrayed as unintelligent automatons , their mouths <unk> <unk> as they respond to Hollywood films and to hand signals from film directors . One scene repeatedly loops the same shot of a man climbing a flight of stairs with the word " SUCCESS " atop it , representing the actors ' vain attempts to find fulfillment and advancement in his career . Film historians William Moritz and David E. James have compared this to a similar scene involving a washerwoman in the Dadaist post @-@ Cubist film Ballet Mécanique ( 1924 ) . Other segments in the A Hollywood Extra are also frequently repeated , like views of the city lights , and shots of " Hollywood " and " No Casting " signs . This further exemplifies the protagonist 's constant struggle to succeed in Hollywood . 
 The film 's abrupt cuts , artificial scenery , extreme close @-@ ups , and twisted angles all metaphorically amplify the dark and somber narrative . Shots of film producers and critics in A Hollywood Extra are shot from low angles with dark backdrops , giving the characters a powerful and foreboding ambiance . Gregg Toland would make use of similar camera techniques in his later work on Citizen Kane . Due to the lighting , close @-@ ups of the actors ' faces are often shadowed , <unk> some of their features and depriving the characters of wholeness . The all @-@ black backdrops in these close @-@ ups also derive the film of a real @-@ world presence . During a scene in which the protagonist await phone calls to learn about casting decisions , the image of a telephone is superimposed directly onto the actor 's forehead , symbolizing his growing obsession with finding work . His failure to achieve success mocks him even after his death , as the words " No Casting Today " appear next to his gravestone . His death is symbolized by a pair of scissors cutting a film strip . 
 While the film portrays the reality of the protagonist 's experience in an expressionistic style , the glamour of Hollywood is portrayed more objectively . In reversing these conventional expectations , however , the film invites the viewer to interpret this version of Hollywood as merely " the material of dreams " and " an unreal paradise of cruelty and failure " , according to Taves . Scenes on the streets of Hollywood are filmed with a wildly moving camera from tilted angles , and edited into rapid juxtapositions , to reflect the false and excessive nature of the Hollywood film industry . The protagonist 's ascension to heaven at the end of the film serves simultaneously as a fitting conclusion to the story , and as a satire of Hollywood 's desire for traditional happy endings . As he ascends , heaven is located in the opposite direction from Hollywood , another jab at the industry . James wrote that the vision of heaven as an escape from the film industry 's brutality " figures the avant @-@ garde 's recurrent utopian aspirations " . 
 The film also touches upon Hollywood 's perceived mistreatment of women . While the male actors wear masks , which symbolize their ability to act , the female Extra # 13 does not wear any and is instead expected to simply stand obediently and listen to the male filmmakers . Her only role is to be an object for men to look upon . The fact that she is able to achieve success by filling this simple role , contrasted against the protagonist 's inability to succeed despite his hard work , reveals how differently the film industry views the roles of male and female actors . 
 = = Release = = 
 Although most commonly known by its proper title , The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra has also been released and advertised under different titles at various times , including Hollywood Extra 9413 , and $ 97 , a reference to the film 's low budget . Other titles include The Rhapsody of Hollywood , a name suggested by comic actor and filmmaker Charlie Chaplin , and The Suicide of a Hollywood Extra , a misnomer created by the distributor , FBO Pictures Corporation . While many experimental films from the period were simply screened in the filmmakers ' homes for private audiences of families and friends , A Hollywood Extra received a wide public exhibition . Upon its release , Florey described the film this way : 
 Sources differ on when and where the film premiered . According to film critic Daniel Eagan , Florey premiered the film in a movie club in Los Angeles , while film writer Anthony Slide wrote that it opened at New York City 's Cameo Theatre on June 17 , 1928 . However , David E. James said the film had its true premiere at Charlie Chaplin 's villa in Beverly Hills , California . Chaplin , who by this time was disenchanted with many aspects of Hollywood filmmaking , was so impressed with the film that he watched it five times , and then screened it for guests at his home . This audience included elites from the film industry , including Douglas Fairbanks , John Considine , Harry d <unk> , D. W. Griffith , Jesse L. Lasky , Ernst Lubitsch , Lewis Milestone , Mary Pickford , Joseph M. Schenck , Norma Talmadge , Josef von Sternberg , and King Vidor . The screening was accompanied by a record of Rhapsody in Blue , as well as Chaplin himself playing the organ . Florey was so fearful of a negative reaction due to the film 's satire of Hollywood that he removed his name from the credits and hid in the projection room during the screening . While the audience originally expected it to be one of Chaplin 's gags , they were very impressed with the film , and Schenck arranged for it to be shown on a United Artists Theater on Broadway starting on March 21 , 1928 . A special musical score , based on Rhapsody in Blue , was prepared by Hugo Riesenfeld for the showing , which was played by a live orchestra , and made heavy use of the saxophone . With a presentation usually reserved for bigger budget films , it played twice nightly along with the Gloria Swanson film Sadie Thompson , and was billed as " the first of the impressionistic photoplays to be made in America " . 
 The film was heavily publicized , which many of the media reports emphasizing its low budget of $ 97 . It achieved enough fame to become picked up for distribution by FBO Pictures Corporation , which eventually became RKO Pictures through a merger . The company released the film to more than 700 theaters in North America and Europe . In North America , it was shown not only in New York and Hollywood , but also in the Philadelphia , Cleveland , Montreal , and Washington , D.C. areas . It played in Philadelphia along with Prem <unk> ( 1925 ) , but it generated more praise than the main attraction film and earned $ 32 in a single week . A Hollywood Extra became one of the first widely @-@ seen American avant @-@ garde films , not only in the United States but also throughout the Soviet Union and Europe , including England , France , Germany , and Italy . The French rights for the film , along with Florey 's The Love of Zero ( 1928 ) , were sold for $ 390 . 
 Though the film was made in opposition to classical style , it was embraced by those within the Hollywood industry , and ultimately helped Florey , Vorkapić , and Toland get more prestigious assignments within the film industry . <unk> was offered a special effects position at Paramount Pictures shortly after A Hollywood Extra was released . Paramount wanted to hire Florey for the position , but after Josef von Sternberg clarified that Vorkapić was most responsible for A Hollywood Extra 's special effects , they made the offer to him . Film production designer William Cameron Menzies was anxious to work with Florey after watching A Hollywood Extra , so the two co @-@ authored The Love of Zero , with Florey directing and Menzies designing the sets . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film was well received by critics , both in its time period and in modern day . One reviewer said it ranked in cinema " where Gertrude Stein ranks in poetry " , while another praised Florey as " the Eugene O 'Neill of the cinema " . A 1929 edition of Movie Makers , the official publication of the Amateur Cinema League , called it a triumph of amateur experimentation and imaginative use of limited resources . In a separate Movie Makers article , Herman G. Weinberg called the scenery " a fantastically beautiful vision of a dream metropolis , done in the expressionistic manner , but done with a fine eye for the camera and the context of the piece " . C. Adolph <unk> , contributing editor for the journal The Arts , called it " a truly tremendous picture " and said Florey could become " the eventual leader of cinematic art " . He added : " It has movement , tempo , form , intensity of feeling , highly dramatic moments ; in short , it is a real motion picture . " In a Film Mercury review , Anabel Lane predicted Florey would " one day hold a position of one of the bigger film directors " , and said of the film : " If this production had been made in Europe and heralded as a hit , it would ... have been called a masterpiece . " One reviewer from Variety even speculated as to whether A Hollywood Extra was " an unannounced foreign @-@ made short " given how similar in style it was to European art films . Film director Henry King praised the film as " way ahead of its time " and " a stroke of genius " , declaring : " It was the most original thought I ever saw " . 
 It has also been acclaimed by modern @-@ day film historians and critics , and has often been included in lists of the most prominent experimental films . Brian Taves called it a " landmark " of avant @-@ garde film , and said : " A Hollywood Extra was something entirely new , in both style and substance ; more than any other American film , it initiated the avant @-@ garde in this country . " Film historian William Moritz called it " a genuine little masterpiece " , and " perhaps the most famous American experimental film of the 1920s " . Hye Seung Chung , a film professor at Colorado State University , called the film an " early American avant @-@ garde masterpiece " and described Florey as " one of the most <unk> neglected B film auteurs " . David E. James called it the " prototypical 20th @-@ century avant @-@ garde film " , and wrote that A Hollywood Extra 's successful commercial distribution indicates experimental films were acceptable among a popular audience during its time period , " rather than only an elite or mandarin audience " . Director and author Lewis Jacobs wrote : " Its style , broad and impressionistic , disclosed a remarkable sensitivity and resourcefulness in the use of props , painting , camera , and editing . " 
 The entirety of the original A Hollywood Extra has not survived . In 1997 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . The film has been restored and released on two DVD collections : Unseen Cinema : Early American Avant Garde Film 1894 – 1941 , by Image Entertainment , and Avant @-@ Garde : Experimental Cinema of the 1920s and 1930s , by Kino International . In 1996 , the BFI commissioned composer David <unk> to write a score for the film . It and first performed by the Matrix Ensemble , conducted by Robert Ziegler . The work , called Hollywood Extra , is scored for eight musicians and was published by Universal Edition . 
 = = Remake = = 
 The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra was adapted into a remake called Hollywood Boulevard ( 1936 ) , which was co @-@ written and directed by Florey . Like in the original film , the remake 's central character is an actor seeking a job in Hollywood , who is subjected to the cruelties of the film industry and the whims of studio executives and film producers . Hollywood Boulevard also includes some visual similarities to the original film , such as unusual angles to reflect the disordered nature of Hollywood . However , the remake includes several subplots that lengthen the running time of the film and make it more attractive to mass audiences , which Brian Taves said " tend ( s ) to diminish the importance of the central characterization , depriving Hollywood Boulevard of the singleness of purpose that made A Hollywood Extra so unforgettable " . 
 = Global warming = 
 Global warming and climate change are terms for the observed century @-@ scale rise in the average temperature of the Earth 's climate system and its related effects . Multiple lines of scientific evidence show that the climate system is warming . Although the increase of near @-@ surface atmospheric temperature is the measure of global warming often reported in the popular press , most of the additional energy stored in the climate system since 1970 has gone into ocean warming . The remainder has melted ice and warmed the continents and atmosphere . Many of the observed changes since the 1950s are unprecedented over tens to thousands of years . 
 Scientific understanding of global warming is increasing . The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) reported in 2014 that scientists were more than 95 % certain that global warming is mostly being caused by human ( anthropogenic ) activities , mainly increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . Human @-@ made carbon dioxide continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years : currently , about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans and remains in the atmosphere . Climate model projections summarized in the report indicated that during the 21st century the global surface temperature is likely to rise a further 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 7 ° C ( 0 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 1 ° F ) for their lowest emissions scenario using stringent mitigation and 2 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 8 ° C ( 4 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 6 ° F ) for their highest . These findings have been recognized by the national science academies of the major industrialized nations and are not disputed by any scientific body of national or international standing . 
 Future climate change and associated impacts will differ from region to region around the globe . Anticipated effects include warming global temperature , rising sea levels , changing precipitation , and expansion of deserts in the subtropics . Warming is expected to be greater over land than over the oceans and greatest in the Arctic , with the continuing retreat of glaciers , permafrost and sea ice . Other likely changes include more frequent extreme weather events including heat waves , droughts , heavy rainfall with floods and heavy snowfall ; ocean acidification ; and species extinctions due to shifting temperature regimes . Effects significant to humans include the threat to food security from decreasing crop yields and the abandonment of populated areas due to rising sea levels . Because the climate system has a large " inertia " and CO2 will stay in the atmosphere for a long time , many of these effects will not only exist for decades or centuries , but will persist for tens of thousands of years . 
 Possible societal responses to global warming include mitigation by emissions reduction , adaptation to its effects , building systems resilient to its effects , and possible future climate engineering . Most countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) , whose ultimate objective is to prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change . The UNFCCC have adopted a range of policies designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to assist in adaptation to global warming . Parties to the UNFCCC had agreed that deep cuts in emissions are required and as first target the future global warming should be limited to below 2 @.@ 0 ° C ( 3 @.@ 6 ° F ) relative to the pre @-@ industrial level , while the Paris Agreement of 2015 stated that the parties will also " pursue efforts to " limit the temperature increase to 1 @.@ 5 ° F ( 0 @.@ 8 ° C ) . 
 Public reactions to global warming and general fears of its effects are also steadily on the rise , with a global 2015 Pew Research Center report showing a median of 54 % who consider it " a very serious problem " . There are , however , significant regional differences . Notably , Americans and Chinese , whose economies are responsible for the greatest annual CO2 emissions , are among the least concerned . 
 = = Observed temperature changes = = 
 The global average ( land and ocean ) surface temperature shows a warming of 0 @.@ 85 [ 0 @.@ 65 to 1 @.@ 06 ] ° C in the period 1880 to 2012 , based on multiple independently produced datasets . Earth 's average surface temperature rose by 0 @.@ 74 ± 0 @.@ 18 ° C over the period 1906 – 2005 . The rate of warming almost doubled for the last half of that period ( 0 @.@ 13 ± 0 @.@ 03 ° C per decade , versus 0 @.@ 07 ± 0 @.@ 02 ° C per decade ) . 
 The average temperature of the lower troposphere has increased between 0 @.@ 13 and 0 @.@ 22 ° C ( 0 @.@ 23 and 0 @.@ 40 ° F ) per decade since 1979 , according to satellite temperature measurements . Climate proxies show the temperature to have been relatively stable over the one or two thousand years before 1850 , with regionally varying fluctuations such as the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age . 
 The warming that is evident in the instrumental temperature record is consistent with a wide range of observations , as documented by many independent scientific groups . Examples include sea level rise , widespread melting of snow and land ice , increased heat content of the oceans , increased humidity , and the earlier timing of spring events , e.g. , the flowering of plants . The probability that these changes could have occurred by chance is virtually zero . 
 = = = Trends = = = 
 Temperature changes vary over the globe . Since 1979 , land temperatures have increased about twice as fast as ocean temperatures ( 0 @.@ 25 ° C per decade against 0 @.@ 13 ° C per decade ) . Ocean temperatures increase more slowly than land temperatures because of the larger effective heat capacity of the oceans and because the ocean loses more heat by evaporation . Since the beginning of industrialisation the temperature difference between the hemispheres has increased due to melting of sea ice and snow in the North . Average arctic temperatures have been increasing at almost twice the rate of the rest of the world in the past 100 years ; however arctic temperatures are also highly variable . Although more greenhouse gases are emitted in the Northern than Southern Hemisphere this does not contribute to the difference in warming because the major greenhouse gases persist long enough to mix between hemispheres . 
 The thermal inertia of the oceans and slow responses of other indirect effects mean that climate can take centuries or longer to adjust to changes in forcing . Climate commitment studies indicate that even if greenhouse gases were stabilized at year 2000 levels , a further warming of about 0 @.@ 5 ° C ( 0 @.@ 9 ° F ) would still occur . 
 Global temperature is subject to short @-@ term fluctuations that overlay long @-@ term trends and can temporarily mask them . The relative stability in surface temperature from 2002 to 2009 , which has been dubbed the global warming hiatus by the media and some scientists , is consistent with such an episode . 2015 updates to account for differing methods of measuring ocean surface temperature measurements show a positive trend over the recent decade . 
 = = = <unk> years = = = 
 15 of the top 16 warmest years have occurred since 2000 . While record @-@ breaking years can attract considerable public interest , individual years are less significant than the overall trend . So some climatologists have criticized the attention that the popular press gives to " warmest year " statistics ; for example , Gavin Schmidt stated " the long @-@ term trends or the expected sequence of records are far more important than whether any single year is a record or not . " 
 2015 was not only the warmest year on record , it broke the record by the largest margin by which the record has been broken . 2015 was the 39th consecutive year with above @-@ average temperatures . Ocean oscillations like El Niño Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) can affect global average temperatures , for example , 1998 temperatures were significantly enhanced by strong El Niño conditions . 1998 remained the warmest year until 2005 and 2010 and the temperature of both of these years was enhanced by El Niño periods . The large margin by which 2015 is the warmest year is also attributed to another strong El Niño . However , 2014 was ENSO neutral . According to NOAA and NASA , 2015 had the warmest respective months on record for 10 out of the 12 months . The average temperature around the globe was 1 @.@ 62 ˚ F ( 0 @.@ 90 ˚ C ) or 20 % above the twentieth century average . In a first , December 2015 was also the first month to ever reach a temperature 2 degrees Fahrenheit above normal for the planet . 
 = = Initial causes of temperature changes ( external forcings ) = = 
 The climate system can warm or cool in response to changes in external forcings . These are " external " to the climate system but not necessarily external to Earth . Examples of external forcings include changes in atmospheric composition ( e.g. , increased concentrations of greenhouse gases ) , solar luminosity , volcanic eruptions , and variations in Earth 's orbit around the Sun . 
 = = = Greenhouse gases = = = 
 The greenhouse effect is the process by which absorption and emission of infrared radiation by gases in a planet 's atmosphere warm its lower atmosphere and surface . It was proposed by Joseph Fourier in 1824 , discovered in 1860 by John Tyndall , was first investigated quantitatively by Svante Arrhenius in 1896 , and was developed in the 1930s through 1960s by Guy Stewart Callendar . 
 On Earth , naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases cause air temperature near the surface to be about 33 ° C ( 59 ° F ) warmer than it would be in their absence . Without the Earth 's atmosphere , the Earth 's average temperature would be well below the freezing temperature of water . The major greenhouse gases are water vapor , which causes about 36 – 70 % of the greenhouse effect ; carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) , which causes 9 – 26 % ; methane ( CH4 ) , which causes 4 – 9 % ; and ozone ( O3 ) , which causes 3 – 7 % . Clouds also affect the radiation balance through cloud forcings similar to greenhouse gases . 
 Human activity since the Industrial Revolution has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , leading to increased radiative forcing from CO2 , methane , tropospheric ozone , CFCs and nitrous oxide . According to work published in 2007 , the concentrations of CO2 and methane have increased by 36 % and 148 % respectively since 1750 . These levels are much higher than at any time during the last 800 @,@ 000 years , the period for which reliable data has been extracted from ice cores . Less direct geological evidence indicates that CO2 values higher than this were last seen about 20 million years ago . 
 Fossil fuel burning has produced about three @-@ quarters of the increase in CO2 from human activity over the past 20 years . The rest of this increase is caused mostly by changes in land @-@ use , particularly deforestation . Another significant non @-@ fuel source of anthropogenic CO2 emissions is the <unk> of limestone for clinker production , a chemical process which releases CO2 . Estimates of global CO2 emissions in 2011 from fossil fuel combustion , including cement production and gas flaring , was 34 @.@ 8 billion tonnes ( 9 @.@ 5 ± 0 @.@ 5 <unk> ) , an increase of 54 % above emissions in 1990 . Coal burning was responsible for 43 % of the total emissions , oil 34 % , gas 18 % , cement 4 @.@ 9 % and gas flaring 0 @.@ 7 % 
 In May 2013 , it was reported that readings for CO2 taken at the world 's primary benchmark site in Mauna Loa surpassed 400 ppm . According to professor Brian Hoskins , this is likely the first time CO2 levels have been this high for about 4 @.@ 5 million years . Monthly global CO2 concentrations exceeded 400 ppm in March 2015 , probably for the first time in several million years . On 12 November 2015 , NASA scientists reported that human @-@ made carbon dioxide continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years : currently , about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans and remains in the atmosphere . 
 Over the last three decades of the twentieth century , gross domestic product per capita and population growth were the main drivers of increases in greenhouse gas emissions . CO2 emissions are continuing to rise due to the burning of fossil fuels and land @-@ use change . Emissions can be attributed to different regions . Attributions of emissions due to land @-@ use change are subject to considerable uncertainty . 
 Emissions scenarios , estimates of changes in future emission levels of greenhouse gases , have been projected that depend upon uncertain economic , sociological , technological , and natural developments . In most scenarios , emissions continue to rise over the century , while in a few , emissions are reduced . Fossil fuel reserves are abundant , and will not limit carbon emissions in the 21st century . Emission scenarios , combined with modelling of the carbon cycle , have been used to produce estimates of how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future . Using the six IPCC <unk> " marker " scenarios , models suggest that by the year 2100 , the atmospheric concentration of CO2 could range between 541 and 970 ppm . This is 90 – 250 % above the concentration in the year 1750 . 
 The popular media and the public often confuse global warming with ozone depletion , i.e. , the destruction of stratospheric ozone ( e.g. , the ozone layer ) by chlorofluorocarbons . Although there are a few areas of linkage , the relationship between the two is not strong . Reduced stratospheric ozone has had a slight cooling influence on surface temperatures , while increased tropospheric ozone has had a somewhat larger warming effect . 
 = = = Aerosols and soot = = = 
 Global dimming , a gradual reduction in the amount of global direct irradiance at the Earth 's surface , was observed from 1961 until at least 1990 . Solid and liquid particles known as aerosols , produced by volcanoes and human @-@ made pollutants , are thought to be the main cause of this dimming . They exert a cooling effect by increasing the reflection of incoming sunlight . The effects of the products of fossil fuel combustion – CO2 and aerosols – have partially offset one another in recent decades , so that net warming has been due to the increase in non @-@ CO2 greenhouse gases such as methane . Radiative forcing due to aerosols is temporally limited due to the processes that remove aerosols from the atmosphere . Removal by clouds and precipitation gives tropospheric aerosols an atmospheric lifetime of only about a week , while stratospheric aerosols can remain for a few years . Carbon dioxide has a lifetime of a century or more , and as such , changes in aerosols will only delay climate changes due to carbon dioxide . Black carbon is second only to carbon dioxide for its contribution to global warming . 
 In addition to their direct effect by scattering and absorbing solar radiation , aerosols have indirect effects on the Earth 's radiation budget . Sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and thus lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets . These clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets , a phenomenon known as the Twomey effect . This effect also causes droplets to be of more uniform size , which reduces growth of raindrops and makes the cloud more reflective to incoming sunlight , known as the Albrecht effect . Indirect effects are most noticeable in marine stratiform clouds , and have very little radiative effect on convective clouds . Indirect effects of aerosols represent the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing . 
 <unk> may either cool or warm Earth 's climate system , depending on whether it is airborne or deposited . Atmospheric soot directly absorbs solar radiation , which heats the atmosphere and cools the surface . In isolated areas with high soot production , such as rural India , as much as 50 % of surface warming due to greenhouse gases may be masked by atmospheric brown clouds . When deposited , especially on glaciers or on ice in arctic regions , the lower surface albedo can also directly heat the surface . The influences of atmospheric particles , including black carbon , are most pronounced in the tropics and sub @-@ tropics , particularly in Asia , while the effects of greenhouse gases are dominant in the <unk> and southern hemisphere . 
 = = = Solar activity = = = 
 Since 1978 , solar irradiance has been measured by satellites . These measurements indicate that the Sun 's radiative output has not increased since 1978 , so the warming during the past 30 years cannot be attributed to an increase in solar energy reaching the Earth . 
 Climate models have been used to examine the role of the Sun in recent climate change . Models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when they only take into account variations in solar output and volcanic activity . Models are , however , able to simulate the observed 20th century changes in temperature when they include all of the most important external forcings , including human influences and natural forcings . 
 Another line of evidence against solar variations having caused recent climate change comes from looking at how temperatures at different levels in the Earth 's atmosphere have changed . Models and observations show that greenhouse warming results in warming of the lower atmosphere ( the troposphere ) but cooling of the upper atmosphere ( the stratosphere ) . Depletion of the ozone layer by chemical refrigerants has also resulted in a strong cooling effect in the stratosphere . If solar variations were responsible for observed warming , warming of both the troposphere and stratosphere would be expected . 
 = = = Variations in Earth 's orbit = = = 
 The tilt of the Earth ’ s axis and the shape of its orbit around the Sun vary slowly over tens of thousands of years and are a natural source of climate change , by changing the seasonal and latitudinal distribution of solar insolation . 
 During the last few thousand years , this phenomenon contributed to a slow cooling trend at high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere during summer , a trend that was reversed by greenhouse @-@ gas @-@ induced warming during the 20th century . 
 Variations in orbital cycles may initiate a new glacial period in the future , though the timing of this depends on greenhouse gas concentrations as well as the orbital forcing . A new glacial period is not expected within the next 50 @,@ 000 years if atmospheric CO2 concentration remains above 300 ppm . 
 = = Feedback = = 
 The climate system includes a range of feedbacks , which alter the response of the system to changes in external forcings . Positive feedbacks increase the response of the climate system to an initial forcing , while negative feedbacks reduce it . 
 There are a range of feedbacks in the climate system , including water vapor , changes in ice @-@ albedo ( snow and ice cover affect how much the Earth 's surface absorbs or reflects incoming sunlight ) , clouds , and changes in the Earth 's carbon cycle ( e.g. , the release of carbon from soil ) . The main negative feedback is the energy the Earth 's surface radiates into space as infrared radiation . According to the Stefan @-@ Boltzmann law , if the absolute temperature ( as measured in kelvin ) doubles , radiated energy increases by a factor of 16 ( 2 to the 4th power ) . 
 <unk> are an important factor in determining the sensitivity of the climate system to increased atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations . Other factors being equal , a higher climate sensitivity means that more warming will occur for a given increase in greenhouse gas forcing . Uncertainty over the effect of feedbacks is a major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given forcing scenario . More research is needed to understand the role of clouds and carbon cycle feedbacks in climate projections . 
 The IPCC projections previously mentioned span the " likely " range ( greater than 66 % probability , based on expert judgement ) for the selected emissions scenarios . However , the IPCC 's projections do not reflect the full range of uncertainty . The lower end of the " likely " range appears to be better constrained than the upper end . 
 = = Climate models = = 
 A climate model is a representation of the physical , chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system . Such models are based on scientific disciplines such as fluid dynamics and thermodynamics as well as physical processes such as radiative transfer . The models may be used to predict a range of variables such as local air movement , temperature , clouds , and other atmospheric properties ; ocean temperature , salt content , and circulation ; ice cover on land and sea ; the transfer of heat and moisture from soil and vegetation to the atmosphere ; and chemical and biological processes , among others . 
 Although researchers attempt to include as many processes as possible , simplifications of the actual climate system are inevitable because of the constraints of available computer power and limitations in knowledge of the climate system . Results from models can also vary due to different greenhouse gas inputs and the model 's climate sensitivity . For example , the uncertainty in IPCC 's 2007 projections is caused by ( 1 ) the use of multiple models with differing sensitivity to greenhouse gas concentrations , ( 2 ) the use of differing estimates of humanity 's future greenhouse gas emissions , ( 3 ) any additional emissions from climate feedbacks that were not included in the models IPCC used to prepare its report , i.e. , greenhouse gas releases from permafrost . 
 The models do not assume the climate will warm due to increasing levels of greenhouse gases . Instead the models predict how greenhouse gases will interact with radiative transfer and other physical processes . Warming or cooling is thus a result , not an assumption , of the models . 
 Clouds and their effects are especially difficult to predict . Improving the models ' representation of clouds is therefore an important topic in current research . Another prominent research topic is expanding and improving representations of the carbon cycle . 
 Models are also used to help investigate the causes of recent climate change by comparing the observed changes to those that the models project from various natural and human causes . Although these models do not unambiguously attribute the warming that occurred from approximately 1910 to 1945 to either natural variation or human effects , they do indicate that the warming since 1970 is dominated by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions . 
 The physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates . Climate models produce a good match to observations of global temperature changes over the last century , but do not simulate all aspects of climate . Not all effects of global warming are accurately predicted by the climate models used by the IPCC . Observed Arctic shrinkage has been faster than that predicted . Precipitation increased proportionally to atmospheric humidity , and hence significantly faster than global climate models predict . Since 1990 , sea level has also risen considerably faster than models predicted it would . 
 = = Observed and expected environmental effects = = 
 Anthropogenic forcing has likely contributed to some of the observed changes , including sea level rise , changes in climate extremes ( such as the number of warm and cold days ) , declines in Arctic sea ice extent , glacier retreat , and greening of the Sahara . 
 During the 21st century , glaciers and snow cover are projected to continue their widespread retreat . Projections of declines in Arctic sea ice vary . Recent projections suggest that Arctic summers could be ice @-@ free ( defined as ice extent less than 1 million square km ) as early as 2025 @-@ 2030 . 
 " Detection " is the process of demonstrating that climate has changed in some defined statistical sense , without providing a reason for that change . Detection does not imply attribution of the detected change to a particular cause . " Attribution " of causes of climate change is the process of establishing the most likely causes for the detected change with some defined level of confidence . Detection and attribution may also be applied to observed changes in physical , ecological and social systems . 
 = = = Extreme weather = = = 
 Changes in regional climate are expected to include greater warming over land , with most warming at high northern latitudes , and least warming over the Southern Ocean and parts of the North Atlantic Ocean . 
 Future changes in precipitation are expected to follow existing trends , with reduced precipitation over subtropical land areas , and increased precipitation at subpolar latitudes and some equatorial regions . Projections suggest a probable increase in the frequency and severity of some extreme weather events , such as heat waves . 
 A 2015 study published in Nature Climate Change , states : 
 Data analysis of extreme events from 1960 till 2010 suggests that droughts and heat waves appear simultaneously with increased frequency . Extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased since 1980 . 
 = = = Sea level rise = = = 
 The sea level rise since 1993 has been estimated to have been on average 2 @.@ 6 mm and 2 @.@ 9 mm per year ± 0 @.@ 4 mm . Additionally , sea level rise has accelerated from 1995 to 2015 . Over the 21st century , the IPCC projects for a high emissions scenario , that global mean sea level could rise by 52 – 98 cm . The IPCC 's projections are conservative , and may underestimate future sea level rise . Other estimates suggest that for the same period , global mean sea level could rise by 0 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 0 m ( 0 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , relative to mean sea level in 1992 . 
 Widespread coastal flooding would be expected if several degrees of warming is sustained for millennia . For example , sustained global warming of more than 2 ° C ( relative to pre @-@ industrial levels ) could lead to eventual sea level rise of around 1 to 4 m due to thermal expansion of sea water and the melting of glaciers and small ice caps . Melting of the Greenland ice sheet could contribute an additional 4 to 7 @.@ 5 m over many thousands of years . It has been estimated that we are already committed to a sea @-@ level rise of approximately 2 @.@ 3 meters for each degree of temperature rise within the next 2 @,@ 000 years . 
 Warming beyond the 2 ° C target would potentially lead to rates of sea @-@ level rise dominated by ice loss from Antarctica . Continued CO2 emissions from fossil sources could cause additional tens of meters of sea level rise , over the next millennia and eventually ultimately eliminate the entire Antarctic ice sheet , causing about 58 meters of sea level rise . 
 = = = Ecological systems = = = 
 In terrestrial ecosystems , the earlier timing of spring events , as well as poleward and upward shifts in plant and animal ranges , have been linked with high confidence to recent warming . Future climate change is expected to affect particular ecosystems , including tundra , mangroves , and coral reefs . It is expected that most ecosystems will be affected by higher atmospheric CO2 levels , combined with higher global temperatures . Overall , it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species and reduced diversity of ecosystems . 
 Increases in atmospheric CO2 concentrations have led to an increase in ocean acidity . Dissolved CO2 increases ocean acidity , measured by lower pH values . Between 1750 and 2000 , surface @-@ ocean pH has decreased by ≈ 0 @.@ 1 , from ≈ 8 @.@ 2 to ≈ 8 @.@ 1 . Surface @-@ ocean pH has probably not been below ≈ 8 @.@ 1 during the past 2 million years . Projections suggest that surface @-@ ocean pH could decrease by an additional 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 units by 2100 . Future ocean acidification could threaten coral reefs , fisheries , protected species , and other natural resources of value to society . 
 Ocean <unk> is projected to increase hypoxia by 10 % , and triple <unk> waters ( oxygen concentrations 98 % less than the mean surface concentrations ) , for each 1 ° C of upper ocean warming . 
 = = = Long @-@ term effects = = = 
 On the timescale of centuries to millennia , the magnitude of global warming will be determined primarily by anthropogenic CO2 emissions . This is due to carbon dioxide 's very long lifetime in the atmosphere . 
 Stabilizing the global average temperature would require large reductions in CO2 emissions , as well as reductions in emissions of other greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide . Emissions of CO2 would need to be reduced by more than 80 % relative to their peak level . Even if this were achieved , global average temperatures would remain close to their highest level for many centuries . 
 Long @-@ term effects also include a response from the Earth 's crust , due to ice melting and deglaciation , in a process called post @-@ glacial rebound , when land masses are no longer depressed by the weight of ice . This could lead to landslides and increased seismic and volcanic activities . <unk> could be generated by submarine landslides caused by warmer ocean water thawing ocean @-@ floor permafrost or releasing gas hydrates . Some world regions , such as the French Alps , already show signs of an increase in landslide frequency . 
 = = = Large @-@ scale and abrupt impacts = = = 
 Climate change could result in global , large @-@ scale changes in natural and social systems . Examples include the possibility for the Atlantic <unk> <unk> Circulation to <unk> or shutdown , which in the instance of a shutdown would change weather in Europe and North America considerably , ocean acidification caused by increased atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide , and the long @-@ term melting of ice sheets , which contributes to sea level rise . 
 Some large @-@ scale changes could occur abruptly , i.e. , over a short time period , and might also be irreversible . Examples of abrupt climate change are the rapid release of methane and carbon dioxide from permafrost , which would lead to amplified global warming , or the shutdown of thermohaline circulation . Scientific understanding of abrupt climate change is generally poor . The probability of abrupt change for some climate related feedbacks may be low . Factors that may increase the probability of abrupt climate change include higher magnitudes of global warming , warming that occurs more rapidly , and warming that is sustained over longer time periods . 
 = = Observed and expected effects on social systems = = 
 The effects of climate change on human systems , mostly due to warming or shifts in precipitation patterns , or both , have been detected worldwide . Production of wheat and maize globally has been impacted by climate change . While crop production has increased in some mid @-@ latitude regions such as the UK and Northeast China , economic losses due to extreme weather events have increased globally . There has been a shift from <unk> to heat @-@ related mortality in some regions as a result of warming . <unk> of indigenous peoples of the Arctic have been altered by climate change , and there is emerging evidence of climate change impacts on livelihoods of indigenous peoples in other regions . Regional impacts of climate change are now observable at more locations than before , on all continents and across ocean regions . 
 The future social impacts of climate change will be uneven . Many risks are expected to increase with higher magnitudes of global warming . All regions are at risk of experiencing negative impacts . Low @-@ latitude , less developed areas face the greatest risk . A study from 2015 concluded that economic growth ( gross domestic product ) of poorer countries is much more impaired with projected future climate warming , than previously thought . 
 A meta @-@ analysis of 56 studies concluded in 2014 that each degree of temperature rise will increase violence by up to 20 % , which includes fist fights , violent crimes , civil unrest or wars . 
 Examples of impacts include : 
 Food : Crop production will probably be negatively affected in low latitude countries , while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative . Global warming of around 4 @.@ 6 ° C relative to pre @-@ industrial levels could pose a large risk to global and regional food security . 
 Health : Generally impacts will be more negative than positive . Impacts include : the effects of extreme weather , leading to injury and loss of life ; and indirect effects , such as <unk> brought on by crop failures . 
 = = = Habitat inundation = = = 
 In small islands and mega deltas , inundation as a result of sea level rise is expected to threaten vital infrastructure and human settlements . This could lead to issues of homelessness in countries with low @-@ lying areas such as Bangladesh , as well as <unk> for populations in countries such as the Maldives and Tuvalu . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Estimates based on the IPCC <unk> emission scenario from additional CO2 and CH4 greenhouse gases released from permafrost , estimate associated impact damages by US $ 43 trillion . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 Continued permafrost degradation will likely result in unstable infrastructure in Arctic regions , or Alaska before 2100 . Thus , impacting roads , pipelines and buildings , as well as water distribution , and cause slope failures . 
 = = Possible responses to global warming = = 
 = = = Mitigation = = = 
 Mitigation of climate change are actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , or enhance the capacity of carbon sinks to absorb <unk> from the atmosphere . There is a large potential for future reductions in emissions by a combination of activities , including : energy conservation and increased energy efficiency ; the use of low @-@ carbon energy technologies , such as renewable energy , nuclear energy , and carbon capture and storage ; and enhancing carbon sinks through , for example , reforestation and preventing deforestation . A 2015 report by Citibank concluded that transitioning to a low carbon economy would yield positive return on investments . 
 <unk> and long @-@ term trends in the global energy system are inconsistent with limiting global warming at below 1 @.@ 5 or 2 ° C , relative to pre @-@ industrial levels . Pledges made as part of the Cancún agreements are broadly consistent with having a likely chance ( 66 to 100 % probability ) of limiting global warming ( in the 21st century ) at below 3 ° C , relative to pre @-@ industrial levels . 
 In limiting warming at below 2 ° C , more stringent emission reductions in the near @-@ term would allow for less rapid reductions after 2030 . Many integrated models are unable to meet the 2 ° C target if pessimistic assumptions are made about the availability of mitigation technologies . 
 = = = Adaptation = = = 
 Other policy responses include adaptation to climate change . Adaptation to climate change may be planned , either in reaction to or anticipation of climate change , or spontaneous , i.e. , without government intervention . Planned adaptation is already occurring on a limited basis . The barriers , limits , and costs of future adaptation are not fully understood . 
 A concept related to adaptation is adaptive capacity , which is the ability of a system ( human , natural or managed ) to adjust to climate change ( including climate variability and extremes ) to moderate potential damages , to take advantage of opportunities , or to cope with consequences . <unk> climate change ( i.e. , future climate change without efforts to limit greenhouse gas emissions ) would , in the long term , be likely to exceed the capacity of natural , managed and human systems to adapt . 
 Environmental organizations and public figures have emphasized changes in the climate and the risks they entail , while promoting adaptation to changes in infrastructural needs and emissions reductions . 
 = = = Climate engineering = = = 
 Climate engineering ( sometimes called geoengineering or climate intervention ) is the deliberate modification of the climate . It has been investigated as a possible response to global warming , e.g. by NASA and the Royal Society . Techniques under research fall generally into the categories solar radiation management and carbon dioxide removal , although various other schemes have been suggested . A study from 2014 investigated the most common climate engineering methods and concluded they are either ineffective or have potentially severe side effects and cannot be stopped without causing rapid climate change . 
 = = Discourse about global warming = = 
 = = = Political discussion = = = 
 Most countries in the world are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) . The ultimate objective of the Convention is to prevent dangerous human interference of the climate system . As stated in the Convention , this requires that GHG concentrations are stabilized in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change , food production is not threatened , and economic development can proceed in a sustainable fashion . The Framework Convention was agreed in 1992 , but since then , global emissions have risen . 
 During negotiations , the <unk> ( a lobbying group in the United Nations representing 133 developing nations ) pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to " [ take ] the lead " in reducing their emissions . This was justified on the basis that : the developed world 's emissions had contributed most to the cumulation of <unk> in the atmosphere ; per @-@ capita emissions ( i.e. , emissions per head of population ) were still relatively low in developing countries ; and the emissions of developing countries would grow to meet their development needs . 
 This mandate was sustained in the Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention , which entered into legal effect in 2005 . In ratifying the Kyoto Protocol , most developed countries accepted legally binding commitments to limit their emissions . These first @-@ round commitments expired in 2012 . United States President George W. Bush rejected the treaty on the basis that " it exempts 80 % of the world , including major population centers such as China and India , from compliance , and would cause serious harm to the US economy . " 
 At the 15th UNFCCC Conference of the Parties , held in 2009 at Copenhagen , several UNFCCC Parties produced the Copenhagen Accord . Parties associated with the Accord ( 140 countries , as of November 2010 ) aim to limit the future increase in global mean temperature to below 2 ° C. The 16th Conference of the Parties ( <unk> ) was held at Cancún in 2010 . It produced an agreement , not a binding treaty , that the Parties should take urgent action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet a goal of limiting global warming to 2 ° C above pre @-@ industrial temperatures . It also recognized the need to consider strengthening the goal to a global average rise of 1 @.@ 5 ° C. 
 = = = Scientific discussion = = = 
 There is continuing discussion through published peer @-@ reviewed scientific papers , which are assessed by scientists working in the relevant fields taking part in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . The scientific consensus as of 2013 stated in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report is that it " is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid @-@ 20th century " . A 2008 report by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences stated that most scientists by then agreed that observed warming in recent decades was primarily caused by human activities increasing the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere . In 2005 the Royal Society stated that while the overwhelming majority of scientists were in agreement on the main points , some individuals and organisations opposed to the consensus on urgent action needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have tried to undermine the science and work of the IPCC . National science academies have called on world leaders for policies to cut global emissions . 
 In the scientific literature , there is a strong consensus that global surface temperatures have increased in recent decades and that the trend is caused mainly by human @-@ induced emissions of greenhouse gases . No scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view . 
 = = = Discussion by the public and in popular media = = = 
 The global warming controversy refers to a variety of disputes , substantially more pronounced in the popular media than in the scientific literature , regarding the nature , causes , and consequences of global warming . The disputed issues include the causes of increased global average air temperature , especially since the mid @-@ 20th century , whether this warming trend is unprecedented or within normal climatic variations , whether humankind has contributed significantly to it , and whether the increase is completely or partially an artifact of poor measurements . Additional disputes concern estimates of climate sensitivity , predictions of additional warming , and what the consequences of global warming will be . 
 From 1990 to 1997 , right @-@ wing conservative think tanks in the United States mobilized to challenge the legitimacy of global warming as a social problem . They challenged the scientific evidence , argued that global warming will have benefits , and asserted that proposed solutions would do more harm than good . Some people dispute aspects of climate change science . Organizations such as the libertarian Competitive Enterprise Institute , conservative commentators , and some companies such as ExxonMobil have challenged IPCC climate change scenarios , funded scientists who disagree with the scientific consensus , and provided their own projections of the economic cost of stricter controls . On the other hand , some fossil fuel companies have scaled back their efforts in recent years , or even called for policies to reduce global warming . Global oil companies have begun to acknowledge climate change exists and is caused by human activities and the burning of fossil fuels . 
 = = = = Surveys of public opinion = = = = 
 The world public , or at least people in economically advanced regions , became broadly aware of the global warming problem in the late 1980s . Polling groups began to track opinions on the subject , at first mainly in the United States . The longest consistent polling , by Gallup in the US , found relatively small deviations of 10 % or so from 1998 to 2015 in opinion on the seriousness of global warming , but with increasing polarization between those concerned and those unconcerned . 
 The first major worldwide poll , conducted by Gallup in 2008 @-@ 2009 in 127 countries , found that some 62 % of people worldwide said they knew about global warming . In the advanced countries of North America , Europe and Japan , 90 % or more knew about it ( 97 % in the U.S. , 99 % in Japan ) ; in less developed countries , especially in Africa , fewer than a quarter knew about it , although many had noticed local weather changes . Among those who knew about global warming , there was a wide variation between nations in belief that the warming was a result of human activities . 
 By 2010 , with 111 countries surveyed , Gallup determined that there was a substantial decrease since 2007 – 08 in the number of Americans and Europeans who viewed global warming as a serious threat . In the US , just a little over half the population ( 53 % ) now viewed it as a serious concern for either themselves or their families ; this was 10 points below the 2008 poll ( 63 % ) . Latin America had the biggest rise in concern : 73 % said global warming is a serious threat to their families . This global poll also found that people are more likely to attribute global warming to human activities than to natural causes , except in the US where nearly half ( 47 % ) of the population attributed global warming to natural causes . 
 A March – May 2013 survey by Pew Research Center for the People & the Press polled 39 countries about global threats . According to 54 % of those questioned , global warming featured top of the perceived global threats . In a January 2013 survey , Pew found that 69 % of Americans say there is solid evidence that the Earth 's average temperature has got warmer over the past few decades , up six points since November 2011 and 12 points since 2009 . 
 A 2010 survey of 14 industrialized countries found that skepticism about the danger of global warming was highest in Australia , Norway , New Zealand and the United States , in that order , correlating positively with per capita emissions of carbon dioxide . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In the 1950s , research suggested increasing temperatures , and a 1952 newspaper reported " climate change " . This phrase next appeared in a November 1957 report in The Hammond Times which described Roger Revelle 's research into the effects of increasing human @-@ caused CO2 emissions on the greenhouse effect , " a large scale global warming , with radical climate changes may result " . Both phrases were only used occasionally until 1975 , when Wallace Smith Broecker published a scientific paper on the topic ; " Climatic Change : Are We on the Brink of a Pronounced Global Warming ? " The phrase began to come into common use , and in 1976 Mikhail Budyko 's statement that " a global warming up has started " was widely reported . Other studies , such as a 1971 MIT report , referred to the human impact as " inadvertent climate modification " , but an influential 1979 National Academy of Sciences study headed by Jule Charney followed Broecker in using global warming for rising surface temperatures , while describing the wider effects of increased CO2 as climate change . 
 In 1986 and November 1987 , NASA climate scientist James Hansen gave testimony to Congress on global warming . There were increasing heatwaves and drought problems in the summer of 1988 , and when Hansen testified in the Senate on 23 June he sparked worldwide interest . He said : " global warming has reached a level such that we can ascribe with a high degree of confidence a cause and effect relationship between the greenhouse effect and the observed warming . " Public attention increased over the summer , and global warming became the dominant popular term , commonly used both by the press and in public discourse . 
 In a 2008 NASA article on usage , Erik M. Conway defined Global warming as " the increase in Earth ’ s average surface temperature due to rising levels of greenhouse gases " , while Climate change was " a long @-@ term change in the Earth ’ s climate , or of a region on Earth . " As effects such as changing patterns of rainfall and rising sea levels would probably have more impact than temperatures alone , he considered global climate change a more scientifically accurate term , and like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , the NASA website would emphasise this wider context . 
 = HD 209458 b = 
 HD 209458 b ( sometimes unofficially called Osiris ) is an exoplanet that orbits the solar analog HD 209458 in the constellation Pegasus , some 150 light @-@ years from the Solar System . The radius of the planet 's orbit is 7 million kilometres , about 0 @.@ 047 astronomical units , or one eighth the radius of Mercury 's orbit . This small radius results in a year that is 3 @.@ 5 Earth days long and an estimated surface temperature of about 1 @,@ 000 ° C ( about 1 @,@ 800 ° F ) . Its mass is 220 times that of Earth ( 0 @.@ 69 Jupiter masses ) and its volume is some 2 @.@ 5 times greater than that of Jupiter . The high mass and volume of HD 209458 b indicate that it is a gas giant . 
 HD 209458 b represents a number of milestones in <unk> research . It was the first of many categories : 
 a transiting extrasolar planet 
 the first planet detected through more than one method 
 an extrasolar planet known to have an atmosphere 
 an extrasolar planet observed to have an evaporating hydrogen atmosphere 
 an extrasolar planet found to have an atmosphere containing oxygen and carbon 
 one of the first two extrasolar planets to be directly observed spectroscopically 
 the first extrasolar gas giant to have its superstorm measured 
 the first planet to have its orbital speed measured , determining its mass directly . 
 Based on the application of new , theoretical models , as of April 2007 , it is alleged to be the first extrasolar planet found to have water vapor in its atmosphere . 
 In July , 2014 , NASA announced finding very dry atmospheres on HD 209458 b and two other exoplanets ( HD 189733 b and WASP @-@ <unk> ) orbiting Sun @-@ like stars . 
 = = Detection and discovery = = 
 = = = Transits = = = 
 Spectroscopic studies first revealed the presence of a planet around HD 209458 on November 5 , 1999 . Astronomers had made careful photometric measurements of several stars known to be orbited by planets , in the hope that they might observe a dip in brightness caused by the transit of the planet across the star 's face . This would require the planet 's orbit to be inclined such that it would pass between the Earth and the star , and previously no transits had been detected . 
 Soon after the discovery , separate teams , one led by David Charbonneau including Timothy Brown and others , and the other by Gregory W. Henry , were able to detect a transit of the planet across the surface of the star making it the first known transiting extrasolar planet . On September 9 and 16 , 1999 , Charbonneau 's team measured a 1 @.@ 7 % drop in HD 209458 's brightness , which was attributed to the passage of the planet across the star . On November 8 , Henry 's team observed a partial transit , seeing only the ingress . Initially unsure of their results , the Henry group decided to rush their results to publication after overhearing rumors that Charbonneau had successfully seen an entire transit in September . Papers from both teams were published simultaneously in the same issue of the Astrophysical Journal . Each transit lasts about three hours , during which the planet covers about 1 @.@ 5 % of the star 's face . 
 The star had been observed many times by the Hipparcos satellite , which allowed astronomers to calculate the orbital period of HD 209458 b very accurately at 3 @.@ <unk> days . 
 = = = Spectroscopic = = = 
 Spectroscopic analysis had shown that the planet had a mass about 0 @.@ 69 times that of Jupiter . The occurrence of transits allowed astronomers to calculate the planet 's radius , which had not been possible for any previously known exoplanet , and it turned out to have a radius some 35 % larger than Jupiter 's . 
 = = = Direct detection = = = 
 On March 22 , 2005 , NASA released news that infrared light from the planet had been measured by the Spitzer Space Telescope , the first ever direct detection of light from an extrasolar planet . This was done by subtracting the parent star 's constant light and noting the difference as the planet transited in front of the star and was eclipsed behind it , providing a measure of the light from the planet itself . New measurements from this observation determined the planet 's temperature as at least 750 ° C ( 1300 ° F ) . The circular orbit of HD 209458 b was also confirmed . 
 = = = Spectral observation = = = 
 On February 21 , 2007 , NASA and Nature released news that HD 209458 b was one of the first two extrasolar planets to have their spectra directly observed , the other one being HD 189733 b . This was long seen as the first mechanism by which extrasolar but non @-@ sentient life forms could be searched for , by way of influence on a planet 's atmosphere . A group of investigators led by Jeremy Richardson of NASA 's Goddard Space Flight Center spectrally measured HD 209458 b 's atmosphere in the range of 7 @.@ 5 to 13 @.@ 2 micrometres . The results defied theoretical expectations in several ways . The spectrum had been predicted to have a peak at 10 micrometres which would have indicated water vapor in the atmosphere , but such a peak was absent , indicating no detectable water vapor . Another unpredicted peak was observed at 9 @.@ 65 micrometres , which the investigators attributed to clouds of silicate dust , a phenomenon not previously observed . Another unpredicted peak occurred at 7 @.@ 78 micrometres , which the investigators did not have an explanation for . A separate team led by Mark Swain of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory reanalyzed the Richardson et al. data , and had not yet published their results when the Richardson et al. article came out , but made similar findings . 
 On 23 June 2010 , astronomers announced they have measured a superstorm ( with windspeeds of up to 7000 km / h ) for the first time in the atmosphere of HD 209458 b . The very high @-@ precision observations done by ESO ’ s Very Large Telescope and its powerful <unk> spectrograph of carbon monoxide gas show that it is streaming at enormous speed from the extremely hot day side to the cooler night side of the planet . The observations also allow another exciting " first " — measuring the orbital speed of the exoplanet itself , providing a direct determination of its mass . 
 = = Rotation = = 
 As of August 2008 , the most recent calculation of HD 209458 b 's Rossiter – McLaughlin effect and hence spin – orbit angle is − 4 @.@ 4 ± 1 @.@ 4 ° . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 It had been previously hypothesized that hot Jupiters particularly close to their parent star should exhibit this kind of inflation due to intense heating of their outer atmosphere . Tidal heating due to its orbit 's eccentricity , which may have been more eccentric at formation , may also have played a role over the past billion years . 
 = = = Stratosphere and upper clouds = = = 
 The atmosphere is at a pressure of one bar at an altitude of 1 @.@ 29 Jupiter radii above the planet 's center . 
 Where the pressure is 33 ± 5 millibars , the atmosphere is clear ( probably hydrogen ) and its Rayleigh effect is detectable . At that pressure the temperature is 2200 ± 260 K. 
 Observations by the orbiting <unk> and Oscillations of <unk> telescope initially limited the planet 's albedo ( or reflectivity ) below 0 @.@ 3 , making it a surprisingly dark object . ( The geometric albedo has since been measured to be 0 @.@ 038 ± 0 @.@ 045 . ) In comparison , Jupiter has a much higher albedo of 0 @.@ 52 . This would suggest that HD 209458 b 's upper cloud deck is either made of less reflective material than is Jupiter 's , or else has no clouds and Rayleigh @-@ scatters incoming radiation like Earth 's dark ocean . Models since then have shown that between the top of its atmosphere and the hot , high pressure gas surrounding the mantle , there exists a stratosphere of cooler gas . This implies an outer shell of dark , opaque , hot cloud ; usually thought to consist of vanadium and titanium oxides like red dwarfs ( " <unk> planets " ) , but other compounds like tholins cannot be ruled out yet . The Rayleigh @-@ scattering heated hydrogen rests at the top of the stratosphere ; the absorptive portion of the cloud deck floats above it at 25 millibars . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Surrounding that level , on November 27 , 2001 the Hubble Space Telescope detected sodium , the first planetary atmosphere outside the Solar System to be measured . This detection was predicted by Sara Seager in late 2001 . The core of the sodium line runs from pressures of 50 millibar to a <unk> . This turns out to be about a third the amount of sodium at HD 189733 b . 
 In 2003 – 4 , astronomers used the Hubble Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph to discover an enormous ellipsoidal envelope of hydrogen , carbon and oxygen around the planet that reaches 10 @,@ 000 K. The hydrogen exosphere extends to a distance RH = 3 @.@ 1 RJ , much larger than the planetary radius of 1 @.@ 32 RJ . At this temperature and distance , the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution of particle velocities gives rise to a significant ' tail ' of atoms moving at speeds greater than the escape velocity . The planet is estimated to be losing about 100 – 500 million ( 1 – 5 × 108 ) kg of hydrogen per second . Analysis of the starlight passing through the envelope shows that the heavier carbon and oxygen atoms are being blown from the planet by the extreme " hydrodynamic drag " created by its evaporating hydrogen atmosphere . The hydrogen tail streaming from the planet is approximately 200 @,@ 000 kilometres long , which is roughly equivalent to its diameter . 
 It is thought that this type of atmosphere loss may be common to all planets orbiting Sun @-@ like stars closer than around 0 @.@ 1 AU . HD 209458 b will not evaporate entirely , although it may have lost up to about 7 % of its mass over its estimated lifetime of 5 billion years . It may be possible that the planet 's magnetic field may prevent this loss , because the exosphere would become ionized by the star , and the magnetic field would contain the ions from loss . 
 = = = Presumed atmospheric water vapor = = = 
 On April 10 , 2007 , Travis Barman of the Lowell Observatory announced evidence that the atmosphere of HD 209458 b contained water vapor . Using a combination of previously published Hubble Space Telescope measurements and new theoretical models , Barman found strong evidence for water absorption in the planet 's atmosphere . His method modeled light passing directly through the atmosphere from the planet 's star as the planet passed in front of it . However , this hypothesis is still being investigated for confirmation . 
 Barman drew on data and measurements taken by Heather Knutson , a student at Harvard University , from the Hubble Space Telescope , and applied new theoretical models to demonstrate the likelihood of water absorption in the atmosphere of the planet . The planet orbits its parent star every three and a half days , and each time it passes in front of its parent star , the atmospheric contents can be analyzed by examining how the atmosphere absorbs light passing from the star directly through the atmosphere in the direction of Earth . 
 According to a summary of the research , atmospheric water absorption in such an exoplanet renders it larger in appearance across one part of the infrared spectrum , compared to wavelengths in the visible spectrum . Barman took Knutson 's Hubble data on HD 209458 b , applied to his theoretical model , and allegedly identified water absorption in the planet 's atmosphere . 
 On April 24 , the astronomer David Charbonneau , who led the team that made the Hubble observations , cautioned that the telescope itself may have introduced variations that caused the theoretical model to suggest the presence of water . He hoped that further observations would clear the matter up in the following months . As of April 2007 , further investigation is being conducted . 
 On October 20 , 2009 , researchers at JPL announced the discovery of water vapor , carbon dioxide , and methane in the atmosphere . 
 = = Magnetic field = = 
 In 2014 , a magnetic field around HD 209458 b was inferred from the way hydrogen was evaporating from the planet . It is the first ( indirect ) detection of a magnetic field on an exoplanet . The magnetic field is estimated to be about one tenth as strong as Jupiter 's . 
 = Budapest Gambit = 
 The Budapest Gambit ( or Budapest Defence ) is a chess opening that begins with the moves : 
 1 @.@ d4 Nf6 
 2 @.@ c4 e5 
 Despite an early debut in 1896 , the Budapest Gambit received attention from leading players only after a win as Black by Grandmaster Milan Vidmar over Akiba Rubinstein in 1918 . [ 1 ] It enjoyed a rise in popularity in the early 1920s , but nowadays is rarely played at the top level . It experiences a lower percentage of draws than other main lines , but also a lower overall performance for Black . 
 After 3.dxe5 Black can try the Fajarowicz variation 3 ... Ne4 which concentrates on the rapid development of the pieces , but the most common move is 3 ... Ng4 with three main possibilities for White . The Adler variation 4.Nf3 sees White seeking a spatial advantage in the centre with his pieces , notably the important d5 @-@ square . The Alekhine variation 4.e4 gives White an important spatial advantage and a strong pawn centre . The Rubinstein variation 4.Bf4 leads to an important choice for White , after 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + , between 6.Nbd2 and <unk> The reply 6.Nbd2 brings a positional game in which White enjoys the bishop pair and tries to break through on the queenside , while 6.Nc3 keeps the material advantage of a pawn at the cost of a weakening of the white pawn structure . Black usually looks to have an aggressive game ( many lines of which can shock opponents that do not know the theory ) or cripple white 's pawn structure . 
 The Budapest Gambit contains several specific strategic themes . After 3.dxe5 Ng4 , there is a battle over White 's extra pawn on e5 , which Black typically attacks with ... Nc6 and ( after ... Bc5 or ... Bb4 + ) ... Qe7 , while White often defends it with Bf4 , Nf3 , and sometimes Qd5 . In the 4.Nf3 variation the game can evolve either with Black attacking White 's kingside with manoeuvres of rook lifts , or with White attacking Black 's kingside with the push f2 – f4 , in which case Black reacts in the centre against the e3 @-@ pawn . In numerous variations the move c4 – c5 allows White to gain space and to open prospects for his light @-@ square bishop . For Black , the check Bf8 – b4 + often allows rapid development . 
 = = History = = 
 In a Chess Notes feature article , Edward Winter showed that the origins of this opening are not yet entirely elucidated . The first known game with the Budapest Gambit is Adler – Maróczy ( played in Budapest in 1896 ) . This game already featured some key aspects of the gambit , such as active play for the black pieces , and White making the typical mistake of moving the queen too early . As the player of the white pieces was not a strong player , the new opening went unnoticed apart from the local experts who had witnessed the game . The Hungarians István Abonyi , Zsigmond <unk> and Gyula Breyer further developed the opening . Abonyi played it in 1916 against the Dutch surgeon Johannes Esser in a small tournament in Budapest . The Austrian player Josef Emil <unk> played it against Helmer in Vienna in 1917 . Carl Schlechter published an optimistic analysis of the gambit in the Deutsche Schachzeitung . 
 The first use of the opening against a world @-@ class player was at Berlin in April 1918 , a double round @-@ robin tournament with four players : Akiba Rubinstein , Carl Schlechter , Jacques Mieses and Milan Vidmar . Vidmar had to play Black in the first round against Rubinstein , then ranked the fourth best player in the world with a very positional style . At a loss for what to play , he sought advice from his friend Abonyi , who showed him the Budapest Gambit and the main ideas the Hungarian players had found . Vidmar followed Abonyi 's advice and beat Rubinstein convincingly in just 24 moves . This victory so heartened Vidmar that he went on to win the tournament , while Rubinstein was so demoralised by this defeat that he lost another game against Mieses and drew a third one against Schlechter in the same opening . 
 After this tournament , the gambit finally began to be taken seriously . Top players like Savielly Tartakower and Siegbert Tarrasch started to play it . Schlechter published in 1918 the monograph Die <unk> <unk> des <unk> , which can be considered the first book on this opening . The gambit reached its peak of popularity ( around five Budapest Gambits for every thousand games played ) around 1920 , so much so that many White players adopted the move @-@ order 1.d4 Nf6 2.Nf3 to avoid it . 
 The leading exponents of 1.d4 started to look for reliable antidotes . Alexander Alekhine showed how White could get a strong attack with 4.e4 in his games against Ilya Rabinovich ( Baden @-@ Baden 1925 ) and Adolf Seitz ( Hastings 1925 – 26 ) . But a few weeks later a theme tournament on the Budapest Gambit was held , in Budapest , and the result was 14 ½ – 21 ½ in Black 's favor . Another tournament in Semmering the same year saw Alekhine losing to Karl <unk> in his pet line with White against the gambit , so that the e4 @-@ line had a mixed reputation . Meanwhile , more positional plans were also developed for White . Rubinstein showed how White could get a small positional advantage with 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 , an assessment still valid today . The possibility 6.Nc3 was also considered attractive , as structural weaknesses were not valued as much as a material advantage of one pawn in those days . By the end of the 1920s , despite the invention of the highly original Fajarowicz variation 3 ... Ne4 in 1928 , the Budapest Gambit was considered theoretically dubious . 
 This assessment was left unchanged for decades , as few players at the highest level used the Budapest Gambit and information about games from lesser players could not easily be found . During that time , various responses were developed against the 4.Bf4 line ; these included 4 ... g5 , invented by István Abonyi , further developed by the masters <unk> and Drimer . The master <unk> showed that even when White succeeded in his positional plan , it only meant for Black a worse endgame with drawish tendencies . Two pawn sacrifices were also introduced in the variation with 6.Nbd2 ( still in the 4.Bf4 line ) , based on pawn pushes d7 – d6 or f7 – f6 and a quick attack against b2 . 
 The Budapest Gambit saw a short @-@ lived revival in 1984 – 85 when Chess Informant included three games ( as many as in the previous fifteen years ) , all played at a high level of competition , and all won by Black . But White players found reinforcements and even invented a line with 4.e3 and <unk> In the 21st century , despite <unk> Mamedyarov 's successful efforts to rehabilitate the line 4.Bf4 g5 , the Budapest Gambit almost never appears at the highest level . , however Richard Rapport with black defeated Gelfand using the opening in round 2 of the 2014 Tata Steel Chess competition . 
 = = Performance = = 
 In the database of the website <unk> , the Budapest Gambit scores 28 @.@ 9 % Black wins , 44 @.@ 1 % White wins and 27 @.@ 1 % draws . The percentage of draws is especially low compared to mainstream alternatives such as 2 ... e6 ( 43 @.@ 7 % draws ) or 2 ... g6 ( 37 % draws ) . This opening gives more chance to win for both opponents , although the percentage of Black wins is still lower than the alternative 2 ... c5 . In the main line 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 the percentage of Black wins already falls to 21 @.@ 1 % , lower than the main lines after 2 ... e6 or 2 ... g6 . 
 The Budapest Gambit has never been widely used as Black by the top @-@ ten chessplayers . Richard Réti used it five times in the period 1919 – 26 when he was among the ten best players in the world , but he scored only 1 ½ points . Savielly Tartakower used it four times in 1928 when he was the eighth @-@ best player in the world , including thrice in one tournament ( Bad Kissingen 1928 ) but he scored only ½ point against world @-@ class opposition : Bogoljubov then ranked number four in the world , Capablanca ranked number two , and Rubinstein ranked number seven . Rudolf Spielmann used it thrice in 1922 – 23 when he was about number 9 – 12 in the world , with a win against Euwe but defeats against Yates and Sämisch . Nigel Short played the gambit twice in the years 1992 – 93 when he was number 7 – 11 , scoring only ½ points against Karpov ( then ranked number two ) and Ivanchuk ( then ranked number three ) . Recently , Mamedyarov used it twice in 2004 ( scoring 1 ½ with a win against Van Wely ) when he was not already among the top @-@ players , and six times in 2008 when he was about number 6 – 14 ; he scored five points with wins against former world champion Kramnik ( then ranked number three ) , and grandmasters <unk> and <unk> , but all six games took place in rapid or blitz events . 
 Nicolas Giffard summarises the modern assessment of the Budapest Gambit : 
 [ It is ] an old opening , seldom used by champions without having fallen in disgrace . While White has several methods to get a small advantage , this defence is strategically sound . Black gets a good pawn structure and possibilities of attack on the kingside . His problems generally come from the white pressure on the d @-@ column and a lack of space to manoeuvre his pieces . 
 Boris <unk> writes , " The Budapest Gambit is almost a respectable opening ; I doubt there is a refutation . Even in the lines where White manages to keep an extra pawn , Black always has a lot of play for it . " 
 = = Strategic and tactical themes = = 
 = = = White builds up an imposing pawn centre = = = 
 In the Alekhine variation White does not try to defend his e5 @-@ pawn and keep his material advantage , but instead he concentrates on building an imposing pawn centre . This brings him good prospects of a space advantage that may serve as a basis for a future attack on the kingside . However , the extended pawn centre has its drawbacks , as Lalic explains : " White must invest some valuable tempi in protecting his pawn structure , which allows Black to seize the best squares for his minor pieces with excellent prospects for counterplay against the white centre . " 
 Hence in this variation Black lets White build his pawn centre only to undermine it later , a playing philosophy espoused in the teachings of the <unk> school . The strategic themes are similar to the ones that can be found in other openings like the Four Pawns Attack , the Alekhine Defence or the Grünfeld Defence . 
 = = = Budapest rook = = = 
 The " Budapest rook " is a manoeuvre , introduced by the IM Dolfi Drimer in 1968 , with which Black develops the a8 rook aggressively along the sixth rank using the moves a7 – a5 and the rook lift Ra8 – a6 – h6 . For example , this can happen in the Adler variation after the move sequence 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Nf3 Bc5 5.e3 Nc6 6.Be2 Ngxe5 7.Nxe5 Nxe5 8.a3 a5 9 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 0 @-@ 0 10.Nc3 Ra6 <unk> Rh6 . 
 The rook is then used to support a piece attack against White 's castled King . Black can easily get several pieces around the white king , notably a rook to h6 , a queen to h4 and a knight on g4 . The queen 's arrival on the h4 @-@ square is facilitated by the absence of a white knight on the f3 @-@ square ( that would otherwise cover the h4 @-@ square ) and of a black knight on the f6 @-@ square ( that would block the way for the black queen ) . If White tries to defend with h2 – h3 , this may allow the Bc8 to be sacrificed at h3 in order to open the h @-@ file . 
 The Bc5 may not seem particularly useful in this attack , but by eyeing e3 it makes it difficult for White to play f4 to chase away the black knight ; furthermore , the attack on e3 is sometimes intensified with major pieces doubling on the e @-@ file . Besides , the Bc5 can sometimes be recycled to the b8 – h2 diagonal via Bc5 – a7 – b8 , to apply still more pressure on h2 . It can also stay on the a7 – g1 diagonal to put pressure on f2 , if White pushes e3 – e4 at some stage . 
 The " Budapest rook " was an invigorating innovation of the 1980s , and gave the gambit new life . However , inconveniences arise from delaying d7 – d6 in order to allow the lift : the light @-@ square bishop has to wait a long time to develop , and any attack on the Bc5 is potentially annoying for Black ( since it means either closing the sixth rank with ... d6 / ... b6 , abandoning the active a7 – g1 diagonal , or blocking the rook when deployed to a7 ) . This , in addition to the risk of awkwardness in the king side ( a knight on f5 will fork the Rh6 and the Qh4 ) and the single @-@ mindedness of Black 's plan ( with nothing to fall back on if the direct attack is repelled ) , has made some revisit the old lines , where it is instead the king 's rook that is developed to h6 . The queen 's rook can then be retained on the queenside , and will be well @-@ placed if the b @-@ file opens as a result of Black 's Bc5 being exchanged and recaptured with a b6 pawn . 
 = = = Advantages of ... Bb4 + = = = 
 In most variations Black has the opportunity to play Bb4 + , a move whose advisability depends on White 's possible answers . If White blocks the check with Nb1 – c3 then Black should capture the knight only if White is forced to take back with the pawn , after which the isolated , doubled pawns are a positional advantage for Black that fully compensates the loss of the bishop pair , and even the <unk> pawn . Due to its immunity to pawn attacks , the c5 @-@ square may be used by Black as a stronghold for his pieces . Piece exchanges can be good for Black even if he is a pawn down , as he can hope to exploit the crippled pawn structure in the ending . On the other hand , if White can recapture with a piece , the trade on c3 typically concedes the bishop pair for insufficient compensation . 
 If White is compelled to play Nb1 – d2 , it is sometimes a minuscule positional concession , as it makes it harder for this knight to reach its ideal square d5 . However , if Black is later compelled to exchange Bxd2 , that is advantageous to White who thereby gains the bishop pair . Besides , in some situations the Bb4 could be as misplaced as the Nd2 . Finally , if White has to play <unk> , then Black should exchange the bishops only if White is forced to recapture with the Nb1 , as a recapture by the Qd1 would still allow the Nb1 to reach the d5 @-@ square through Nb1 – c3 – d5 . 
 For example in the Alekhine variation , after 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.e4 Nxe5 5.f4 Ng6 6.Nf3 , the move 6 ... Bb4 + ( see diagram at right ) is good because White has no good reply apart from <unk> Indeed , <unk> ? just loses a pawn after 7 ... Nxf4 whereas <unk> ? ! Qe7 ! causes White great problems : both the pawn f4 and e4 pawns are attacked , and <unk> Qxb4 + results in a double attack against b2 and f4 . After 7.Nc3 Black can either answer with 7 ... Bxc3 + 8.bxc3 or with 7 ... Qf6 , simultaneously attacking c3 and f4 . 
 = = = Pressure against the e4 @-@ square and the e3 @-@ pawn = = = 
 In the Adler variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Nf3 , after White has moved f2 – f4 , the e3 @-@ pawn becomes a backward pawn on an open file . Black can then apply pressure on the e @-@ file in general , against the e3 @-@ pawn and the e4 @-@ square in particular . Typical moves in this plan would include the manoeuvre Ne5 – d7 – f6 , followed by putting the heavy pieces on the e @-@ file with Rf8 – <unk> and Qd8 – e7 ( see diagram at right ) . The Bc5 is already well placed to pressure the e3 @-@ pawn . Depending on circumstances , the Bc8 may be involved either on b7 or on f5 , in both cases to assert control over the central e4 @-@ square . 
 This plan is viable only if certain conditions are met . The d7 @-@ square must be available for the Ne5 , so that it can later transfer to f6 . White should also not be able to easily advance the e3 @-@ pawn to e4 , where it would be adequately defended by the Nc3 and a possible <unk> . Finally , White should not have the time to launch a quick attack on Black 's castled position with the pawn thrust f4 – f5 – f6 . 
 = = = Breakthrough with the c4 – c5 push = = = 
 In the main lines the pawn push c4 – c5 often brings positional gains to White . In the Rubinstein variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Bf4 with 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.a3 , after 7 ... Ngxe5 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 9.e3 Bxd2 + 10.Qxd2 ( see diagram at right ) White gets the bishop pair and a space advantage . In order to build up on these potential advantages , the most common plan is to perform a minority attack on the queenside , with the goal of performing the pawn advance c4 – c5 in favourable conditions . This push can yield several advantages to White : it enhances the prospects of the light @-@ square bishop , it creates a half @-@ open file to attack with the rooks , and it creates an isolated , backward pawn on d6 after the exchange <unk> . 
 For example , in the diagram on the right , after the natural but mistaken 10 ... 0 @-@ 0 ? ! White can immediately realise his strategic goal with 11.c5 ! Then if Black accepts the temporary sacrifice after 11 ... Qxc5 <unk> <unk> <unk> cxd6 <unk> White gets his pawn back and has created a weak pawn in d7 , while if Black declines the pawn he has difficulties in developing his queenside ( for example 11 ... d6 might be followed by <unk> Qxd6 <unk> cxd6 and the pawn on d6 is weak ) . Therefore Black generally tries to hinder the c4 – c5 push with moves like d7 – d6 , b7 – b6 or Rf8 – <unk> ( if this creates a hidden vis @-@ à @-@ vis between the Rd8 and the Qd2 ) . 
 Similarly , in the Rubinstein variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Bf4 with 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nc3 , after 6 ... Bxc3 + 7.bxc3 White is saddled with doubled pawns in c3 and c4 that limit the scope of his bishop pair . Hence the push c4 – c5 can be used to free the light @-@ squared bishop and disrupt Black 's position . 
 In the Adler variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Nf3 , after 4 ... Bc5 5.e3 Nc6 6.Be2 0 @-@ 0 7 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Re8 8.Nc3 Ngxe5 9.b3 a5 10.Bb2 Nxf3 + Bxf3 Ne5 <unk> Ra6 <unk> Qe7 <unk> Ba7 White has good reasons to push <unk> This move would close the diagonal of the Ba7 . It would make it harder for Black to develop the Bc8 as pawn pushes like b7 – b6 or d7 – d6 may be answered respectively by <unk> or cxd6 , creating a weak pawn for Black . Also , the prospects of the Be2 would be enhanced . 
 = = = Kieninger Trap = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.a3 Ngxe5 8.axb4 Nd3 # 
 The Kieninger Trap is named after Georg Kieninger who used it in an offhand game against Godai at Vienna in 1925 . It occurs in the Rubinstein variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Bf4 with 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 Qe7 <unk> The Bb4 is attacked but Black does not have to move it for the moment , and instead both regains the gambit pawn and sets a trap with 7 ... Ngxe5 ( see diagram at right ) . Superficially , White seems to win a piece with 8.axb4 ? ? , but that would be falling into the Kieninger Trap because it would allow 8 ... Nd3 mate ; even after the exchange 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 , the threat of ... Nd3 mate remains and indirectly defends the Bb4 from capture . 
 A rare variant has also occurred in a miniature in the Fajarowicz variation , after the moves 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ne4 4.Qc2 Bb4 + 5.Nd2 d5 6.exd6 Bf5 <unk> + Nc6 8.a3 Nc5 <unk> Qe7 ! when White , trying to save his queen , fell into 10.Qd1 Nd3 mate . 
 = = Adler variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Nf3 = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Nf3 
 The Adler variation is named after the game Adler – Maróczy , played at the 1896 Budapest tournament . White is ready to return the e5 @-@ pawn in order to develop his pieces on their best squares , i.e. the d5 @-@ square for the Nb1 , the f3 @-@ square for the Ng1 and the a1 – h8 diagonal for the Bc1 . 
 Black can try the minor line 4 ... Nc6 that delays the development of its dark @-@ square bishop , to develop it along the a1 – h8 diagonal instead of the a3 – f8 diagonal , depending on the circumstances . But the main line is 4 ... Bc5 to attack the f2 @-@ pawn , forcing 5.e3 , blocking in White 's bishop on c1 , so that after 5 ... Nc6 White will not have enough pieces to protect his e5 @-@ pawn in the long run . Placing the bishop on the c5 @-@ square also has subtler points , as Tseitlin explains : 
 At first sight the bishop on c5 lacks prospects , being held at bay by the pawn on e3 , and is insecure in view of the threat to exchange it by Nc3 – a4 / e4 . In reality , posting the bishop here has a deep strategic significance . It holds up the advance of the <unk> and the f @-@ pawns ( assuming the white bishop will go to b2 ) , and thereby secures e5 as a future knight outpost , which in turn restricts the activity of both White 's bishops . As to the exchanging threat , the bishop may conveniently retreat on a7 or f8 , or even in some cases remain on c5 with support from a pawn on b6 . 
 An important theoretical decision for White is to choose whether to play a2 – a3 . While this move protects the b4 square and threatens the pawn advance b2 – b4 , it encourages Black 's rook lift Ra8 – a6 – h6 . As Lalic puts it : 
 It was not so long ago that 8.a3 , with the obvious intention of expanding with b2 – b4 , was the standard move . However , after Black responds with the logical a7 – a5 , it became apparent in tournament practice that the inclusion of these moves is in fact in Black 's favour , as it gives his queen 's rook access into play via the a6 @-@ square . 
 = = = Line 4 ... Bc5 with a2 – a3 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Nf3 Bc5 5.e3 Nc6 6.a3 
 The opinion of the move 6.a3 has gradually shifted from being the main continuation to being a possible continuation , then down to its present status of being considered a mistake . The threat to push b2 – b4 must be taken seriously by Black , who typically answers 6 ... a5 . But in the 1980s it was discovered that the push a7 – a5 was actually a very useful one for Black , as it allows the Ra8 to be developed along the sixth rank . Meanwhile , the push a2 – a3 is less useful for White , as he will not be able to easily push b2 – b4 . As Tseitlin puts it , " the point is that 6 ... a5 fits into the plan of attacking White 's kingside , whereas 6.a3 does little in the way of defending it " . Thus if White does not find a clear way to make good use of his move a2 – a3 , it may turn out to be a critical waste of tempo . 
 After the topical moves <unk> 0 @-@ 0 <unk> Re8 9.Nc3 Ngxe5 <unk> Nxe5 11.Be2 Black has regained the invested pawn . White has a space advantage in the centre and can initiate pressure here or on the queenside by pawn pushes like b3 – b4 and c4 – c5 ( possibly supported by a knight on the d5 @-@ square ) . Meanwhile , the white king lacks defenders so Black can start a pieces @-@ driven attack with the rook lift 11 ... Ra6 ( see section " Budapest rook " ) . The stem game continued with <unk> Rh6 <unk> d6 <unk> Bf5 <unk> dxc5 and Black won in 26 moves . To avoid such an unfavourable development , White players have changed the move @-@ order to keep the Bc1 on its original square as long as possible , so that it can help the defence . Thus , the typical move @-@ order became <unk> 0 @-@ 0 8.Nc3 Re8 9.Be2 Ngxe5 <unk> Nxe5 11 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 when 11 ... Ra6 would be met with <unk> Rh6 <unk> immediately attacking the <unk> rook . So Black usually opts for 11 ... d6 , forgetting about the Ra8 – a6 – h6 manoeuvre . After <unk> ECO considers the situation as favourable to White , but Tseitlin thinks Black still has a lot of possibilities ( e.g. the other rook lift Re8 – e6 – h6 ) , so that " the struggle still lies ahead " . 
 = = = Line 4 ... Bc5 without a2 – a3 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Nf3 Bc5 5.e3 Nc6 
 By refraining from the advance a2 @-@ a3 White tries to gain a tempo on the lines of the previous section , making it more difficult for Black to initiate the Re8 – e6 – h6 or Ra8 – a6 – h6 lifts . After the moves 6.Be2 0 @-@ 0 7 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Re8 8.Nc3 Ngxe5 <unk> Nxe5 White has tried two different plans . 
 The older one sees White attack in the centre with moves like b2 – b3 , Bc1 – b2 , Qd1 – d5 , Nc3 – e4 and c4 – c5 . White gets an important space advantage in the centre , but Black can attack the kingside with rook lifts . After <unk> a5 White can try to capture the Bc5 with 11.Na4 or <unk> , one point being that the retreat 11 ... Ba7 would lock the Ra8 because Black has not played Ra8 – a6 already . Lalic still thinks 11 ... Ba7 is the right move after <unk> due to the importance of the a7 – g1 diagonal , but Black can also reroute the bishop with 11 ... Bf8 and " White has no obvious path to even a minute advantage " . After 11.Na4 Black can also simply react by 11 ... b6 when the loss of the bishop pair is compensated by the semi @-@ open b @-@ file and improved control of the central squares . Tseitlin considers that after the exchange on c5 Black has the better position . Hence the main continuation is <unk> , keeping the knight jumps for later . Then the most common plan for Black is a rook lift : the plan Ra8 – a6 – h6 was tried in the much @-@ commented game Åkesson – <unk> ( Berlin Open 1984 ) . Black duly won , but after the game continuation 11 ... Ra6 <unk> ! Qe7 <unk> Ba7 <unk> Rg6 <unk> <unk> <unk> authors do not agree on which side had the advantage . Borik and Tseitlin both consider White to have a positional advantage , with Tseitlin recommending instead 15 ... Nc6 ! , with dangerous threats . However Lalic writes of 15 ... <unk> , " it is true that the bishop pair looks a bit pathetic lined up on the back rank just now , but there is no way to stop them breaking out later " . 
 The second plan for White , unveiled by Spassky in 1990 , aims at a kingside blitzkrieg with moves like <unk> – h1 , f2 – f4 , Be2 – d3 and Qd1 – h5 . In the original game Black did not fathom White 's idea , so that after 10.Kh1 a5 ? ! 11.f4 Nc6 12.Bd3 d6 <unk> ! h6 <unk> Black 's pieces were ill @-@ placed to counter White 's attack . A more principled plan for Black is to react in the centre , specifically targeting the backward e3 @-@ pawn and e4 @-@ square . After 10.Kh1 d6 11.f4 Nd7 ! 12.Bd3 Nf6 <unk> Ng4 <unk> f5 ! and Black has succeeded in inhibiting White 's e3 – e4 expansion . As Black was doing fine with the 11.f4 move @-@ order , White has been searching for a new path with 10.Kh1 d6 11.Na4 ! ? b6 ! <unk> a5 <unk> bxc5 <unk> Nd7 <unk> when Jeremy Silman prefers White . White has even dared the immediate <unk> Nc6 <unk> when it is extremely dangerous for Black to take the offered e3 @-@ pawn , as White gets a fierce kingside attack for free . 
 = = Rubinstein variation 3 ... Ng4 4.Bf4 = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 
 This move sequence is called the " Rubinstein variation " in reference to the famous game Rubinstein – Vidmar ( Berlin 1918 ) when 4.Bf4 was first employed . Various authors consider this move to be the most dangerous for Black . It aims to answer 4 ... Bc5 with 5.e3 without blocking the Bc1 , contrary to what happens in the Adler variation <unk> Another point is that in the Adler variation White faces the risk of a strong attack against his kingside ( see section " Budapest rook " ) , while in the 4.Bf4 variation this is seldom the case because the Bf4 is well placed to protect White 's kingside . On the other hand , the early development of the bishop means that White is more vulnerable to the check Bf8 – b4 + , the b2 @-@ pawn is not defended , and in some rare cases the Bf4 can become subject to attack . 
 Apart from the sideline 4 ... g5 , the main line continues with both players developing their pieces around the e5 @-@ pawn with 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + when White has an important choice between the moves 6.Nc3 and 6.Nbd2 , each leading to extremely different play . With 6.Nc3 White acquiesces to the breakup of his queenside pawns in return for a material advantage of one pawn , the bishop pair and active play in the centre . With 6.Nbd2 White gives back the <unk> pawn to keep a healthy pawn structure and acquire the bishop pair . After 6.Nbd2 Qe7 White generally plays 7.a3 to force the immediate exchange of bishop for knight , gaining the bishop pair , a spatial advantage and chances for a minority attack on the queenside . White can also try 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.e3 to win a tempo over the 7.a3 variation , though he may end up with the exchange at d2 made in less favourable circumstances , or not at all . The maverick gambit 6 ... f6 also exists . 
 = = = Sideline 4 ... g5 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 g5 
 The sideline 4 ... g5 ! ? was not well regarded at the end of the 20th century . It weakens several squares — particularly f5 and h5 — as they cannot be covered by the g @-@ pawn any more . White can try to exploit these weaknesses with the manoeuvres Bf4 – d2 – c3 ( pressure along the diagonal a1 – h8 ) , Ng1 – e2 – g3 – h5 ( pressure against the squares f6 and g7 ) and h2 – h4 ( to open the h @-@ file ) . Nonetheless , the 4 ... g5 line has found new supporters in recent years thanks to black wins against both 5.Bg3 and <unk> 
 For years , the reaction 5.Bg3 was not well considered , because the retreat does not make the most out of Black 's provocative fourth move ; as Tseitlin points out , " the bishop is in danger of staying out of play for a long time " . But later Lalic found that 5.Bg3 was " just as effective " as <unk> Black concentrates on capturing the e5 @-@ pawn while White tries to get an advantage from the weakening of the black kingside . After the typical moves 5 ... Bg7 6.Nf3 Nc6 7.Nc3 Ngxe5 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 9.e3 d6 Lalic considers the best try to be <unk> ! , sacrificing a pawn to weaken Black 's control on the e5 @-@ square and expose the black king further . White has also tried to quickly open the h @-@ file with <unk> Ngxe5 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 9.e3 but after 9 ... g4 ! Black succeeds in keeping the file closed . 
 The alternative to 5.Bg3 is 5.Bd2 to place the bishop on the wide @-@ open diagonal a1 – h8 , after which " White can expect a safe advantage " . Then according to Lalic , delaying the recapture with 5 ... Bg7 6.Bc3 Nc6 7.e3 Ngxe5 is not correct as White can gain an advantage by <unk> or <unk> , so the immediate 5 ... Nxe5 is better . For some time 6.Bc3 was well considered because Black had problems dealing with various positional threats , but the correct way for Black was found in 5 ... Nxe5 6.Bc3 Qe7 7.e3 <unk> ! 8.Nf3 <unk> 9.Be2 d6 <unk> Bd7 <unk> g4 with good counterplay for Black on the kingside . White 's efforts then switched to 6.Nf3 to open the e @-@ file , something that Black cannot really avoid , as 6 ... Bg7 7.Nxe5 Bxe5 8.Bc3 would leave an advantage to White . For example 8 ... Qe7 <unk> Qxe5 10.Nc3 d6 <unk> and Black is at a loss for an equalising line , White 's advantage consisting in his ability to install his knight on the strong d5 @-@ square and to attack the weakened Black 's kingside with the advance h2 – h4 . It is better for Black to continue with 6 ... Nxf3 + <unk> when both 7 ... h5 ? and 7 ... Bg7 would fail to 8.Qe2 + , so Black must try 7 ... d6 8.Qe2 + Be6 instead . 
 = = = Line 6.Nc3 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nc3 
 This is the only important line in the Budapest where Black is not ensured of regaining his sacrificed pawn . Black does best to immediately exchange the Nc3 with 6 ... Bxc3 + 7.bxc3 as otherwise White gets a small positional advantage simply by avoiding the doubled pawns ( see the section " Advantages of ... Bb4 + " ) . Then Black can put pressure on the e5 @-@ pawn with 7 ... Qe7 when White 's only possibility to keep the pawn is <unk> White threatens to ease the pressure with the move h2 – h3 that would force the Ng4 to the unfavourable square h6 , so Black 's only possibilities to sustain the initiative are 8 ... Qa3 and 8 ... f6 . 
 The line 8 ... Qa3 puts pressure on the white queenside pawns , pressure that may later be intensified with Nf6 – e4 . The black queen also gains access to the a5 @-@ square , from where it puts pressure on the e1 – a5 diagonal aimed towards the white king . After <unk> f6 <unk> Nxf6 11.Qd2 d6 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 we reach the position of the famous game between Rubinstein and Vidmar , when Rubinstein erred with <unk> ? and later lost . After the better <unk> the correct method for Black is to target the c4 @-@ pawn with the regrouping Ne5 / Qc5 . Hence Lalic thinks 11.Qd2 is inappropriate and gives Black excellent counterplay , and prefers <unk> or even <unk> ! ? After <unk> 0 @-@ 0 <unk> d6 <unk> Black should switch to a materialistic mode with 13 ... <unk> . 
 In the other line 8 ... f6 Black does not want to decentralise his queen and prefers to concentrate on active piece play in the centre . After <unk> Nxf6 , 10.Qd1 , 10.Qd2 and <unk> are all possible , but each has its drawbacks : on d1 the queen is not developed , on d3 it is exposed to Bc8 – f5 and on d2 it is exposed to Nf6 – e4 . Lalic considers <unk> to be the main move , qualifies 10.Qd1 as a " respectable option " , but considers 10.Qd2 as " inaccurate " . Meanwhile , Black will try to create counterplay by attacking either the weak c4 @-@ pawn , or the kingside with g7 – g5 and h7 – h5 . In both cases a key possibility is the move Nf6 – e4 that <unk> the knight , attacks the weak c3 @-@ pawn , controls the c5 @-@ square and supports the g7 – g5 thrust . 
 = = = Line 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.a3 = = = 
 = = = = On the way till 10 ... d6 = = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.a3 
 The Bb4 is attacked but Black can play 7 ... Ngxe5 to get the <unk> pawn back , as 8.axb4 ? ? would allow the Kieninger trap 8 ... Nd3 mate ( see the section " Kieninger trap " ) . Now White is more or less forced to exchange a pair of knights with 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 . White still cannot win a piece with <unk> ? ? Nd3 # or <unk> ? ! Bxd2 + 10.Qxd2 Qxe5 , so he usually plays 9.e3 in order to protect the c4 @-@ pawn and defuse the mating threat , so that now Black is obliged to move his Bb4 . As 9 ... Bd6 would <unk> the bishop and 9 ... Ba5 ? ? would lose the bishop to <unk> Bb6 11.c5 , Black usually plays 9 ... Bxd2 + <unk> 
 After 10.Qxd2 , Tseitlin explains that " opening manuals assess this position as favourable to White on the basis of the bishop pair . However , considering the closed nature of the position , White faces substantial difficulties in the realisation of this nominal advantage . " Black has not a lot of things to be proud of as there are no targets in White 's camp , but can put up a lot of resistance thanks to small assets . Black 's Ne5 is strongly centralised , attacks the c4 @-@ pawn , and restricts the Bf1 from moving to the natural squares d3 and f3 . Moreover , exchanging the knight with Bxe5 is not appealing for White , since that would mean losing the advantage of the bishop pair . Also , the Bc8 can sometimes become better than its counterpart the Bf1 , if it makes it to the good squares b7 or c6 while the Bf1 remains restricted by the Ne5 . 
 This explains the most natural plans for both sides . White will try a minority attack on the queenside , in order to increase its space advantage and to create some weaknesses in the black pawns ( e.g. an isolated pawn or a backward pawn ) . So White will try to use the advances b2 – b4 or c4 – c5 in good conditions , supported by the queen and the rooks on the c @-@ file and the d @-@ file . On the other hand , Black will try to keep the position closed , most importantly by keeping the c4 @-@ pawn where it is in order to keep the Bf1 at bay . This can be achieved by moves like b7 – b6 and d7 – d6 , and sometimes the manoeuvre Ne5 – d7 – f8 – e6 . The first move by Black has to be 10 ... d6 ! because otherwise White plays 11.c5 ! and gets a clear advantage immediately . For example 10 ... b6 ? loses a pawn to <unk> Nc6 <unk> , and 10 ... 0 @-@ 0 ? ! is bad because of 11.c5 ! Qxc5 ? <unk> Qe7 <unk> and White is winning already . 
 International Master Timothy Taylor has suggested an alternative for Black on move 9 . He regards 9 ... Bxd2 + as inferior , arguing that " the strong black bishop is traded for the inoffensive knight , and white gets the long @-@ term advantage of the two bishops in a semi @-@ open game " . Taylor instead advocates 9 ... Bc5 , when Black stands well after <unk> Bd4 ! ( <unk> ? ? Nd3 # ) <unk> d6 <unk> Bf5 <unk> Ng6 <unk> ( <unk> Nxf4 <unk> ? <unk> + wins ; <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 16.g3 Bc2 ! wins material ) Bf6 ; <unk> Ng6 ; <unk> Bd6 ; or 10.Be2 d6 . 
 = = = = Battle for the push c4 – c5 = = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.a3 Ngxe5 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 9.e3 Bxd2 + 10.Qxd2 d6 
 After 10 ... d6 ! White can try ( and has tried ) about any move that supports the aforementioned plan . In particular , White has to choose if he wants to start active operations on the queenside immediately ( e.g. Rc1 , <unk> , c5 ) , or if he wants to finish his development first ( with Be2 and 0 @-@ 0 ) . The immediate 11.c5 ! ? is a possible pawn sacrifice in order to open some diagonals for the bishops . As Lalic points out , " after 11 ... dxc5 Black 's knight on e5 has lost its support and therefore all tactical motifs based on Qd5 and Bb5 + must be carefully checked " . White gets a powerful attack for his pawn but nothing decisive . The same idea can be tried with the preparatory 11.Rc1 , and after 11 ... 0 @-@ 0 12.c5 ! ? dxc5 <unk> Ng6 <unk> White should be reminded that he has not finished his development with 14 ... Qf6 ! and a counter @-@ attack on the b2 @-@ pawn . Playing Black , Svidler chose a different path with 11 ... b6 but his opponent <unk> nevertheless sacrificed the pawn with 12.c5 ! bxc5 13.b4 0 @-@ 0 <unk> Bb7 15.f3 and <unk> chose to destroy his own pawn structure with 15 ... dxc5 ! ? to activate his pieces and make use of the d @-@ file . The most popular move is 11.Be2 , where White delays his queenside play until he has achieved castling . It also gives Black more time to organise a defence on the queenside with b7 – b6 , either now or after 11 ... 0 @-@ 0 . 
 = = = Line 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.e3 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 Qe7 7.e3 
 In this variation White tries to avoid the move a2 – a3 in order to gain a tempo over the 7.a3 variation . After the standard moves 7 ... Ngxe5 8.Nxe5 Nxe5 9.Be2 followed by 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 it is Black 's last chance to exchange the Bb4 for the Nd2 . The game will take an entirely different structure depending on whether Black gives up the bishop pair or tries to keep it . 
 Lalic thinks the strategies in which Black gives up the bishop pair ( by exchanging its Bb4 for the Nd2 ) for nothing are a mistake . He does not like the strategy to retreat the Bb4 in d6 either , because they are too drawish . He recommends the strategy to retreat the bishop in c5 , and maintain its position there with the help of the a7 – a5 pawn advance . 
 = = = = Black gives up the bishop pair = = = = 
 When Black opts for 10 ... Bxd2 , he runs the risk to end up a tempo down over the 7.a3 variation and to be soon unable to meet White 's positional threats on the queenside . White can avoid the push a2 – a3 and continue with the standard plans of the 7.a3 variation . However , everything is not that bad for Black . First , to implement his plan White has to concentrate on development ( 9.Be2 , 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 ) before he turns his attention to the queenside . That means Black has more time to organise his play than in the 7.a3 variation , notably to attempt a blockade of the c5 @-@ square . Moreover , as White does not put immediate pressure on Black 's position , Black is not compelled to castle rapidly and he can keep his king in the centre for a longer time , or even castle queenside . Hence Lalic note that " White has not wasted time with a2 – a3 , but in fact it is not so easy to capitalise on this extra tempo . " 
 A possibility for Black is to develop his light @-@ square bishop rapidly , by prioritising the moves b7 – b6 and Bc8 – b7 over castling and d7 – d6 . The game <unk> – <unk> ( Leningrad 1990 ) continued with 9 ... b6 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Bxd2 <unk> Bb7 12.c5 bxc5 <unk> d6 <unk> dxe5 <unk> and Moskalenko assesses this position as better for White ; Lalic suggests that 13 ... Ng6 is an improvement . In the game Gausel – <unk> ( Norwegian Team Championship 1991 ) , after the same 9.Be2 b6 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Bxd2 <unk> Bb7 Black introduced a highly original plan by avoiding the natural advance d7 – d6 , and instead blocked a white c5 @-@ push by playing ... c5 himself . The game continued <unk> f6 13.b4 c5 ! ? and Lalic was " deeply impressed by this plan , which really spoils all of White 's fun " . The c4 @-@ pawn is never allowed to advance , so that the Be2 is <unk> restricted . The Bf4 is obstructed by the Ne5 , that cannot be easily removed . The weakness of the d7 @-@ pawn is not a worry as it can be protected by Bb7 – c6 if necessary . 
 = = = = Black keeps the bishop pair = = = = 
 After 9.Be2 0 @-@ 0 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 Black can avoid the immediate exchange of his Bb4 against the Nd2 in several ways . The first one , resurrected and elaborated by the grandmaster Pavel <unk> , is to exchange the Bb4 for the Bf4 . This can be achieved via 10 ... Ng6 <unk> ( <unk> ? ? d6 loses a piece ) 11 ... Bd6 <unk> Qxd6 . White still has possibilities to play for an advantage due to his more advanced development , his space advantage on the queenside and the possibility to install his knight on the good square d5 . Taylor considers this Black 's best line , stating that Black has not given White the bishop pair , nor weakened his pawn structure , and should be able to gradually equalize . 
 The other possibility for Black is to keep his Bb4 as long as possible , exchanging it against the white knight only in favourable circumstances . A couple of attempts have been done with this in mind , with subtle variations along the moves a7 – a5 , b7 – b6 and d7 – d6 . Against the mundane 10 ... d6 White can continue with 11.Nb3 ( see diagram at right ) to play on the queenside against the exposed Bb4 , or <unk> to recycle the knight on the ideal d5 @-@ square . Another idea is the immediate 10 ... a5 , to have the d6 @-@ square for the bishop , inhibit the b2 – b4 push and have the possible a5 – a4 pawn advance if the white knight moves to b3 . In the game <unk> – <unk> ( Bad <unk> 1995 ) Black kept the bishop with 11.Nb3 a4 12.a3 Bd6 <unk> Bc5 <unk> d6 <unk> Ng6 <unk> f5 and had dynamic play . 
 = = = Gambits 5.Nbd2 d6 and 6.Nbd2 f6 = = = 
 With 4 ... Bb4 + 5.Nbd2 d6 ( see diagram at right ) Black wants to open the diagonal a1 – h8 for his queen . After 6.exd6 Qf6 White can react to the attack on his Bf4 in several ways , the best one being <unk> to develop a piece and protect both the Bf4 and the f2 @-@ pawn . It also helps that the Bf4 is still guarding the Nd2 , so that after 7 ... Qxb2 ? there is not the threat of winning the exchange ( 8 ... Bxd2 + would be answered by <unk> ) and White can repel Black 's attack with <unk> Qa3 <unk> Qa5 <unk> Nc6 <unk> ! Be7 <unk> Instead , Black must play energetically with 7 ... Nxf2 <unk> Bxh3 <unk> <unk> <unk> ! ? Nc6 <unk> and here Lalic recommends 11 ... 0 @-@ 0 <unk> Rfe8 . 
 The other gambit , 4 ... Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4 + 6.Nbd2 f6 <unk> Qxf6 , is much riskier , as Black weakens his kingside and does not open a diagonal for his Bc8 . Black tries to take advantage of the fact White has moved his dark @-@ squared bishop away from the queenside , leaving the b2 @-@ pawn without protection . The correct plan for White was shown by <unk> who played <unk> Qxb2 9.Be2 d6 10 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 0 @-@ 0 11.Nb3 Qf6 12.c5 ! to open the a2 – g8 diagonal that was weakened precisely by the gambit move 6 ... f6 . The move 11.Nb3 is not only useful to support the c4 – c5 push , but also to exchange the knight against Black 's dark @-@ squared bishop after a possible a2 – a3 forcing the retreat Bb4 – c5 . As Lalic puts it , " I doubt if Black has a satisfactory answer to White 's play in this game " . 
 = = Alekhine variation 3 ... Ng4 4.e4 = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.e4 
 This variation is named after Alekhine thanks to his wins in the games Alekhine – <unk> ( Baden Baden , 1925 ) and Alekhine – Seitz ( Hastings , 1926 ) . White does not try to keep its material advantage ( the e5 @-@ pawn ) and concentrates on establishing a strong pawn center and space advantage . A controversial point is whether the typical black manoeuvre Bf8 – b4 – <unk> is advantageous for Black ( as it saddles White with doubled pawns ) or for White ( as it reinforces his centre ) . Lalic thinks both , considering 6 ... Bb4 + to be a bad move after 4 ... Nxe5 5.f4 Nec6 6.Nf3 , but a good one after 4 ... Nxe5 5.f4 Nec6 <unk> After 4.e4 the main line is 4 ... Nxe5 5.f4 when Black has an important choice to make about where to move the Ne5 . The retreat to the queenside with 5 ... Nec6 is considered best , while the retreat to the kingside with 5 ... Ng6 is probably playable . 
 Taylor considers 4 ... Nxe5 inferior , recommending instead a rarely played idea of Richard Réti , 4 ... h5 ! ( Taylor 's exclamation point ) . Then 5.Nf3 would allow 5 ... Bc5 , while Taylor suggests meeting <unk> with 5 ... Nc6 ! and 5.f4 with 5 ... Bc5 with quick development compensating for the lost pawn . He considers the main line to be 4 ... h5 <unk> Nxe5 6.Be3 Bb4 + , with good play for Black . 
 = = = Line 5 ... Nec6 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.e4 Nxe5 5.f4 Nec6 
 The Knight on c6 is safer than on g6 , and is well @-@ placed as part of a general strategy to control the central dark squares . It can go to d4 while the other Knight can go to c5 via a6 or d7 . After 6.Nf3 Bc5 White has difficulties castling short , because the plan to exchange the dark @-@ squared bishops with Bd3 / Qe2 / Be3 can be met by Bg4 / Nd4 to muddy the waters . As Lalic points out : 
 White can no longer castle kingside and will usually have to go the other way . However , this is rather slow and gives Black time to try to undermine the white centre . To this end Bc8 – g4 often comes in handy , in order to pin the white knight on f3 against the white queen . Note that Black should wait until his opponent has wasted a tempo with Qe2 . 
 The main continuation 6.Be3 controls the a7 – g1 diagonal and is considered to be the best reply . If Black wants to contest the c5 @-@ square for his Bf8 he can try 6 ... Na6 , but most games continue with 6 ... Bb4 + . Here the best reply for White is controversial . 
 After 7.Nc3 Black has the <unk> 7 ... Qh4 + <unk> Bxc3 + <unk> Qe7 so that the diagonal a8 – h1 is weakened before Black develops the Bc8 to the b7 @-@ square . The queen on the e7 @-@ square is well placed to pressure the e4 @-@ pawn . However , as most of Black 's pieces are on the queenside , continuing with pawn pushes like f7 – f5 is probably too weakening , as Alekhine demonstrated in his game against Seitz in 1925 . So Black does best to attack with pieces , possibly with the setup b6 / Nc5 / Bb7 / 0 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 . In that case Tseitlin considers that with a knight on c5 the move d7 – d6 should be avoided if Black has to respond to the capture Bxc5 by dxc5 , because the white pawns in e4 and f4 would have too much leeway . 
 After 7.Nd2 Qe7 8.a3 Lalic considers 8 ... Qxe4 should be avoided , e.g. the continuation <unk> Bxd2 10.Qxd2 0 @-@ 0 <unk> d6 <unk> gives White several tempi against the black queen . After the better 8 ... Bc5 <unk> Qxc5 <unk> Lalic recommends 10 ... a5 . The introduction of the intermediate 7 ... Qh4 + <unk> Qe7 does not change Lalic 's opinion , as after <unk> Na6 <unk> Bc5 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> the bishop was well placed on g2 and Black experienced difficulties developing the Bc8 . But Lalic does not mention the game Pomar – <unk> cited by Borik , in which Black played the advance a7 – a5 to restrict the white advance b2 – b4 , and achieved equality after <unk> a5 <unk> Na6 . Instead , he recommends 7 ... d6 8.Nf3 0 @-@ 0 9.Bd3 and now the same development as in Pomar 's game : 
 9 ... a5 and 10 ... Na6 deserves attention , when White 's movements on the queenside are more restricted and the black knight will be able to settle on the c5 @-@ square without being kicked by the thematic b2 – b4 . It may appear that we have reached the same position elaborated in previous games a tempo down for Black , since he has committed his bishop to b4 and will later drop back to the c5 @-@ square instead of heading there at once . However , the white knight is less actively placed on d2 and in fact this fully compensates Black for the slight loss of time . 
 = = = Line 5 ... Ng6 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.e4 Nxe5 5.f4 Ng6 
 The Knight on g6 puts the f4 @-@ pawn under pressure , but may be embarrassed later by the pawn thrust f4 – f5 . Now 6.a3 , an attempt to deny squares from the Bf8 by continuing with b2 – b4 or Bc1 – e3 , does not achieve its goal after 6 ... Bc5 ! <unk> ? ! <unk> ! <unk> 0 @-@ 0 ! <unk> d6 <unk> a5 <unk> Nd7 <unk> Nc5 when Black 's superior pawn structure and well @-@ positioned Nc5 gives him the advantage . That leaves White with the choice between 6.Nf3 and <unk> 
 The move 6.Nf3 controls the e5 @-@ square in order to prepare the push f4 – f5 . Unlike after 5 ... Nec6 , White does not have to fear 6 ... Bc5 ? ! , which encounters difficulties after <unk> ! <unk> <unk> ! , when the black knight is already in danger of being lost to Qd1 – g4 or Qd1 – h5 . Instead Black must react quickly with 6 ... Bb4 + 7.Nc3 when he can adopt a normal setup with d6 / 0 @-@ 0 / Nc6 / b6 or act boldly with 7 ... Qf6 threatening both the Nc3 and the f4 @-@ pawn . One point in favour of 7 ... Qf6 is that after <unk> Qb6 the black queen prevents White from castling short and is well placed if White castles long . 
 The move 6.Be3 takes the a7 – g1 diagonal from Black 's Bf8 and may in some lines prepare the long castle . After the mandatory 6 ... Bb4 + White can opt for 7.Nd2 to avoid having doubled pawns , but he must be prepared to sacrifice a pawn after 7 ... Qe7 <unk> ! ? Bxd2 <unk> Qxe4 10.Bd3 with piece activity for the pawn deficit , because the normal defence <unk> ? runs into 8 ... <unk> ! and both the Bd3 and the f4 @-@ pawn are attacked . White does not need , however , bother too much about the doubled pawns and after 7.Nc3 Bxc3 + 8.bxc3 a peaceful black player might choose the quiet 8 ... b6 ! ? followed by a normal development with d6 / 0 @-@ 0 / Bb7 / Nd7 / Re8 / Nc5 . Instead of 8 ... b6 a more adventurous black player could choose 8 ... Qe7 9.Bd3 f5 ! ? as indicated by Borik , Tseitlin and Lalic , but in his more recent book Moskalenko thinks " this move complicates the game too much " . If the black player is neither peaceful nor aggressive , Lalic proposes an alternative with 8 ... Qe7 9.Bd3 0 @-@ 0 10.Qd2 and only now that Black has his king safe shall he unleash 10 ... f5 ! ? , when " it is not so easy for White to meet [ 10 ... f5 ] as the two main responses , <unk> and <unk> , allow Black promising chances with 11 ... d6 and 11 ... Nxf4 respectively " . 
 = = Fajarowicz variation 3 ... Ne4 = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ne4 The Fajarowicz variation is said to have its origins in the chess circles from Leipzig , with the first important game being <unk> – Fajarowicz at the 1928 Wiesbaden tournament . In this variation , Black makes no immediate effort to regain the gambit pawn , preferring to concentrate on active piece play and tactical tricks . 
 The move <unk> allows White to avoid the annoying bishop check on b4 , the also annoying knight jump to b4 , and prepares Qc2 to undermine Black 's knight . Both Lalic and de Firmian consider it to be White 's best move , with de Firmian assessing it as leading to a large advantage for White . Lalic considers 4 ... b6 ! ? to be the best answer , one point being that Qd1 – c2 , so effective in most of the other lines , can be met by Bc8 – b7 . After 5.Nd2 Bb7 <unk> Lalic gives 6 ... Nxd2 7.Bxd2 a5 ! when the black bishops will be excellently placed on the <unk> and c5 @-@ squares . Lalic recommends 6.Nf3 instead , while de Firmian continues by 5.Nf3 Bb7 6.Nbd2 Qe7 <unk> with a large advantage for White . 
 The move 4.Nf3 develops a piece and covers the sensitive d2 @-@ square . After 4 ... Bb4 + 5.Nbd2 Nc6 6.a3 Black can easily get confused by the move @-@ order . The natural 6 ... Nxd2 7.Bxd2 Bxd2 + <unk> Qe7 <unk> transposes in the same position as after 5.Bd2 , but White can also try 6 ... Nxd2 <unk> ! Nxf3 + <unk> Nxe5 <unk> Qe7 <unk> ! with a strong initiative . White can even retain his bishop with 6 ... Nxd2 <unk> and now Borik recommends 7 ... Bf8 with difficult play for Black as he is not certain to gain his pawn back . To avoid these possibilities Lalic advises the move @-@ order 6 ... Bxd2 + 7.Bxd2 Nxd2 <unk> Qe7 , but does not mention the possibility of White answering 6 ... Bxd2 + with <unk> A possible improvement for Black ( after 4 ... Bb4 + 5.Nbd2 ) would be 5 ... d5 with compensation for the pawn in all lines . 
 The line 4.Qc2 immediately attacks the Ne4 , as a retreat by Black would effectively surrender his temporary lead in development , which is the compensation for the sacrificed pawn . Black must continue to develop while trying to keep the Ne4 on its square , but that is by no means easy . Borik thinks 4.Qc2 is the move " that gives Black the most problems to solve " , but Lalic does not agree at all , stating that the reply " 4 ... Bb4 + [ .... ] followed by d7 – d5 ensures Black a rapid development and plenty of counterplay . It is for this reason that 4.Qc2 is not on the danger list " . The reply 4 ... Bb4 + ( see diagram at right ) pins the white pieces before deciding what to do with the Ne4 . White cannot reply 5.Bd2 as he would lose the bishop pair and Black would easily regain the e5 @-@ pawn with Nc6 / Qe7 / 0 @-@ 0 / Re8 . After 5.Nd2 this knight would be misplaced and would block the Bc1 , so Black could open the game with 5 ... d5 in favourable circumstances . Best for White is 5.Nc3 d5 6.exd6 Bf5 <unk> <unk> 8.e4 ! Bxc3 <unk> <unk> when Black has regained his pawn but White has the bishop pair and possibilities of an attack on the kingside . 
 = = Other possibilities = = 
 = = = Line 3 ... Ng4 4.e3 = = = 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.e3 
 Apart from the main lines 4.Bf4 , 4.Nf3 and 4.e4 , the only significant other fourth move is 4.e3 to continue by 4 ... Nxe5 5.Nh3 ( or the other move @-@ order <unk> and 5.e3 ) so that the white knight starts the journey Ng1 – h3 – f4 – d5 reach its ideal d5 @-@ square . The idea with 4.e3 and 5.Nh3 was favorite of a leading Soviet coach and writer Mikhail <unk> , who wrote in his 1994 book The Soviet Chess Conveyor that the line was first shown to him by a strong correspondence player Donatas <unk> . Black has tried to prevent White 's idea by the suitably strange @-@ looking move 5 ... Ng6 , taking the f4 @-@ square from the Nh3 . Then White can develop along various setups , the most active being <unk> with the possibility Nh3 – g5 in store to recycle the knight towards a more central position . Black can also ignore White 's intentions and concentrate on his own play by placing the Nb8 on c5 , in order to put pressure on the d3 @-@ square . After 5 ... g6 <unk> Bg7 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 8 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 d6 9.Nc3 Nbd7 10.Qd2 a5 <unk> Nc5 the position of Black 's knights is secured and Black 's position is similar to the Leningrad variation of the Dutch Defence ( once he has played f7 – f5 ) . White has no reason , however , to abandon the a1 – h8 diagonal to Black , and he can try 5 ... g6 <unk> d6 <unk> Bg7 8.Bc3 0 @-@ 0 9.Be2 Nbd7 10.Nd2 b6 and in one game White gained a minimal edge . 
 = = = Other fourth moves after 3 ... Ng4 = = = 
 A few other lines have been tried , with the outcome varying from an immediate equality to a clear advantage for Black . The cooling <unk> avoids complications and heads for an equal endgame with 4 ... dxe6 <unk> + <unk> , Black 's loss of the right to castle being of no great importance since queens have been traded . If Black wants to avoid this early endgame , he can try 4 ... Bb4 + 5.Nc3 Bxc3 + <unk> dxe6 and now the exchange of queens would give a plus to Black , as the white queenside pawns are isolated and doubled . The greedy <unk> is weak because White neglects his development and weakens the a7 – g1 diagonal . Black can immediately exploit this with 4 ... Bc5 , which threatens a fork on f2 and forbids White 's castling ; Black may later push d7 – d6 to open the centre , e.g. 5.Nh3 0 @-@ 0 6.Nc3 d6 <unk> cxd6 when Black has good squares for its pieces while White 's castling is delayed . 
 Another reasonable @-@ looking move is <unk> as it protects the e5 @-@ pawn and attacks the Ng4 . However , " the problem for White in the Budapest is that natural moves often lead to disaster " . Best for Black is the gambit 4 ... d6 <unk> Nc6 ! <unk> Bxd6 , when the natural 7.Nf3 ? ? is an error because of 7 ... Nxf2 ! <unk> <unk> + winning the queen . White must develop quietly with moves like Nc3 / Nf3 / e3 / Be2 , allowing Black to find active positions for his pieces with 0 @-@ 0 / Be6 / Qe7 / Rfd8 , and preparing several sacrificial ideas on e3 or f2 , with excellent attacking possibilities . Similar to <unk> is <unk> when after 4 ... Nc6 White can seize the last opportunity to return to calm waters with 5.Bf4 Bb4 + 6.Nc3 which will transpose in the Rubinstein line , or he can try 5.Nf3 d6 6.exd6 Be6 <unk> + <unk> when Black 's lead in development compensates for the pawn . 
 = = = Declining the gambit = = = 
 Declining the gambit is almost never seen in master play because it promises White equality at best . After 3.d5 ? ! Bc5 White has prematurely blocked the central position , giving the a7 – g1 diagonal to Black for his bishop . In this variation Black can either play on the queenside with a plan like b5 / Nb6 / Bd7 , or on the kingside with a plan like Ne8 / g6 / <unk> / f5 . The shy <unk> ? ! exd4 <unk> transposes into a line of the Exchange Variation of the French Defence with 4 ... d5 , but Black can also develop rapidly with 4 ... Bb4 + 5.Bd2 Bxd2 + <unk> 0 @-@ 0 . After <unk> ? Black gains a crushing attack via 3 ... Nxe4 <unk> Bc5 5.Nh3 d6 <unk> f5 <unk> 0 @-@ 0 ! <unk> Re8 <unk> <unk> <unk> Bxh3 <unk> Qh4 + . After <unk> ? ! the game <unk> – Tartakower ( Scarborough 1929 ) continued with 3 ... exd4 <unk> Be7 5.Nf3 Nc6 <unk> Ne4 <unk> <unk> 8.a3 d6 9.e3 0 @-@ 0 10.Be2 Qf6 <unk> Bf5 when both Tseitlin and Borik assess the position as favourable for Black . After 3.Nf3 ? ! the game <unk> – Tartakower ( Paris 1929 ) continued with 3 ... e4 <unk> d5 5.cxd5 ? ! Qxd5 6.e3 Bb4 7.Nc3 Bxc3 8.bxc3 0 @-@ 0 and White has problems developing his kingside because of the potential weakness of g2 . 
 = = Illustrative games = = 
 = = = Wu Shaobin – Nadanian , Singapore 2006 = = = 
 The following game was played between the Chinese GM Wu Shaobin ( White ) and Armenian IM Ashot Nadanian ( Black ) at Singapore 2006 . 
 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Nf3 Bc5 5.e3 Nc6 6.Be2 <unk> 7.Nxe5 Nxe5 8 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 0 @-@ 0 9.b3 Re8 10.Bb2 a5 Preparing Dolfi Drimer 's rook manoeuvre Ra8 – a6 – h6 . Nadanian calls the pawn advance a7 – a5 " the soul of the Budapest Gambit " . 11.Nc3 Ra6 <unk> Ba7 <unk> Qh4 <unk> Qg5 ! ? This was a new move , before 14 ... Qe4 had been played . <unk> Rg6 16.g3 d5 ? ! 18 ... Qh6 was stronger . <unk> ? White should have played <unk> ! 17 ... Bh3 ! 18.Re1 Ng4 <unk> <unk> ! Karolyi writes , " This shows Kasparov @-@ like aggression and ingenuity . " <unk> Qxf2 + ! ! <unk> Bxf2 + <unk> Bb6 <unk> ? White should have defended with <unk> ! After 23 ... Ne3 24.Qd3 Bg2 + <unk> Bh3 White can either repeat moves with 26.Kh1 , or try <unk> 23 ... <unk> + <unk> Rf6 ! Black has time to increase the pressure . <unk> ! If <unk> ? , then 25 ... Ng4 + 26.Kh1 Bg2 + ! winning the queen . 25 ... a4 ! But not 25 ... Rxf3 ? <unk> <unk> Black can now force mate in 8 moves . 26 ... Ng4 + ! <unk> Bg2 + ! ! " This is a marvellous move , and it must have been such a thrill to play it on the board . " ( Karolyi ) . <unk> Rf2 + <unk> Rxh2 + <unk> h5 + 31.Kf4 Be3 + 0 – 1 
 = Rhodotus = 
 Rhodotus is a genus in the fungus family Physalacriaceae . It is a monotypic genus and consists of the single mushroom species Rhodotus palmatus , known in the vernacular as the netted <unk> , the rosy <unk> , or the wrinkled peach . This uncommon species has a circumboreal distribution , and has been collected in eastern North America , northern Africa , Europe , and Asia ; declining populations in Europe have led to its appearance in over half of the European fungal Red Lists of threatened species . Typically found growing on the stumps and logs of rotting hardwoods , mature specimens may usually be identified by the pinkish color and the distinctive ridged and veined surface of their rubbery caps ; variations in the color and quantity of light received during development lead to variations in the size , shape , and cap color of fruit bodies . 
 The unique characteristics of R. palmatus have made it difficult for taxonomists to agree on how it should be classified , resulting in an elaborate taxonomical history and an extensive synonymy . First named Agaricus palmatus by Bulliard in 1785 , it was reclassified into several different genera before becoming Rhodotus in 1926 . The familial placement of the genus Rhodotus within the order Agaricales has also been subject to dispute , and the taxon has been transferred variously to the families Amanitaceae , Entolomataceae , and Tricholomataceae . More recently , molecular phylogenetics analysis has helped determine that Rhodotus is most closely related to genera in the Physalacriaceae . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 The type species of genus Rhodotus was originally described as Agaricus palmatus in 1785 by French botanist Jean Bulliard ; mycologist Elias Magnus Fries later included it under the same name in his Systema Mycologicum . It was transferred to the then newly described genus Rhodotus in a 1926 publication by French mycologist René Maire . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin palmatus , meaning " shaped like a hand " — possibly a reference to the resemblance of the cap surface to the lines in the palm of a hand . Common names for R. palmatus include the netted <unk> , the rosy <unk> , and the wrinkled peach . 
 = = = Synonymy = = = 
 French botanist Claude Gillet called the species Pleurotus <unk> in 1876 . A 1986 paper reported that the species Pleurotus pubescens , first described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1891 , was the same as Rhodotus palmatus , making their names synonymous . According to the same publication , another synonym is <unk> <unk> , described by William Alphonso Murrill in 1915 , who thought it to be synonymous with Agaricus <unk> ( described by Montagne in 1856 ) , Agaricus reticulatus ( Johnson , 1880 ) , Agaricus <unk> ( <unk> , 1885 ) , Pluteus <unk> ( Saccardo , 1887 ) , and Panus <unk> ( Peck , 1905 ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The placement of the genus Rhodotus in the order Agaricales is uncertain , and various authors have offered solutions to the taxonomic conundrum . In 1951 , Agaricales specialist Rolf Singer placed Rhodotus in the Amanitaceae because of similarities between the tribes <unk> and <unk> , such as spore color and ornamentation ( modifications of the spore wall that result in surface irregularities ) , structure of the hyphae and trama , and <unk> production during culture growth . 
 In 1953 , French mycologists Robert Kühner and Henri Romagnesi placed Rhodotus in the family Tricholomataceae — a traditional " wastebasket taxon " — on the basis of spore color . In 1969 , Besson argued for the placement of Rhodotus with the Entolomataceae after studying the ultrastructure of the spores . By 1986 , Singer had revised the placement of Rhodotus in his latest edition of The Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy , noting that " It has formerly been inserted in the family Amanitaceae but is obviously closer to tribus <unk> of the Tricholomataceae . " Tribe <unk> included such genera as Flammulina , <unk> , Cyptotrama , and <unk> . In 1988 , a proposal was made to split the Tricholomataceae into several new families , including a family , <unk> , to contain the problematic genus . 
 The use of molecular phylogenetics has helped to clarify the proper taxonomic placement of Rhodotus . Studies of the ribosomal DNA sequences from a wide variety of agaric fungi have corroborated Kühner and Romagnesi 's placement of Rhodotus in the Tricholomataceae as then understood . A large scale phylogenetic analysis published in 2005 showed Rhodotus to be in the " core <unk> clade " , a name given to a grouping of gilled mushrooms corresponding largely to the suborder <unk> as defined by Singer ( 1986 ) , but also including taxa that were traditionally classified in the <unk> ( e.g. , Clavaria , Typhula , Fistulina , <unk> , etc . ) and several orders of Gasteromycetes ( e.g. , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . These results corroborated a previous study which showed Rhodotus to be part of a clade containing species such as Cyptotrama asprata , Marasmius <unk> , Flammulina velutipes , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Armillaria <unk> . The genera containing these latter species have been reassigned to the family Physalacriaceae ; as of 2009 , both Index Fungorum and MycoBank also list Rhodotus as belonging to the Physalacriaceae . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The fruit body of Rhodotus has a cap , and stem without a ring or volva . The cap initially assumes a convex shape before flattening somewhat with age , and typically reaches widths of 2 – 6 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The edges of the cap are rolled inwards , and the cap surface typically has a conspicuous network of lightly colored ridges or veins that outline deep and narrow grooves or pits — a condition technically termed sulcate or reticulate . Between the ridges , the surface color is somewhat variable ; depending on the lighting conditions experienced by the mushroom during its development , it may range from salmon @-@ orange to pink to red . The texture of the cap surface is gelatinous , and the internal flesh is firm but rubbery , and pinkish in color . 
 The gills have an adnate attachment to the stem , that is , broadly attached to the stem along all or most of the gill width . The gills are thick , packed close to each other , with veins and color similar to , but paler than , the cap . Some of the gills do not extend the full distance from the edge of the cap to the stem . These short gills , called lamellulae , form two to four groups of roughly equal length . The stem is 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 0 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 24 in ) thick ( usually slightly larger near the base ) , and may be attached to the underside of the cap in a central or lateral manner . Like the cap color , stem size is also affected by the type of light received during fruit body maturation . 
 In nature , Rhodotus palmatus is sometimes seen " bleeding " a red- or orange @-@ colored liquid . A similar phenomenon has also been observed when it is grown in laboratory culture on a petri dish : the orange @-@ colored drops that appear on the mat formed by fungal mycelia precede the initial appearance of fruit bodies . The mature fruit body will turn green when exposed to a 10 % aqueous solution of Iron ( II ) sulfate ( FeSO4 ) , a common mushroom identification test known as iron salts . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 In deposit , the spore color of Rhodotus palmatus has been described most commonly as pink , but also as cream colored . Viewed microscopically , the spores of Rhodotus have a roughly spherical shape , with dimensions of 6 – 7 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 5 µm ; the spore surface is marked with numerous wart @-@ like projections ( defined as <unk> ) , typically 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 µm long . The spores are non @-@ amyloid — unable to take up iodine stain in the chemical test with Melzer 's reagent . 
 The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped and 4 @-@ spored , with dimensions of 33 @.@ 6 – 43 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 6 – 8 µm . Although this species lacks cells called pleurocystidia ( large sterile cells found on the gill face in some mushrooms ) , it contains abundant cheilocystidia ( large sterile cells found on the gill edge ) that are 27 @.@ 2 – 48 by 4 @.@ 8 – 8 µm in size . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . The outer cellular layer of the cap cuticle is made of bladder @-@ shaped , thick @-@ walled hyphae , each individually supported by a small stalk that extends down into a " gelatinized zone " . 
 <unk> are asexual reproductive units made by some fungi that allow them to exist solely as mycelium , a process which helps them survive over periods unsuitable for growth ; Rhodotus was shown experimentally to be capable of producing these structures in 1906 . The chlamydospores of Rhodotus are thick @-@ walled cells that develop from single hyphal compartments , and have dimensions of 12 – 8 by 8 – 6 micrometres ( 0 @.@ 00031 – 0 @.@ 00024 in ) . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Depending on the source consulted , the edibility of Rhodotus palmatus is typically listed as unknown or inedible . The species has no distinguishable odor , and a " bitter " taste , although one early description referred to the taste as " sweet " . 
 = = = Antimicrobial activity = = = 
 As part of a Spanish research study to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of mushrooms , Rhodotus palmatus was one of 204 species screened against a panel of human clinical pathogens and laboratory control strains . Using a standard laboratory method to determine antimicrobial susceptibility , the mushroom was shown to have moderate antibacterial activity against Bacillus subtilis , and weak antifungal activity against both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Aspergillus fumigatus . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Rhodotus palmatus is saprobic , meaning it obtains nutrients from decomposing organic matter . It grows scattered or clustered in small groups on rotting hardwoods , such as basswood , maple , and especially elm ; in Europe it is known to grow on horse chestnut . The mushroom prefers low @-@ lying logs in areas that are periodically flooded and that receive little sunlight , such as areas shaded by forest canopy . A pioneer species in the fungal colonization of dead wood , it prefers to grow on relatively <unk> substrates . It is often found growing on dark @-@ stained wood , especially the dried @-@ out upper parts of trunks that have lost their bark . R. palmatus tends to fruit in cooler and moister weather , from spring to autumn in the United States , or autumn to winter in Britain and Europe . 
 Described as having a circumboreal distribution , R. palmatus has been reported from Canada , Iran , Hungary , Italy , Poland , Slovakia , Denmark , Sweden , Norway , Germany , the area formerly known as the USSR , Korea , Japan , and New Zealand . In the United States it has been found in Indiana , and elsewhere in eastern North America . Although often described as " rare " , a 1997 study suggests that it may be relatively common in Illinois . It has been suggested that an increase in the number of dead elms , a byproduct of Dutch elm disease , has contributed to its resurgence . 
 = = = Light requirements = = = 
 Light at the red end of the visible spectrum has been observed to be required for the development of R. palmatus fruit bodies , contrary to the typical requirement for blue light seen with many other mushroom species . Fruiting occurs in the presence of green , yellow or red light with wavelengths above 500 nm , but only when blue light ( under 500 nm ) is absent . Consequently , phenotypic variations observed in the field — such as size , shape , and cap color — may be influenced by differing conditions of light color and intensity . For example , specimens grown in the laboratory under green light had fruit bodies with short , straight stems and pale orange , large caps with well @-@ developed ridges and pits , an appearance similar to specimens found in the field that were growing under a canopy of green leaves . Laboratory @-@ grown specimens under amber light had bright orange , small caps with less pronounced reticulations ; similarly , field specimens found in the fall , after the leaves had fallen , were more orange to orange @-@ pink in color . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 In the 1980s in Europe , increases in the levels of air pollution , as well as changing land use practices coincided with reports of declines in the populations of certain mushrooms . Consequently , a number of fungal conservation initiatives were started to better understand fungal biodiversity ; as of October 2007 , 31 European countries have produced fungal Red Lists of threatened species . Rhodotus palmatus is a candidate species in over half of the European fungal Red Lists , and is listed as critically endangered , endangered , or near threatened ( or the equivalent ) in 12 countries . In the Baltic countries Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania , it is considered by the Environmental Protection Ministries ( a branch of government charged with implementing the Convention on Biological Diversity ) to be regionally extinct , reported as " extinct or probably extinct " . It was one of 35 fungal species to gain legal protection in Hungary in 2005 , making it a <unk> offense to pick them . 
 = Heart @-@ Shaped Box = 
 " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " is a song by American rock band Nirvana , written by vocalist and guitarist Kurt Cobain . The song was released as the first single from the group 's third and final studio album , In Utero , in 1993 . It was one of two songs from the album mixed by Scott Litt in order to augment the original production by producer Steve Albini . While Nirvana 's label DGC Records did not release a physical single for sale in the United States , " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " received much American radio airplay , reaching number one on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . The international release of the single reached number five on the UK Singles Chart . The song 's music video , directed by Anton Corbijn , garnered critical plaudits , and won two awards , including Best Alternative Video at the MTV Video Music Awards in 1994 . 
 = = Origin and recording = = 
 Kurt Cobain wrote " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " in early 1992 . Cobain forgot about the song for a while , but began working on it again when he and his wife , Courtney Love , moved to a house in the Hollywood Hills . In a 1994 Rolling Stone interview , Love said she overheard him working on the song 's riff in a closet . She said she asked him if she could use the riff for one of her songs , to which he replied , " Fuck off ! " and closed the closet door . " He was trying to be so sneaky " , said Love . " I could hear that one from downstairs . " The couple shared a journal in which they would write lyrics ; Cobain biographer Charles R. Cross noted that Love 's songwriting sensibility informed Cobain 's on the song . The song 's name came from a heart @-@ shaped box Love had given Cobain . However , Cobain had originally titled the song " Heart @-@ Shaped Coffin " . 
 Nirvana had difficulty completing the song . Cobain attempted to have the rest of the band complete the song during jam sessions . He said , " During those practices , I was trying to wait for Krist and Dave to come up with something but it just turned into noise all the time . " One day Cobain made one last attempt at completing the song . Cobain was able to come up with a vocal melody and the band finally finished writing the song . Cobain said that when they completed " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " , " We finally realized that it was a good song . " 
 In January 1993 , the band recorded a demo of " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " during sessions with Craig Montgomery in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil ; it was the first song recorded . The In Utero version was recorded in February 1993 by Steve Albini in Cannon Falls , Minnesota . Prior to the album 's release , the track was remixed by Scott Litt . Cobain was unapologetic about the band 's decision to remix it , and maintained that the vocals and bass were not prominent enough in the original mixes . Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic was also unhappy with the original mix of " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " . In a 1993 Chicago Sun @-@ Times interview , he said the original effect used on the song 's guitar solo sounded " like a fucking abortion hitting the floor . " When the song was remixed by Litt , Cobain took the opportunity to add acoustic guitar and vocal harmonies . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 Journalist Gillian Gaar described " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " as " the Nirvana formula personified , with a restrained , descending riff played through the verse , building in intensity to the cascading passion of the chorus " . 
 Cobain said the song was inspired by documentaries about children with cancer . He told biographer Michael Azerrad , " Anytime I think about it , it makes me sadder than anything I can think of . " Azerrad asserted in his biography Come as You Are : The Story of Nirvana that despite Cobain 's explanation , the song actually appeared to be about Courtney Love . Charles Cross wrote in his Kurt Cobain biography Heavier Than Heaven that with the lyric " I wish I could eat your cancer when you turn black " , the frontman " sang in what has to be the most convoluted route any songwriter undertook in pop history to say ' I love you ' " . After a performance of the song by singer Lana Del Rey in 2012 , Courtney Love asserted on Twitter that the song is about her vagina . The tweets were deleted shortly after . Cobain said that the song 's chorus of " Hey / Wait / I 've got a new complaint " was him giving an example of how he was perceived by the media . 
 = = Release = = 
 In the United States , DGC issued " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " to college , modern rock , and album @-@ oriented rock radio stations in early September 1993 . There were no plans to release a single for the song domestically . At the time , Geffen Records ' head of marketing told Billboard that the label was not actively courting Top 40 radio , explaining " Nirvana didn 't sell nearly 5 million [ records ] because of a hit single . They sold that many albums because of who they are . " The song entered the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart at number seven , and eventually peaked at number one on the chart . The song also reached number four on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . A single of the song was released in the United Kingdom , where it peaked at number five on the UK Singles Chart . Issued in August 1993 , the 7 @-@ inch vinyl and cassette formats featured " Marigold " as a B @-@ side , while the 12 @-@ inch vinyl and CD editions added the In Utero track " Milk It " . In 1999 the song was voted in at number 10 in Kerrang ! magazine 's " 100 Greatest Rock Tracks Ever ! " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Nirvana originally wanted Kevin Kerslake , who had directed the videos for the band 's singles " Come as You Are " , " Lithium " , " In Bloom " , and " Sliver " , to direct the " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " music video . Kerslake prepared five treatments during July and August 1993 , but no shoot arrangements were made and by the end of the month , the group decided to work with Dutch photographer and video director Anton Corbijn . Corbijn , who typically created his own ideas for videos , was initially unsure of directing the video since Cobain 's treatment was so detailed . Corbijn said , " But then I looked at it and I thought that actually it was pretty good . I was very amazed by somebody writing a song and having those ideas as precise as he did . " 
 The video begins and ends with the band in a hospital setting watching an old man being administered medication through an IV drip . The majority of the video takes place in a surreal outdoor setting that incorporates imagery from the film The Wizard of Oz . During the song 's first verse , the old man from the hospital climbs onto a crow @-@ ridden Christian cross . The second verse introduces a young girl in a white robe and peaked cap reaching for human fetuses in a tree , and an overweight woman in a suit with human organs painted onto it and with angel wings affixed to her back . In the video 's final cut , the band is only shown performing in the outdoor setting during the choruses , where Cobain 's face moves in and out of focus in the camera . While most of the video was devised by Cobain , Corbijn added elements such as the intentionally artificial crows , a ladder for the old man to climb onto the cross with , and a box with a heart at the top that the band performs inside of during the song 's final chorus . Corbijn created another cut of the video featuring alternate footage during the final verse , including more shots of the young girl and the woman , and scenes of Cobain lying on his back in the poppy field , with mist surrounding him . This version of the video is featured on the DVD The Work of Director Anton Corbijn . 
 After the video 's release , Kevin Kerslake sued Nirvana , alleging copyright infringement . The case was settled out of court . The " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " music video was the number one most played music video on MTV in the US as recorded by Billboard magazine on November 20 , 1993 . The video won two MTV Video Music Awards in 1994 , for Best Alternative Video and for Best Art Direction . As the ceremony was held after Kurt Cobain 's April 1994 death , the awards were accepted by Cobain 's former bandmates Novoselic , Grohl , and touring guitarist Pat Smear . " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " also topped the music video category in the 1993 Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . In 2011 , NME ranked the song 's music video at number 22 on its of the " 100 Greatest Music Videos " . That same year , Time magazine ranked " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " at number 10 on its list of " The 30 All @-@ TIME Best Music Videos " , where it was described as " beautiful and [ ... ] terrible " . 
 In February 2016 , Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl reunited with the actress , <unk> Rohr , who played the girl in the " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " music video twenty @-@ three years earlier and who was then just six years old . Rohr stated that " Today reminded me that I peaked at 6 years old BUT I was the most badass kid on the playground . Today was the absolute coolest . Or in Dave ’ s words seeing each other today was a ‘ historic moment ’ ! What a legend ! " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Kurt Cobain except where noted . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Kurt Cobain : vocals , guitar 
 Krist Novoselic : bass 
 Dave Grohl : drums , backing vocals 
 = B 'Day ( Beyoncé album ) = 
 B 'Day is the second studio album by American recording artist Beyoncé . It was released to coincide with her twenty @-@ fifth birthday on September 4 , 2006 , by Columbia Records in collaboration with Music World Music and Sony Urban Music . The record was originally planned as a 2004 follow @-@ up to Beyoncé 's debut studio album Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) , although it was delayed to accommodate the recording of Destiny 's Child 's final studio album Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) and her starring role in the film Dreamgirls ( 2006 ) . While on vacation after filming Dreamgirls , Beyoncé began contacting various producers ; she rented Sony Music Studios , and completed B 'Day in three weeks . Most of the lyrical content of the album was inspired by Beyoncé 's role in the film . The album 's musical style ranges from 1970s – 80s funk influences and balladry to urban contemporary elements such as hip hop and R & B. Live instrumentation was employed in recording most of the tracks as part of Beyoncé 's vision of creating a record using live instruments . 
 Upon its release , B 'Day received generally positive reviews from most music critics and has since earned Beyoncé several accolades , including the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary R & B Album at the 2007 Grammy Awards . The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 541 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , the second @-@ highest debut @-@ week sales for Beyoncé . The album has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . It was also successful in international music markets and yielded six singles , including three commercial hits : " Déjà Vu " , " Irreplaceable " and " Beautiful Liar " . B 'Day Anthology Video Album , which features thirteen music videos to accompany the songs , was released alongside the deluxe edition of B 'Day . Beyoncé then embarked on her second solo concert tour in 2007 , which she titled The Beyoncé Experience . A live album , The Beyoncé Experience Live , was released which featured footage from the tour . As of June 2015 , B 'Day has sold 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2002 , Beyoncé had productive studio sessions while making her debut album , Dangerously in Love , recording up to forty @-@ five songs . After the release of Dangerously in Love in 2003 , Beyoncé had planned to produce a follow @-@ up album using several of the left @-@ over tracks . However , on January 7 , 2004 , a spokesperson for her record label , Columbia , announced that Beyoncé had put her plans on hold in order to concentrate on the recording of Destiny Fulfilled , the final studio album by Destiny 's Child , and to sing the U.S. national anthem at the Super Bowl XXXVIII in Houston , which was a childhood dream of hers . In late 2005 , Beyoncé decided to postpone the recording of her second album because she had landed a lead role in Dreamgirls , a film adaptation of the 1981 Tony Award @-@ winning Broadway musical of the same name . As she wanted to focus on one project at a time , Beyoncé decided to wait until the movie was completed before returning to the recording studio . Beyoncé later told Billboard magazine , " I 'm not going to write for the album until I finish doing the movie . " 
 While having a month @-@ long vacation after filming Dreamgirls , Beyoncé went to the studio to start working on the album . She said , " [ When filming ended ] I had so many things bottled up , so many emotions , so many ideas , " prompting her to begin working without telling her father and then @-@ manager , Mathew Knowles . Beyoncé kept the recording of B 'Day somewhat quiet , telling only her artists and repertoire man Max <unk> , and the team of producers they contacted to collaborate for the album . She began working with songwriter @-@ producers Rich Harrison , Rodney Jerkins , Sean Garrett , Cameron Wallace ; the Neptunes , Norwegian production duo Stargate , American hip hop producer @-@ rapper Swizz Beatz , and Walter Millsap . Two female songwriters were also included in the production team who helped structure the album : Beyoncé 's cousin Angela Beyincé , who had previously collaborated in Dangerously in Love , and up @-@ and @-@ coming songwriter Makeba Riddick , who made her way onto the team after writing " Déjà Vu " , the lead single off the album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Beyoncé rented the Sony Music Studios in New York City , and was influenced by her husband Jay @-@ Z 's method of collaborating with multiple record producers ; she used four recording studios simultaneously . She booked Harrison , Jerkins and Garrett , each with a room to work in . During the sessions , Beyoncé would move from studio to studio to check her producers ' progress , later claiming this fostered " healthy competition " among producers . When Beyoncé conceived a potential song , she would tell the group who would deliberate , and after three hours the song would be created . While Beyoncé and the team brainstormed the lyrics , other collaborators such as the Neptunes , Jerkins and Swizz Beatz would simultaneously produce the tracks . They would sometimes begin working at eleven o 'clock , spending up to fourteen hours a day in the studios during the recording process . Beyoncé arranged , co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced all the songs . Makeba Riddick , in an interview with MTV News , recounted her experience in the production : 
 [ Beyoncé ] had multiple producers in Sony Studios . She booked out the whole studio and she had the biggest and best producers in there . She would have us in one room , we would start collaborating with one producer , then she would go and start something else with another producer . We would bounce around to the different rooms and work with the different producers . It was definitely a factory type of process . 
 B 'Day , which is titled as a reference to Beyoncé 's birthday , was completed in three weeks , ahead of the originally scheduled six weeks . Swizz Beatz co @-@ produced four songs for the album , the most from a single producer in the team . Beyoncé recorded three songs a day , finishing recording within two weeks . Twenty @-@ five songs were produced for the album ; ten of the tracks were selected for the track list , and mastered in early July by Brian " Big Bass " Gardner in Los Angeles . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Many of the themes and musical styles of the album were inspired by Beyoncé 's role in Dreamgirls . The plot of the film revolves around The Dreams , a fictional 1960s group of three female singers who attempt success in the mainstream music industry with the help of their manager , Curtis Taylor . Beyoncé portrays Deena Jones , the lead singer of the group and the wife of Taylor , and is emotionally abused by him . Because of her role , Beyoncé was inspired to produce an album with an overriding theme of feminism and female empowerment . In the bonus track , " Encore for the Fans " , Beyoncé says , " Because I was so inspired by Deena , I wrote songs that were saying all the things I wish she would have said in the film . " 
 B 'Day was influenced by a variety of American genres , and , like Beyoncé 's previous album , incorporated urban contemporary elements including contemporary R & B and hip hop . Some songs have 1970s and 1980s styles , inspired through record sampling . " Suga Mama " , which employs blues @-@ guitar samples from Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers ' " Searching for Soul " , contains a 1970s <unk> and 1980s go @-@ go @-@ influenced melody . " Upgrade U " is sampled from the 1968 Betty Wright song " Girls Can 't Do What the Guys Do " . " Resentment " used Curtis Mayfield 's 1972 " Think ( Instrumental ) " , from the Super Fly soundtrack . " Déjà Vu " has 1970s influence , " Green Light " is a classic groove , and " Get Me Bodied " features twang , a musical style that originated from Texas . 
 Beyoncé crafted most songs on B 'Day through live instrumentation and diverse techniques . This is evident on " Déjà Vu " , which utilizes bass guitar , conga , hi @-@ hat , horns and the 808 drum ; it also features rap vocals by Jay @-@ Z. In an interview with MTV , Beyoncé said , " When I recorded ' Déjà Vu ' [ ... ] I knew that even before I started working on my album , I wanted to add live instruments to all of my songs ... " The album 's second single " Ring the Alarm " is noted for the use of a siren in its melody . It was called a song that " shows a harder edge to Beyoncé 'ss sound " . " Freakum Dress " is a crescendo that uses a two @-@ note riff and galloping beats . The song " advises women who have partners with straying eyes to put on sexy dresses and grind on other guys in the club to regain their affections . " Meanwhile , the use of the " uh @-@ huh huh huh " vocals and brassy stabs in the song " Green Light " is a direct echo to " Crazy in Love " , according to Peter Robinson of The Guardian . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 In collaboration with Sony Urban Music and Music World Music , B 'Day was first released outside of North America through Columbia Records on September 4 , 2006 to coincide with Beyoncé 's 25th birthday . The following day , it was released in North America . Seven months after the release of the original version , an expanded double @-@ disc deluxe edition of the album was released in the United States on April 3 , 2007 . In addition to the original track listing , the deluxe edition features five new songs , including " Beautiful Liar " , a duet with Colombian singer Shakira . The single made Billboard Hot 100 history when it moved ninety @-@ one positions — from number ninety @-@ four to number three — on April 7 , 2007 . " Amor Gitano " ( " Gypsy Love " ) , a Spanish @-@ language flamenco @-@ pop duet with Mexican singer Alejandro Fernández served as a soundtrack for Telemundo 's " El Zorro " telenovela , was included in the deluxe edition , alongside Spanish re @-@ recordings of " Listen " ( " Oye " ) , " Irreplaceable " ( " Irreemplazable " ) and " Beautiful Liar " ( " Bello Embustero " ) . The idea of recording songs in a foreign language emanated from her experience when Destiny 's Child collaborated with Alejandro Sanz for " Quisiera Ser " ( 2000 ) . Beyoncé worked with producer Rudy Perez for these recordings in order to retain the same feeling of the English version of the song into the Spanish translation . The Spanish language EP on the deluxe edition was later released independently under the title Irreemplazable . 
 B 'Day Anthology Video Album was released simultaneously with the deluxe edition ; the anthology features thirteen videos including the director 's cut of " Listen " and the extended mix of " Get Me Bodied " . Most of the videos were accompaniments for the up @-@ tempo tracks on B 'Day ; which featured retro stylization , use of color and black hair styles , as Beyoncé thought it would create a resemblance between herself and the character she played in Dreamgirls , Deena Jones . The shooting of the videos was completed in two weeks ; they were directed by Jake Nava , Anthony Mandler , Melina Matsoukas , Cliff Watts , Ray Kay , Sophie Muller , Diane Martel and Beyoncé . Initially the DVD was available exclusively in Wal @-@ Mart , but was later released to other markets . The Spanish songs were not included on international releases of the deluxe edition , but instead feature the thirteen music videos from the anthology DVD . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Déjà Vu " , featuring Jay @-@ Z , was released on July 31 , 2006 , as the album 's lead single . " Green Light " was planned to be released as the second single for the international market , but the management opted for " Ring the Alarm " instead , which was released in the United States only . " Irreplaceable " was serviced to international markets as the second international and third overall single from B 'Day . " Ring the Alarm " was released on October 3 , and became her highest @-@ charting single debut , opening at number twelve on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Upgrade U " , also featuring Jay @-@ Z , was released as a promotional single in November 2006 , and reached number fifty @-@ nine on the Hot 100 . 
 The album 's third single " Irreplaceable " became the best @-@ selling single in the U.S. in 2007 and the 25th most successful song of the 2000s ( decade ) , according to the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of the Decade . " Irreplaceable " became the most successful single to be released from the album , received positive critical reception , and spent ten consecutive weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 . The single 's music video features the debut performance of her all @-@ female band , Suga Mama . " Get Me Bodied " was released on July 10 , 2007 as the fifth single . " Get Me Bodied " peaked at number sixty @-@ eight on the Hot 100 . The single 's accompanying music video features sister Solange Knowles and former Destiny 's Child band @-@ mates Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams in its 1960s @-@ influenced instructional music video . " Green Light " was released in the United Kingdom on July 30 , 2007 . Along with the release of the single , the remix EP Green Light : Freemasons EP was released on July 27 , 2007 as a digital download . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2006 , Beyoncé looked for an all @-@ female band for her 2007 tour , The Beyoncé Experience , to promote the album . She held an audition for keyboard players , bassists , guitarists , horn players , percussionists and drummers around the world . Beyoncé named the band Suga Mama . Although the band only consisted of women , both male and female backup dancers performed onstage . As well as singing songs from B 'Day , Beyoncé also performed songs from Dangerously in Love and gave a medley of Destiny 's Child songs . She embarked on the tour in Japan on April 10 , 2007 and concluded it in <unk> , Taiwan on November 12 , 2007 . At the Los Angeles show Jay @-@ Z and Destiny 's Child bandmates Rowland and Williams made guest appearances . Footage from this show was filmed and released on November 20 , 2007 as a live album titled The Beyoncé Experience Live . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Despite an average commercial performance of the album 's first two singles , " Déjà Vu " and " Ring the Alarm " , B 'Day peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 , the official albums chart in the United States , on September 23 , 2006 . The album sold 541 @,@ 000 units in its first week of release . B 'Day was Beyoncé 's highest debut week album sales , until it was surpassed by her self @-@ titled fifth album , which sold 617 @,@ 213 digital copies in its first week . The album gave Beyoncé her second number @-@ one album following Dangerously in Love , which also topped the chart on its debut . This feat was noted by Keith Caulfield of Billboard magazine , surmising that perhaps " its handsome debut was generated by goodwill earned from the performance of her smash first album Dangerously in Love " . By the end of 2006 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and became the thirty @-@ eighth best @-@ selling album of that year in the US . 
 The album 's commercial performance was reinforced by the subsequent release of its editions . The release of the deluxe edition helped B 'Day re @-@ enter the top ten , gaining 903 percent in sales . On April 16 , 2007 , the RIAA re @-@ certified B 'Day as triple platinum , combining the sales from the original edition of album with those of the deluxe edition . However , B 'Day 's extended life in the music market has been attributed to the release and eventual success of " Irreplaceable " , which is the album 's certifiable smash hit . The single , which was released by the end of 2006 , helped the album in regaining its strength , having re @-@ entered into the top ten of Billboard 200 . As of July 2014 , the album has sold 3 @.@ 4 million copies in the US . 
 In the United Kingdom , B 'Day debuted at number three on September 11 , 2007 selling 35 @,@ 012 copies in its first week . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified B 'Day platinum for shipping 300 @,@ 000 units , and the deluxe edition gold for shipping 100 @,@ 000 units . As of July 3 , 2011 , B 'Day has sold 385 @,@ 078 copies in the UK . The album peaked at number three on the European Top 100 Albums , while reaching the top ten in the albums charts of Denmark , Flanders , Germany , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Portugal , Spain and Switzerland . The album reached number two on the Canadian Albums Chart , where it stayed for two weeks and receiving a platinum certification from the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . Across Oceania , it had the same reception debuting on Australian Albums Chart and New Zealand Albums Chart both at number eight on the same week , September 11 , 2006 . B 'Day remained on the charts for twenty and twenty @-@ five weeks respectively , and was certified platinum by both the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . As of September 2013 , B 'Day had sold 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 B 'Day received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 70 , based on 23 reviews . Jody Rosen , writing for Entertainment Weekly , commented that the album 's songs " arrive in huge gusts of rhythm and emotion , with Beyoncé 's voice rippling over clattery beats " . Jonah Weiner of Blender commented that " sweaty up @-@ tempo numbers prove the best platform for Beyoncé 's <unk> phrasing and pipe @-@ flaunting fireballs " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic felt that , despite " no songs with the smooth elegance " of " Me , Myself and I " or " Be with You " , the album is " lean in a beneficial way " . The Boston Globe 's Sarah Rodman commented that the production team helped Beyoncé " focus on edgier , up @-@ tempo tracks that take her sweet soprano to new places " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian felt that , " apart from a few pop @-@ R & B space @-@ fillers , there 's not much to dislike about B 'Day " . Robert Christgau from MSN Music said " on most of [ the songs ] she 's wronged yet still in control because she 's got so much money " and felt that Beyoncé " earns her props " if " opulence can signify liberation in this grotesquely materialistic time , as in hip @-@ hop it can " . 
 In a mixed review , Jon Pareles of The New York Times found the album " tense , high @-@ strung and obsessive " , and said that it was neither " ingratiating or seductive " . Richard Cromelin of the Los Angeles Times observed that Beyoncé " heads into a new , more challenging terrain " , but " some of the experiments don 't click " . Although he found the album " solid " , Mike Joseph of PopMatters said that " aside from its relatively short running time , it sounds suspiciously under produced " . Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone averred that " while the mostly up @-@ tempo disc never lacks for energy , some of the more beat @-@ driven tracks feel harmonically and melodically undercooked , with hooks that don 't live up to ' Crazy in Love ' or the best Destiny 's Child hits " . Priya Elan of NME cited only " Freakum Dress " and " Ring the Alarm " as highlights and criticized that " too many tracks sound like updated versions of former glories " , with no song on @-@ par with " Crazy in Love " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2007 , B 'Day was nominated for five Grammy Awards at the 49th annual ceremony , including Best Contemporary R & B Album , Best Female R & B Vocal Performance for " Ring the Alarm " and Best R & B Song and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration " for " Déjà Vu " . The Freemasons club mix of " Déjà Vu " without the rap was put forward in the Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical category . B 'Day won the award for Best Contemporary R & B Album . The following year , B 'Day received two Grammy nominations for Record of the Year for " Irreplaceable " and Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for " Beautiful Liar " ( with Shakira ) . The same year , she also received a Grammy nomination for her work on Dreamgirls . In April 2013 , Vibe magazine named B 'Day the 41st best album since 1993 , as well as the greatest party album of the last twenty years . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The cover art for the single " Ring the Alarm " fueled controversy after Beyoncé used alligators during the photo shoot . Beyoncé revealed that using the animal and taping their mouths shut was her idea . PETA , an animal rights organization which had previously confronted her after she had used furs for her fashion line 's clothing design , contacted a biologist who later wrote a letter to her , stating " As a specialist in reptile biology and welfare , I 'm concerned about your posing with a terrified baby alligator for your new album cover . Humans and alligators are not natural bedfellows , and the two should not mix at events such as photo shoots . In my view , doing so is arguably abusive to an animal . " 
 In 2007 , Beyoncé appeared on billboards and newspapers across Australia showing her holding an antiquated cigarette holder . Taken from the back cover of B 'Day , the image provoked response from an anti @-@ smoking group , stating that she did not need to add the cigarette holder " to make herself appear more sophisticated " . In the same year , three weeks after their release , the deluxe edition and the video anthology DVD were temporarily ceased for retail in stores . A lawsuit was filed for breach of contract of using " Still in Love ( Kissing You ) " , a version of British singer Des 'ree 's original song " Kissing You " . Not intended for the album 's inclusion , Des 'ree 's deal also stipulated that the title of the song was not to be altered , and a video was not to be made . After the infringement case , the re @-@ issued version of the album does not include the track , and instead includes " If " as a replacement . The lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice in October 2007 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 North American deluxe edition 
 International deluxe edition 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 ^ b signifies a co @-@ producer 
 " Suga Mama " samples " Searching for Soul " by Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers . 
 " Upgrade U " samples " Girls Can 't Do What the Guys Do " by Betty Wright . 
 " Resentment " samples " Think ( Instrumental ) " by Curtis Mayfield . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of B 'Day . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = MediEvil 2 = 
 MediEvil 2 ( stylised as MediEvil II in North America ) is an action @-@ adventure hack and slash video game developed by SCE Cambridge Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation . It is the second instalment in the MediEvil series and a sequel to MediEvil . It was first released on 19 April 2000 in Europe and 30 April 2000 in North America . Taking place 500 years after the events of the first game , it follows series ' protagonist Sir Daniel Fortesque 's revival in Victorian era London as he attempts to stop sorcerer Lord Palethorn and Jack the Ripper 's plans to terrorise the city by raising the dead . 
 Following the positive reception of the first game , Sony Computer Entertainment commissioned SCE Cambridge Studio to make a sequel to MediEvil before the end of the PlayStation 's lifespan . The original concepts for MediEvil 2 went through many transformations during development before the Cambridge team finally settled on making a sequel set during the Victorian Gothic revival , largely reminiscent of its predecessor . The game received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release , with praise including slight improvements over its predecessor such as artificial intelligence and graphical enhancements , but was criticised for lack of innovation from the original . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The interface and gameplay style do not differ much from the previous title . MediEvil 2 sees the player once again in control of Sir Daniel Fortesque , who can use various forms of weaponry , such as close range swords and clubs to long @-@ range crossbows or catapults . The game contains several of the original forms of gameplay , weaponry , and graphics that were present in the first instalment of the series . Similar to its predecessor , Dan is able to tear off his skeletal arm and use it as a club to fight off enemies during the early levels . Whilst featuring many of the classic swords and other medieval weaponry , new weapons featured in MediEvil 2 include pistols , shotguns and Gatling guns . 
 Dan can visit merchants known as ' <unk> ' to buy additional ammunition and services . He can also get advice from his ghost sidekick named Winston to learn new moves or to save the player 's game between longer levels . Similar to the previous game , Dan 's health is determined by a single health bar , which reduces when Dan is hit . It also depletes completely if he drowns or falls from a great height . If Dan completely runs out of health , the game restarts from the last known save point . Dan can refill his maximum health by collecting Life Bottles , which automatically refill his health if it is depleted . Whilst defeating enemies , Dan 's Chalice of Souls will gradually fill up , which can then be collected and traded with Professor Kift to unlock new weapons and items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins 500 years after Sir Daniel Fortesque 's battle against the evil sorcerer Zarok in events from the previous game . In Kensington in the year 1886 , a sorcerer named Lord Palethorn discovers Zarok 's spellbook and casts its spell of raising the dead over the city of London . However , the pages of the book soon scatter across London and Palethorn gains a demon @-@ like appearance as a result . The spell Palethorn casts once again brings Sir Daniel Fortesque , who was resting at a nearby museum , back to life . He is recruited by a professor named Hamilton Kift and his ghostly sidekick Winston ( a play on Winston Churchill ) to recover the pages of Zarok 's spellbook and put a stop to Palethorn 's plans . Along the way , they end up being joined by an ancient mummy princess named Kiya , Dan 's future love interest . 
 During an incident in which Kiya goes off on her own , she is killed by Jack the Ripper , much to Dan 's shock . Having discovered a time machine , Dan travels back in time to save Kiya in Whitechapel , merging with his past self to gain golden armour . As Dan finally confronts Palethorn , he steals the pages from him and uses them to summon a large blue demon . Dan manages to turn the demon against Palethorn , putting a stop to both of them . As Palethorn blows up his lair with his last breath , Dan decides to join Kiya in the afterlife as they return to their eternal rest . If the player has collected all the Chalices , Dan and Kiya go for a ride on the time machine which takes them back to the time of the first MediEvil instead only to find Palethorn has merged with Zarok . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the success of the first MediEvil , Sony Computer Entertainment commissioned SCE Cambridge to develop a sequel that would be released before the end of the PlayStation 's lifespan . Chris Sorrell , who previously served as director of the first game , was not involved in development so the project was handed over to James Shepherd instead . According to Shepherd , the original plot for MediEvil 2 had previous antagonist Zarok being held prisoner in the Tower of London and Sir Daniel Fortesque 's objective would be to free him , but this idea was eventually dropped due it being considered identical to a " B @-@ movie twist ending " . 
 The Cambridge studio decided it would not be difficult to make a sequel to the first MediEvil , considering that the ending of its predecessor would give the team an opportunity to set the next game in a different time period . Shepherd settled on MediEvil 2 being set in the Victorian era , the birthplace of the Neo @-@ Gothic revival . Shepherd considered the hardest part of the development was deciding how to make the game better than its predecessor through making certain aspects of the game humorous . To achieve this end , the Cambridge studio recoded a lot of core technology , which Shepherd considered was arguably similar to " starting from scratch " . Various features cut from the previous game were added into MediEvil 2 , such as playable characters and levels that featured puzzles . By the time the game reached beta status the game offered larger levels , improved NPC logic , and more moves for the protagonist . 
 = = Reception = = 
 MediEvil 2 received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release . The game was mostly praised for its rich , detailed graphics but was criticised by many reviewers for its bad camera angles , easy difficulty and for being too similar to the first game . The game received an aggregate score of 79 % from GameRankings , slightly lower than its predecessor . At the 2000 BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Awards , MediEvil 2 won the best console game category . 
 IGN 's Doug Perry praised the graphical advancements of the game , noticing that the sharper detail brings out a more " sophisticated feel " to the story and the new addition of cutscenes create a better sense of continuity and story to help break up the game into a more controlled broader world . Shawn Sparks of Game Revolution similarly praised the improved graphics , noting that smooth frame rate and sharper graphics brought out the original PlayStation 's power despite nearing the end of its lifespan . Sparks hailed the graphics as " eye candy " and said that the levels are " a joy to explore " . 
 Despite the graphical achievements of the game , the level layouts and camera work were among the main criticisms . Perry noted the game 's " plain wide confusion " in level layouts would cause frustration for players , and was several times found without direction in the larger levels . Sparks also noted similar concerns with confusing level layout . Perry disliked the fixed camera positioning throughout the game , saying that at least 20 % of the camera angles could have been tuned or changed to provide better views for the player , outlining that the camera was " good , not great " and a small improvement to its predecessor . Daily Radar 's Stephen Frost praised the game 's improved artificial intelligence and harder difficulty in comparison to the first game , summarising that MediEvil 2 was " better , not perfect " although he thought that the game was still lacking in innovation . 
 = Little Red Rooster = 
 " Little Red Rooster " ( or " The Red Rooster " as it was first titled ) is a blues standard credited to arranger and songwriter Willie Dixon . The song was first recorded in 1961 by American blues musician Howlin ' Wolf in the Chicago blues style . His vocal and slide guitar playing are key elements of the song . It is rooted in the Delta blues tradition and the theme is derived from folklore . Musical antecedents to " Little Red Rooster " appear in earlier songs by blues artists Charlie Patton and Memphis Minnie . 
 A variety of musicians have interpreted and recorded " Little Red Rooster " . Some add new words and instrumentation to mimic the sounds of animals mentioned in the lyrics . American soul music singer Sam Cooke adapted the song using a more uptempo approach and it became a successful single on both the US rhythm and blues and pop record charts in 1963 . Concurrently , Dixon and Howlin ' Wolf toured the UK with the American Folk Blues Festival and helped popularize Chicago blues with local rock musicians overseas . 
 The Rolling Stones were among the first British rock groups to record modern electric blues songs . In 1964 , they recorded " Little Red Rooster " with original member Brian Jones , a key player in the recording . Their rendition , which remains closer to the original arrangement than Cooke 's , became a number one record in the UK and continues to be the only blues song to reach the top of the British chart . The Stones frequently performed it on television and in concert and released several live recordings of the song . " Little Red Rooster " continues to be performed and recorded , making it one of Willie Dixon 's best @-@ known compositions . 
 = = Background = = 
 Willie Dixon 's " The Red Rooster " / " Little Red Rooster " uses elements from several earlier blues songs . The theme reflects early twentieth century folk beliefs in the American South that a rooster contributes to peace in the barnyard . The image of the rooster appears in several blues songs from the 1920s and 1930s , with two particular songs identified as precursors . Influential Delta blues musician Charlie Patton 's 1929 " <unk> Rooster Blues " contains the verses " What you want with a rooster , he won 't crow ' fore day " and " I know my dog anywhere I hear him bark " , which are analogous to Dixon 's " I have a little red rooster , too lazy to crow ' fore day " and " Oh the dogs begin to bark " . Some of the lyrics to Memphis Minnie 's 1936 acoustic combo blues " If You See My Rooster ( Please Run Him Home ) " are also similar . For example , she sings " If you see my rooster , please run ' im on back home " , while Dixon uses " If you see my little red rooster , please drive ' im home " . Additionally , similar melody lines are found in both songs . For her recording , Memphis Minnie does a full @-@ throated imitation of a rooster 's crow . <unk> animal sounds later became a feature of several recordings of " Little Red Rooster " . 
 In the post @-@ war era , Margie Day with the Griffin Brothers recorded a song in 1950 titled " Little Red Rooster " in an updated jump blues style . It is a boisterous , uptempo piece performed by a small combo group . Day 's lyrics include " Got a little red rooster , and man how he can crow ... He 's a boss of the barnyard , any ol ' place he goes " ; Dixon 's song uses the line " Keep everything in the barnyard , upset in every way " . The original Dot Records single lists the songwriters as " Griffin @-@ Griffin " . Day 's song was a hit , reaching number five on Billboard 's Best Selling Retail Rhythm & Blues Records chart in 1951 . 
 = = Howlin ' Wolf song = = 
 Delta blues musician Charlie Patton influenced Howlin ' Wolf 's early musical development . Wolf later recorded adaptations of several Patton songs , including " Spoonful " , " Smokestack Lightning " , and " Saddle My Pony " . Relatives and early friends recall Howlin ' Wolf playing a song similar to " The Red Rooster " in the 1930s . Evelyn Sumlin , who was the wife of long @-@ time Wolf guitarist Hubert Sumlin , felt that several of the songs that were later arranged by and credited to Willie Dixon had already been developed by Howlin ' Wolf . 
 Howlin ' Wolf recorded " The Red Rooster " in Chicago in June 1961 . The song is performed as a slow blues in the key of A. Although Dixon biographer Mitsutoshi Inaba notes it as a twelve @-@ bar blues , the changes in the first section vary due to extra beats . Lyrically , it follows the classic AAB blues pattern , where two repeated lines are followed by a second . The opening verse echoes Charlie Patton 's second verse : 
 As with many blues songs , Dixon 's lyrics are ambiguous and may be seen on several levels . Interpretations of his verses range from the " most overtly phallic song since Blind Lemon Jefferson 's [ 1927 ] ' Black Snake Moan ' " to an innocuous farm ditty . Although Dixon described it in the latter terms , he added , " I wrote it as a barnyard song really , and some people even take it that way ! " The lyrics are delivered in Howlin ' Wolf 's distinctive vocal style ; music writer Bill Janovitz describes it as displaying a " master singer 's attention to phrasing and note choice , milking out maximum emotion and nuance from the melody " . 
 A key element of the song is the distinctive slide guitar , played by Howlin ' Wolf , with backing by long @-@ time accompanist Hubert Sumlin on electric guitar . It is one of only two of the many songs recorded by Howlin ' Wolf in the early 1960s which include his guitar playing . Described as " slinky " by Janovitz and " sly " by music historian Ted Gioia , it weaves in and out of the vocal lines and is the stylistic foundation of the song . The other musicians include Johnny Jones on piano , Willie Dixon on double bass , Sam Lay on drums , and possibly Jimmy Rogers on guitar . 
 " The Red Rooster " , backed with " Shake for Me " , which was also recorded during the same session , was issued by Chess Records in October 1961 . Neither song , nor his other songs from the period now considered to be among his best known , entered the record charts . Both were included on his acclaimed 1962 album Howlin ' Wolf , often called the Rockin ' Chair album . " The Red Rooster " also appears on many Howlin ' Wolf compilations , including Howlin ' Wolf : The Chess Box and Howlin ' Wolf : His Best – The Chess 50th Anniversary Collection . 
 Later , Chess arranged for Howlin ' Wolf to record " The Red Rooster " and some other songs with Eric Clapton , Steve Winwood , Bill Wyman , and Charlie Watts for the 1971 album The London Howlin ' Wolf Sessions . At the beginning of the recording , Howlin ' Wolf can be heard attempting to explain the timing of the song , because as Wyman later explained , " we were kind of playing it backwards " . Finally , Clapton ( joined in by the others ) encourages him to play it on guitar so " I can follow you if I can see what you 're doing " . Despite their efforts to get it right , according to Wyman , " the Chess people ended up using the old ' backwards ' take anyway " . 
 = = Sam Cooke rendition = = 
 On February 23 , 1963 , American soul singer Sam Cooke recorded his interpretation of Willie Dixon 's song , calling it " Little Red Rooster " . The song was first proposed for Cooke 's brother , L.C. , who was recording some new material at the time . However , L.C. felt the song was not suitable for him . " I said , ' I 'm not a blues singer . ' So Sam said , ' Well , I 'm gonna do it then , ' " L.C. recalled . Sam Cooke chose to forgo Howlin ' Wolf 's gutbucket approach and came up with an arrangement that music writer Charles Keil describes as " somewhat more relaxed and respectable " . Dixon 's lyrics are delivered in Cooke 's articulate vocal style , but with an additional verse : 
 Cooke 's musical arrangement follows a typical twelve @-@ bar blues structure and is performed at a faster tempo than Howlin ' Wolf 's . It has been notated as a moderate blues ( 92 beats per minute ) in 12 / 8 time in the key of A. The recording took place in Los Angeles with a small group of session musicians . A young Billy Preston uses " playful organ vocalizing " or organ lines to imitate the sounds of a rooster crowing and , following the lyrics , dogs barking and hounds howling . Also backing Cooke are Ray Johnson on piano and Hal Blaine on drums ( Barney Kessel has also been mentioned as the guitarist ) . The song was a hit , reaching number seven on Billboard 's Hot R & B singles chart . It was also a crossover hit and appeared at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 pop chart . " Little Red Rooster " is included on Cooke 's 1963 album Night Beat , which reached number 62 on the Billboard 200 album chart . It also appears on several Cooke compilation albums , including Portrait of a Legend : 1951 – 1964 , which was released in 2003 . 
 = = Rolling Stones version = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Chess Records Chicago artists , including Howlin ' Wolf and Muddy Waters , influenced the Rolling Stones , with the band taking their name from a Muddy Waters tune and playing from a repertoire of blues songs at the beginning of their career . In 1962 , before they had recorded as a group , Mick Jagger , Brian Jones , and Keith Richards , attended the first American Folk Blues Festival , whose performers included Howlin ' Wolf . Willie Dixon , another Festival player , later recalled " When the Rolling Stones came to Chess studios , they had already met me and doing my songs , especially ' Little Red Rooster ' " . When Dixon and Howlin ' Wolf were in London , they met several local rock musicians . Early Stones manager Giorgio Gomelsky described such a meeting : 
 There was Howlin ' Wolf , Sonny Boy [ Williamson II ] and Willie Dixon , the three of them sitting on this sofa ... Willie was just singing and tapping on the back of the chair and Sonny Boy would play the harmonica and they would do new songs . To a degree , that 's why people know those songs and recorded them later . I remember ' 300 Pounds of Joy ' , ' Little Red Rooster ' , ' You Shook Me ' were all songs Willie passed on at that time ... Jimmy Page came often , the Yardbirds , [ and ] Brian Jones . 
 Dixon added , " I left lots of tapes when I was over there [ in London ... I told ] them anybody who wanted to could go and make a blues song . That 's how the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds got their songs " . Stones biographer Sean Egan noted , " In many ways , this is Brian Jones ' record . [ He was ] always the biggest blues purist in the band " . 
 Although they had already recorded several Chess songs , according to Bill Wyman , " Little Red Rooster " was " a slow , intense blues song ... [ that producer Andrew Loog Oldham argued was ] totally uncommercial and wrong for our new @-@ found fame ... the tempo made the track virtually <unk> " . Mick Jagger commented 
 The reason we recorded ' Little Red Rooster ' isn 't because we want to bring blues to the masses . We 've been going on and on about blues , so we thought it was about time we stopped talking and did something about it . We liked that particular song , so we released it . We 're not on the blues kick as far as recording goes . The next record will be entirely different , just as all the others have been . 
 = = = Composition and recording = = = 
 Although Wyman noted some early criticism of their rendition , Janovitz described it as " a fairly faithful version [ of the original ] " . It is performed as a moderately slow ( 74 bpm ) blues in the key of G. Although AllMusic reviewer Matthew Greenwald describes their arrangement as having a straight I @-@ IV @-@ V twelve @-@ bar blues progression , they sometimes vary the changes , but not in the same manner as Howlin ' Wolf . Jagger uses the lyrics from the original ( omitting Cooke 's extra verse ) , but makes one important change — instead of " I got a little red rooster " , he sings " I am the little red rooster " , although the later verse reverts to " If you see my little red rooster " . Instrumentally , Bill Wyman generally follows Dixon 's bass lines . Charlie Watts later admitted that his drum part was inspired by Sam Cooke 's version , which was played by Hal Blaine . Keith Richards adds a second guitar part ; according to Egan , " the juxtaposition of acoustic guitar and electric slide all make for something richer and warmer than any blues they had ever attempted before " . 
 However , it is Jones ' contributions that are usually singled out . Egan writes " it is his [ Jones ' ] playing that makes the record via both the cawing bottleneck that is its most prominent feature and his closing harmonica " . Biographer Stephen Davis adds , " It was his [ Jones ' ] masterpiece , his inspired guitar howling like a hound , barking like a dog , crowing like a rooster " ( similar to Billy Preston 's " playful organ vocalizing " ) . Wyman wrote " I believe ' Rooster ' provided Brian Jones with one of his finest hours . 
 Two different dates and recording locations are known . Wyman recalled that the song was recorded September 2 , 1964 , at Regent Sound in London , while the session information for the 1989 Rolling Stones box set Singles Collection : The London Years lists " November 1964 Chess Studios , Chicago " . Biographer Massimo Bonanno commented , " The boys entered the Regent Sound Studios on September 2nd [ 1964 ] to resume work on ... ' Little Red Rooster ' ... [ and later on November 8 , 1964 , at Chess ] some unverified sources [ indicate ] the boys also put the final touches to their next British single ' Little Red Rooster ' " . According to Davis , Jones was left to later record overdubs after the track was recorded without him . 
 = = = Charts and releases = = = 
 " Little Red Rooster " was released on Friday , November 13 , 1964 , and reached number one on the UK Singles Chart on December 5 , 1964 , where it stayed for one week . It remains to this day the only time a blues song has ever topped the British pop charts . According to AllMusic writer Matthew Greenwald , " Little Red Rooster " was Brian Jones ' favorite Stones single . Wyman noted that it " realized a cherished ambition [ of Jones ] to put blues music at the top of the charts , and meant his guilt of having ' sold out ' completely to pop fame was diminished " . It was the band 's last cover song to be released as a single during the 1960s . 
 In 1964 and 1965 , the Rolling Stones performed " Little Red Rooster " several times on television , including the British programs Ready Steady Go ! ( November 20 , 1964 ) and Thank Your Lucky Stars ( December 5 , 1964 ) ; and the American The Ed Sullivan Show ( May 2 , 1965 ) , Shindig ! ( May 20 , 1965 ) , and Shivaree ( May 1965 ) . On Shindig ! , Jagger and Jones introduced Howlin ' Wolf as the first one to record " Little Red Rooster " and as one of their first influences . Although often reported that the Stones would only agreed to appear if Howlin ' Wolf ( or Muddy Waters ) also performed , Keith Richards later explained that the show 's producer , Jack Good , was in on the idea to present an original blues artist on prime time network television . During the group 's concerts in 1965 , Charlie Watts , who did not normally address the audiences , was often brought from behind the drum kit to the front of the stage to introduce " Little Red Rooster " from Jagger 's microphone . Wyman recalled particularly enthusiastic responses to the song in Sydney ( at the Agricultural Hall in January 1965 ) , Paris ( Olympia in April 1965 ) , and Long Beach , California ( Long Beach Auditorium on May 16 , 1965 ) . 
 " Little Red Rooster " is included on their third American album , The Rolling Stones , Now ! , released in February 1965 . It also appears on several Rolling Stones compilation albums , including the UK version of Big Hits ( High Tide and Green Grass ) , Singles Collection : The London Years , Rolled Gold : The Very Best of the Rolling Stones , and <unk> ! . Live versions appear on Love You Live and Flashpoint ( with Eric Clapton , who contributed to Howlin ' Wolf 's 1971 remake , on slide guitar ) . 
 = = = No U.S. single release = = = 
 Bill Wyman later wrote in his book Stone Alone that " on December 18 , 1964 , news came from America that ' Little Red Rooster ' was banned from record release because of its ' sexual connotations ' " . This has been repeated and embellished to include that it had been banned by or from American radio stations ; however , Sam Cooke 's version with nearly the same lyrics had been a Top 40 crossover pop hit one year earlier . Additionally , the Rolling Stones ' " Little Red Rooster " was included on Los Angeles radio station KRLA 's ( at the time the number @-@ one Top 40 radio station in the second largest market in the U.S. ) playlist from December 9 , 1964 to February 5 , 1965 . Radio personality Bob Eubanks wrote in his weekly Record Review column for January 1 , 1965 , " ' Little Red Rooster ' , by the Stones , is still KRLA 's exclusive ... Don 't fret , though , it may still be released in this country " . 
 " Mona ( I Need You Baby ) " from the Rolling Stones ' first UK album was also being aired and considered for their next single , but with " Time Is on My Side " , " Heart of Stone " , and " The Last Time " on the U.S. charts during this same period , neither " Little Red Rooster " or " Mona " were released as singles . However , they were included on Rolling Stones , Now ! ( by contrast , only " Little Red Rooster " and " The Last Time " were released as singles in the UK during this period ) . Although it appeared at the top of the British chart for one week , Jagger later commented , " I still dig ' Little Red Rooster ' , but it didn 't sell " . Egan believes that actual sales of the record may have fallen short of previous Stones ' singles . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 Howlin ' Wolf 's original " The Red Rooster " is included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's list of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . As well as being a blues standard , Janovitz calls " Little Red Rooster " a " classic song [ that ] has been recorded countless times , a warhorse for most late- ' 60s and 1970s classic rock acts " . Dixon and Snowden have noted cover versions by Luther Allison , Eddie C. Campbell , the Doors ( with John Sebastian ) , Jose Feliciano , Grateful Dead , <unk> , Ronnie Hawkins , <unk> Hill , Hubert Sumlin , and Big Mama Thornton . 
 = Michael Wacha = 
 Michael Joseph Wacha ( / <unk> / ; born July 1 , 1991 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher for the St. Louis Cardinals of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played college baseball for the Texas A & M Aggies . 
 The Cardinals selected Wacha in the first round of the 2012 Major League Baseball Draft from Texas A & M. With just one year in the minor leagues , he made his MLB debut on May 30 , 2013 . Following a strong regular season , Wacha earned the 2013 National League Championship Series Most Valuable Player Award , after yielding one run and eight hits in his first 21 postseason innings pitched . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Michael Wacha was born in Iowa City , Iowa , to Tom and Karen Wacha as the second of four children . He has one older brother , Charlie , one younger brother , Lucas , and a younger sister , <unk> . When Wacha was three years old , his family moved from Iowa City to Texarkana , Texas . His future college coach , Rob Childress , first spotted Wacha pitching in an American Legion game ; Wacha 's father was the coach and his sister the <unk> . Wacha 's uncle , Dusty Rogers , pitched in the Cincinnati Reds organization from 1984 through 1988 . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Wacha attended Pleasant Grove High School in Texarkana , Texas , where he played for the school 's baseball and basketball teams . As a basketball player , he lettered three years as a forward and was honored on the first @-@ team all @-@ district on his way to advancing his school to the regional finals during his senior year . In his junior baseball season , Wacha posted a 16 – 3 W – L record , pitching the Hawks to the state finals . As a senior , he led the Hawks to the state semi @-@ finals in his senior year in 2009 with a 6 – 3 win – loss record ( W – L record ) . Wacha was a two @-@ time all @-@ state selection ; he was selected to the all @-@ state first @-@ team and all @-@ state tournament team . <unk> academically , Wacha was a member of the National Honor Society ; in basketball , Wacha earned first @-@ team academic all @-@ state honors . 
 As an enrollee at Texas A & M University , Wacha played three years of college baseball for the Texas A & M Aggies . At this point , Wacha stood 6 ' 5 " ( 77 inches ( 200 cm ) ) tall , weighed 180 pounds ( 82 kg ) and threw his fastball with a velocity between 84 miles per hour ( 135 km / h ) and 88 miles per hour ( 142 km / h ) . During his freshman campaign , he made ten starts in 25 total appearances and posted a 2 @.@ 90 earned run average ( ERA ) and a 9 – 2 W – L record . Wacha also registered 97 strikeouts ( SO ) and 22 walks ( BB ) in 105 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched ( IP ) . His nine wins ranked fifth and 2 @.@ 90 ERA sixth in the Big 12 Conference . For his performance , Louisville Slugger named Wacha a freshman All @-@ American . 
 In his sophomore year , Wacha posted a 9 – 4 record in 16 starts with 123 SO and just 20 BB and a 2 @.@ 29 ERA in 129 2 ⁄ 3 IP . That performance earned him a spot as a Third Team All @-@ American and All @-@ Big 12 Second Team . Wacha was a member of the USA Baseball Collegiate National Team . He also pitched in the Big 12 Championship , NCAA College Station Regional and College World Series at the end of his sophomore year . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues ( 2012 – 13 ) = = = 
 The Cardinals selected Wacha in the first round with the 19th overall selection of the 2012 MLB Draft and signed him for $ 1 @.@ 9 million on June 14 , 2012 . His draft slot originally belonged to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , who , upon signing Albert Pujols as a free agent , surrendered it to the Cardinals . Cardinals director of scouting Dan <unk> foresaw Wacha as a future starter for the Cardinals whose size and competitive nature drew favorable comparisons with right @-@ handers Chris Carpenter and Adam Wainwright . 
 Wacha ascended quickly through the minor leagues . The Cardinals first assigned Wacha to the Gulf Coast League ( Rookie League ) Cardinals , then promoted him to the Palm Beach Cardinals in the Florida State League and finally to the Springfield Cardinals of the Double @-@ A Texas League before the 2012 season ended . In 21 innings pitched ( IP ) between the three levels , he struck out 40 batters , allowed just eight hits , four walks and two runs . With Springfield , he pitched eight innings , struck out 17 batters , and allowed just one home run ( HR ) . 
 The Cardinals invited Wacha to their major league spring training camp in 2013 . He impressed team management and players alike , striking out fifteen batters while only allowing one walk and one unearned run in eleven and two @-@ thirds innings of work before being reassigned to the minor league camp . 
 Wacha started the 2013 season with the Memphis Redbirds of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League , going 4 – 0 with a league @-@ leading 2 @.@ 05 ERA in nine games started and 52 2 ⁄ 3 IP before his first call @-@ up to the Major Leagues . His overall season totals at Memphis included a 2 @.@ 65 ERA in 15 starts , 73 SO and 85 IP . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Rookie season ( 2013 ) = = = = 
 The Cardinals activated Wacha on May 30 to make his major league debut against the Kansas City Royals at Busch Stadium . Just 364 days after throwing his last pitch for Texas A & M , Wacha was standing on a major league mound for the first time . 
 In his first at @-@ bat in the majors , Wacha singled to right @-@ center field . On the mound , he demonstrated the prodigious pitching ability that rapidly shuttled him through the minor leagues when he retired the first 13 Royals he faced before giving up a hit , a double in the fifth inning . That runner then scored after another hit . He pitched seven innings with 93 pitches ( 67 strikes ) , giving up only two hits and one run , walking none , and striking out six , leaving with a 2 – 1 lead . Wacha lost the chance for a win in the ninth , when Mitchell Boggs relieved and gave up a tying home run to the first batter he faced . 
 The Arizona Diamondbacks scored six runs against Wacha in his second start , which turned out to be a no @-@ decision on his part . Wacha earned his first MLB win on June 11 as the Cardinals beat the New York Mets 9 – 2 at Citi Field . The game got off to a rough start as he gave up a home run to the second Met batter he faced , walked three others and saw his team fall behind two runs in the first inning . However , he rebounded and scattered five hits and no more walks over six total innings of work . It was Wacha 's third career start . Three days after earning his first major league win , the Cardinals optioned Wacha back to Memphis to clear roster room for pitcher Jake Westbrook as he returned from the disabled list ( DL ) . During his first stint with the Cardinals , Wacha posted a 1 @-@ 0 record with an ERA of 4 @.@ 58 in three starts . 
 The Cardinals recalled Wacha in mid @-@ August and he was on the roster to stay for the remainder of the season . He started one game against the Chicago Cubs before being moved to the bullpen . Manager Mike Matheny placed him back in the rotation in September . He pitched six shutout innings with just three hits against the Cincinnati Reds . 
 Encompassing his last regular @-@ season game and first three playoff appearances in 2013 , Wacha authored a series of masterful performances . On September 24 , he pitched a no @-@ hitter through 8 2 ⁄ 3 innings against the Washington Nationals that ended when Ryan Zimmerman stroked an infield single that glanced off Wacha 's glove . It was Washington 's only hit as the Cardinals prevailed 2 – 0 . It was also the third potential no @-@ hitter lost with the final out to go on the 2013 season , after Yu Darvish and Yusmeiro Petit . Wacha finished his regular season in the Major Leagues appearing in 15 games , making nine starts and pitching 64 2 ⁄ 3 innings . He surrendered 52 hits , twenty runs , five home runs and struck out 65 hitters for a 2 @.@ 78 ERA . 
 = = = = First playoff experience ( 2013 ) = = = = 
 On October 7 , Wacha started his first Major League playoff game . In 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings of Game 4 of the 2013 National League Division Series ( NLDS ) – an elimination game against the Pittsburgh Pirates – he again surrendered one hit ( a home run ) and two walks . Due to Wacha 's back @-@ to @-@ back one @-@ hit performances , Matheny announced that he would start Game 2 of the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . In that game on October 12 , he outdueled Clayton Kershaw in 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings for a 1 – 0 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers . In just the 11th start of his MLB career , Wacha joined Bob Gibson as the only pitchers in franchise history to strike out at least eight batters while yielding one or no runs in consecutive postseason starts . 
 Facing Kershaw again in Game 6 , Wacha yielded just two hits in seven innings as his opponent unravelled in a 9 – 0 victory that sent the Cardinals to the World Series . Wacha won both his NLCS starts , holding the Dodgers to a .149 batting average against ( BAA ) , two walks and 13 SO in 13 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless IP as he earned the NLCS MVP . He became the fourth rookie to win a postseason MVP , following Larry Sherry ( 1959 World Series ) , Mike Boddicker ( 1983 NLCS ) , and Liván Hernández ( 1997 NLCS and 1997 World Series ) . Through the NLCS , Wacha allowed just one run on eight hits in 21 IP for a 0 @.@ 43 ERA while striking out 22 . 
