 Starting Game Two of the World Series against the Boston Red Sox , Wacha pitched six innings in a 4 – 2 Cardinals ' victory , although he said after the game he " didn 't have [ his ] best stuff . " Before surrendering a home run to David Ortiz , Wacha tied Gibson with the longest scoreless streak ( 19 innings ) in Cardinals ' postseason history . Wacha became the 17th @-@ youngest pitcher overall to win a World Series game and the second @-@ youngest in Cardinals history behind only Paul Dean . In Game 6 , with the Cardinals facing elimination once more , Wacha was again called upon to save their season after winning four consecutive playoff starts with a 1 @.@ 00 ERA and just 11 hits allowed in 27 innings for a <unk> opponents ' batting average . However , the Red Sox finally solved him , tagging him for six runs in 3 2 ⁄ 3 innings on the way to defeating the Cardinals for their eighth World Series title . 
 = = = = 2014 – present = = = = 
 Wacha was guaranteed a regular post in the rotation at the outset of the 2014 season , and his first two starts came against the Reds . Receiving one win and one no @-@ decision , he furthered a strong start against them . His first career 22 2 ⁄ 3 IP against them included just 13 hits and five walks allowed with 20 SO and a 0 @.@ 40 ERA . In an April 24 start against the New York Mets , Wacha struck out nine batters in the first three innings . This was just the 11th such occurrence in the expansion era . With 41 miles per hour ( 66 km / h ) winds whipping , he struck out ten total in four innings but also walked five and required 93 pitches . Two of the walks proved costly as they were with the bases loaded ; the Mets took advantage in a 3 – 2 triumph . 
 Wacha 's first 15 starts of 2014 included a 2 @.@ 79 ERA and 5 – 5 W – L. However , after pitching with lingering shoulder discomfort and fatigue in May and June , the Cardinals placed him on the DL on June 18 . A series of magnetic resonance ( MRI ) and computed tomography ( CT ) images revealed an injury termed as a stress reaction in the scapula behind his throwing arm . The stress reaction apparently was a case of the shoulder not repairing itself as fast as the strain from regular pitching had caused between the scapula bone and tendons . 
 Although similar to the stress fracture injury Brandon McCarthy suffered , it was deemed less severe . According to medical opinion , it was part of the same injury process , but Wacha 's injury had not progressed as far as McCarthy 's as a fracture had yet to occur . Therefore , Cardinals general manager John Mozeliak stated , as " a precursor to a stress fracture , ... which is a precursor to a ... fracture , " it was more manageable to correct . With limited knowledge on the related biomechanical processes , the Cardinals training and medical staff researched methods to treat Wacha 's injury and circumvent the same course from happening again ; likewise , they were uncertain of when he was to return to play . 
 Wacha surrendered a series @-@ ending , three @-@ run walk @-@ off home run to Travis Ishikawa of the San Francisco Giants in the ninth inning of Game 5 of the 2014 NLCS , as the Giants prevailed , 6 – 3 . 
 The Cardinals won each of Wacha 's first nine starts of 2015 while he credited as the winner in seven of them . With an ERA of 1 @.@ 87 , he became the first Cardinal to start with a 7 – 0 record since Matt Morris started 8 – 0 in 2005 . He was selected to his first All @-@ Star Game , played at Great American Ball Park in Cincinnati . The Cardinals skipped 10 days between two August starts over concerns about his shoulder . To that point , he was 15 – 4 with a 2 @.@ 69 ERA and 1 @.@ 12 WHIP . In Game 4 of the NLDS against the Cubs on October 12 , 2015 , Wacha surrendered three home runs in 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings in an 8 – 6 loss . 
 = = Pitching profile = = 
 Standing 6 ' 6 " ( 78 inches ( 200 cm ) ) tall and weighing 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) , Wacha repeats the same delivery with all his pitches . Featuring a sinking fastball that usually travels between 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) and 95 miles per hour ( 153 km / h ) , Wacha frequently shows velocity up to 97 miles per hour ( 156 km / h ) . His high arm angle and release point create substantial downward action on his fastball . Wacha 's fastball complement , a changeup , features deep , fading movement to right @-@ handed hitters with a 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) to 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) decrease in velocity from his fastball . Not only is his arm angle on the two pitches the same , the arm speed appears virtually identical to the hitter , thus disguising the difference in velocity . 
 Wacha 's third pitch is an average curveball that travels about 77 miles per hour ( 124 km / h ) and has improved in break and consistency ; in college , scouts considered his curveball a below average pitch . He has a fourth pitch , a slider , that lacks consistent break and darts horizontally similar to the cutter . Wacha attributed the increase in pitch velocity to gaining weight from physical exercise and increased food consumption , asserting that he " felt like the velocity just kept on increasing every single year . I changed my mechanics a little bit when I was in college , and that might have added a few ticks . " Wacha added a cut fastball ( commonly called a " cutter " ) late in the 2013 season , though he only threw the pitch 1 @.@ 8 % of the time . During the 2014 spring training , Wacha showed increased confidence in the pitch after finding a consistent grip . 
 Depending on the source , Wacha shows a wide range of potential . Scouting reports initially projected him for a potential of two plus @-@ plus pitches ( fastball and changeup ) with command of both . Baseball Prospectus noted that his polish due to pitch command helped fast @-@ track him to the Major Leagues . However , a dearth of vigorous fastball life escalates the importance of command . Wacha offsets the shortage of sizable vertical movement with the pronounced descent through which his fastball , changeup and curve travel to create an additional obstacle as hitters to attempt square the bat on the pitch . In addition , the drop in elevation changes the hitter 's eye level . Wacha was previously criticized for a heavy reliance on the fastball from lacking a solid breaking pitch . Before refining his curveball , Baseball Prospect Nation commented that development of a slider " to even only an occasional ' show @-@ me ' pitch would add another element to his game and allow him to become more refined in his pitch sequencing ability to work through a lineup . " 
 During each at @-@ bat , Wacha does not easily give in to the batter . He maintains his composure on the mound . With both fastball and changeup being plus @-@ plus pitches and improved command , Baseball Prospectus and Baseball Prospect Nation conclude his likely future is as a solid number @-@ three starter . However , as command of his curve has markedly improved , so have his projections . The same initial reports stated that if he could enhance his slider 's reliability , he may be able to become a low @-@ end number two starter . Still others , such as scout Ralph Garr , Jr . , and <unk> , project him as a " future top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rotation guy . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As both a play on his last name , and the pronunciation of his first and last names together , " Wacha Wacha " became a phenomenon in 2013 following the favorite catch phrase of Fozzie Bear of The Muppets , and for its similarity to the sound effects from the Pac @-@ Man arcade game . A restaurant in St. Louis named a milkshake the " Wacha Wacha " following his 2013 NLCS MVP honors . The milkshake 's ingredients included vanilla with chocolate chips and Cracker Jacks . Although he could not remember the name of the restaurant ( believed to be Fozzie 's ) , he stated the Cracker Jacks " added a little baseball flair to it . " 
 = Cyber Rights = 
 Cyber Rights : Defending Free speech in the Digital Age is a non @-@ fiction book about <unk> , written by free speech lawyer Mike Godwin . It was first published in 1998 by Times Books . It was republished in 2003 as a revised edition by The MIT Press . Godwin graduated from the University of Texas School of Law in 1990 and was the first staff counsel for the Electronic Frontier Foundation . Written with a first @-@ person perspective , Cyber Rights offers a background in the legal issues and history pertaining to free speech on the Internet . It documents the author 's experiences in defending free speech online , and puts forth the thesis that " the remedy for the abuse of free speech is more speech " . Godwin emphasizes that decisions made about the expression of ideas on the Internet affect freedom of speech in other media as well , as granted by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . 
 The book was received favorably by Library Journal , where it was " Recommended for anyone concerned about expression on the Internet and democratic society . " Publishers Weekly noted Godwin 's " unusually broad view of free speech " , and criticized the author for viewing issues " filtered through rose @-@ colored screens " . The Philadelphia Inquirer highlighted Cyber Rights among " 1998 's Best Reading " . 
 = = Author = = 
 Godwin is a graduate of the University of Texas School of Law . At the time of the book 's first publication , Godwin was employed as a staff counsel EFF . He had been hired as EFF 's first staff counsel after graduating from law school in 1990 . Law Library Journal noted , " In this position , he worked on the frontlines of the fight to make sure that freedom of expression is more than tolerated , that in fact it is able to flourish in cyberspace . " 
 Cyber Rights is Godwin 's first book . Godwin described himself as a civil libertarian . From 1997 to 1998 , Godwin was a fellow of the Media Studies Center . In 2007 , he took a research fellowship at Yale University . Godwin became general counsel for Wikimedia Foundation in July 2007 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Cyber Rights analyzes the legal issues involved with communicating on the Internet , including those relating to Internet privacy and government involvement . The book is written with a first @-@ person perspective : the reader learns of the author 's morning ritual , the fact that his cat is named Francie and that he married a woman he met through a Bulletin Board System . Godwin 's motivation was to keep the Internet safe from government actions that restrict freedom of speech . He asserts that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution should apply equally to the Internet as it does to other media . 
 The book 's early chapters ground the reader in principles involving cyberspace and the law . The author provides enough background that a layperson can understand the relevant legal history , including explaining libel and the extent to which copyrighted text may be quoted and used under the fair use principle . Godwin explains his goal is " to show that striking a balance in favor of individual rights has always been the right decision for us and that it remains so even when technology gives us new ways to exercise those rights . Individual liberty has never weakened us ; freedom of speech , enhanced by the Net , will only make us stronger " . He instructs the reader on how to become proficient in dealing with mainstream news media , writing , " Learn how to hack all the media . Then put that knowledge to good use " . 
 Subsequent chapters consider traditional challenges to broad free speech in the online context , including : defamation , sexual harassment , copyright and issues involving privacy . He dismisses these issues as less important than freedom of speech . Godwin argues that individuals maintain latitude when communicating over the Internet because " it 's far more likely that they 'll do good than otherwise . This is because freedom of speech is itself a good . The framers of the Constitution were right to give it special protection , because societies in which people can speak freely are better off than societies in which they can 't " . 
 The author discusses influential legal cases including a judgment involving <unk> , where the court ruled that the Internet service provider should be deemed similar to a bookstore avoiding liability for publishing potentially offensive speech . He recounts Steve Jackson Games , Inc. v. United States Secret Service which followed a raid by the United States Secret Service in 1990 on Steve Jackson Games and his involvement influencing the media relating to the incident . He cites the <unk> case , which dealt with charges of copyright infringement of software subsequently dismissed . An incident at Santa Rosa Junior College which involved issues of free speech and gender discrimination is discussed and analyzed in the book . 
 Godwin analyzes the effects of a 1995 cover story " <unk> " in TIME magazine and writings by Martin <unk> that discussed the effect of Internet pornography . He explains how the theories presented in the article were discredited . Godwin calls the incident following the TIME article the " cyber @-@ porn panic " ; noting how the magazine published a cover story on a purported pornography " study " and how he and others exposed flaws in the piece . 
 He cites the Communications Decency Act of 1996 ( CDA ) as an example of U.S. government action which cramps free speech . Godwin describes the subsequent attempts to defeat CDA . The Supreme Court of the United States held two sections to be unconstitutional and Godwin recounts how he became emotional over the decision . Throughout the book Godwin emphasizes that " the remedy for the abuse of free speech is more speech " . Cyber Rights puts forth the notion that " virtual communities " can be fostered on the Internet that serve the values of democracy , writing " The decisions we make about the Internet don 't affect just the Internet – they are answers to basic questions about the relationship each citizen has to the government and about the extent to which we trust one another with the full range of fundamental rights granted by the Constitution , " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cyber Rights was reviewed favorably in Library Journal , where it was described as " a provocative discussion of the social and legal issues concerning computer online communications " . The review noted that Godwin , " provides an excellent background to the governmental and privacy dimensions of the Internet , using anecdotal accounts to illustrate web @-@ related legal issues . " Library Journal concluded , " Recommended for anyone concerned about expression on the Internet and democratic society . " Booklist observed , " He wants us to understand that the principles upon which this country is founded are unquestionably worth the risk . He passionately defends , in clear , one @-@ two @-@ three soundbites , the online freedom he wants his daughter to inherit , and he insists that his readers untangle the meanings behind the use of words such as indecency and pornography to frighten and to confuse . " Booklist recommended Cyber Rights be carried in libraries , concluding , " Most libraries will want copies for both circulating and professional collections . " 
 Cyber Rights received a positive review in Salon , which noted , " Readers of ' Cyber Rights ' will range from those who have never heard of Mike Godwin to those who have <unk> with him online at some point or have at least lurked silently as the debate raged . Whatever the number in the first category , those falling into the second are legion . Godwin has been online so long he 's had a celebrated law that predicts the course of online discussions named after him . " The review observed , " Throughout ' Cyber Rights , ' it becomes clear that what makes Godwin a sometimes unpleasant online sparring partner is precisely what has catapulted him to the front lines in the seemingly endless battles for free speech on the Net . ... his tenacity and his insistence on wrestling every last breath out of his opponents ' arguments . " Salon characterized the book as , " an instructional book with an argument to convey – a sort of cross between a dry , <unk> primer and a lively personal history . " 
 Columbia Journalism Review gave the book a favorable review , noting , " This is a lively , garrulous account by an activist who was deeply involved in turning back the threat of regulation and , at least for the time being , securing rights of free expression online . " The review described the latter portion of the book as " a more intense personal chronicle of Godwin 's deep involvement in what he calls the ' <unk> panic ' – the push to control Internet content . " Columbia Journalism Review concluded , " Ultimately , Godwin shows , this strong response laid the groundwork for lawsuits that enabled the Supreme Court to declare the ' decency ' amendment unconstitutional . He was in the thick of things throughout this effort , and his journal lets the reader relive the tension and uncertainty of trying to halt a media stampede before it crushed everything in its path . " 
 School Library Journal recommended the book for young readers , and commented , " Teens growing up with the Net aren 't likely to find a better roadmap to the issues affecting their First Amendment future there than this book . " The New York Times Book Review was critical of Godwin 's writing style in the book , and observed , " He writes in a strong , piercing voice that probably does wonders in a courtroom , but comes off increasingly shrill over several hundred pages of commentary , and at one point fairly warns his reader , ' <unk> isn 't my strong point . ' " The Journal of Information Ethics wrote , " This is less an analytic study than a personal survey of situations or occurrences articulated in an informal , colloquial , and anecdotal fashion . It is not aimed at the intelligentsia or legal profession , although members of these groups would certainly benefit from the details . " The review concluded , " The details are sometimes overwhelming , but for those who wish to know everything , this is a good place to start . " 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer highlighted Cyber Rights among " 1998 's Best Reading " , and concluded , " Often reads , as Godwin intends , as a handbook for free @-@ speech activism " . A review in the San Antonio Express @-@ News concluded , " ' Cyber Rights ' is an extremely important book , one that anyone who accesses the Internet should read . Those who support the causes Godwin fights against aren 't going to be happy with it , because he pokes some big holes in their arguments . But one of the bedrock freedoms we all enjoy is freedom of speech , and Godwin makes an elegant defense in its behalf . " The Dallas Morning News characterized the book as a <unk> legal instructive work , and commented , " Part philosophical musings , part legal primer , part history and part political analysis , the book touches on just about every facet of how the Internet is transforming free @-@ speech issues . " The Houston Chronicle wrote , " Godwin makes a passionate case for ensuring the online world has the same civil rights as the ' real ' world . " Writing in the book Internet and the Law , author Aaron <unk> comments , " The book takes an <unk> position , but it presents all sides of the various questions fairly and completely . " 
 <unk> Conspectus of The Catholic University of America noted , " Cyber Rights brims with anecdotes and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes looks at the people and organizations struggling with the [ reality ] and potential of the information superhighway . " A review of the book in The Green Bag concluded , " Overall , Godwin seems to be preaching to the choir , rather than making legal arguments to win over converts . Lower publication costs do increase the possibility of publication , but , standing alone , may not justify replacing the legal regimes developed over time to regulate expression – legal regimes which , for the most part , have endured through previous revolutions in the technology of disseminating information . Theology , which calls on faith , and economics , which calls on reason and empiricism , may not be compatible . But the Internet is about a shift in the economics of expression , not a theological revolution in how the First Amendment affects society , and when the project is getting the legal prescriptions right , all of the implications must be taken seriously . " 
 Publishers Weekly commented that in the book Godwin put forth " an unusually broad view of free speech " . The review noted that by citing noteworthy legal cases affecting free speech online , " he frames nicely some of the issues raised by the encounter of the 200 @-@ year @-@ old Bill of Rights and the cutting @-@ edge Internet . " Publishers Weekly wrote that by the end of the book , " his arguments have become predictable – or flimsy , as when he implies that the Net poses no new risks with its dissemination of dangerous information , such as bomb @-@ making instructions , because libraries have carried such information for years . " The review concluded , " Godwin 's book is a thoughtful examination of an important subject , but its thoughts seem too often filtered through rose @-@ colored screens . " 
 In a review of the revised and updated 2003 edition of the book , Law Library Journal wrote , " Cyber Rights : Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age is a book that can help the uninitiated become familiar with the issues and arguments that have shaped the debate over regulating cyberspace . " The review noted , " Cyber Rights was inspired by Godwin 's unwavering belief that an uncensored Internet can transform society into a true democracy . It is an exceptionally personal work and resembles an online journal . ... The book , written in the first person , has a casual and conversational style . As the reader is able to ' hear ' the author 's voice , Cyber Rights is extremely easy to read . " Law Library Journal criticized the book for being repetitive , and for dismissing arguments of his opponents as " an irrational fear of the unknown ( i.e. , cyberspace ) or as a poor understanding of case law or the Framers ' intent " . The review acknowledged , " Cyber Rights is a good introduction to the world of cyberspace and the legal issues that affect the Internet . It presents , in a readable style , a passionate perspective on an emerging area of law . " Law Library Journal recommended the book for " large academic law libraries " . 
 = RTI International = 
 RTI International ( formerly Research Triangle Institute ) is a nonprofit organization headquartered in the Research Triangle Park in North Carolina that provides research and technical services . It was founded in 1958 with $ 500 @,@ 000 in funding by local businesses and the three North Carolina universities in the Research Triangle region . RTI started with departments for research in isotopes , operational sciences and statistics . It restructured into four departments in 1971 and later created the Office for International Projects , now called the International Development Group . 
 RTI later split into eleven departments , including Health Research , Drug Discovery & Development , Education & Training Research , Survey Research , among others . The US Agency for International Development has come to account for 35 percent of RTI 's research revenue . RTI research has covered HIV / AIDS , healthcare , education curriculum and the environment , among others . Forbes magazine ranked RTI International sixth of 250 in its America ’ s Best Employers list for mid @-@ size companies for 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1954 , Romeo Guest , a building contractor , met with the North Carolina state treasurer , Brandon Hodges , and the president of Wachovia , Robert Hanes , to discuss building a research park in North Carolina to attract new industries to the region . They obtained support for the concept of Research Triangle Park from state governor Luther Hodges and the three universities that form the research triangle : University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Duke University and North Carolina State University . The Research Triangle Institute ( now RTI International ) was formed as the research park 's first tenant in 1958 by the park 's founders . The following January they announced that $ 1 @.@ 425 million had been raised by the Research Triangle Foundation to fund the park and that $ 500 @,@ 000 of it had been set aside for RTI . 
 RTI started with three divisions : Isotope Development , Operational Sciences and Statistics Research . Its first contract was a $ 4 @,@ 500 statistical study of morbidity data from Tennessee . In RTI 's first year of operation , it had 25 staff and $ 240 @,@ 000 in research contracts . Its early work was focused on statistics , but within a few years expanded into radioisotopes , organic chemistry and polymers . In 1960 the Institute had its first international research contract , for an agricultural census in Nigeria . RTI won contracts with the Department of Education , Defense Department , NASA and the Atomic Energy Commission , growing to $ 3 @.@ 4 million in contracts in 1964 and $ 85 million in 1988 . 
 In 1971 , RTI 's staff of 430 was reorganized into four research groups : social and economic systems , statistical sciences , environmental sciences and engineering , and chemistry and life sciences . It also created a division for education called the Center for Education Research and Evaluation . Four years later , RTI created the Office for International Programs to manage international projects . RTI provided funding assistance to help found the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics in 1980 , and two years later was part of a joint venture to create Microelectronics Center of North Carolina ( <unk> ) , a non @-@ profit whose computer network connected local K @-@ 12 schools . A Health Solutions division formed in 2000 serves the pharmaceutical , biotechnology and medical device industries . In 2015 , it formed a subsidiary in New Delhi , India . Among other projects , it was funded to develop a waterless toilet for use in third @-@ world countries . 
 = = Organization = = 
 RTI International is a not @-@ for @-@ profit research organization established by three local universities , but managed independently by a separate board and management team . RTI 's structure consists of members of the corporation , the board of governors and corporate officers . The members of the corporation elect governors , who in turn create the organization 's policies . Corporate officers are senior managers that report to the board for their area of responsibility . 
 RTI has eleven service areas : 
 RTI also has a separate business called RTI Health Solutions , which supports biotech , diagnostic and medical device companies . As of 2012 , the organization 's largest division managed the social , statistical and environmental sciences services . More than half of RTI 's staff have advanced degrees in one of 120 fields and work on approximately 1 @,@ 200 projects at a time . RTI has partnerships with the Research Triangle Energy Consortium , the Triangle Global Health Consortium and other universities and research organizations . Many of RTI 's staff hold faculty positions at the three universities that form the Research Triangle and participate in cooperative research projects . 
 There are nine US offices and nine international locations in France , the United Kingdom , South America , Indian and Indonesia , among others , supporting operations in 80 countries . About 60 percent of RTI 's staff are headquartered on a 180 @-@ acre campus inside the Research Triangle Park . Most of RTI International 's funding comes from government research contracts . In 2012 it authored 627 journal articles . At the time , RTI owned 400 patents . RTI competes with the three universities that form the research triangle and other research institutes for contracts . It bids on $ 2 billion in research contracts a year and wins approximately 40 percent of the budget it bids on . 
 = = Projects = = 
 RTI International 's research has spanned areas like cancer , pollution , drug abuse and education . 
 RTI scientists Monroe Wall and <unk> <unk> synthesized anti @-@ cancer treatments <unk> in 1966 , from the bark of the <unk> tree , and Taxol in 1971 , from a Pacific yew tree . These two drugs account for $ 3 billion a year in sales by pharmaceutical companies . In 1986 , RTI was awarded a $ 4 million contract with the National Cancer Institute to conduct an eight @-@ year clinical trial on the effects of an anti @-@ smoking campaign . Two years later , RTI began a $ 4 @.@ 4 million program to coordinate AIDS drug trials for the National Institutes of Health . This had grown to $ 26 million by 1988 . 
 RTI scientists helped identify toxic chemicals in the Love Canal in the 1970s . In 1978 , RTI researched the possibility of improving solar cells for the US Department of Energy and coal gasification for the Environmental Protection Agency in 1979 . It trained Chinese government employees on using computer models to forecast pollution patterns before the 2007 Olympics in Beijing . 
 An RTI survey in 1973 , commissioned by the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs , confirmed prior research that found no connection between drug use and violent crime , despite prior perceptions of heroin users as more prone to violence . A 1975 study RTI conducted for the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism found that 28 percent of 13 @,@ 000 teenagers polled were " problem drinkers , " despite their age . A 1996 study done by RTI and funded by the Pentagon found that drug abuse in the military had been reduced by 90 percent since 1980 . 
 RTI in 1975 recommended that the Bureau of the Mint halt expensive production of pennies , and replace half @-@ dollars with a new dollar coin . In 2001 , RTI scientists created a new <unk> <unk> material that uses the thermoelectric effect to cool microprocessors . A 2009 study by RTI and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published in Health Affairs estimated that obesity in the US caused $ 147 billion in increased medical care costs annually . RTI also developed a reading skill measurement program , the Early Grade Reading Assessment ( <unk> ) , for the USAID and the World Bank . The <unk> has been used in 70 languages and 50 countries . 
 RTI began working for the US Agency for International Development ( USAID ) after the conflict between Iraq and the US began in 2003 . USAID work represented 35 percent of RTI 's revenue by 2010 . An employee of the contractor Unity Resources Group , hired to protect RTI staff doing USAID work in Iraq , shot and killed two Iraqi women on October 9 , 2007 . 
 In 2004 , <unk> was spun off of RTI to develop a thermoelectric material for semiconductors commercially . RTI acquired a healthcare marketing firm called <unk> in March 2009 . It also created another semiconductor startup that year called <unk> . In 2011 RTI created the Center for Agricultural and Environmental Biotechnology and in 2012 it acquired a California @-@ based education research firm , MPR Associates . 
 = Quatermass and the Pit ( film ) = 
 Quatermass and the Pit ( US title : Five Million Years to Earth ) is a 1967 British science fiction horror film . Made by Hammer Film Productions it is a sequel to the earlier Hammer films The Quatermass Xperiment and Quatermass 2 . Like its predecessors it is based on a BBC Television serial – Quatermass and the Pit – written by Nigel Kneale . It was directed by Roy Ward Baker and stars Andrew Keir in the title role as Professor Bernard Quatermass , replacing Brian Donlevy who played the role in the two earlier films . James Donald , Barbara Shelley and Julian Glover appear in co @-@ starring roles . 
 The plot , which is largely faithful to the original television production , centres on the discovery of a mysterious object buried at the site of an extension to the London Underground . Also uncovered nearby are the remains of early human ancestors more than five million years old . Realising that the object is in fact an ancient Martian spacecraft , Quatermass deduces that the aliens have influenced human evolution and the development of human intelligence . The spacecraft has an intelligence of its own , and once uncovered begins to exert a malign influence , resurrecting Martian memories and instincts buried deep within the human psyche . 
 Nigel Kneale wrote the first draft of the screenplay in 1961 but difficulties in attracting interest from American co @-@ financiers meant the film did not go into production until 1967 . The director , Roy Ward Baker , was chosen because of his experience with technically demanding productions such as A Night to Remember ; this was the first of six films that he directed for Hammer . Andrew Keir , playing Quatermass , found making the film an unhappy experience , believing Baker had wanted Kenneth More to play the role . Owing to lack of space the film was shot at the MGM studios in Elstree , Borehamwood rather than Hammer 's usual home at the time , which was the Associated British Studios , also in Elstree . 
 The film opened in November 1967 to favourable reviews and remains generally well regarded . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Workers building an extension to the London Underground at Hobbs End dig up skeletal remains . Palaeontologist Dr Matthew Roney ( James Donald ) is called in and deduces that they are the remnants of a group of apemen over five million years old , more ancient than any previous finds . One of Roney 's assistants uncovers part of a metallic object . Believing it to be an unexploded bomb , they call in an army bomb disposal team . 
 Meanwhile , Professor Bernard Quatermass ( Andrew Keir ) is dismayed to learn that his plans for the colonisation of the Moon are to be taken over by the military . He gives a cold reception to Colonel Breen ( Julian Glover ) , who has been assigned to join Quatermass 's British Experimental Rocket Group . When the bomb disposal team call for Breen 's assistance , Quatermass accompanies him to the site . Breen concludes it is a V @-@ weapon , but Quatermass disagrees . When another skeleton is found in an inner chamber , Quatermass and Roney realise that the object must also be five million years old . Quatermass suspects it is of alien origin , but Roney is certain the apemen are terrestrial . 
 Quatermass becomes intrigued by the name of the area , recalling that " hob " is an old name for the Devil . Working with Roney 's assistant , Barbara Judd ( Barbara Shelley ) , Quatermass finds historical accounts of hauntings and other spectral appearances going back over many centuries . They deduce that these events coincided with any disturbances of the ground around Hobbs End . 
 An attempt to open a sealed chamber using a Borazon drill fails to make any progress . However , a few moments after the drill is stopped , a small hole is seen , though the drill operator , Sladden ( Duncan Lamont ) , is certain it was not created by his machine . The hole widens to reveal the contents : the corpses of three @-@ legged , insectoid creatures with horned heads . Roney and Judd work to preserve the bodies before they decay . An examination of the creatures ' physiology suggests they came from the planet Mars . Quatermass and Roney note the similarity between the appearance of the creatures and the Devil . 
 Sladden is overcome by a powerful telekinetic force emanating from the missile and flees to the sanctuary of a church . Sladden tells Quatermass he saw a vision of hordes of the creatures from the missile . Quatermass believes this is a race memory . Seeking proof , he returns to Hobbs End , bringing a machine Roney has been working on which taps into the primeval psyche . While trying to replicate the circumstances under which Sladden was affected , he notices that Judd has fallen under its influence . Using Roney 's machine , he is able to record her thoughts . 
 Quatermass presents his theory to a government minister ( Edwin Richfield ) and other officials . The occupants of the missile came from the dying Mars . Unable to survive on Earth , they chose to preserve some part of their race by creating a colony by proxy by significantly enhancing the intelligence of the natives . The descendants of these apemen evolved into modern humans , but retain the vestiges of the Martian influence buried in their subconscious . He plays the recording of Judd 's mind as evidence : it shows hordes of Martians engaged in what he interprets as a racial purge , cleansing the Martian hives of weaker members of the race . A disbelieving Breen offers an alternative theory : the missile is a Nazi propaganda exercise designed to sow fear of an alien invasion among the populace . The minister rejects Quatermass 's theory in favour of Breen 's and decides to unveil the missile to the press . 
 Disaster strikes at the press event . The missile apparently draws power from the broadcasting equipment , and its influence is magnified . The streets of London erupt into violence as those affected go on a rampage . Breen becomes drawn towards the missile and is killed . Quatermass falls under alien control as well , but is snapped out of it by Roney , who is unaffected . The two men realise that a small portion of the population are immune . The psychic energy becomes stronger , ripping up streets and buildings , and the spectral image of a Martian towers over the city , centred on Hobbs End . Recalling stories about how the Devil could be defeated with iron and water , Roney theorises the alien energy could be discharged into the earth . Roney climbs to the top of a building crane and swings it into the spectre . The crane bursts into flames as it discharges the energy , killing Roney , but the image disappears . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Professor Bernard Quatermass was first introduced to audiences in two BBC television serials , The Quatermass Experiment ( 1953 ) and Quatermass II ( 1955 ) , written by Nigel Kneale . The rights to both these serials were acquired by Hammer Film Productions , and the film adaptations – The Quatermass Xperiment and Quatermass 2 , both directed by Val Guest and starring Brian Donlevy as Quatermass – were released in 1955 and 1957 respectively . Kneale went on to write a third Quatermass serial – Quatermass and the Pit – for the BBC , which was broadcast in December 1958 and January 1959 . Hammer were once again interested in making a film adaptation , and Kneale , who had by then left the BBC and was working as a freelance screenwriter , completed a script in 1961 . It was intended that Val Guest would once again direct and Brian Donlevy would reprise the role of Quatermass , with production to commence in 1963 . However , securing finance for the new Quatermass film proved problematic . In 1957 Hammer had struck a deal with Columbia Pictures to distribute their pictures , and the two companies would go on to collaborate on thirty films between 1957 and 1964 . Columbia , who were not interested in Quatermass , passed on the script and production went into limbo for several years . In 1964 Kneale and Anthony Hinds submitted a revised , lower @-@ budget script to Columbia ; but by this time the relationship between Hammer and Columbia had begun to sour , and the script was once again rejected . In 1966 Hammer entered into a new distribution deal with Seven Arts , ABPC and Twentieth Century Fox , and Quatermass and the Pit finally entered production . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The script of Quatermass and the Pit is largely faithful to the television original . The plot was heavily condensed to fit the shorter running time of the film , with the main casualty being the removal of a subplot involving the journalist James Fullalove , who does not appear in the film adaptation at all . The climax was altered slightly to make it more cinematic , with Roney using a crane to short out the Martian influence , whereas in the television version he merely throws a metal chain into the pit . The setting for the pit itself was changed from a building site to the London Underground . The closing scene of the television version , in which Quatermass pleads with humanity to prevent Earth 's becoming the " second dead planet " , was also dropped , in favour of a shot of Quatermass and Judd sitting alone amid the devastation wrought by the Martian spacecraft . The script was sent to John Trevelyan of the British Board of Film Censors in December 1966 . Trevelyan replied that the film would require an ' X ' -Certificate and raised concerns regarding the sound of the vibrations from the alien ship , the scenes of the Martian massacre , the scenes of destruction and panic as the Martian influence takes hold and the image of the Devil . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 James Donald as Doctor Roney : Donald first came to prominence playing Theo van Gogh in Lust for Life ( 1956 ) before going on to play a string of roles in the World War II prisoner of war films The Bridge on the River Kwai ( 1957 ) , The Great Escape ( 1963 ) and King Rat ( 1965 ) . Although not playing the title role , Donald was accorded top @-@ billing status . 
 Andrew Keir as Professor Bernard Quatermass : Nigel Kneale had long been highly critical of Brian Donlevy 's interpretation of Quatermass and lobbied for the role to be recast , arguing that enough time had passed that audiences would not resist a change of actor . A number of actors were considered for the part including André Morell who had played Quatermass in the television version of Quatermass and the Pit . However , Morell was not interested in revisiting a role he had already played . The producers eventually settled on Scottish actor Andrew Keir who had appeared in supporting roles in a number of Hammer productions including The Pirates of Blood River ( 1962 ) , The Devil @-@ Ship Pirates ( 1964 ) and Dracula : Prince of Darkness ( 1966 ) . Keir found the shoot an unhappy experience : he later recalled , “ The director – Roy Ward Baker – didn 't want me for the role . He wanted Kenneth More ... and it was a very unhappy shoot . [ … ] Normally I enjoy going to work every day . But for seven and a half weeks it was sheer hell . ” Roy Ward Baker denied he had wanted Kenneth More , who he felt would be " too nice " for the role , saying , “ I had no idea he [ Keir ] was unhappy while we were shooting . His performance was absolutely right in every detail and I was presenting him as the star of the picture . Perhaps I should have interfered more . ” Keir went on to appear for Hammer in The Viking Queen ( 1967 ) and Blood from the Mummy 's Tomb ( 1971 ) . He reprised the role of Quatermass for BBC Radio 3 in The Quatermass Memoirs ( 1996 ) , making him the only actor other than Donlevy to play the role more than once . 
 Barbara Shelley as Barbara Judd : Shelley was a regular leading lady for Hammer , having appeared in The Camp on Blood Island ( 1958 ) , Shadow of the Cat ( 1961 ) , The Gorgon ( 1964 ) , The Secret of Blood Island ( 1964 ) , Dracula : Prince of Darkness and Rasputin , the Mad Monk ( 1966 ) for them . Quatermass and the Pit was her last film for the company and she subsequently worked in television and the theatre . Roy Ward Baker was particularly taken with his leading lady , telling Bizarre Magazine in 1974 he was “ mad about her in the sense of love . We used to waltz about the set together , a great love affair . ” 
 Julian Glover as ( Lieutenant ) Colonel Breen : Roy Ward Baker first met Glover when he directed him in an episode of The Avengers ( " Two 's a Crowd " , 1965 ) . Baker said of Glover 's performance , “ He turned in a tremendous character , forceful , autocratic but never over the top . ” Glover recalled of the role , “ I think I was too young for it . [ … ] I think I played it all right . It was very straightforward . Bit of a stereotype . [ … ] The obligatory asshole ! ” 
 Other actors appearing in the film include Bryan Marshall , Peter Copley , Edwin Richfield ( who previously appeared in Quatermass 2 ) , Grant Taylor , and Robert Morris . Duncan Lamont , playing Sladden , had appeared in the original BBC production of The Quatermass Experiment in the key role of the hapless astronaut Victor Carroon . Quatermass and the Pit also features an early film role for Sheila <unk> who makes a brief appearance as a journalist near the start of the movie . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 By the time Quatermass and the Pit finally entered production Val Guest was occupied on Casino Royale ( 1967 ) , so directing duties went instead to Roy Ward Baker . Baker 's first film had been The October Man ( 1947 ) and he was best known for The One That Got Away ( 1957 ) and A Night to Remember ( 1958 ) . Following the failure of Two Left Feet ( 1963 ) , he moved into television , directing episodes of The Human Jungle ( 1963 – 64 ) , The Saint ( 1962 – 69 ) and The Avengers . Producer Anthony Nelson Keys chose Baker as director because he felt his experience on such films as A Night to Remember gave him the technical expertise to handle the film 's significant special effects requirements . Baker , for his part , felt that his background on fact @-@ based dramas such as A Night to Remember and The One That Got Away enabled him to give Quatermass and the Pit the air of realism it needed to be convincing to audiences . He was impressed by Nigel Kneale 's screenplay , feeling the script was " taut , exciting and an intriguing story with excellent narrative drive . It needed no work at all . All one had to do was cast it and shoot it . " He was also impressed with Hammer Films ’ lean set @-@ up : having been used to working for major studios with thousands of full @-@ time employees , he was surprised to find that Hammer 's core operation consisted of just five people and enjoyed how this made the decision making process fast and simple . Quatermass and the Pit was the first film the director was credited as “ Roy Ward Baker ” , having previously been credited as “ Roy Baker ” . The change was made to avoid confusion with another Roy Baker who was a sound editor . Baker later regretted making the change as many people assumed he was a new director . 
 Filming took place between 27 February and 25 April 1967 . The budget was £ 275 @,@ 000 . At this time , Hammer was operating out of the Associated British Studios in Elstree , Borehamwood . However , a lack of space meant that production was relocated to the nearby MGM Borehamwood studio . There were no other productions working at the MGM Studios at this time so the Quatermass crew had full access to all the facilities of the studio . Roy Ward Baker was particularly pleased to be able to use MGM 's extensive backlot for the exteriors of the Underground station . The production team included many Hammer regulars , including production designer Bernard Robinson who , as an in @-@ joke , incorporated a poster for Hammer 's The Witches ( 1966 ) into the dressing of his set for the Hobbs End station . Another Hammer regular was special effects supervisor Les Bowie . Roy Ward Baker recalled he had a row with Bowie , who believed the film was entirely a special effects picture , when he tried to run the first pre @-@ production conference . Bowie 's contribution to the film included the Martian massacre scene , which was achieved with a mixture of puppets and live locusts , and model sequences of London 's destruction , including the climatic scene of the crane swinging into the Martian apparition . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chosen to provide the score for Quatermass and the Pit was Tristram Cary . He developed an interest in electronic music while serving in the Royal Navy as an electronics expert working on radar during the Second World War . He became a professional composer in 1954 , working in film , theatre , radio and television , with credits including The Ladykillers ( 1955 ) . He said of his assignment , “ I was not mad about doing the film because Hammer wanted masses of electronic material and a great deal of orchestral music . But I had three kids , all of which were at fee @-@ paying schools , so I needed every penny I could get ! ” . Cary also recalled that , “ The main use of electronics in Quatermass , I think , was the violent shaking , vibrating sound that the " thing in the tunnel " gave off [ … ] It was not a terribly challenging sound to do , though I never played it very loud because I didn 't want to destroy my speakers – I did have hopes of destroying a few cinema loudspeaker systems , though it never happened ” . Carey went on to write the score for another Hammer film , Blood from the Mummy 's Tomb , in 1971 . Several orchestral and electronic cues from the film were released by GDI Records on a compilation titled The Quatermass Film Music Collection . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Quatermass and the Pit premiered on 9 November 1967 and went on general release in a double bill with Circus of Fear on 19 November 1967 . It was released under the title Five Million Years to Earth in the US in March 1968 . The critical reception was generally positive . Writing in The Times , John Russell Taylor found that , “ After a slowish beginning , which shows up the deficiencies of acting and direction , things really start hopping when a mysterious missile @-@ like object discovered in a London excavation proves to be a relic of a prehistoric Martian attempt ( successful , it would seem ) to colonize Earth [ … ] The development of this situation is scrupulously worked out and the film is genuinely gripping even when ( a real test this ) the Power of Evil is finally shown personified in hazy glowing outline , a spectacle as a rule more likely to provoke <unk> than gasps of horror . ” Paul Errol of the Evening Standard described the film as a “ well @-@ made , but wordy , blob of hokum ” , a view echoed by William Hall of the Evening News who described the film as " entertaining hokum " with an " imaginative ending " . A slightly more critical view was espoused by Penelope Mortimer in The Observer who said , “ This nonsense makes quite a good film , well put together , competently photographed , on the whole sturdily performed . What it totally lacks is imagination . ” 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The film was a success for Hammer and they quickly announced that Nigel Kneale was writing a new Quatermass story for them but the script never went further than a few <unk> discussions . Kneale did eventually write a fourth Quatermass story , broadcast as a four @-@ part serial , titled Quatermass , by ITV television in 1979 , an edited version of which was also given a limited cinema release under the title The Quatermass Conclusion . Quatermass and the Pit marked the return to directing for the cinema for Roy Ward Baker and he went on to direct such films as The Anniversary ( 1968 ) , Moon Zero Two ( 1969 ) , The Vampire Lovers ( 1970 ) , Scars of Dracula ( 1970 ) , Dr. Jekyll and Sister Hyde ( 1971 ) and The Legend of the 7 Golden Vampires ( 1974 ) for Hammer . He also directed Asylum ( 1972 ) , And Now the Screaming Starts ! ( 1973 ) and The Vault of Horror ( 1973 ) for Hammer 's rival , Amicus Productions . 
 Quatermass and the Pit continues to be generally well regarded among critics . John Baxter notes in Science Fiction in the Cinema that “ Baker 's unravelling of this crisp thriller is tough and interesting . [ … ] The film has moments of pure terror , perhaps the most effective that in which the drill operator , driven off the spaceship by the mysterious power within is caught up in a whirlwind that fills the excavation with a mass of flying papers . ” John Brosnan , writing in The Primal Scream , found that , “ As a condensed version of the serial , the film is fine but the old black @-@ and @-@ white version , though understandably creaky in places and with inferior effects , still works surprisingly well , having more time to build up a disturbing atmosphere . Bill Warren in Keep Watching the Skies ! said , “ The ambition of the storyline is contained in a well @-@ constructed mystery that unfolds carefully and clearly ” . Nigel Kneale had mixed feelings about the end result : he said , “ I was very happy with Andrew Keir , who they eventually chose , and very happy with the film . There are , however , a few things that bother me ... The special effects in Hammer films were always diabolical . ” 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The region 1 release of Quatermass and the Pit from Anchor Bay includes a commentary from Nigel Kneale and Roy Ward Baker as well as trailers and an instalment of a documentary called The Worlds of Hammer devoted to Hammer 's forays into science fiction . 
 A UK Blu @-@ ray release of the film , was released in Oct 10 , 2011 and was followed by releases in Germany , Australia and Italy . 
 = Philippine resistance against Japan = 
 During the Japanese occupation of the islands in World War II , there was an extensive Philippine resistance movement , which opposed the Japanese with active underground and guerrilla activity that increased over the years . Fighting the guerrillas – apart from the Japanese regular forces – were a Japanese @-@ formed Bureau of Constabulary ( later taking the name of the old Philippine Constabulary during the Second Republic ) , Kempeitai ( the Japanese military police ) , and the <unk> ( Filipinos fighting for the Japanese ) . Postwar studies estimate that around 260 @,@ 000 persons were organized under guerrilla groups and that members of anti @-@ Japanese underground organizations were more numerous . Such was their effectiveness that by the end of World War II , Japan controlled only twelve of the forty @-@ eight provinces . 
 Select units of the resistance would go on to be reorganized and equipped as units of the Philippine Army and Constabulary . The United States Government officially granted payments and benefits to various <unk> who have fought with the Allies by the war 's end . However , only the Filipinos were excluded from such benefits , and since then these veterans have made efforts in finally being acknowledged by the United States . Some 277 separate guerrilla units made up of 260 @,@ 715 individuals were officially recognized as having fought in the resistance movement . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Attack on Pearl Harbor ( called Hawaii Operation or Operation AI by the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters ) was a surprise military strike conducted by the Imperial Japanese Navy against the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , on the morning of December 7 , 1941 ( December 8 in Japan and the Philippines ) . The attack was intended as a preventive action in order to keep the U.S. Pacific Fleet from interfering with military actions the Empire of Japan was planning in Southeast Asia against the overseas territories of the United Kingdom , the Netherlands , and the United States . 
 Immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor , the Japanese operations to invade the Philippines began . 43 planes bombed Tuguegarao and Baguio in the first preemptive strike in Luzon . The Japanese forces then quickly conducted a landing at <unk> Island , and by December 17 , General Masaharu Homma gave his estimate that the main component of the United States Air Force in the archipelago was destroyed . By January 2 , Manila was under Japanese control and by January 9 , Homma had cornered the remaining forces in Bataan . By April 9 , the remaining of the combined Filipino @-@ American force was forced to retire from Bataan to Corregidor . Meanwhile , Japanese invasions of Cebu ( April 19 ) and Panay ( April 20 ) were successful . By May 7 , after the last of the Japanese attacks on Corregidor , General Jonathan M. Wainwright announced through a radio broadcast in Manila the surrender of the Philippines . Following Wainwright was General William F. Sharp , who surrendered Visayas and Mindanao on May 10 . 
 Afterwards came the Bataan Death March , which was the forcible transfer , by the Imperial Japanese Army , of 60 @,@ 000 Filipino and 15 @,@ 000 American prisoners of war after the three @-@ month Battle of Bataan in the Philippines during World War II . The death toll of the march is difficult to assess as thousands of captives were able to escape from their guards ( although many were killed during their escapes ) , and it is not known how many died in the fighting that was taking place concurrently . All told , approximately 2 @,@ 500 – 10 @,@ 000 Filipino and 300 – 650 American prisoners of war died before they could reach Camp O 'Donnell . 
 = = Resistance in Luzon = = 
 = = = USAFFE and American sponsored guerrillas = = = 
 After Bataan and Corregidor , many who escaped the Japanese reorganized in the mountains as guerrillas still loyal to the U.S. Army Forces Far East ( USAFFE ) . One example would be the unit of Ramon Magsaysay in Zambales , which first served as a supply and intelligence unit . After the surrender in May 1942 , Magsaysay and his unit formed a guerrilla force which grew to a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ man force by the end of the war . Another was the Hunters ROTC which operated in the Southern Luzon area , mainly near Manila . It was created upon dissolution of the Philippine Military Academy in the beginning days of the war . Cadet Terry <unk> , refused to simply go home as cadets were ordered to do , and began recruiting fighters willing to undertake guerrilla action against the Japanese . This force would later be instrumental , providing intelligence to the liberating forces led by General Douglas MacArthur , and took an active role in numerous battles , such as the Raid at Los Baños . When war broke out in the Philippines , some 300 Philippine Military Academy and ROTC cadets , unable to join the USAFFE units because of their youth , banded together in a common desire to contribute to the war effort throughout the Bataan campaign . The Hunters originally conducted operations with another guerrilla group called Marking 's Guerrillas , with whom they went about liquidating Japanese spies . Led by Miguel Ver , a PMA cadet , the Hunters raided the enemy @-@ occupied Union College in Manila and seized 130 Enfield rifles . 
 Also , before being proven false in 1985 by the United States Military , Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos claimed that he had commanded a 9 @,@ 000 @-@ strong guerrilla force known as the <unk> Unit . Marcos also used <unk> as his personal pseudonym ; depicting himself as a <unk> anti @-@ Japanese Filipino guerrilla fighter during World War II . Marcos told exaggerated tales and exploits of himself fighting the Japanese in his self @-@ published autobiography Marcos of the Philippines which was proven to be fiction . His father , Mariano Marcos , did however , collaborated with the Japanese and was executed by Filipino guerillas in April 1945 , and Ferdinand himself was accused of being a collaborator as well . 
 In July 1942 , South West Pacific Area , became aware of the resistance movements forming in occupied Philippines through attempted radio communications to Allies outside of the Philippines ; by late 1942 , couriers had made it to Australia confirming the existence of the resistance . By December 1942 , SWPA sent Captain Jesús A. <unk> to the Philippines to make contact with guerrilla organizations , eventually developing extensive intelligence networks including contacts within the Second Republic Government . In addition , through the Allied Intelligence Bureau 's Philippine Regional Section , SWPA began to send operatives , and equipment , into the Philippines to make contact and supply guerrilla organizations . Unique to other guerrillas in the Philippines were the Wa Chi ; a resistance unit composed of Filipino @-@ Chinese and Chinese immigrants . They were established to counter the Japanese suspicion and abuse of the Chinese living in the country , and had over 700 men strong . The movement was aided by the American guerrilla forces and were also supported by anti @-@ Japanese civilians and farmers living in the outskirts . In Nueva Ecija , guerrillas led by Juan Pajota and Eduardo Joson protected the U.S. Army Rangers and Alamo Scouts who were conducting a rescue mission of Allied <unk> from a counterattack by Japanese reinforcements . Pajota and the Filipino guerrillas received Bronze Stars for their role in the raid . Among the guerrilla units , the Blue Eagles were a specialized unit established for landmine and sniper detection , as well as in hunting Japanese spies who have blended in with the civilian population . 
 Nonetheless , Japanese crackdowns on these guerrillas in Luzon were widespread and brutal . The Japanese Army , Kempeitai and Filipino collaborators hunted down resistance fighters and anyone associated with them . One example happened to resistance leader Wenceslao Vinzons ; leader of the successful guerilla movement in Bicol . After being betrayed to the Japanese by a Japanese collaborator , Vinzons was tortured to give up information on his resistance movement . Vinzons however , refused to cooperate , and he and his family , consisting of his father Gabino , his wife <unk> , sister Milagros and children Aurora and Alexander , were bayonet to death . 
 = = = Hukbalahap resistance = = = 
 As originally constituted in March 1942 , the Hukbalahap was to be part of a broad united front resistance to the Japanese occupation of the Philippines . This original intent is reflected in its name : " <unk> Bayan Laban sa mga <unk> " , which was " People 's Army Against the Japanese " when translated into English . The adopted slogan was " Anti @-@ Japanese Above All " . The Huk Military Committee was at the apex of Huk structure and was charged to direct the guerrilla campaign and to lead the revolution that would seize power after the war . Luis Taruc ; a communist leader and peasant @-@ organizer from a barrio in Pampanga ; was elected as head the committee , and became the first Huk commander called " El Supremo " . 
 The Huks began their anti @-@ Japanese campaign as five 100 @-@ man units . They obtained needed arms and ammunition from Philippine army stragglers , which were escapees from the Battle of Bataan and deserters from the Philippine Constabulary , in exchange of civilian clothes . The Huk recruitment campaign progressed more slowly than Taruc had expected , due to competition with U.S. Army Forces Far East ( USAFFE ) guerrilla units in enlisting new soldiers . The U.S. units already had recognition among the islands , had trained military leaders , and an organized command and logistical system . Despite being restrained by the American sponsored guerrilla units , the Huks nevertheless took to the battlefield with only 500 men and much fewer weapons . Several setbacks at the hands of the Japanese and with less than enthusiastic support from USAFFE units did not hinder the Huks growth in size and efficiency throughout the war , developing into a well trained , highly organized force with some 15 @,@ 000 armed fighters by war 's end . The Huks attacked both the Japanese and other non @-@ Huk guerrillas . 
 = = Resistance in the Visayas = = 
 Various guerrilla groups also sprang out throughout the central islands of the Visayas . Like those in Luzon , many of these Filipino guerrillas were trained by the Americans to fight in case the Japanese set its sight towards Visayas . When the Americans finally surrendered the country to the Japanese , these soldiers continued to fight , believing that it was they who have surrendered and not them . As such , they commanded loyalty to the Philippine Commonwealth , and participated in many pivotal battles during the war besides their guerrilla activities . In Cebu , guerrillas and irregulars under Lieutenant Colonel James M. Cushing and Basilio J. Valdes aided in the Battle for Cebu City . They were also successful in their capture of Maj. Gen. Takeo <unk> and his 2 @,@ 000 soldiers and munitions . Panay las under Col. <unk> Peralta helped in the seizing of the Tiring Landing Field and Mandurriao district airfield during the Battle of the Visayas . Major <unk> commanded the guerrilla forces in Bohol , in which they were credited in the liberation of the island from Japanese outposts at a cost of only seven men . 
 Another significant achievement for the guerrillas was the capture of the " Koga Papers " in March 1944 . Named after Admiral Mineichi Koga , these papers contained vital battle plans and defensive strategies of the Japanese Navy codenamed the " Z Plan " , as well as information on the overall strength of the Japanese fleet , naval air units and stationed troops . The documents also revealed how the Japanese managed to deduce MacArthur 's initial plans to invade the Philippines through Mindanao . These papers came into the possession of the Filipino guerrillas when the seaplane of Admiral Koga , who was on route to Davao , crashed into the coast San Fernando , Cebu . Koga was killed , and 12 other high @-@ ranking officers including Chief of Staff of the Combined Fleet Vice Admiral Shigeru <unk> were captured by Cebuano guerrillas under Lt. Col. James M. Cushing . The papers were inside a briefcase which was fished out of the sea by Cebuano fishermen before being handed down to the guerrillas . The Japanese ruthlessly hunted down the documents and their captured officers ; burning villages and holding out civilians in their search . This forced the guerrillas to release their captives in order to stop the Japanese , but Cushing managed to send for a submarine that took the documents to the Allied headquarters in Australia . The discovery of the papers helped the Allies make a breakthrough in the Pacific , aiding them in the Battle of the Philippine Sea . It also allowed MacArthur to move his invasion not in Mindanao as the Japanese were expecting but in Leyte . 
 Waray guerrillas under a former schoolteacher named Captain Nieves Fernandez , fought the Japanese in Tacloban . Being infamously known as a <unk> , Nieves extensively trained her men in combat skills and the making of improvised weaponry . She led her men in the front and managed to take out over 200 Japanese soldiers in the war with only 110 men . Her activities earned her the ire of the Imperial Japanese Army and they posted a 10 @,@ 000 Pesos reward on her head . The main commander of the resistance movement in Leyte however , was <unk> Kangleon , a former Filipino soldier turned resistance fighter and leader . After the fall of the country , he successfully escaped from being captured by the Japanese . Kangleon established a united guerrilla front that is unique for being well @-@ connected to U.S. guerrilla leader Wendell Fertig . He and his men , the Black Army , were successful in pushing the Japanese from the mainland province and further into the coastlands of Southern Leyte . Kangleon 's guerrillas provided intelligence for the American landings and assisted in the subsequent Battle of Leyte . The guerrillas in Leyte were also very instrumental not only in the opposition against Japanese rule , but also in the safety and aid of the civilians living in the island . In the book The Hidden Battle of Leyte : The Picture Diary of a Girl taken by the Japanese Military by Remedios <unk> ; a former comfort woman , revealed how the Filipino guerrillas saved the lives of many young girls raped or to @-@ be raped by the Japanese . In her vivid account of the Battle of Burauen , she recounts how the guerrillas managed to wipe out entire Japanese platoons off the various villages in the municipality , eventually saving the lives of many . 
 = = Moro resistance in Mindanao = = 
 While Moros rebels were still unsuccessfully at war with the United States , the Japanese invasion became the new perceived threat to their religion and culture . Some of those who opposed the occupation , and a fighter for Moro nationalism , were Sultan <unk> <unk> II of Sulu , the Sulu Sultanate of the Tausug , the Maranao Moros living around Lake Lanao and ruled by the Confederation of sultanates in Lanao led by <unk> <unk> . Another anti @-@ Japanese Moro unit , the Moro @-@ Bolo Battalion led by Datu <unk> <unk> , consisted of about 20 @,@ 000 fighting men made up of both Muslims and Christians . As their name suggests , these fighters were known visibly by their large <unk> and kris . The Japanese Major Hiramatsu , a propaganda officer , tried convincing Datu <unk> Kalaw of Maranao to join their side as " brother Orientals " . Kalaw sent a response which goaded Major Hiramatsu into sending a force of Japanese soldiers to attack him , whom Kalaw butchered completely with no survivors . The infamous <unk> brigands , who were veterans in fighting the Filipinos , Spanish and the Americans , now focused their assaults on the Japanese , using their traditional hit and run as well as suicide charges . The Japanese were anxious of being attacked by the resistance , and they fought back by murdering innocent civilians and destroying properties . 
 During these times , the Moros had no allegiance with the Filipinos and the Americans , and they were largely unwelcoming of their assistance . In many cases , they would even indiscriminately attack them as well . The Moros also performed various cruelties during the war , such as thoughtlessly assaulting Japanese immigrants already living in Mindanao before the war . The vicious warlord Datu <unk> Kalaw , was known for boasting that he " fought both the Americans , Filipinos and the Japanese " , which took the lives of both American and Filipino agents and the Japanese occupiers . Nonetheless , the Americans respected the success of the Moros during the war . An American POW Herbert <unk> recalled in his secret diary that the Japanese guarding him and other prisoners were scared of the Moro warriors and tried to keep as far away from them as possible to avoid getting attacked . The American Captain Edward Kraus recommended Moro fighters for a suggested plan to capture an airbase in Lake Lanao for eventually driving the Japanese occupiers out of the Philippines . The Moro Datu Pino sliced the ears off Japanese and cashed them in with the American guerilla leader Colonel Fertig at the exchange rate of a pair of ears for one bullet and 20 centavos . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 The Filipino guerrillas were successful in their resistance against the Japanese occupation . Of the 48 provinces in the Philippines , only 12 were in firm control of the Japanese . Many provinces in Mindanao were already liberated by the Moros way before the Americans came , as well as major islands in the Visayas such as Cebu , Panay and Negros . After the war , the American and Philippines governments officially recognized some of the units and individuals who had fought against the Japanese . Recognition led to benefits as veterans but not all claims were upheld ; there were 277 recognized guerrilla units out of over a thousand claimed and 260 @,@ 715 individuals were recognized from nearly 1 @.@ 3 million claims . These beneficiaries are only available to the guerrillas and veterans who have served for the Commonwealth , and doesn 't include the brigand groups of the Huks and the Moros . Resistance leaders Wendell Fertig , Russell W. <unk> and Donald Blackburn would incorporate what they 've learned fighting with the Filipino guerrillas in establishing what would become the U.S. Special Forces . 
 Back then in 1944 , only Filipino soldiers were denied from being given benefits by the GI Bill of Rights , which was supposed to give welfare to all those who have served in the United States Military irrespective of race , color or nationality . Over 66 countries were inducted into the bill but only the Philippines were not allowed , describing the Filipino soldiers as mere " Second Class Veterans " . Then in 1946 , the <unk> Act was enacted to mandate some aid to Filipino veterans , but only to those who had disabilities or serious injury . The only benefit the United States could only give at that time was the Immigrant Act , which made the naturalization of Filipinos who served in World War II into American citizens easier . It was not until in 1996 when the veterans started seeking for recognition from the United States . Representative Colleen Hanabusa submitted legislation to award Filipino Veterans with a Congressional Gold Medal , which became known as the Filipino Veterans of World War II Congressional Gold Medal Act . The Act was referred to the Committee on Financial Services and the Committee on House Administration . The Philippine government has also enacted laws concerning the benefits of Filipino guerrillas . 
 World War II guerrilla movement in the Philippines has also garnered attention in Hollywood films such as Back to Bataan , Back Door to Hell , American Guerrilla in the Philippines , Cry of Battle and the more contemporary John Dahl film The Great Raid . Filipino and Japanese films have also paid homage to the <unk> of the Filipino guerrillas during the occupation , such as Yamashita : The Tiger 's Treasure , In the Bosom of the Enemy , <unk> <unk> 1941 : Mahal Kita and the critically acclaimed Japanese film Fires on the Plain . There have been various memorials and monuments erected to commemorate the actions of the Filipino guerrillas . Among such as the Filipino Heroes Memorial in Corregidor , the Luis Taruc Memorial in San Luis , Pampanga , the bronze statue of a Filipino guerrilla in Corregidor , <unk> National Shrine in Jaro , Iloilo City to commemorate the 6th Military District that liberated the provinces of Panay , Romblon , and Guimaras , and the NL Military Shrine and Park in La Union . The <unk> ng mga Bayani ( translated to Cemetery of the Heroes ) , which houses many historical Filipino national heroes , erected a special monument to pay respect to the numerous unnamed Filipino guerrillas who fought in the occupation . 
 = Arbitration Act 1979 = 
 The Arbitration Act 1979 ( <unk> ) was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that reformed arbitration law in England and Wales . Prior to 1979 , arbitration law was based on the Arbitration Act 1950 , which allowed use of the " Case Stated " procedure and other methods of judicial intervention , which marked English arbitration law as significantly different from that of other jurisdictions . The prior law significantly increased the cost and time required for arbitration , which made England an unpopular jurisdiction to conduct such negotiations in . As a result , while London maintained its traditional position as a centre for arbitration in insurance , admiralty and commodities trading , it failed to attract more modern forms of trade . Following pressure from industry groups , the Lord Chancellor introduced the Arbitration Bill into Parliament , having it passed hours before the dissolution of James Callaghan 's government . It was given the Royal Assent on 4 April 1979 , and commenced working on 1 August 1979 . 
 The Act completely abolished the " Case Stated " procedure and other forms of judicial interference , replacing it with a limited system of appeal to the High Court of Justice and Court of Appeal of England and Wales ; it also allowed for exclusion agreements limiting the rights of parties to arbitration to appeal to the courts , and gave arbitrators the ability to enforce interlocutory orders . Academics met the Act with a mixed response ; while some praised it for bringing English law more into line with that of other nations , others criticised the wording used as unnecessarily complex and hazy . The Act did , in the eyes of some commentators , lead to a shift in judicial policy away from legal certainty and towards a system focused on speed and finality . Having been repealed in its entirety by Section 107 ( 2 ) of the Arbitration Act 1996 , the Act is no longer in force . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Previous law = = = 
 London was historically a centre for trade and arbitration , which Peter S. <unk> , writing in the Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce divides into three categories of transaction . English commodities trading , through bodies such as the Baltic Exchange , specify that any conflicts are to be settled through arbitration in London , even when the goods being traded have no relation to the United Kingdom . London has also been a centre for arbitration on maritime issues , and insurance . However , it failed to significantly attract more modern forms of trade , such as major communications developments or high @-@ technology projects , due to the nature of its arbitration law . These contracts normally involve large amounts of money and are administered by the International Chamber of Commerce , which rarely sent arbitration cases to London due to the individual nature of English law on the subject . 
 In most nations , arbitrators can apply the principle of " amiable composition " ; the case is decided under broad , sweeping principles of equity , without judicial oversight or the application of national commercial law . In England , this was not the case ; the Arbitration Act 1950 , in Section 22 ( 1 ) , allowed the courts to instruct an arbitrator to " correct " his decision , if it had an incorrect statement of law immediately obvious . In response to this , English arbitrators simply stopped giving reasons for their decisions . The second form of judicial oversight was found in Section 21 , and was an application of the " Case Stated " procedure . This allowed judicial review of a decision by the High Court of Justice , and was regularly applied during the 1970s , because the freeze on interest rates during a delayed case made it attractive for debtors to delay ; conversely , this made London a far less attractive venue for creditors . 
 Before the 1979 Act , English law did not provide many ways to avoid the Case Stated procedure , even prohibiting parties from agreeing in advance not to use it ; this was due to Scrutton LJ 's statement , in <unk> v Roth , Schmidt & Co , that " There must be no <unk> in England where the King 's writ does not run " . In The <unk> , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales gave a decision interpreted as saying that the courts must consider a Case Stated " even if there is no great some in dispute , no point of general importance is involved or the answer is reasonably clear " . Lord Denning 's statement in that case has been described as " [ T ] he death knell of arbitrator autonomy " , and led to arbitrators almost automatically asking for judicial supervision for fear that they would otherwise be found to have committed misconduct . For obvious reasons , companies and parties to a case who submit their issues to arbitration expect something private , quick , and cheap , with fixed results . The traditional English emphasis on judicial oversight , therefore , meant that with the Case Stated procedure , London was a highly unpopular venue for arbitration . 
 = = = Development of the Act = = = 
 By the 1960s , even before the increase of abuse of the Case Stated procedure , the United Kingdom was estimated to be losing £ 500 million a year through the movement of arbitration business to other countries . In response , the Lord Chancellor convened a Commercial Court Users Conference in 1960 , and tasked them with reviewing the system ; the conclusion was that the status quo should remain . With the increased use of the Case Stated procedure , more calls for reform came . In June 1977 the London Arbitration Group ( LAG ) was formed , taking it upon itself to make the government aware of the damage current law was causing . In 1978 , in reaction to the continued pressure , the Lord Chancellor established a Commercial Court Committee to again look at the issue ; their report , in June 1978 , recommended changing the system so that appeal was only allowed when either the High Court permitted it , or both parties to the arbitration agreed it was necessary . This was intended to ensure that any new Act of Parliament fulfilled two roles – firstly , decreasing the use of the Case Stated procedure , and secondly , encouraging arbitrators to give reasons for their decisions . 
 The report was endorsed by the government , and published the following month . After being announced in the Queen 's Speech , the Arbitration Bill was introduced to the House of Lords by the Lord Chancellor in late 1978 , given its second reading on 12 December 1978 , and after passing through the committee stage , its third reading on 15 February 1979 . Before it could be sent to the House of Commons , however , James Callaghan 's government collapsed following a motion of no confidence . As " the final drama " , the Arbitration Bill quickly made it to the House of Commons and was passed during the few hours it took Callaghan to get to Buckingham Palace and ask for a dissolution . Royal Assent was granted on 4 April 1979 , and the Arbitration Act 1979 came into force on 1 August . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act was " a compromise between two opposing jurisprudential approaches to arbitration ... that the courts should be kept out of arbitration altogether except to prevent abuses against the rules of natural justice , [ and ] that the courts should retain a substantial measure of control over arbitrations to ensure that arbitral awards apply the law " . 
 = = = Section 1 = = = 
 The primary reforms are found in Section 1 of the Act . Section 1 ( 1 ) repeals Section 21 of the 1950 Act , abolishing the Case Stated procedure in arbitration matters , and states that the courts cannot set aside a decision based on an error in law or fact that is blatantly obvious , effectively repealing Section 22 ( 1 ) . Instead , Sections 1 ( 2 ) and 1 ( 3 ) provide that an appeal may be made " on any question of law arising out of an award made on an arbitration agreement " , if either the High Court agrees the appeal is valid , or if both parties to the arbitration request it . In <unk> ( Bermuda ) Ltd v <unk> International , the Court of Appeal was asked to explain what guidelines should be applied by a High Court judge when deciding whether or not to grant an appeal . The High Court had refused leave to appeal , because a point was raised which had not been mentioned during arbitration . <unk> LJ , with the rest of the Court in agreement , explained that : 
 the judge should give such weight as he thinks fit to the failure to argue the point before the arbitrator . In particular , he should have regard to whether the new point is similar to points that were argued , perhaps a variant of one of those points or a different way of putting it on the one hand , or whether it is a totally new and different point on the other . 
 The conditions for leave to appeal are laid out in Section 1 ( 4 ) . No conditions attach to an appeal where all parties consent , but when the permission of the High Court is sought , the judge may only grant leave if he " considers that ... the question of law concerned could substantially affect the rights of one or more parties to the arbitration agreement " . Under Sections 1 ( 5 ) and 1 ( 6 ) , the High Court may ask for additional reasons as to why the arbitrator reached the decision that he did , but only if one of the parties gave notice to the arbitrator that reasons would be required , or there was " some special reason why such a notice was not given " . In Universal Petroleum Co v <unk> und Transport GmbH , the Court of Appeal interpreted the meaning of Sections 1 ( 4 ) and 1 ( 5 ) . The dispute came from a highly detailed " Schedule of Further Reasons " ordered by the High Court because the judge felt that there was an ambiguous element in the reasons given . The appellate judges found that Section 1 ( 5 ) required judges to order further reasons only to deal with points of law arising from the award . Material ambiguity was " inadmissible and irrelevant for the purpose of the exercise of any jurisdiction under section 1 of the Act " . 
 If the High Court refuses to hear an appeal , the case cannot proceed further ; similarly , with one exception , once the High Court has heard a case , no decision may be reviewed by the Court of Appeal . The one exception is laid out in Section 1 ( 7 ) , and provides that leave to appeal is only valid if either the High Court or Court of Appeal certifies it as such , and the High Court confirms that the case concerns a point of law which merits consideration . In National Westminster Bank Plc v Arthur Young McClelland Moores & Co ( No.1 ) , the Court of Appeal confirmed that , once the High Court has decided not to allow an appeal , the registrar of the Court of Appeal cannot intervene and otherwise validate such a request . 
 = = = Sections 2 – 6 = = = 
 Section 21 of the 1950 Act contained a secondary method of appeal to the High Court . Through the " Consultative Case " procedure , parties in a pending arbitration could ask the High Court to quickly give a decision on a point of law . This provision was maintained in the 1979 Act , despite efforts by legislators to remove it . Section 2 provides that , should a party apply to the High Court with either the consent of the arbitrator or the other parties , the High Court may explain any point of law given in the reference , on the condition that the point of law meets the requirements laid out in Section 1 , and if " the determination of the application might produce substantial savings in costs to the parties " . 
 <unk> v Roth , Schmidt & Co , the decision in which it was decided agreements excluding judicial supervision are invalid , is partially overruled by Sections 3 and 4 . Section 3 provides that , where such an agreement is drafted , the High Court no longer has the automatic right to request additional reasons from the arbitrator or grant leave to appeal the decision . Such exclusion clauses must be specific , but can be general in nature ; Section 3 ( 2 ) states that it can be framed " to relate to a particular award , to awards under a particular reference or to any other description of awards , whether arising out of the same reference or not " . Section 3 ( 6 ) provides an exception , which covers " domestic " arbitration agreements ; these are defined as agreements where leave to appeal would not be valid in a jurisdiction outside the United Kingdom , and no parties are businesses or individuals legally based in the UK . In this situation , the exclusion clause is only valid if agreed to after the start of arbitration . A second exception is found in Section 4 ( 1 ) ; where the contract arbitration is based on is within admiralty jurisdiction , to do with commodities trading , or an insurance agreement , it will not be valid unless either it was entered into after the start of arbitration or the law applicable to the contract is not that of England and Wales . In any situation , the High Court can be asked to give a decision on a point of law , or the exclusion clause removed , should all parties agree . 
 Prior to the 1979 Act , arbitrators were allowed to make interlocutory orders penalising parties who failed to follow the arbitrator 's timetable or requests ; there was , however , no effective enforcement mechanism . Section 5 of the Act allows the High Court to intervene ; if a party fails to comply , the High Court may ( on the application of the arbitrator or any other party ) order the arbitrator to continue as if the offending party was not there ; he can immediately issue an award without considering their missing submission or failure to appear . Section 6 amends the 1950 Act , which required any two arbitrators hearing a case to immediately appoint an umpire . This caused unnecessary delay and expenditure . Section 6 instead provides that arbitrators can choose to appoint an umpire at any point , but must do " forthwith " if they fundamentally disagree . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 David Shenton and Gordon Toland concluded that the Act brought judicial oversight in English law into compliance with that of other nations , saying that it is " broadly comparable to the provisions ... to be found in Swedish , Swiss and French law " . <unk> , however , argued that it would do little to help attract new arbitration and would in fact drive it away , saying that " the vagueness of the statutory language , combined with the rather hazy policy considerations behind the Act , make confusion and litigation likely " . David Hacking , who helped promote the Act , says that it " was not drafted with the elegance of the 1996 Arbitration Act . In the style of the Parliamentary <unk> of that time , many of its provisions were drafted with a complexity which was happily avoided in the 1996 Act " , and criticises the failure to achieve more than minor reform of existing law . However , he does note that the Act led to a shift in judicial policy , with future judgments to be issued with regards " to the need for finality ... the striving for legal accuracy may be said to have been overtaken by commercial expediency " . Jaffe agrees , writing in the journal Arbitration that " [ i ] t is clear that with the passage of the 1979 Act ... there has been a distinct and noticeable shift of emphasis from legal certainty to finality for arbitral awards " . The Act is no longer in force , having been repealed in its entirety by Section 107 ( 2 ) of the Arbitration Act 1996 . 
 = Hurricane Ignacio ( 1985 ) = 
 Hurricane Ignacio threatened Hawaii during July 1985 . A tropical depression formed on July 21 far from land . It became Tropical Storm Ignacio later that day . Ignacio then rapidly intensified and peaked with 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) winds on July 24 . Ignacio weakened quickly , though it briefly leveled off in intensity as a Category 2 hurricane . Ignacio was downgraded into a tropical storm on July 26 while passing south of Hawaii . Continuing to weaken , Ignacio dissipated on July 27 . A hurricane watch was briefly issued for the Hawaiian Islands even though the watch was dropped when Ignacio weakened . However , Ignacio still brought high waves and light rainfall to the islands . A few roads were closed , but otherwise , damage was minimal . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Based on data from the ships <unk> and <unk> and satellite imagery , the next tropical cyclone of 1985 was spotted early on July 21 while located 1 @,@ 623 mi ( 2 @,@ 612 km ) southwest of San Diego . Situated over 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) sea surface temperatures , the depression attained tropical storm intensity a few hours later . Intensifying further west than normal , the storm reached winds of 70 mph ( 140 km / h ) roughly 24 hours after formation . Nine hours later , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center dropped advisories on Ignacio as it had left their area of responsibility and into the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's ( CPHC ) warning zone . 
 A Hurricane Hunter aircraft investigated Ignacio at daybreak on July 22 , and found that Ignacio had developed a well @-@ defined eye and winds of 85 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Based on this , the CPHC upgraded Ignacio to hurricane status . Continuing to rapidly intensify , Hurricane Ignacio moved west @-@ northwest at 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) and was soon upgraded into Category 2 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ( SSHS ) . Several hours later , the hurricane attained major hurricane status , Category 3 or higher on the SSHS . Later that day , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft discovered that Hurricane Ignacio had reached its peak wind speed of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) and a central pressure of 960 mbar ( 28 inHg ) , making Ignacio one of the most intense hurricane to traverse the Central Pacific . 
 The hurricane held peak intensity for several hours , however , an upper trough northwest of the Hawaiian Islands was gradually approaching Ignacio . Subsequently , the environment was rapidly becoming less conductive as the trough induced increased southwesterly wind shear and introduced colder and drier air into Ignacio 's circulation . By 1800 UTC July 24 , Ignacio was no longer a major hurricane as satellite imagery suggested that the eye had become irregular and soon disappeared . Air Force aircraft confirmed the weakening trend despite being located in an area where other hurricanes such as Hurricane Dot in 1959 and Hurricane Fico in 1978 maintained their intensity around the same time of the year . Minor re @-@ intensification may have occurred the next day as the eye re @-@ developed , however , this theory is not supported in the hurricane database . 
 The hurricane resumed its westerly course , and Hurricane Ignacio was downgraded a Category 1 hurricane at 1800 UTC on July 25 , and a tropical storm the next day . While passing south of Hawaii , Ignacio dropped to tropical depression status early on July 27 , and dissipated shortly after that . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Because of a strong trough was located northwest of Ignacio , many tropical cyclone forecast models predicted a more northerly track than what ultimately occurred . By July 24 , a high surf advisory was in effect for east @-@ facing shores of Hawaii ; subsequently , a hurricane watch was issued at 0300 UTC July 25 for the Big Island of Hawaii Because the island chain only recently recovered from the devastating Hurricane Iwa during the 1982 Pacific hurricane season , civil defense authorities evacuated low @-@ lying residents . One drugstore opened a special hurricane supplies center . In addition , beach activities on south @-@ facing shores were cancelled . Roughly 24 hours after the hurricane watch was issued , the watch was cancelled as Ignacio resumed weakening though a small craft advisory initially remained in effect for the Hawaiian Islands . 
 Ignacio resulted in 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) surf , peaking midday on July 25 . Rainfall from the storm was generally light , with a few reports exceeding 2 in ( 51 mm ) on the windward slopes of Maui and the Big Island . Some structures and roads near Kalapana and <unk> were damaged . Many secondary roads that led to the beaches were closed . Picnic areas and nature trails in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park were closed and overnight camping throughout the state was banned . 
 = Slavery in ancient Greece = 
 Slavery was a very common practice in Ancient Greek history , as in other places of the time . It is estimated that the majority of Athenian citizens owned at least one slave ; most ancient writers considered slavery natural and even necessary . This paradigm was notably questioned in Socratic dialogues ; the Stoics produced the first recorded condemnation of slavery . 
 Modern historiographical practice distinguishes chattel ( personal possession ) slavery from land @-@ bonded groups such as the <unk> of Thessaly or the Spartan helots , who were more like medieval serfs ( an enhancement to real estate ) . The chattel helot is an individual deprived of liberty and forced to submit to an owner , who may buy , sell or lease them like any other chattel . 
 The academic study of slavery in ancient Greece is beset by significant methodological problems . Documentation is disjointed and very fragmented , focusing primarily on Athens . No treatises are specifically devoted to the subject , and jurisprudence was interested in slavery only inasmuch as it provided a source of revenue . Comedies and tragedies represented stereotypes while iconography made no substantial differentiation between slaves and craftsmen . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The ancient Greeks had several words for slaves , which leads to textual ambiguity when they are studied out of their proper context . In Homer , Hesiod and <unk> of Megara , the slave was called <unk> / dmōs . The term has a general meaning but refers particularly to war prisoners taken as booty ( in other words , property ) . During the classical period , the Greeks frequently used <unk> / <unk> , ( literally , " one with the feet of a man " ) as opposed to <unk> / <unk> , " quadruped " , or livestock . The most common word is <unk> / doulos , used in opposition to " free man " ( <unk> / <unk> ) ; an earlier form of the former appears in Mycenaean inscriptions as do @-@ e @-@ ro , " male slave " ( or " servant " , " bondman " ; Linear B : <unk> ) , or do @-@ e @-@ ra , " female slave " ( or " maid @-@ servant " , " <unk> " ; Linear B : ) . The verb <unk> ( which survives in Modern Greek , meaning " work " ) can be used metaphorically for other forms of dominion , as of one city over another or parents over their children . Finally , the term <unk> / <unk> was used , meaning " one who lives in house " , referring to household servants . 
 Other terms used were less precise and required context : 
 <unk> / <unk> – At the time of Homer , the word meant " squire " ( Patroclus was referred to as the <unk> of Achilles and Meriones that of <unk> ) ; during the classical age , it meant " servant " . 
 <unk> / akolouthos – literally , " the follower " or " the one who accompanies " . Also , the diminutive <unk> , used for page boys . 
 <unk> / <unk> – literally " child " , used in the same way as " houseboy " , also used in a derogatory way to call adult slaves . 
 <unk> / <unk> – literally " body " , used in the context of emancipation . 
 = = Origins of slavery = = 
 Slaves were present through the Mycenaean civilization , as documented in numerous tablets unearthed in Pylos 140 . Two legal categories can be distinguished : " slaves ( <unk> ) " and " slaves of the god ( <unk> ) " , the god in this case probably being Poseidon . Slaves of the god are always mentioned by name and own their own land ; their legal status is close to that of freemen . The nature and origin of their bond to the divinity is unclear . The names of common slaves show that some of them came from <unk> , Chios , Lemnos or Halicarnassus and were probably enslaved as a result of piracy . The tablets indicate that unions between slaves and freemen were common and that slaves could work and own land . It appears that the major division in Mycenaean civilization was not between a free individual and a slave but rather if the individual was in the palace . · 
 There is no continuity between the Mycenaean era and the time of Homer , where social structures reflected those of the Greek dark ages . The terminology differs : the slave is no longer do @-@ e @-@ ro ( doulos ) but dmōs . In the Iliad , slaves are mainly women taken as booty of war , while men were either ransomed or killed on the battlefield . In the Odyssey , the slaves also seem to be mostly women . These slaves were servants and sometimes concubines . There were some male slaves , especially in the Odyssey , a prime example being the swineherd Eumaeus . The slave was distinctive in being a member of the core part of the oikos ( " family unit " , " household " ) : Laertes eats and drinks with his servants ; in the winter , he sleeps in their company . The term dmōs is not considered pejorative , and Eumaeus , the " divine " swineherd , bears the same Homeric epithet as the Greek heroes . Slavery remained , however , a disgrace . Eumaeus himself declares , " Zeus , of the far @-@ borne voice , takes away the half of a man 's virtue , when the day of slavery comes upon him " . · 
 It is difficult to determine when slave trading began in the archaic period . In Works and Days ( 8th century BC ) , Hesiod owns numerous <unk> although their status is unclear . The presence of <unk> is confirmed by lyric poets such as <unk> or <unk> of Megara . According to epigraphic evidence , the homicide law of Draco ( c . 620 BC ) mentioned slaves . According to Plutarch , Solon ( c . 594 @-@ 593 BC ) forbade slaves from practising gymnastics and pederasty . By the end of the period , references become more common . Slavery becomes prevalent at the very moment when Solon establishes the basis for Athenian democracy . Classical scholar Moses Finley likewise remarks that Chios , which , according to Theopompus , was the first city to organize a slave trade , also enjoyed an early democratic process ( in the 6th century BC ) . He concludes that " one aspect of Greek history , in short , is the advance hand in hand , of freedom and slavery . " 
 = = Economic role = = 
 All activities were open to slaves with the exception of politics . For the Greeks , politics was the only activity worthy of a citizen , the rest being relegated wherever possible to non @-@ citizens . It was status that was of importance , not activity . 
 The principal use of slavery was in agriculture , the foundation of the Greek economy . Some small landowners might own one slave , or even two . An abundant literature of manuals for landowners ( such as the Economy of Xenophon or that of Pseudo @-@ Aristotle ) confirms the presence of dozens of slaves on the larger estates ; they could be common labourers or foremen . The extent to which slaves were used as a labour force in farming is disputed . It is certain that rural slavery was very common in Athens , and that ancient Greece did not know of the immense slave populations found on the Roman latifundia . 
 Slave labour was prevalent in mines and quarries , which had large slave populations , often leased out by rich private citizens . The strategos Nicias leased a thousand slaves to the silver mines of Laurium in Attica ; <unk> , 600 ; and <unk> , 300 . Xenophon indicates that they received one obolus per slave per day , amounting to 60 drachmas per year . This was one of the most prized investments for Athenians . The number of slaves working in the Laurium mines or in the mills processing ore has been estimated at 30 @,@ 000 . Xenophon suggested that the city buy a large number of slaves , up to three state slaves per citizen , so that their leasing would assure the upkeep of all the citizens . 
 Slaves were also used as craftsmen and <unk> . As in agriculture , they were used for labour that was beyond the capability of the family . The slave population was greatest in workshops : the shield factory of Lysias employed 120 slaves , and the father of Demosthenes owned 32 <unk> and 20 <unk> . 
 Slaves were also employed in the home . The domestic 's main role was to stand in for his master at his trade and to accompany him on trips . In time of war he was batman to the hoplite . The female slave carried out domestic tasks , in particular bread baking and textile making . Only the poorest citizens did not possess a domestic slave . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 It is difficult to estimate the number of slaves in ancient Greece , given the lack of a precise census and variations in definitions during that era . It is certain that Athens had the largest slave population , with as many as 80 @,@ 000 in the 6th and 5th centuries BC , on average three or four slaves per household . In the 5th century BC , Thucydides remarked on the desertion of 20 @,@ 890 slaves during the war of Decelea , mostly tradesmen . The lowest estimate , of 20 @,@ 000 slaves , during the time of Demosthenes , corresponds to one slave per family . Between 317 BC and 307 BC , the tyrant Demetrius Phalereus ordered a general census of Attica , which arrived at the following figures : 21 @,@ 000 citizens , 10 @,@ 000 metics and 400 @,@ 000 slaves . The orator Hypereides , in his Against <unk> , recalls that the effort to enlist 15 @,@ 000 male slaves of military age led to the defeat of the Southern Greeks at the Battle of Chaeronea ( 338 BC ) , which corresponds to the figures of <unk> . 
 According to the literature , it appears that the majority of free Athenians owned at least one slave . Aristophanes , in Plutus , portrays poor peasants who have several slaves ; Aristotle defines a house as containing freemen and slaves . Conversely , not owning even one slave was a clear sign of poverty . In the celebrated discourse of Lysias For the Invalid , a cripple pleading for a pension explains " my income is very small and now I 'm required to do these things myself and do not even have the means to purchase a slave who can do these things for me . " However , the huge slave populations of the Romans were unknown in ancient Greece . When Athenaeus cites the case of <unk> , friend of Aristotle and owner of a thousand slaves , this appears to be exceptional . Plato , owner of five slaves at the time of his death , describes the very rich as owning 50 slaves . 
 Thucydides estimates that the isle of Chios had proportionally the largest number of slaves . 
 = = = = War = = = = 
 By the rules of war of the period , the victor possessed absolute rights over the vanquished , whether they were soldiers or not . Enslavement , while not systematic , was common practice . Thucydides recalls that 7 @,@ 000 inhabitants of <unk> in Sicily were taken prisoner by Nicias and sold for 120 talents in the neighbouring village of Catania . Likewise in 348 BC the population of Olynthus was reduced to slavery , as was that of Thebes in 335 BC by Alexander the Great and that of Mantineia by the Achaean League . 
 The existence of Greek slaves was a constant source of discomfort for free Greeks . The enslavement of cities was also a controversial practice . Some generals refused , such as the Spartans Agesilaus II and <unk> . Some cities passed accords to forbid the practice : in the middle of the 3rd century BC , Miletus agreed not to reduce any free <unk> to slavery , and vice versa . Conversely , the emancipation by ransom of a city that had been entirely reduced to slavery carried great prestige : Cassander , in 316 BC , restored Thebes . Before him , Philip II of Macedon enslaved and then emancipated <unk> . 
 = = = = Piracy and banditry = = = = 
 Piracy and banditry provided a significant and consistent supply of slaves , though the significance of this source varied according to era and region . Pirates and brigands would demand ransom whenever the status of their catch warranted it . Whenever ransom was not paid or not warranted , captives would be sold to a trafficker . In certain areas , piracy was practically a national specialty , described by Thucydides as " the old @-@ fashioned " way of life . Such was the case in Acarnania , Crete , and Aetolia . Outside of Greece , this was also the case with Illyrians , Phoenicians , and Etruscans . During the Hellenistic period , Cilicians and the mountain peoples from the coasts of Anatolia could also be added to the list . Strabo explains the popularity of the practice among the Cilicians by its profitability ; Delos , not far away , allowed for " moving a myriad of slaves daily " . The growing influence of the Roman Republic , a large consumer of slaves , led to development of the market and an aggravation of piracy . In the 1st century BC , however , the Romans largely eradicated piracy to protect the Mediterranean trade routes . 
 = = = = Slave trade = = = = 
 There was slave trade between kingdoms and states of the wider region . The fragmentary list of slaves confiscated from the property of the mutilators of the <unk> mentions 32 slaves whose origin have been ascertained : 13 came from Thrace , 7 from Caria , and the others came from Cappadocia , Scythia , Phrygia , Lydia , Syria , <unk> , Macedon and Peloponnese . Local professionals sold their own people to Greek slave merchants . The principal centres of the slave trade appear to have been Ephesus , Byzantium , and even faraway <unk> at the mouth of the Don . Some " barbarian " slaves were victims of war or localised piracy , but others were sold by their parents . There is a lack of direct evidence of slave traffic , but corroborating evidence exists . Firstly , certain nationalities are consistently and significantly represented in the slave population , such as the corps of Scythian archers employed by Athens as a police force — originally 300 , but eventually nearly a thousand . Secondly , the names given to slaves in the comedies often had a geographical link ; thus <unk> , used by Aristophanes in The Wasps , The <unk> , and Peace , simply signified Thracian woman . Finally , the nationality of a slave was a significant criterion for major purchasers ; the ancient advice was not to concentrate too many slaves of the same origin in the same place , in order to limit the risk of revolt . It is also probable that , as with the Romans , certain nationalities were considered more productive as slaves than others . 
 The price of slaves varied in accordance with their ability . Xenophon valued a <unk> miner at 180 drachmas ; while a workman at major works was paid one drachma per day . Demosthenes ' father 's <unk> were valued at 500 to 600 drachmas each . Price was also a function of the quantity of slaves available ; in the 4th century BC they were abundant and it was thus a buyer 's market . A tax on sale revenues was levied by the market cities . For instance , a large helot market was organized during the festivities at the temple of Apollo at Actium . The Acarnanian League , which was in charge of the logistics , received half of the tax proceeds , the other half going to the city of <unk> , of which Actium was a part . Buyers enjoyed a guarantee against latent defects ; the transaction could be invalidated if the bought slave turned out to be crippled and the buyer had not been warned about it . 
 = = = Natural growth = = = 
 Curiously , it appears that the Greeks did not " breed " their slaves , at least during the Classical Era , though the proportion of <unk> slaves appears to have been rather large in Ptolemaic Egypt and in manumission inscriptions at Delphi . Sometimes the cause of this was natural ; mines , for instance , were exclusively a male domain . On the other hand , there were many female domestic slaves . The example of African slaves in the American South on the other hand demonstrates that slave populations can multiply . This incongruity remains relatively unexplained . 
 Xenophon advised that male and female slaves should be lodged separately , that " … nor children born and bred by our domestics without our knowledge and consent — no unimportant matter , since , if the act of rearing children tends to make good servants still more loyally disposed , cohabiting but sharpens ingenuity for mischief in the bad . " The explanation is perhaps economic ; even a skilled slave was cheap , so it may have been cheaper to purchase a slave than to raise one . Additionally , childbirth placed the slave @-@ mother 's life at risk , and the baby was not guaranteed to survive to adulthood . 
 <unk> slaves ( <unk> ) often constituted a privileged class . They were , for example , entrusted to take the children to school ; they were " pedagogues " in the first sense of the term . Some of them were the offspring of the master of the house , but in most cities , notably Athens , a child inherited the status of its mother . 
 = = Status of slaves = = 
 The Greeks had many degrees of enslavement . There was a multitude of categories , ranging from free citizen to chattel slave , and including <unk> or helots , disenfranchised citizens , freedmen , bastards , and metics . The common ground was the deprivation of civic rights . 
 Moses Finley proposed a set of criteria for different degrees of enslavement : 
 had no rights 
 Right to own property 
 Authority over the work of another 
 Power of punishment over another 
 Legal rights and duties ( liability to arrest and / or arbitrary punishment , or to litigate ) 
 Familial rights and privileges ( marriage , inheritance , etc . ) 
 Possibility of social mobility ( manumission or emancipation , access to citizen rights ) 
 Religious rights and obligations 
 Military rights and obligations ( military service as servant , heavy or light soldier , or sailor ) 
 = = = Athenian slaves = = = 
 Athenian slaves were the property of their master ( or of the state ) , who could dispose of them as he saw fit . He could give , sell , rent , or bequeath them . A slave could have a spouse and children , but the slave family was not recognized by the state , and the master could scatter the family members at any time . Slaves had fewer judicial rights than citizens and were represented by their master in all judicial proceedings . A misdemeanour that would result in a fine for the free man would result in a flogging for the slave ; the ratio seems to have been one lash for one drachma . With several minor exceptions , the testimony of a slave was not admissible except under torture . Slaves were tortured in trials because they often remained loyal to their master . A famous example of trusty slave was Themistocles 's Persian slave Sicinnus ( the counterpart of Ephialtes of Trachis ) , who , despite his Persian origin , betrayed Xerxes and helped Athenians in the Battle of Salamis . Despite torture in trials , the Athenian slave was protected in an indirect way : if he was mistreated , the master could initiate litigation for damages and interest ( <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> ) . Conversely , a master who excessively mistreated a slave could be prosecuted by any citizen ( <unk> <unk> / graphē <unk> ) ; this was not enacted for the sake of the slave , but to avoid violent excess ( <unk> / hubris ) . 
 Isocrates claimed that " not even the most worthless slave can be put to death without trial " ; the master 's power over his slave was not absolute . Draco 's law apparently punished with death the murder of a slave ; the underlying principle was : " was the crime such that , if it became more widespread , it would do serious harm to society ? " The suit that could be brought against a slave 's killer was not a suit for damages , as would be the case for the killing of cattle , but a <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , demanding punishment for the religious pollution brought by the shedding of blood . In the 4th century BC , the suspect was judged by the <unk> , a court which had jurisdiction over unintentional homicide ; the imposed penalty seems to have been more than a fine but less than death — maybe exile , as was the case in the murder of a Metic . 
 However , slaves did belong to their master 's household . A newly @-@ bought slave was welcomed with nuts and fruits , just like a newly @-@ wed wife . Slaves took part in most of the civic and family cults ; they were expressly invited to join the banquet of the <unk> , second day of the Anthesteria , and were allowed initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries . A slave could claim asylum in a temple or at an altar , just like a free man . The slaves shared the gods of their masters and could keep their own religious customs if any . 
 Slaves could not own property , but their masters often let them save up to purchase their freedom , and records survive of slaves operating businesses by themselves , making only a fixed tax @-@ payment to their masters . Athens also had a law forbidding the striking of slaves : if a person struck what appeared to be a slave in Athens , that person might find himself hitting a fellow @-@ citizen , because many citizens dressed no better . It astonished other Greeks that Athenians tolerated back @-@ chat from slaves . Athenian slaves fought together with Athenian freemen at the battle of Marathon , and the monuments memorialize them . It was formally decreed before the battle of Salamis that the citizens should " save themselves , their women , children , and slaves " . 
 Slaves had special sexual restrictions and obligations . For example , a slave could not engage free boys in pederastic relationships ( " A slave shall not be the lover of a free boy nor follow after him , or else he shall receive fifty blows of the public lash . " ) , and they were forbidden from the <unk> ( " A slave shall not take exercise or anoint himself in the wrestling @-@ schools . " ) . Both laws are attributed to Solon . Fathers wanting to protect their sons from unwanted advances provided them with a slave guard , called a <unk> , to escort the boy in his travels . 
 The sons of vanquished foes would be enslaved and often forced to work in male brothels , as in the case of Phaedo of Elis , who at the request of Socrates was bought and freed from such an enterprise by the philosopher 's rich friends . On the other hand , it is attested in sources that the rape of slaves was persecuted , at least occasionally . 
 = = = Slaves in Gortyn = = = 
 In Gortyn , in Crete , according to a code engraved in stone dating to the 6th century BC , slaves ( doulos or <unk> ) found themselves in a state of great dependence . Their children belonged to the master . The master was responsible for all their offences , and , inversely , he received amends for crimes committed against his slaves by others . In the Gortyn code , where all punishment was monetary , fines were doubled for slaves committing a misdemeanour or felony . Conversely , an offence committed against a slave was much less expensive than an offence committed against a free person . As an example , the rape of a free woman by a slave was punishable by a fine of 200 staters ( 400 drachms ) , while the rape of a non @-@ virgin slave by another slave brought a fine of only one obolus ( a sixth of a drachm ) . 
 Slaves did have the right to possess a house and livestock , which could be transmitted to descendants , as could clothing and household furnishings . Their family was recognized by law : they could marry , divorce , write a testament and inherit just like free men . 
 = = = A specific case : debt slavery = = = 
 Prior to its interdiction by Solon , Athenians practiced debt enslavement : a citizen incapable of paying his debts became " enslaved " to the creditor . The exact nature of this dependency is a much controversial issue among modern historians : was it truly slavery or another form of bondage ? However , this issue primarily concerned those peasants known as " <unk> " working leased land belonging to rich landowners and unable to pay their rents . In theory , those so enslaved would be liberated when their original debts were repaid . The system was developed with variants throughout the Near East and is cited in the Bible . 
 Solon put an end to it with the <unk> / <unk> , liberation of debts , which prevented all claim to the person by the debtor and forbade the sale of free Athenians , including by themselves . Aristotle in his Constitution of the Athenians quotes one of Solon 's poems : 
 And many a man whom fraud or law had sold 
 Far from his god @-@ built land , an outcast slave , 
 I brought again to Athens ; yea , and some , 
 Exiles from home through debt ’ s oppressive load , 
 Speaking no more the dear Athenian tongue , 
 But wandering far and wide , I brought again ; 
 And those that here in vilest slavery ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> ‘ neath a master ’ s ( <unk> ) frown , I set them free . 
 Though much of Solon 's vocabulary is that of " traditional " slavery , servitude for debt was at least different in that the enslaved Athenian remained an Athenian , dependent on another Athenian , in his place of birth . It is this aspect which explains the great wave of discontent with slavery of the 6th century BC , which was not intended to free all slaves but only those enslaved by debt . The reforms of Solon left two exceptions : the guardian of an unmarried woman who had lost her virginity had the right to sell her as a slave , and a citizen could " expose " ( abandon ) unwanted newborn children . 
 = = = Manumission = = = 
 The practice of manumission is confirmed to have existed in Chios from the 6th century BC . It probably dates back to an earlier period , as it was an oral procedure . Informal <unk> are also confirmed in the classical period . It was sufficient to have witnesses , who would escort the citizen to a public emancipation of his slave , either at the theatre or before a public tribunal . This practice was outlawed in Athens in the middle of the 6th century BC to avoid public disorder . 
 The practice became more common in the 4th century BC and gave rise to inscriptions in stone which have been recovered from shrines such as Delphi and Dodona . They primarily date to the 2nd and 1st centuries BC , and the 1st century AD . Collective manumission was possible ; an example is known from the 2nd century BC in the island of Thasos . It probably took place during a period of war as a reward for the slaves ' loyalty , but in most cases the documentation deals with a voluntary act on the part of the master ( predominantly male , but in the Hellenistic period also female ) . 
 The slave was often required to pay for himself an amount at least equivalent to his street value . To this end they could use their savings or take a so @-@ called " friendly " loan ( <unk> / <unk> ) from their master , a friend or a client like the hetaera Neaira did . 
 Emancipation was often of a religious nature , where the slave was considered to be " sold " to a deity , often Delphian Apollo , or was consecrated after his emancipation . The temple would receive a portion of the monetary transaction and would guarantee the contract . The manumission could also be entirely civil , in which case the magistrate played the role of the deity . 
 The slave 's freedom could be either total or partial , at the master 's whim . In the former , the emancipated slave was legally protected against all attempts at re @-@ enslavement — for instance , on the part of the former master 's inheritors . In the latter case , the emancipated slave could be liable to a number of obligations to the former master . The most restrictive contract was the <unk> , a type of enslavement of limited duration during which time the master retained practically absolute rights . 
 In regard to the city , the emancipated slave was far from equal to a citizen by birth . He was liable to all types of obligations , as one can see from the proposals of Plato in The Laws : presentation three times monthly at the home of the former master , forbidden to become richer than him , etc . In fact , the status of emancipated slaves was similar to that of metics , the residing foreigners , who were free but did not enjoy a citizen 's rights . 
 = = = Spartan slaves = = = 
 Spartan citizens used helots , a dependent group collectively owned by the state . It is uncertain whether they had chattel slaves as well . There are mentions of people manumitted by Spartans , which was supposedly forbidden for helots , or sold outside of <unk> : the poet <unk> ; a <unk> from <unk> , reputedly enslaved with all his fellow citizens when his city was conquered , later sold to an Athenian ; a Spartan cook bought by Dionysius the Elder or by a king of Pontus , both versions being mentioned by Plutarch ; and the famous Spartan nurses , much appreciated by Athenian parents . 
 Some texts mention both slaves and helots , which seems to indicate that they were not the same thing . Plato in Alcibiades I cites " the ownership of slaves , and notably helots " among the Spartan riches , and Plutarch writes about " slaves and helots " . Finally , according to Thucydides , the agreement that ended the 464 BC revolt of helots stated that any Messenian rebel who might hereafter be found within the Peloponnese was " to be the slave of his captor " , which means that the ownership of chattel slaves was not illegal at that time . 
 Most historians thus concur that chattel slaves were indeed used in the Greek city @-@ state of Sparta , at least after the <unk> victory of 404 BC against Athens , but not in great numbers and only among the upper classes . As was in the other Greek cities , chattel slaves could be purchased at the market or taken in war . 
 = = Slavery conditions = = 
 It is difficult to appreciate the condition of Greek slaves . According to Aristotle , the daily routine of slaves could be summed up in three words : " work , discipline , and feeding " . Xenophon 's advice is to treat slaves as domestic animals , that is to say punish disobedience and reward good behaviour . For his part , Aristotle prefers to see slaves treated as children and to use not only orders but also recommendations , as the slave is capable of understanding reasons when they are explained . 
 Greek literature abounds with scenes of slaves being flogged ; it was a means of forcing them to work , as were control of rations , clothing , and rest . This violence could be meted out by the master or the supervisor , who was possibly also a slave . Thus , at the beginning of Aristophanes ' The Knights ( 4 – 5 ) , two slaves complain of being " bruised and thrashed without respite " by their new supervisor . However , Aristophanes himself cites what is a typical old saw in ancient Greek comedy : 
 " He also dismissed those slaves who kept on running off , or deceiving someone , or getting whipped . They were always led out crying , so one of their fellow slaves could mock the bruises and ask then : ' Oh you poor miserable fellow , what 's happened to your skin ? Surely a huge army of lashes from a whip has fallen down on you and laid waste your back ? ' " 
 The condition of slaves varied very much according to their status ; the mine slaves of <unk> and the <unk> ( brothel prostitutes ) lived a particularly brutal existence , while public slaves , craftsmen , tradesmen and bankers enjoyed relative independence . In return for a fee ( <unk> / <unk> ) paid to their master , they could live and work alone . They could thus earn some money on the side , sometimes enough to purchase their freedom . Potential emancipation was indeed a powerful motivator , though the real scale of this is difficult to estimate . 
 Ancient writers considered that Attic slaves enjoyed a " peculiarly happy lot " : Pseudo @-@ Xenophon deplores the liberties taken by Athenian slaves : " as for the slaves and <unk> of Athens , they take the greatest licence ; you cannot just strike them , and they do not step aside to give you free passage " . This alleged good treatment did not prevent 20 @,@ 000 Athenian slaves from running away at the end of the Peloponnesian War at the incitement of the Spartan garrison at Attica in Decelea . These were principally skilled artisans ( <unk> ) , probably among the better @-@ treated slaves . The title of a 4th @-@ century comedy by <unk> , The Runaway @-@ catcher ( <unk> ) , suggests that slave flight was not uncommon . 
 Conversely , there are no records of a large @-@ scale Greek slave revolt comparable to that of Spartacus in Rome . It can probably be explained by the relative dispersion of Greek slaves , which would have prevented any large @-@ scale planning . Slave revolts were rare , even in Rome . Individual acts of rebellion of slaves against their master , though scarce , are not unheard of ; a judicial speech mentions the attempted murder of his master by a boy slave , not 12 years old . 
 = = Views of Greek slavery = = 
 = = = Historical views = = = 
 Very few authors of antiquity call slavery into question . To Homer and the pre @-@ classical authors , slavery was an inevitable consequence of war . Heraclitus states that " War is the father of all , the king of all ... he turns some into slaves and sets others free " . 
 During the classical period , the main justification for slavery was economic . From a philosophical point of view , the idea of " natural " slavery emerged at the same time ; thus , as Aeschylus states in The Persians , the Greeks " [ o ] f no man are they called the slaves or vassals " , while the Persians , as Euripides states in Helen , " are all slaves , except one " — the Great King . Hippocrates theorizes about this latent idea at the end of the 5th century BC . According to him , the temperate climate of Anatolia produced a placid and submissive people . This explanation is reprised by Plato , then Aristotle in Politics , where he develops the concept of " natural slavery " : " for he that can foresee with his mind is naturally ruler and naturally master , and he that can do these things with his body is subject and naturally a slave . " As opposed to an animal , a slave can comprehend reason but " … has not got the deliberative part at all . " 
 <unk> , at the same time as Aristotle , took the view : " nature has made nobody a slave " . 
 In parallel , the concept that all men , whether Greek or barbarian , belonged to the same race was being developed by the Sophists and thus that certain men were slaves although they had the soul of a freeman and vice versa . Aristotle himself recognized this possibility and argued that slavery could not be imposed unless the master was better than the slave , in keeping with his theory of " natural " slavery . The Sophists concluded that true servitude was not a matter of status but a matter of spirit ; thus , as Menander stated , " be free in the mind , although you are slave : and thus you will no longer be a slave " . This idea , repeated by the Stoics and the <unk> , was not so much an opposition to slavery as a trivialisation of it . 
 The Greeks could not comprehend an absence of slaves . Slaves exist even in the " <unk> " of Aristophanes ' The Birds as well as in the ideal cities of Plato 's Laws or Republic . The utopian cities of <unk> of Chalcedon and <unk> of Miletus are based on the equal distribution of property , but public slaves are used respectively as craftsmen and land workers . The " reversed cities " placed women in power or even saw the end of private property , as in Lysistrata or <unk> , but could not picture slaves in charge of masters . The only societies without slaves were those of the Golden Age , where all needs were met without anyone having to work . In this type of society , as explained by Plato , one reaped generously without sowing . In <unk> ' <unk> barley loaves fight with wheat loaves for the honour of being eaten by men . Moreover , objects move themselves — dough <unk> itself , and the jug pours itself . Similarly , Aristotle said that slaves would not be necessary " if every instrument could accomplish its own work ... the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch the lyre without a hand to guide them " , like the legendary constructs of Daedalus and Hephaestus . Society without slaves is thus relegated to a different time and space . In a " normal " society , one needs slaves . 
 = = = Modern views = = = 
 Slavery in Greek antiquity has long been an object of apologetic discourse among Christians , who are typically awarded the merit of its collapse . From the 16th century the discourse became moralizing in nature . The existence of colonial slavery had significant impact on the debate , with some authors lending it civilizing merits and others denouncing its misdeeds . Thus Henri @-@ Alexandre Wallon in 1847 published a History of Slavery in Antiquity among his works for the abolition of slavery in the French colonies . 
 In the 19th century , a politico @-@ economic discourse emerged . It concerned itself with distinguishing the phases in the organisation of human societies and correctly identifying the place of Greek slavery . The influence of Marx is decisive ; for him the ancient society was characterized by development of private ownership and the dominant ( and not secondary as in other pre @-@ capitalist societies ) character of slavery as a mode of production . The Positivists represented by the historian Eduard Meyer ( Slavery in Antiquity , 1898 ) were soon to oppose the Marxist theory . According to him slavery was the foundation of Greek democracy . It was thus a legal and social phenomenon , and not economic . 
 Current historiography developed in the 20th century ; led by authors such as Joseph Vogt , it saw in slavery the conditions for the development of elites . Conversely , the theory also demonstrates an opportunity for slaves to join the elite . Finally , Vogt estimates that modern society , founded on humanist values , has surpassed this level of development . 
 In 2011 , Greek slavery remains the subject of historiographical debate , on two questions in particular : can it be said that ancient Greece was a " slave society " , and did Greek slaves comprise a social class ? 
 = María del Luján Telpuk = 
 Lorena Telpuk , formerly María del Luján Telpuk , ( sometimes María de Luján Telpuk ) or the Suitcase Girl ( c . 1981 ) is a former airport police officer at Aeroparque Jorge Newbery in Buenos Aires , Argentina , who noticed a suitcase with US $ 800 @,@ 000 as it went through an X @-@ ray machine in August 2007 . In December 2007 , the money became a very public part of an international election suitcase scandal , known as Maletinazo . When the suitcase scandal became public , she became an international celebrity and appeared on the cover of several magazines , including those of the February 2008 issue of the Argentine edition of Playboy magazine and the March 2008 issue of the Venezuelan edition of Playboy magazine . 
 In 2008 , according to foreign language sources , she changed her name from María del Luján Telpuk to Lorena Telpuk ; she posed for additional adult modeling photographs ; and continued her pursuit of stardom . She also testified in court regarding her involvement in the case . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Telpuk is a former nursery school teacher . She was raised in a small town in the Santa Fe Province where she taught nursery school , but she moved to Buenos Aires after passing an entrance exam for the Airport Security Police about three years prior to the Maletinazo incident . In the short time since Telpuk has transformed from night shift policewoman to pinup girl almost overnight . She has left the police force , joined a charter airline , begun taking English classes and begun to prepare for a role on Skating for a Dream , an Argentine variety show . 
 Telpuk 's mother Yolanda lives in a middle @-@ class suburb of Buenos Aires . She is widowed and used to work for a pasta factory . 
 = = Maletinazo = = 
 On August 4 , 2007 , at 2 : 45 a.m. , she discovered the money that became part of a political scandal in the electoral campaign of President of Argentina Cristina Fernández de Kirchner . It was in the possession of a Key Biscayne , Florida , associate of President of Venezuela Hugo Chávez . The carrier , Guido Antonini Wilson ( who is referred to in the press by both Antonini and Wilson and who is sometimes referred to by the nicknames " El Gordo " or " The Fat Man " ) , is an interpreter and was part of a delegation of executives that traveled to Argentina in advance of Chávez ' energy deal signing . He opened the bag at the insistence of Telpuk , who noticed the six dense and perfectly rectangular blocks in the luggage scans . At first , Wilson had explained the items as books and papers . When forced to open it , he began to stammer and show signs of nervousness , and he said the suitcase only contained about $ 60 @,@ 000 . The blocks turned out to be US $ 790 @,@ 550 . The delegation , which arrived on a Cessna Citation jet from Caracas , Venezuela , chartered by <unk> Argentina , SA , carried five Venezuelans and three Argentines who represented their respective governments ' energy companies . In a country known for its corruption , Telpuk did not have an interest in a bribe although she felt Wilson may have expected her to be willing to take one . Instead of pursuing a bribe , she reported the finding . 
 Although the local media of both Argentina and Venezuela gave the story immediate front page coverage , the case faded away until after Kirchner was elected . The United States prosecutors believe that the money represented a contribution from Venezuelan President Chávez to the presidential campaign of Argentina 's leftist leader , Kirchner . Two days after the December 10 , 2007 inauguration , several arrests were announced by prosecutors working for the United States Attorney General . The arrests were for activities related to having offered Wilson $ 2 million to keep quiet about the contributions from Venezuela to support Kirchner 's campaign . In addition to Maletinazo , the case is known in Latin America as " <unk> " or " <unk> " , and Telpuk is known as the Suitcase Girl in her homeland , Argentina . 
 For her part , Telpuk felt she was caught in the " middle of a rivalry of nations " . She has been vilified as a mercenary fortune @-@ seeker and CIA lackey . She has received a variety of threats by telephone and email , and had police protection starting when the incident became a public scandal in December . She has even received a bouquet with an ominous note . 
 = = Media appearances = = 
 Her first magazine cover appearance was on the December issue of an irreverent political magazine , <unk> where Telpuk appeared under the headline " The Bombshell Behind the Suitcase " standing behind a suitcase . She wore little other than a police cap , and another headline on the cover read , " Is She the Key Piece of a Plot Designed by Washington ? " She then appeared on the February issue of the Argentine edition of Playboy magazine next to the headline " <unk> Al <unk> " ( translated as " Corruption Laid Bare " ) . Subsequently , she appeared on the March 2008 issue of the Venezuelan edition of Playboy magazine . She posed with a red suitcase decorated with both the Argentine and Venezuelan flags while wearing a scarf , black leather gloves and black @-@ and @-@ white boots for her Playboy cover appearance . Within the magazine in her pictorial , she posed with fewer clothes and with various props : the ubiquitous suitcase , dollar bills , including the propeller blades of a single @-@ engine airplane . She decided to pursue an appearance on the Argentine variety show " <unk> por un sueño " , after Marcelo Tinelli visited her at the airport to congratulate her . 
 Telpuk has appeared on various talk shows since the scandal . In 2008 , according to foreign language sources , she changed her name from María del Luján Telpuk to Lorena Telpuk ; she was mysteriously dismissed from Skating for a Dream ; and she posed for additional adult modeling photographs in Premium , an Argentine magazine . Telpuk had breast augmentation surgery prior to her late 2008 court appearances . 
 = = Courtroom = = 
 Telpuk testified in court in October 2008 on various days spanning the weekend of October 5 , 2008 , regarding her knowledge in the famous suitcase scandal . Her October 3 testimony , wherein she contradicted the testimony of Antonini , in which he had stated that he was carrying the suitcase as a courtesy to his companions , was considered a highlight of the trial . On that day , her presence prompted a media frenzy . For her part , Telpuk took the stand to testify that she had been offered political asylum by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as well as employment in the United States in exchange for modifying her witness statement that Mr. Antonini Wilson was the owner of the suitcase that contained the $ 800 @,@ 000 . On November 3 , 2008 , part of the case was decided in a Miami courtroom when Franklin Durán , a wealthy businessman who allegedly conspired to cover up both the origin and the destination of the suitcase , was convicted of acting as an " unregistered agent " of Venezuela on American soil . On March 17 , 2009 Franklin Durán , who was facing up to 15 years in prison , was sentenced to 4 . 
 = Super Mario Galaxy 2 = 
 Super Mario Galaxy 2 ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Sūpā Mario <unk> Tsū ) is a platforming video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Wii . It was first announced at E3 2009 and is the sequel to Super Mario Galaxy . It was released in North America on May 23 , 2010 ; in Japan on May 27 , 2010 ; in Europe on June 11 , 2010 ; and in Australia on July 1 , 2010 . It is the fourth original 3D platformer in the Super Mario series , after Super Mario 64 , Super Mario Sunshine , and Super Mario Galaxy . 
 The story follows Mario as he pursues the Koopa King , Bowser , into outer space , where he has imprisoned Princess Peach and taken control of the universe using Power Stars . Mario must travel across various galaxies to recover the Power Stars in order to travel to the center of the universe and rescue the princess . The game was originally planned as an updated version of Super Mario Galaxy with some modifications and a projected development time of a year ; this version would have been called Super Mario Galaxy More . It was later decided that the game was to be developed as a fleshed @-@ out sequel when the development staff continued to build upon the game with dozens of new ideas , and so development time expanded to two and a half years . Among the additions are dynamic environments , new power @-@ ups , and , most notably , the ability to ride Yoshi . 
 Upon its release , Super Mario Galaxy 2 was met with as much widespread critical acclaim as its predecessor , and is regarded by many to be one of the greatest video games of all time , as well as one of the highest rated video games on the aggregation sites Metacritic and GameRankings . It is one of the best @-@ selling games on the Wii with 6 @.@ 72 million copies sold worldwide . In 2015 , it became the first disc @-@ based Wii game to get a re @-@ release on the Wii U eShop . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Super Mario Galaxy 2 is similar to Super Mario Galaxy , with a focus on platforming based on and around 3D planets ( referred to collectively as galaxies ) with varying themes , sizes , landscapes , and climates . The player controls Mario ( or later in the game , his brother Luigi , though using him is optional ) , who has special abilities such as the " Spin " attack , long jump , wall jumps , and a variety of somersaults . As in the original , the objective of the game is to travel to the various galaxies and collect Power Stars , which are awarded by completing levels and accomplishing tasks and are used to gain access to later levels . The game retains some gameplay mechanics introduced in the original , such as the blue Star Pointer that allows the player to pick up Star Bits and shoot them at enemies , levels that restrict movement to a 2D plane , balance ball levels , and gravity @-@ reversing background arrows . 
 = = = Setting and level design = = = 
 Super Mario Galaxy 2 provides the player access to the game 's galaxies through means of a map system similar to that in previous Mario games such as Super Mario World and New Super Mario Bros. Wii . This is navigated via a mobile planet called Starship Mario ( named as such because it is shaped exactly like Mario 's head ) that serves as a hub world , which can be visited anytime and is expanded when new abilities or levels are unlocked . The game contains forty @-@ nine galaxies allotted among seven different regions in the universe ( called " worlds " ) , the general difficulty progressively increasing in each world . The first six worlds end with a boss level in which the object is to conquer Bowser or Bowser Jr . ( the former being in even @-@ numbered worlds , and the latter being in odd @-@ numbered worlds ) , which then allows the player to access the next world . When the player collects all 120 Power Stars , 120 Green Star levels are unlocked . These levels , containing Green Stars that are hidden or are placed in hard @-@ to @-@ reach areas , require intense exploration and precision and may cause instant death if the player fails . Acquiring all 120 Green Stars awards the player with the final , forty @-@ ninth galaxy with two new challenges that are considered exceptionally difficult . Super Mario Galaxy 2 contains 242 unique Power Stars to collect overall . 
 Most of the levels in Super Mario Galaxy 2 offer a unique task based around its theme , and many focus on dynamic environments that change or alternate between various states . For example , some environments change to the beat of the background music , such as sudden shifts in the direction of gravity or the appearance or disappearance of platforms ; and others feature a special switch that temporarily slows down time . Prankster Comets , which were featured in the original game and cause variation and tougher challenges in levels , no longer appear randomly in visited galaxies but instead require the collection of a Comet Medal in that galaxy in order for it to appear . In addition , Prankster Comets have become more general and offer any number of variations : while Super Mario Galaxy offered only five mutually exclusive variations , the Prankster Comets in Super Mario Galaxy 2 range to any number of challenges that often mix or overlap . These include : destroying all the enemies , collecting 100 Purple Coins , and completing the level within a time limit , with Mario 's maximum health reduced to one unit , or while avoiding Cosmic Clones ( doppelgängers of Mario that pursue and imitate all the player 's actions ) . As a result , both the dynamic environments and the Prankster Comets often create challenges with puzzle elements , requiring precision and strategy in order to overcome them . 
 = = = Power @-@ ups = = = 
 All the original transformations in Super Mario Galaxy return except for Ice Mario and Flying Mario , along with some new power @-@ ups and items . These include the Spin Drill , which allows the player to burrow through some planets and emerge out the other side ; Rock Mario , which allows the player to smash through obstacles , such as boulders and enemies ; and Cloud Mario , which allows the player to create temporary platforms in midair . 
 Mario is able to ride the dinosaur Yoshi , who is available in certain levels . When riding Yoshi , the player 's blue Star Pointer is replaced by a red dot , which allows the player to point at various objects and manipulate them with Yoshi 's tongue . Yoshi can also use his tongue to swing across gaps , pull levers , and swallow enemies ( with the option to spit them back out as projectiles ) . In addition , Yoshi allows the player to double jump . There are also three different power @-@ up fruits available for Yoshi to eat that grant him temporary abilities . These are the Dash Pepper , the Blimp Fruit and the Bulb Berry . The Dash Pepper allows Yoshi to run quickly , giving him the ability to run up walls and run on water ; the Blimp Fruit allows Yoshi to float into the air ; and the Bulb Berry allows Yoshi to reveal secret pathways . If the player takes damage while riding Yoshi , the player will fall off and Yoshi will run away until the player gets back on him . If the player does not get back on , Yoshi will retreat into his egg . 
 = = = Guides and multiplayer = = = 
 Because of the game 's increased difficulty over the original , Super Mario Galaxy 2 offers some features that assist inexperienced or frustrated players . The most notable is the Cosmic Guide , similar to New Super Mario Bros. Wii 's " Super Guide " feature , who takes the form of Rosalina . The Cosmic Guide appears if the player has failed during a particular level a certain number of times , and allows the player to give computer control over Mario in order to complete the level if necessary . The drawback is that the player is awarded a Bronze Star , requiring the player to complete the level without using the Cosmic Guide in order to earn a Golden Power Star . There are also monitors called " Hint TVs " that will demonstrate how to perform a specific move or optimal ways of using a power @-@ up . 
 Multiplayer gameplay has also been expanded upon over the original . In Super Mario Galaxy , another player could use a second Wii Remote to control a second Star Pointer and assist Mario by grabbing onto enemies or collecting and shooting Star Bits . In Super Mario Galaxy 2 , the second player now controls an orange Luma who retains all the original abilities , but can also physically attack enemies and collect items , power @-@ ups and 1 @-@ ups , making the player 's involvement more useful . 
 = = Story = = 
 Princess Peach invites Mario to share some cake at the Star Festival , a time when Star Bits rain down from the skies over the Mushroom Kingdom . On his way , Mario finds a Luma , who immediately befriends him and grants him the ability to spin . Shortly thereafter , Mario 's nemesis Bowser , who has grown to an immense size ( after swallowing Grand Stars , unbeknownst to Mario at this point ) , appears and attacks Princess Peach 's Castle . Kidnapping the princess , Bowser escapes into outer space to recreate his empire at the center of the universe . After launching into outer space , Mario is given control of Starship Mario , a mobile planetoid in the shape of his head , made by a crafty Luma mechanic called Lubba , powered by Power Stars , and piloted by other Lumas ; his mission is to fly across the universe in pursuit of Bowser and the Princess and to help Lubba find the lost Lumas that were part of Bowser 's plot . Along the way Mario meets new Lumas and joins up with his companion Yoshi , the Toad Brigade from the original Super Mario Galaxy , and his brother Luigi . 
 Upon collecting enough Power Stars , fighting Bowser twice and blowing up Bowser Jr . ' s machine sending him flying into space along the way , Mario reaches Bowser 's main fortification , draining energy from what appears to be a comet . Mario infiltrates the castle and defeats Bowser , retrieving the last Grand Star . Rosalina and her Comet Observatory from the first Super Mario Galaxy appear before Mario and Peach . Rosalina thanks Mario for watching over the Luma that he had found , and the Luma returns to the Comet Observatory , taking Mario 's hat with him . Mario and his friends return to the Mushroom Kingdom and celebrate their victory . The game ends with Starship Mario sitting above Princess Peach 's Castle , with the Comet Observatory streaking across the sky . 
 = = Development = = 
 After Nintendo finished making the first Super Mario Galaxy , Shigeru Miyamoto approached the development team and suggested that a follow @-@ up be produced . The game was originally planned to just do variations on the original game 's planets and call the game " Super Mario Galaxy More , " ( it was dubbed " Super Mario Galaxy 1 @.@ 5 " during early development ) , with a projected development time of approximately a year . The first elements that were implemented were anything that was scrapped from the original game , either to ensure game balance or simply because of time constraints , such as Yoshi and the concept of a planet shaped like Mario 's head . Over time , more and more new elements and ideas were brought into the game , and it was decided that the game would be a fleshed @-@ out sequel rather than a slightly modified follow @-@ up . Thus , development took two and a half years . Takeshi Hayakawa , the lead programmer for Super Mario Galaxy 2 , created a development tool that allowed different staff members , including visual and sound designers , to easily design and create stages without waiting for programmers , many of which were incorporated into the final game . 
 In order to help distinguish Super Mario Galaxy 2 from its predecessor , the staff originally wanted the whole game to revolve around the concept of " switching , " in which the game 's environments would dramatically change under certain conditions . This concept ended up being particularly difficult to implement full @-@ scale , so was relegated to only certain levels . Another idea that came up early on were cameo inclusions by other Nintendo characters ( specifically Donkey Kong and Pikmin ) . The idea however was nixed by Miyamoto who stated that Pikmin characters wouldn 't work within the Mario universe , and that there was no reason for other such cameos . Game tutorials were confined to an optional system called the " Tip Network " in order to benefit players already familiar with the original game . Miyamoto compared Super Mario Galaxy 2 to The Legend of Zelda : Majora 's Mask , in that both games use the same engines as their predecessors , yet build upon their foundations . 
 The game was revealed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 on June 2 . In Miyamoto 's private conference , it was stated that the game was very far along in development , but its release was held back to mid @-@ 2010 because of New Super Mario Bros. Wii 's release in late 2009 . Miyamoto also stated that the game has 95 – 99 % new features , with the rest being previous features introduced in Super Mario Galaxy . With regard to the original game , Nintendo of America President and CEO Reggie Fils @-@ Aime stated in an interview that the sequel would be more challenging , and Miyamoto said in a Wired interview that the game would have less focus on plot . Miyamoto initially hinted that the game might utilize the " Super Guide " feature , introduced in New Super Mario Bros. Wii , into the game , and this was confirmed by Nintendo 's Senior Manager of Product Managing , Bill <unk> , who claimed that the feature was implemented differently compared to what New Super Mario Bros. Wii offered . The feature is called Cosmic Guide , where the Cosmic Spirit ( Rosalina ) takes control of Mario . 
 The game made its playable debut at the Nintendo Media Summit 2010 on February 24 , 2010 , when a second trailer for the game was released , and its North American release date on May 23 , 2010 was finally announced . The Japanese , European and Australian versions of the game came packaged with an instructional DVD manual , explaining the basic controls , as well as showing advanced play . The voice actors from Super Mario Galaxy reprise their roles for its sequel including additional voices by Dex Manley who played Lubba . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As with the original Super Mario Galaxy , Super Mario Galaxy 2 features a musical score written for and performed by a symphony orchestra ( known as the Mario Galaxy Orchestra in the credits ) . Early in the development process , when the concept of " Super Mario Galaxy 1 @.@ 5 " was being considered , there were no plans to use different music from the first Super Mario Galaxy . However , as the game evolved , the sound team , headed by Mahito Yokota , realized they needed new music that fit with the new gameplay mechanics that were being added . Although they were hesitant to use a symphony orchestra again because of recording difficulties , general producer Shigeru Miyamoto gave permission immediately – according to Yokota , Miyamoto felt that players would be expecting an orchestral soundtrack . Miyamoto also apparently suggested that players would want to hear arrangements from Super Mario Galaxy , which is why the soundtrack is a mixture of brand new pieces and arrangements of themes from the original Galaxy as well as many past installments in the Mario series , such as Super Mario World and Super Mario 64 . Ryo Nagamatsu , who worked previously on Mario Kart Wii , Wii Sports Resort , and New Super Mario Bros. Wii , contributed nine pieces to the soundtrack . 
 Koji Kondo recruited sixty musicians for the orchestra , ten more than the number of musicians used for the original game 's score , with an additional ten musicians providing a big band style of music with trumpets , trombones , saxophones and drums for a grand total of seventy players . The orchestral performances were conducted by <unk> Takemoto , renowned for his work with the Super Smash Bros. Concert in 2002 , while Kondo served as a supervisor , while also contributing five pieces to the soundtrack . The soundtrack was available as a 2 @-@ disc set to Japanese Club Nintendo members . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Super Mario Galaxy 2 received critical acclaim from major video game critics with numerous reviews praising the game for its creativity and technical improvements over the original . It has an average critic score of 97 % at GameRankings and 97 / 100 at Metacritic , making it one of the highest rated games on the sites . 
 Tom McShea from GameSpot called it a " new standard for platformers , " giving it a perfect 10 @.@ 0 , making it the seventh game in the site 's history to earn that score . Other perfect scores came from Edge , stating " this isn 't a game that redefines the genre : this is one that rolls it up and locks it away , " and IGN 's Craig Harris , who felt that the game " perfectly captures that classic videogame charm , the reason why most of us got into gaming from the start . " IGN later placed Super Mario Galaxy 2 4th on their " Top Modern Games " list . IGN also listed Super Mario Galaxy 2 as the greatest Wii game of all time . The Escapist editor Susan Arendt echoed this view by stating it " doesn 't tinker with the established formula very much , but we didn 't really want it to , " while GameTrailers commented that " there 's something tremendous for just about everyone and games that we can truly recommend to almost everyone are rare . " Ryan Scott at GameSpy regards it a much better game than the first Super Mario Galaxy , stating " for a series that 's explored every conceivable angle of its genre , the Mario games keep coming up with ways to challenge our notions of what a platformer can and should do . " 
 Giant Bomb 's Ryan Davis particularly praised the improved level designs , commenting that the designers were " bolder " and " more willing to take some weird risks with the planetoids and abstract platforming that set the tone in the original Galaxy , " while Chris Kohler from Wired commented that the level concepts alone " could be made into full games on their own . " Additionally 1UP.com 's Justin Haywald noted the expanded soundtrack as " sweeping . " GamesRadar praised the graphics , saying that despite the Wii 's technical limitations , Galaxy 2 " understands how to get the most out of aging technology that nearly all graphical flaws are smoothed over or covered up , leaving you with Wii 's best @-@ looking title to date . " X @-@ Play editor Andrew Pfister awarded Super Mario Galaxy 2 a 5 / 5 , calling it " the culmination of 20 years of Mario gaming into one fantastically @-@ designed and creative platformer . " 
 Despite this praise , some critics raised complaints over increased difficulty and the game 's similarity to the original Super Mario Galaxy . Chris Scullion from Official Nintendo Magazine called it the " new best game on Wii , " but said it lacked the original 's impact ( though they admitted the extreme difficulty of this , due to the quality of the original ) . Game Informer editor Matt Helgeson was concerned with some of the challenges being potentially " frustrating , " particularly towards the end of the game ; similarly , Ben <unk> from GamePro remarked that the " increased difficulty and high proficiency requirement may turn new fans off . " However , Worthplaying editor Chris <unk> praised the game 's difficulty , stating " perhaps most positively of all , there are very few sequences where death will feel like a result of bad design instead of player error , which helps keep the frustration down . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In Japan , Super Mario Galaxy 2 sold 143 @,@ 000 copies on its first day of release and 340 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , about 90 @,@ 000 more than the first Super Mario Galaxy sold in the same amount of time . In North America , the game sold 650 @,@ 000 copies during the month of May 2010 . In the United Kingdom , Super Mario Galaxy 2 was the third best @-@ selling game among multiplatform releases and the best @-@ selling single platform release for the week ending June 26 , 2010 . As of July 16 , 2010 , the game has sold 1 million copies within the USA . As of April 2011 , Super Mario Galaxy 2 has sold 6 @.@ 36 million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Super Mario Galaxy 2 received Game of the Year 2010 awards from Nintendo Power , GamesMaster , Official Nintendo Magazine , Edge , GamesTM , Destructoid and Metacritic . It was named best " Wii Game of the Year " by IGN , GameTrailers , GameSpot , 1UP.com , and many other media outlets . As of December 2010 , IGN awarded Super Mario Galaxy 2 the number 1 Wii game , overtaking its predecessor . In 2012 , Official Nintendo Magazine had named Super Mario Galaxy 2 the ' Greatest Nintendo Game Ever Made ' ranking at # 1 . 
 = Cyclone John = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone John was an intense tropical cyclone that rapidly deepened offshore before devastating areas of Western Australia . The system was the second cyclone and first severe tropical cyclone of the active 1999 – 00 Australian region cyclone season . Cyclone John developed from a monsoon trough positioned northwest of Australia on 9 December 1999 . As it moved to the west and later south as the result of a subtropical ridge under favourable conditions , the cyclone was able to rapidly intensify . John reached peak intensity on 14 December as a Category 5 cyclone on the Australian cyclone scale , the highest rating possible . Cyclone John later began interacting with a mid – latitude trough , which slightly weakened the cyclone prior to making landfall near Whim Creek early on 15 December . Increasingly unfavourable conditions further inland resulted in the cyclone 's rapid weakening , before it dissipated during the next day . 
 Cyclone John extensively affected areas of Western Australia , but damage was not as bad as expected . Widespread power outages across the Pilbara region were caused by John . Strong winds caused minor damage to infrastructure across the coast , as well as tree damage . 140 windmills were destroyed by the cyclone on the coast . Further inland , rainfall associated with the cyclone and its remnants brought flooding , which flooded 25 houses and caused rivers to overflow . The system was responsible for no deaths and a limited amount of damage . After the season , the name John was retired from the Australian tropical cyclone naming list . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early December , a monsoon trough north of Australia intensified due to a strong northwest cross – equatorial surge in the South China Sea . This resulted in the formation of a tropical low southwest of Timor on 9 December . At 0600 UTC on 10 December , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began to monitor the system , designating it as 02S . As it moved towards the west and subsequently southwards , improving upper – air divergence allowed the system to intensify , reaching tropical cyclone intensity on the evening of 11 December and thus attaining the name John . At the time , a Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission ( TRMM ) pass of the system revealed a compact system , with a convective rainband tightly surrounding a central cloud – filled eye . A developed anticyclone positioned over the system provided favorable conditions for development . Due to the presence of a subtropical ridge to the east over Australia , Cyclone John was forecast to generally move in a south @-@ southwestward direction . 
 Steadily intensifying , the cyclone attained Category 3 cyclone intensity on the Australian cyclone scale at 1600 UTC on 12 December . TRMM imagery indicated that the cyclone had developed a banding eye feature , and had good outflow and a symmetric structure . Cyclone John continued to intensify under favorable atmospheric conditions , before reaching its peak intensity as a Category 5 cyclone on the Australian cyclone scale at 0800 UTC on 14 December , while located 170 km ( 105 mi ) northwest of Port Hedland , Western Australia . At peak intensity , the storm had maximum 10 – minute sustained wind speeds of 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) . 
 However , after peak intensity , dry air began to become wrapped into the northwestern quadrant of the system . Moving towards the Australian coastline , radar imagery from Dampier , Western Australia showed a strong eyewall associated with John . Cyclone John began to become elongated along a northwest – southeast axis as it neared the coast . The cyclone also began interacting with a mid – latitude trough the southwest . This generated some vertical wind shear , which weakened John slightly and caused it to curve towards the southeast . Cyclone John made landfall near Whim Creek , Western Australia as a Category 5 cyclone at 0000 UTC on 15 December with a minimum central pressure between 930 – 940 mbar ( 27 @.@ 46 – 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) , with maximum 10 – minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) , gusting to 285 km / h ( 175 mph ) . The entirety of the cyclone 's eye crossed the coast by 0200 UTC as the storm moved further inland into an area of wind shear and dry air , which caused it to rapidly weaken . The cyclone was last noted by TCWC Perth and the JTWC on 16 December as it dissipated overland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to Cyclone John 's landfall , hundreds of people were evacuated from homes , primarily in Karratha , where two shelters were set up . In Point Samson , 500 people evacuated to shelters in Wickham , Western Australia . TCWC Perth began issuing hourly warnings for potentially affected areas beginning at 1400 UTC on 14 December . As the storm made landfall , some residents of Whim Creek took refuge in a shipping container . 
 Strong winds from the cyclone caused widespread power outages to areas in Pilbara . At Cape Lambert , winds averaged 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) for five hours , with a peak wind gust of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Karratha suffered minor damage from John , primarily in the form of wind damage . Various trees were uprooted by strong winds , and some homes suffered minor roof damage . Palm fronds in Karratha were blown off palm trees due to strong winds . In Whim Creek , where the cyclone had made landfall , the top floor of a 113 @-@ year @-@ old pub and hotel was destroyed . A temporary roof made up of tarpaulins later collapsed in a flood event the following month . 140 windmills between Whim Creek and Newman were destroyed by the cyclone . 
 Offshore , 220 cattle aboard a ship died after the ship was battered by rough seas associated with Cyclone John . Production from an oil field off the coast of northwest Australia were down 38 % , partly due to being shut down in preparation for Cyclone John . Rough seas from John also caused a maximum storm surge height of 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , recorded in Port Hedland by the Port Hedland Authority on 15 December . Further inland , Cyclone John brought widespread rainfall and flooding . In Newman , Western Australia , 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of rain was recorded early on 16 December . As a result , some roads and 25 houses were flooded by the rains . By the evening of that day , the rainfall total had increased to 500 mm ( 20 in ) . Todd River was flooded after 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) of rain fell as a result of the cyclone . Overall John was responsible for no deaths and a limited amount of damage . After the season had ended the name John was retired from the Australian tropical cyclone naming list . 
 = Utah State Route 68 = 
 State Route 68 ( SR @-@ 68 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Utah . It is a major thoroughfare throughout the Wasatch Front as it runs north – south for 70 @.@ 832 miles ( 113 @.@ 993 km ) , linking US @-@ 6 near Elberta to US @-@ 89 in Woods Cross . The route intersects several major freeways and highways in the Salt Lake City metropolitan area including I @-@ 215 , I @-@ 80 , and I @-@ 15 . The route is more commonly referred to as Redwood Road , after the street it is routed along throughout Salt Lake County . The highway is also routed for a short distance along 500 South and 200 West in Bountiful and Camp Williams Road in Utah County . The route is a surface street for its entire length . 
 SR @-@ 68 became a state highway in 1931 , at which time the route ran from then – US @-@ 40 ( North Temple Street ) in Salt Lake City to present @-@ day US @-@ 89 in Lehi . In 1933 , the route was extended north to US @-@ 89 at Beck 's Hot Springs . SR @-@ 68 was routed onto Redwood Road in 1943 , taking over what had been designated SR @-@ 153 . In 1960 , SR @-@ 68 switched alignments with SR @-@ 249 to follow Redwood Road and 2300 North to Bountiful ; the route was extended south to Elberta at this time also . SR @-@ 249 was extended west along a proposed roadway to 2200 West and 2200 North in 1961 before being removed in 1969 . In 2001 , SR @-@ 68 was extended south on a former piece of SR @-@ 106 in Bountiful . 
 = = Route description = = 
 On average , the most driven @-@ on portion of SR @-@ 68 is between I @-@ 215 and 5400 South , with 66 @,@ 635 cars @-@ per @-@ day traveling between these two points in 2007 . The lowest traffic is recorded at the beginning point of the route through Elberta , with an average of 1 @,@ 120 cars per day . Traffic along SR @-@ 68 in Elberta has increased 135 percent , and the segment between I @-@ 215 and 5400 West has increased 13 percent since 1998 . 
 = = = Utah County = = = 
 A four @-@ way intersection in Elberta with US @-@ 6 marks the southern terminus of the route as it starts north on a two @-@ lane undivided highway . The highway exits Elberta and continues north along the sparsely @-@ populated portion of western Utah County . The southwestern shore of Utah Lake appears as the road briefly turns northeast . The route passes the failed planned community of <unk> before turning north again . Once more turning northeast , the highway approaches the western shore of the lake and runs parallel to it before once more turning north . After turning northwest , the highway enters Saratoga Springs . The route turns north near Utah Lake 's northern shore , widening to two lanes each direction at the intersection with 400 South . The route then intersects Pony Express Parkway , which connects to Eagle Mountain , then the route continues north to intersections with Pioneer Crossing and SR @-@ 73 . Past the SR @-@ 73 intersection , the route turns northwest and intersects the east spur of the Mountain View Corridor ( SR @-@ 85 ) , then passes slightly east of Camp Williams . 
 = = = Salt Lake County = = = 
 The highway then enters Salt Lake County and the Salt Lake City metropolitan area . SR @-@ 68 is one of two roads that connect Utah and Salt Lake Counties through a bottleneck in the Wasatch Front called Point of the Mountain , referring to the Traverse Mountains . The low @-@ lying area through this neck is occupied by the former Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad . SR @-@ 68 is routed on the western slope of the canyon , The other highway , I @-@ 15 / US @-@ 89 , is routed higher up Point of the Mountain . As the route enters Bluffdale on Redwood Road , it turns northeast and intersects with Mountain View Corridor again , then with SR @-@ 140 ; the Utah State Prison is located on this road east of the junction . SR @-@ 68 then turns north before crossing SR @-@ 154 , commonly known as the Bangerter Highway . Soon reverting to two lanes , the route exits Bluffdale and enters Riverton , gaining two lanes in each direction as it passes SR @-@ 71 . Continuing north , it enters South Jordan . It intersects with SR @-@ 175 , SR @-@ 151 , and SR @-@ 209 , gaining one more lane in each direction beyond the latter intersection , and enters West Jordan and central Salt Lake County . 
 Soon reaching Taylorsville , the highway intersects I @-@ 215 . Shortly thereafter , the road passes Salt Lake Community College and enters West Valley City . It soon reaches a single @-@ point urban interchange at SR @-@ 201 that lies on the border of West Valley City and Salt Lake City . The highway loses one lane in each direction past the frontage road of SR @-@ 201 . West of Salt Lake City , the highway passes over the surplus canal of the Jordan River as it goes through the neighborhoods of Glendale and Poplar Grove . It arrives at an interchange with I @-@ 80 east of Salt Lake City International Airport . The road loses one lane northbound beyond 1000 North as it proceeds through the neighborhood of Rose Park in the northwestern portion of the city ; the second southbound lane is lost north of 1300 North . The highway crosses the Jordan River before exiting the county . 
 = = = Davis County = = = 
 Entering Davis County and North Salt Lake , SR @-@ 68 reaches a second interchange with I @-@ 215 at its Exit 28 . The road briefly turns northeast before drifting north again and gaining one lane in each direction . Before passing Skypark Airport , the highway loses one lane in each direction . Redwood Road turns east onto 500 South and enters Bountiful . Past an interchange at I @-@ 15 , the route gains one passing lane and turns south onto 200 West , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The highway turns southwest and defaults onto southbound US @-@ 89 within the city of Woods Cross . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1931 , the state legislature added State Route 68 to the state highway system . It followed Redwood Road from US @-@ 40 ( North Temple Street ) south to the present SR @-@ 73 and then used SR @-@ 73 east to US @-@ 50 / US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 ( now solely US @-@ 89 ) in Lehi . The state added 900 West and Warm Springs Road from US @-@ 40 north to US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 at Becks as SR @-@ 153 in 1933 . Becks is the name of a rail siding , 4 miles ( 6 km ) north of downtown Salt Lake , that briefly served as the terminus of a commuter rail line to Beck 's Hot Springs . In 1943 SR @-@ 153 was moved west to Redwood Road , returning to Becks via 2300 North . This brought the north end of SR @-@ 68 and the south end of SR @-@ 153 together , and two years later SR @-@ 68 was extended north to absorb SR @-@ 153 . In 1953 , Redwood Road north of 2300 North became SR @-@ 249 , which turned east at 500 South in Davis County to end at US @-@ 89 / US @-@ 91 ( 500 West ) in Bountiful . 
 To provide for route continuity on a truck bypass route of Salt Lake City , SR @-@ 68 and SR @-@ 249 were swapped in 1960 , bringing the north end of SR @-@ 68 to Bountiful and making SR @-@ 249 a short connection on 2300 North . At the same time , SR @-@ 68 was extended south from the intersection with SR @-@ 73 around the west side of Utah Lake to US @-@ 6 at Elberta , with the portion east to Lehi becoming an extension of SR @-@ 73 . SR @-@ 249 was extended west along a proposed roadway to 2200 West and 2200 North in 1961 , " in order to provide an adequate road from the north to the Salt Lake City municipal airport " , but in 1969 the entire route was removed from the state highway system . SR @-@ 68 was extended slightly east at its north end , from 500 West ( US @-@ 89 ) to 200 West ( SR @-@ 106 ) , in 1975 , and , in 2001 , with the removal of SR @-@ 106 through downtown Bountiful from the state highway system , SR @-@ 68 was extended south along 200 West , formerly SR @-@ 106 , to Parkin Junction on US @-@ 89 . 
 When the highway was established in 1931 , it ran from Lehi to Salt Lake City . The state subsequently extended it south into Elberta and north into Bountiful . The road was routed along its current alignment of Redwood Road in 1943 . The road has been moved and extended multiple times , with the most recent change being in 2001 when SR @-@ 106 was deleted from the state highway system . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hair ( musical ) = 
 Hair : The American Tribal Love @-@ Rock Musical is a rock musical with a book and lyrics by James Rado and Gerome Ragni and music by Galt MacDermot . A product of the hippie counterculture and sexual revolution of the 1960s , several of its songs became anthems of the anti @-@ Vietnam War peace movement . The musical 's profanity , its depiction of the use of illegal drugs , its treatment of sexuality , its irreverence for the American flag , and its nude scene caused much comment and controversy . The musical broke new ground in musical theatre by defining the genre of " rock musical " , using a racially integrated cast , and inviting the audience onstage for a " Be @-@ In " finale . 
 Hair tells the story of the " tribe " , a group of politically active , long @-@ haired hippies of the " Age of Aquarius " living a bohemian life in New York City and fighting against conscription into the Vietnam War . Claude , his good friend Berger , their roommate Sheila and their friends struggle to balance their young lives , loves , and the sexual revolution with their rebellion against the war and their conservative parents and society . Ultimately , Claude must decide whether to resist the draft as his friends have done , or to succumb to the pressures of his parents ( and conservative America ) to serve in Vietnam , compromising his pacifistic principles and risking his life . 
 After an off @-@ Broadway debut in October 1967 at Joseph Papp 's Public Theater and a subsequent run at the Cheetah nightclub from December 1967 through January 1968 , the show opened on Broadway in April 1968 and ran for 1 @,@ 750 performances . Simultaneous productions in cities across the United States and Europe followed shortly thereafter , including a successful London production that ran for 1 @,@ 997 performances . Since then , numerous productions have been staged around the world , spawning dozens of recordings of the musical , including the 3 million @-@ selling original Broadway cast recording . Some of the songs from its score became Top 10 hits , and a feature film adaptation was released in 1979 . A Broadway revival opened on March 31 , 2009 , earning strong reviews and winning the Tony Award and Drama Desk Award for best revival of a musical . In 2008 , Time magazine wrote , " Today Hair seems , if anything , more daring than ever . " 
 = = History = = 
 Hair was conceived by actors James Rado and Gerome Ragni . The two met in 1964 when they performed together in the Off @-@ Broadway flop Hang Down Your Head and Die , and they began writing Hair together in late 1964 . The main characters were autobiographical , with Rado 's Claude being a pensive romantic and Ragni 's Berger an extrovert . Their close relationship , including its volatility , was reflected in the musical . Rado explained , " We were great friends . It was a passionate kind of relationship that we directed into creativity , into writing , into creating this piece . We put the drama between us on stage . " 
 Rado described the inspiration for Hair as " a combination of some characters we met in the streets , people we knew and our own imaginations . We knew this group of kids in the East Village who were dropping out and dodging the draft , and there were also lots of articles in the press about how kids were being kicked out of school for growing their hair long " . He recalled , " There was so much excitement in the streets and the parks and the hippie areas , and we thought if we could transmit this excitement to the stage it would be wonderful .... We hung out with them and went to their Be @-@ Ins [ and ] let our hair grow . " Many cast members ( Shelley Plimpton in particular ) were recruited right off the street . Rado said , " It was very important historically , and if we hadn 't written it , there 'd not be any examples . You could read about it and see film clips , but you 'd never experience it . We thought , ' This is happening in the streets , ' and we wanted to bring it to the stage . " 
 Rado and Ragni came from different artistic backgrounds . In college , Rado wrote musical revues and aspired to be a Broadway composer in the Rodgers and Hammerstein tradition . He went on to study acting with Lee Strasberg . Ragni , on the other hand , was an active member of The Open Theater , one of several groups , mostly Off @-@ off Broadway , that were developing experimental theatre techniques . He introduced Rado to the modern theatre styles and methods being developed at The Open Theater . In 1966 , while the two were developing Hair , Ragni performed in The Open Theater 's production of Megan Terry 's play , Viet Rock , a story about young men being deployed to the Vietnam War . In addition to the war theme , Viet Rock employed the improvisational exercises being used in the experimental theatre scene and later used in the development of Hair . 
 Rado and Ragni brought their drafts of the show to producer Eric Blau who , through common friend Nat Shapiro , connected the two with Canadian composer Galt MacDermot . MacDermot had won a Grammy Award in 1961 for his composition " African Waltz " ( recorded by Cannonball Adderley ) . The composer 's lifestyle was in marked contrast to his co @-@ creators : " I had short hair , a wife , and , at that point , four children , and I lived on Staten Island . " " I never even heard of a hippie when I met Rado and Ragni . " But he shared their enthusiasm to do a rock and roll show . " We work independently , " explained MacDermot in May 1968 . " I prefer it that way . They hand me the material . I set it to music . " MacDermot wrote the first score in three weeks , starting with the songs " I Got Life " , " Ain 't Got No " , " Where Do I Go " and the title song . He first wrote " Aquarius " as an unconventional art piece , but later rewrote it into an uplifting anthem . 
 = = = Off @-@ Broadway productions = = = 
 The creators pitched the show to Broadway producers and received many rejections . Eventually Joe Papp , who ran the New York Shakespeare Festival , decided he wanted Hair to open the new Public Theater ( still under construction ) in New York City 's East Village . The musical was Papp 's first non @-@ Shakespeare offering . The production did not go smoothly : " The rehearsal and casting process was confused , the material itself incomprehensible to many of the theater ’ s staff . The director , Gerald Freedman , the theater 's associate artistic director , withdrew in frustration during the final week of rehearsals and offered his resignation . Papp accepted it , and the choreographer Anna Sokolow took over the show .... After a disastrous final dress rehearsal , Papp wired Mr. Freedman in Washington , where he 'd fled : ' Please come back . ' Mr. Freedman did . " 
 Hair premiered off @-@ Broadway at the Public on October 17 , 1967 and ran for a limited engagement of six weeks . The lead roles were played by Walker Daniels as Claude , Ragni as Berger , Jill O 'Hara as Sheila , Steve Dean as Woof , Arnold Wilkerson as Hud , Sally Eaton as Jeanie and Shelley Plimpton as Crissy . Set design was by Ming Cho Lee , costume design by <unk> Aldredge , and although Anna Sokolow began rehearsals as choreographer , Freedman received choreographer credit . Although the production had a " tepid critical reception " , it was popular with audiences . A cast album was released in 1967 . 
 Chicago businessman Michael Butler was planning to run for the U.S. Senate on an anti @-@ war platform . After seeing an ad for Hair in The New York Times that led him to believe the show was about Native Americans , he watched the Public 's production several times and joined forces with Joe Papp to reproduce the show at another New York venue after the close of its run at the Public . Papp and Butler first moved the show to The Cheetah , a discothèque at 53rd Street and Broadway . It opened there on December 22 , 1967 and ran for 45 performances . There was no nudity in either the Public Theater or Cheetah production . 
 = = = Revision for Broadway = = = 
 Hair underwent a thorough overhaul between its closing at the Cheetah in January 1968 and its Broadway opening three months later . The off @-@ Broadway book , already light on plot , was loosened even further and made more realistic . For example , Claude had been written as a space alien who aspires to be a cinematic director ; he became human for the Broadway version . Moreover , 13 new songs were added . The song " Let the Sun Shine In " was added so that the ending would be more uplifting . 
 Before the move to Broadway , the creative team hired director Tom O 'Horgan , who had built a reputation directing experimental theater at the La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club . He had been the authors ' first choice to direct the Public Theater production , but he was in Europe at the time . Newsweek described O 'Horgan 's directing style as " sensual , savage , and thoroughly musical ... [ he ] disintegrates verbal structure and often breaks up and distributes narrative and even character among different actors .... He enjoys sensory bombardment . " In rehearsals , O 'Horgan used techniques passed down by Viola Spolin and Paul Sills involving role playing and improvisational " games " . Many of the improvisations tried during this process were incorporated into the Broadway script . O 'Horgan and new choreographer Julie Arenal encouraged freedom and spontaneity in their actors , introducing " an organic , expansive style of staging " that had never been seen before on Broadway . The inspiration to include nudity came when the authors saw an anti @-@ war demonstration in Central Park where two men stripped naked as an expression of defiance and freedom , and they decided to incorporate the idea into the show . O 'Horgan had used nudity in many of the plays he directed , and he helped integrate the idea into the fabric of the show . 
 Papp declined to pursue a Broadway production , and so Butler produced the show himself . For a time it seemed that Butler would be unable to secure a Broadway theater , as the Shuberts , <unk> and other theater owners deemed the material too controversial . However , Butler had family connections and knew important people ; he persuaded Biltmore Theatre owner David Cogan to make his venue available . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Act I 
 Claude , the nominal leader of the " tribe " , sits center stage as the tribe mingles with the audience . Tribe members Sheila , a New York University student who is a determined political activist , and Berger , an irreverent free spirit , cut a lock of Claude 's hair and burn it in a receptacle . After the tribe converges in slow @-@ motion toward the stage , through the audience , they begin their celebration as children of the Age of Aquarius ( " Aquarius " ) . Berger removes his trousers to reveal a loincloth . Interacting with the audience , he introduces himself as a " psychedelic teddy bear " and reveals that he is " looking for my Donna " ( " Donna " ) . 
 The tribe recites a list of pharmaceuticals , legal and illegal ( " Hashish " ) . Woof , a gentle soul , extols several sexual practices ( " Sodomy " ) and says , " I grow things . " He loves plants , his family and the audience , telling the audience , " We are all one . " Hud , a militant African @-@ American , is carried in upside down on a pole . He declares himself " president of the United States of Love " ( " Colored Spade " ) . In a fake English accent , Claude says that he is " the most beautiful beast in the forest " from " Manchester , England " . A tribe member reminds him that he 's really from Flushing , New York . Hud , Woof and Berger declare what color they are ( " I 'm Black " ) , while Claude says that he 's " invisible " . The tribe recites a list of things they lack ( " Ain 't Got No " ) . Four African @-@ American tribe members recite street signs in symbolic sequence ( " Dead End " ) . 
 Sheila is carried onstage ( " I Believe in Love " ) and leads the tribe in a protest chant . The tribe reprises " Ain 't Got No ( Grass ) " . Jeanie , an eccentric young woman , appears wearing a gas mask , satirizing pollution ( " Air " ) . She is pregnant and in love with Claude . Although she wishes it was Claude 's baby , she was " knocked up by some crazy speed freak " . The tribe link together LBJ ( President Lyndon B. Johnson ) , FBI ( the Federal Bureau of Investigation ) , CIA ( the Central Intelligence Agency ) and LSD ( " Initials " ) . Six members of the tribe appear dressed as Claude 's parents , berating him for his various transgressions – he does not have a job , and he collects " mountains of paper " clippings and notes . They say that they will not give him any more money , and " the army 'll make a man out of you " . In defiance , Claude leads the tribe in celebrating their vitality ( " I Got Life " ) . 
 After handing out imaginary pills to the tribe members , saying the pills are for high @-@ profile people such as Richard Nixon , the Pope , and " Alabama Wallace " , Berger relates how he was expelled from high school ( " Goin ' Down " ) . Claude returns from his draft board physical , which he passed . He pretends to burn his Vietnam War draft card , which Berger reveals as a library card . Claude agonizes about what to do about being drafted . 
 Two tribe members dressed as tourists come down the aisle to ask the tribe why they have such long hair . In answer , Claude and Berger lead the tribe in explaining the significance of their " Hair " . The tourist lady states that kids should " be free , no guilt " and should " do whatever you want , just so long as you don 't hurt anyone . " She observes that long hair is natural , like the " elegant plumage " of male birds ( " My Conviction " ) . She opens her coat to reveal that she 's a man in drag . As the couple leaves , the tribe calls her Margaret Mead . 
 Sheila gives Berger a yellow shirt . He goofs around and ends up tearing it in two . Sheila voices her distress that Berger seems to care more about the " bleeding crowd " than about her ( " Easy to Be Hard " ) . Jeanie summarizes everyone 's romantic entanglements : " I 'm hung up on Claude , Sheila 's hung up on Berger , Berger is hung up everywhere . Claude is hung up on a cross over Sheila and Berger . " The tribe runs out to the audience with fliers inviting them to a Be @-@ In . Berger , Woof and another tribe member pay satiric tribute to the American flag as they fold it ( " Don 't Put it Down " ) . After young and innocent Crissy describes " Frank Mills " , a boy she 's looking for , the tribe participates in the " Be @-@ In " . The men of the tribe burn their draft cards . Claude puts his card in the fire , then changes his mind and pulls it out . He asks , " where is the something , where is the someone , that tells me why I live and die ? " ( " Where Do I Go " ) . The tribe emerges naked , intoning " beads , flowers , freedom , happiness . " 
 Act II 
 Four tribe members have the " Electric Blues " . After a black @-@ out , the tribe enters worshiping " Oh Great God of Power . " Claude returns from the induction center , and tribe members act out an imagined conversation from Claude 's draft interview , with Hud saying " the draft is white people sending black people to make war on the yellow people to defend the land they stole from the red people " . Claude gives Woof a Mick Jagger poster , and Woof is excited about the gift , as he has said he 's hung up on Jagger . Three white women of the tribe tell why they like " Black Boys " ( " black boys are delicious ... " ) , and three black women of the tribe , dressed like The Supremes , explain why they like " White Boys " ( " white boys are so pretty ... " ) . 
 Berger gives a joint to Claude that is laced with a hallucinogen . Claude starts to trip as the tribe acts out his visions ( " Walking in Space " ) . He hallucinates that he is skydiving from a plane into the jungles of Vietnam . Berger appears as General George Washington and is told to retreat because of an Indian attack . The Indians shoot all of Washington 's men . General Ulysses S. Grant appears and begins a roll call : Abraham Lincoln ( played by a black female tribe member ) , John Wilkes Booth , Calvin Coolidge , Clark Gable , Scarlett O 'Hara , Aretha Franklin , Colonel George Custer . Claude Bukowski is called in the roll call , but Clark Gable says " he couldn 't make it " . They all dance a minuet until three African witch doctors kill them – all except for Abraham Lincoln who says , " I 'm one of you " . Lincoln , after the three Africans sing his praises , recites an alternate version of the Gettysburg Address ( " Abie Baby " ) . Booth shoots Lincoln , but Lincoln says to him , " I ain 't dying for no white man " . 
 As the visions continue , four Buddhist monks enter . One monk pours a can of gasoline over another monk , who is set afire ( reminiscent of the self @-@ immolation of Thích Quảng Đức ) and runs off screaming . Three Catholic nuns strangle the three remaining Buddhist monks . Three astronauts shoot the nuns with ray guns . Three Chinese people stab the astronauts with knives . Three Native Americans kill the Chinese with bows and tomahawks . Three green berets kill the Native Americans with machine guns and then kill each other . A Sergeant and two parents appear holding up a suit on a hanger . The parents talk to the suit as if it is their son and they are very proud of him . The bodies rise and play like children . The play escalates to violence until they are all dead again . They rise again ( " Three @-@ Five @-@ Zero @-@ Zero " ) and , at the end of the trip sequence , two tribe members sing , over the dead bodies , a melody set to a Shakespeare lyric about the nobility of Man ( " What A Piece of Work Is Man " ) . 
 After the trip , Claude says " I can 't take this moment to moment living on the streets .... I know what I want to be ... invisible " . As they " look at the moon , " Sheila and the others enjoy a light moment ( " Good Morning Starshine " ) . The tribe pays tribute to an old mattress ( " The Bed " ) . Claude is left alone with his doubts . He leaves as the tribe enters wrapped in blankets in the midst of a snow storm . They start a protest chant and then wonder where Claude has gone . Berger calls out " Claude ! Claude ! " Claude enters dressed in a military uniform , his hair short , but they do not see him because he is an invisible spirit . Claude says , " like it or not , they got me . " 
 Claude and everyone sing " Flesh Failures " . The tribe moves in front of Claude as Sheila and Dionne take up the lyric . The whole tribe launches into " Let the Sun Shine In " , and as they exit , they reveal Claude lying down center stage on a black cloth . During the curtain call , the tribe reprises " Let the Sun Shine In " and brings audience members up on stage to dance . 
 ( Note : This plot summary is based on the original Broadway script . The script has varied in subsequent productions . ) 
 = = Principal roles ; original Off @-@ Broadway and Broadway casts = = 
 Claude Hooper Bukowski – Walker Daniels / James Rado 
 George Berger – Gerome Ragni 
 Sheila Franklin – Jill O 'Hara / Lynn Kellogg 
 Jeanie – Sally Eaton 
 Neil " Woof " Donovan – Steve Dean / Steve Curry 
 Hud – Arnold Wilkerson / Lamont Washington 
 Crissy – Shelley Plimpton 
 The original Broadway production also included Melba Moore as Dionne , Ronnie Dyson , who sang " Aquarius " , Paul Jabara and Diane Keaton . 
 = = Early productions = = 
 = = = Broadway = = = 
 Hair opened on Broadway at the Biltmore Theatre on April 29 , 1968 . The production was directed by Tom O 'Horgan and choreographed by Julie Arenal , with set design by Robin Wagner , costume design by Nancy Potts , and lighting design by Jules Fisher . The original Broadway " tribe " ( i.e. , cast ) included authors Rado and Ragni , who played the lead roles of Claude and Berger , respectively , and Lynn Kellogg as Sheila , Lamont Washington as Hud , Sally Eaton and Shelley Plimpton reprising their off @-@ Broadway roles as Jeanie and Crissy , Melba Moore as Dionne , Steve Curry as Woof , Ronnie Dyson ( who sang " Aquarius " ) , Paul Jabara and Diane Keaton ( both Moore and Keaton later played Sheila ) . Among the performers who appeared in Hair during its original Broadway run were Ben Vereen , Keith Carradine , Barry McGuire , Ted Lange , Meat Loaf , Kenny Seymour ( of Little Anthony and The Imperials ) , Joe Butler ( of the Lovin ' Spoonful ) , Peppy Castro ( of the Blues Magoos ) , Robin McNamara , Heather MacRae ( daughter of Gordon MacRae and Sheila MacRae ) , Eddie <unk> , Vicki Sue Robinson , Beverly <unk> and Kim Milford . 
 The Hair team soon became embroiled in a lawsuit with the organizers of the Tony Awards . After assuring producer Michael Butler that commencing previews by April 3 , 1968 would assure eligibility for consideration for the 1968 Tonys , the New York Theatre League ruled Hair ineligible , moving the cutoff date to March 19 . The producers brought suit but were unable to force the League to reconsider . At the 1969 Tonys , Hair was nominated for Best Musical and Best Director but lost out to 1776 in both categories . The production ran for four years and 1 @,@ 750 performances , closing on July 1 , 1972 . 
 = = = Early regional productions = = = 
 The West Coast version played at the Aquarius Theater in Los Angeles beginning about six months after the Broadway opening and running for an unprecedented two years . The Los Angeles tribe included Rado , Ragni , Robert Rothman , Ben Vereen ( who replaced Ragni ) , Red Shepard , Ted Neeley ( who replaced Rado ) , Meat Loaf , Gloria Jones , <unk> Vega , Jobriath , Jennifer Warnes , and Dobie Gray . 
 There were soon nine simultaneous productions in U.S. cities , followed by national tours . Among the performers in these were Joe Mantegna , André <unk> , and Alaina Reed ( Chicago ) , David Lasley , David Patrick Kelly , Meat Loaf , and Shaun Murphy ( Detroit ) , Arnold McCuller ( tour ) , Bob Bingham ( Seattle ) and Philip Michael Thomas ( San Francisco ) . The creative team from Broadway worked on Hair in Los Angeles , Chicago and San Francisco , as the Broadway staging served as a rough template for these and other early regional productions . A notable addition to the team in Los Angeles was Tom Smothers , who served as co @-@ producer . Regional casts consisted mostly of local actors , although a few Broadway cast members reprised their roles in other cities . O 'Horgan or the authors sometimes took new ideas and improvisations from a regional show and brought them back to New York , such as when live chickens were tossed onto the stage in Los Angeles . 
 It was rare for so many productions to run simultaneously during an initial Broadway run . Producer Michael Butler , who had declared that Hair is " the strongest anti @-@ war statement ever written " , said the reason that he opened so many productions was to influence public opinion against the Vietnam War and end it as soon as possible . 
 = = = West End = = = 
 Hair opened at the Shaftesbury Theatre in London on September 27 , 1968 , led by the same creative team as the Broadway production . The opening night was delayed until the abolition of theatre censorship in England under the Theatres Act 1968 so that the show could include nudity and profanity . As with other early productions , the London show added a sprinkling of local allusions and other minor departures from the Broadway version . 
 The original London tribe included Sonja Kristina , Peter Straker , Paul Nicholas , Melba Moore , Elaine Paige , Paul Korda , Marsha Hunt , Floella Benjamin , Alex Harvey , Oliver Tobias , Richard O 'Brien and Tim Curry . This was Curry 's first full @-@ time theatrical acting role , where he met future Rocky Horror Show collaborator O 'Brien . Hair 's engagement in London surpassed the Broadway production , running for 1 @,@ 997 performances until its closure was forced by the roof of the theatre collapsing in July 1973 . 
 = = = Early international productions = = = 
 The job of leading the foreign language productions of Hair was given to Bertrand Castelli , Butler 's partner and executive producer of the Broadway show . Castelli was a writer / producer who traveled in Paris art circles and rubbed elbows with Pablo Picasso and Jean Cocteau . Butler described him as a " crazy showman ... the guy with the business suit and beads " . Castelli decided to do the show in the local language of each country at a time when Broadway shows were always done in English . The translations followed the original script closely , and the Broadway stagings were used . Each script contained local references , such as street names and the names or depictions of local politicians and celebrities . Castelli produced companies in France , Germany , Mexico and other countries , sometimes also directing the productions . 
 A German production , directed by Castelli , opened in 1968 in Munich ; the tribe included Donna Summer , Liz Mitchell and Donna <unk> . A successful Parisian production of Hair opened on June 1 , 1969 . The original Australian production premiered in Sydney on June 6 , 1969 , produced by Harry M. Miller and directed by Jim Sharman , who also designed the production . The tribe included Keith Glass and then Reg Livermore as Berger , John Waters as Claude and Sharon Redd as The Magician . Redd was one of six African @-@ Americans brought to Australia to provide a racially integrated tribe . The production broke local box @-@ office records and ran for two years , but because of some of the language in the show , the cast album was banned in Queensland and New Zealand . The production transferred to Melbourne in 1971 and then had a national tour . It marked the stage debut of Boston @-@ born Australian vocalist Marcia Hines . In Mexico the production was banned by the government after one night in Acapulco . An 18 @-@ year @-@ old Sônia Braga appeared in the 1969 Brazilian production . 
 Another notable production was in Belgrade , in the former Yugoslavia , in 1969 . It was the first Hair to be produced in a communist country . The show , translated into Serbian , was directed by female producer @-@ director Mira <unk> at the <unk> 212 theatre . It featured Dragan Nikolić , Branko <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Dušan <unk> . Over four years , the production received 250 performances and was attended by president Tito . Local references in the script included barbs aimed at Mao Zedong as well as Albania , Yugoslavia 's traditional rival . 
 By 1970 , Hair was a huge financial success , and nineteen productions had been staged outside of North America . In addition to those named above , these included productions in Scandinavia , South America , Italy , Israel , Japan , Canada , the Netherlands , Switzerland and Austria . According to Billboard , the various productions of the show were raking in almost $ 1 million every ten days , and royalties were being collected for 300 different recordings of the show 's songs , making it " the most successful score in history as well as the most performed score ever written for the Broadway stage . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Hair explores many of the themes of the hippie movement of the 1960s . Theatre writer Scott Miller described these as follows : 
 [ T ] he youth of America , especially those on college campuses , started protesting all the things that they saw wrong with America : racism , environmental destruction , poverty , sexism and sexual repression , violence at home and the war in Vietnam , depersonalization from new technologies , and corruption in politics . ... Contrary to popular opinion , the hippies had great respect for America and believed that they were the true patriots , the only ones who genuinely wanted to save our country and make it the best it could be once again . ... [ Long ] hair was the hippies ' flag – their ... symbol not only of rebellion but also of new possibilities , a symbol of the rejection of discrimination and restrictive gender roles ( a philosophy celebrated in the song " My Conviction " ) . It symbolized equality between men and women . ... [ T ] he hippies ' chosen clothing also made statements . Drab work clothes ( jeans , work shirts , pea coats ) were a rejection of materialism . Clothing from other cultures , particularly the Third World and native Americans , represented their awareness of the global community and their rejection of U.S. imperialism and selfishness . Simple cotton dresses and other natural fabrics were a rejection of synthetics , a return to natural things and simpler times . Some hippies wore old World War II or Civil War jackets as way of co @-@ opting the symbols of war into their newfound philosophy of nonviolence . 
 = = = Race and the tribe = = = 
 Extending the precedents set by Show Boat ( 1927 ) and Porgy and Bess ( 1935 ) , Hair opened the Broadway musical to racial integration ; fully one @-@ third of the cast was African American . Except for satirically in skits , the roles for the black members of the tribe portrayed them as equals , breaking away from the traditional roles for blacks in entertainment as slaves or servants . An Ebony magazine article declared that the show was the biggest outlet for black actors in the history of the U.S. stage . 
 Several songs and scenes from the show address racial issues . " Colored Spade " , which introduces the character Hud , a militant black male , is a long list of racial slurs ( " jungle bunny ... little black <unk> " ) topped off with the declaration that Hud is the " president of the United States of love " . At the end of his song , he tells the tribe that the " boogie man " will get them , as the tribe pretends to be frightened . " Dead End " , sung by black tribe members , is a list of street signs that symbolize black frustration and alienation . One of the tribe 's protest chants is " What do we think is really great ? To bomb , lynch and segregate ! " " Black Boys / White Boys " is an exuberant acknowledgement of miscegenation ; the U.S. Supreme Court had struck down laws against the practice in 1967 . Another of the tribe 's protest chants is " Black , white , yellow , red . <unk> in a king @-@ sized bed . " 
 " Abie Baby " is part of the Act 2 " trip " sequence : four African witch doctors , who have just killed various American historical , cultural and fictional characters , sing the praises of Abraham Lincoln , portrayed by a black female tribe member , whom they decide not to kill . The first part of the song contains stereotypical language that black characters used in old movies , like " I 's finished ... <unk> ' y 'all 's chickens " and " I 's free now thanks to y 'all , Master Lincoln " . The Lincoln character then recites a modernized version of the Gettysburg Address , while a white female tribe member polishes Lincoln 's shoes with her blond hair . 
 The many references to Native Americans throughout the script are part of the anti @-@ consumerism , naturalism focus of the hippie movement and of Hair . The characters in the show are referred to as the " tribe " , borrowing the term for Native American communities . The cast of each production chooses a tribal name : " The practice is not just cosmetic ... the entire cast must work together , must like each other , and often within the show , must work as a single organism . All the sense of family , of belonging , of responsibility and loyalty inherent in the word " tribe " has to be felt by the cast . " To enhance this feeling , O 'Horgan put the cast through sensitivity exercises based on trust , touching , listening and intensive examination that broke down barriers between the cast and crew and encouraged bonding . These exercises were based on techniques developed at the Esalen Institute and Polish Lab Theater . The idea of Claude , Berger and Sheila living together is another facet of the 1960s concept of tribe . 
 = = = Nudity , sexual freedom and drug use = = = 
 The brief nude scene at the end of Act I was a subject of controversy and notoriety . Miller writes that " nudity was a big part of the hippie culture , both as a rejection of the sexual repression of their parents and also as a statement about naturalism , spirituality , honesty , openness , and freedom . The naked body was beautiful , something to be celebrated and appreciated , not scorned and hidden . They saw their bodies and their sexuality as gifts , not as ' dirty ' things . " 
 Hair glorifies sexual freedom in a variety of ways . In addition to acceptance of miscegenation , mentioned above , the characters ' lifestyle acts as a sexually and politically charged updating of La bohème ; as Rado explained , " The love element of the peace movement was palpable . " In the song " Sodomy " , Woof exhorts everyone to " join the holy orgy Kama Sutra " . Toward the end of Act 2 , the tribe members reveal their free love tendencies when they banter back and forth about who will sleep with whom that night . Woof has a crush on Mick Jagger , and a three @-@ way embrace between Claude , Berger and Sheila turns into a Claude – Berger kiss . 
 Various illegal drugs are taken by the characters during the course of the show , most notably a hallucinogen during the trip sequence . The song " Walking in Space " begins the sequence , and the lyrics celebrate the experience declaring " how dare they try to end this beauty ... in this dive we rediscover sensation ... our eyes are open , wide , wide , wide " . Similarly , in the song " Donna " , Berger sings that " I 'm evolving through the drugs that you put down . " At another point , Jeanie smokes marijuana and dismisses the critics of " pot " . Generally , the tribe favors hallucinogenic or " mind expanding " drugs , such as LSD and marijuana , while disapproving of other drugs such as speed and depressants . For example , Jeanie , after revealing that she is pregnant by a " speed freak " , says that " <unk> is a bad scene " . The song " Hashish " provides a list of pharmaceuticals , both illegal and legal , including cocaine , alcohol , LSD , opium and Thorazine , which is used as an antipsychotic . 
 = = = Pacifism and environmentalism = = = 
 The theme of opposition to the war that pervades the show is unified by the plot thread that progresses through the book – Claude 's moral dilemma over whether to burn his draft card . Pacifism is explored throughout the extended trip sequence in Act 2 . The lyrics to " Three @-@ Five @-@ Zero @-@ Zero " , which is sung during that sequence , evoke the horrors of war ( " ripped open by metal explosion " ) . The song is based on Allen Ginsberg 's 1966 poem , " Wichita Vortex Sutra " . In the poem , General Maxwell Taylor proudly reports to the press the number of enemy soldiers killed in one month , repeating it digit by digit , for effect : " Three @-@ Five @-@ Zero @-@ Zero . " The song begins with images of death and dying and turns into a manic dance number , echoing Maxwell 's glee at reporting the enemy casualties , as the tribe chants " Take weapons up and begin to kill " . The song also includes the repeated phrase " Prisoners in <unk> / It 's a dirty little war " . 
 " Don 't Put It Down " satirizes the unexamined patriotism of people who are literally " crazy " for the American flag . " Be In ( Hare Krishna ) " praises the peace movement and events like the San Francisco and Central Park Be @-@ Ins . Throughout the show , the tribe chants popular protest slogans like " What do we want ? Peace ! – When do we want it ? Now ! " and " Do not enter the induction center " . The upbeat song , " Let the Sun Shine In " , is a call to action , to reject the darkness of war and change the world for the better . 
 Hair also aims its satire at the pollution caused by our civilization . Jeanie appears from a trap door in the stage wearing a gas mask and then sings the song " Air " : " Welcome , sulfur dioxide . Hello carbon monoxide . The air ... is everywhere " . She suggests that pollution will eventually kill her , " vapor and fume at the stone of my tomb , breathing like a sullen perfume " . In a comic , pro @-@ green vein , when Woof introduces himself , he explains that he " grows things " like " beets , and corn ... and sweet peas " and that he " loves the flowers and the fuzz and the trees " . 
 = = = Religion and astrology = = = 
 Religion , particularly Catholicism , appears both overtly and symbolically throughout the piece , and it is often made the brunt of a joke . Berger sings of looking for " my Donna " , giving it the double meaning of the woman he 's searching for and the Madonna . During " Sodomy " , a hymn @-@ like paean to all that is " dirty " about sex , the cast strikes evocative religious positions : the Pietà and Christ on the cross . Before the song , Woof recites a modified rosary . In Act II , when Berger gives imaginary pills to various famous figures , he offers " a pill for the Pope " . In " Going Down " , after being kicked out of school , Berger compares himself to Lucifer : " Just like the angel that fell / Banished forever to hell / Today have I been expelled / From high school heaven . " Claude becomes a classic Christ figure at various points in the script . In Act I , Claude enters , saying , " I am the Son of God . I shall vanish and be forgotten , " then gives benediction to the tribe and the audience . Claude suffers from indecision , and , in his Gethsemane at the end of Act I , he asks " Where Do I Go ? " . There are textual allusions to Claude being on a cross , and , in the end , he is chosen to give his life for the others . Berger has been seen as a John the Baptist figure , preparing the way for Claude . 
 Songs like " Good Morning , Starshine " and " Aquarius " reflect the 1960s cultural interest in astrological and cosmic concepts . " Aquarius " was the result of Rado 's research into his own astrological sign . The company 's astrologer , Maria Crummere , was consulted about casting : Sheila was usually played by a Libra or Capricorn and Berger by a Leo , although Ragni , the original Berger , was a Virgo . Crummere was also consulted when deciding when the show would open on Broadway and in other cities . The 1971 Broadway Playbill reported that she chose April 29 , 1968 for the Broadway premiere . " The 29th was auspicious ... because the moon was high , indicating that people would attend in masses . The position of the ' history makers ' ( Pluto , Uranus , Jupiter ) in the 10th house made the show unique , powerful and a money @-@ maker . And the fact that Neptune was on the ascendancy foretold that Hair would develop a reputation involving sex . " 
 In Mexico , where Crummere did not pick the opening date , the show was closed down by the government after one night . She was not pleased with the date of the Boston opening ( where the producers were sued over the show 's content ) saying , " Jupiter will be in opposition to naughty Saturn , and the show opens the very day of the sun 's eclipse . Terrible . " But there was no astrologically safe time in the near future . 
 = = = Literary themes and symbolism = = = 
 Hair makes many references to Shakespeare 's plays , especially Romeo and Juliet and Hamlet , and , at times , takes lyrical material directly from Shakespeare . For example , the lyrics to the song " What a Piece of Work Is Man " are from Hamlet ( II : scene 2 ) and portions of " Flesh Failures " ( " the rest is silence " ) are from Hamlet 's final lines . In " Flesh Failures / Let The Sun Shine In " , the lyrics " Eyes , look your last ! / Arms , take your last embrace ! And lips , O you / The doors of breath , seal with a righteous kiss " are from Romeo and Juliet ( V : iii , 111 – 14 ) . According to Miller , the Romeo suicide imagery makes the point that , with our complicity in war , we are killing ourselves . 
 Symbolically , the running plot of Claude 's indecision , especially his resistance to burning his draft card , which ultimately causes his demise , has been seen as a parallel to Hamlet : " the melancholy hippie " . The symbolism is carried into the last scene , where Claude appears as a ghostly spirit among his friends wearing an army uniform in an ironic echo of an earlier scene , where he says , " I know what I want to be ... invisible " . According to Public Theater Artistic Director Oskar Eustis , " Both [ Hair and Hamlet ] center on idealistic brilliant men as they struggle to find their place in a world marred by war , violence , and venal politics . They see both the luminous possibilities and the harshest realities of being human . In the end , unable to effectively combat the evil around them , they tragically succumb . " 
 Other literary references include the song " Three @-@ Five @-@ Zero @-@ Zero " , based on Ginsberg 's poem " Wichita Vortex Sutra " , and , in the psychedelic drug trip sequence , the portrayal of Scarlett O 'Hara , from Gone with the Wind , and activist African @-@ American poet <unk> Jones . 
 = = Dramatics = = 
 In his introduction to the published script of Viet Rock , Richard <unk> says , " performance , action , and event are the key terms of our theatre – and these terms are not literary . " In the 1950s , Off @-@ off Broadway theaters began experimenting with non @-@ traditional theater roles , blurring the lines between playwright , director , and actor . The playwright 's job was not just to put words on a page , but to create a theatrical experience based on a central idea . By 1967 , theaters such as The Living Theatre , La MaMa <unk> and The Open Theatre were actively devising plays from improvisational scenes crafted in the rehearsal space , rather than following a traditional script . 
 = = = Viet Rock and Hair = = = 
 Megan Terry 's Viet Rock was created using this improvisational process . Scenes in Viet Rock were connected in " <unk> ways " : a scene could be built from a tangent from the scene before , it could be connected psychologically , or it could be in counterpoint to the previous scene . Actors were asked to switch roles in the middle of a show , and frequently in mid @-@ scene . In her stage directions for a Senate hearing scene in Viet Rock , Terry wrote , " The actors should take turns being senators and witnesses ; the transformations should be abrupt and total . When the actor is finished with one character he becomes another , or just an actor . " 
 Hair was designed in much the same way . Tom O 'Horgan , the show 's Broadway director , was intimately involved in the experimental theatre movement . In the transition to Broadway , O 'Horgan and the writers rearranged scenes to increase the experimental aspects of the show . Hair asks its actors to assume several different characters throughout the course of the piece , and , as in Claude 's psychedelic trip in Act 2 , sometimes during the same scene . Both Hair and Viet Rock include rock music , borrowed heavily from mass media , and frequently break down the invisible " fourth wall " to interact with the audience . For example , in the opening number , the tribe mingles with audience members , and at the end of the show , the audience is invited on stage . 
 = = = Production design = = = 
 In the original Broadway production , the stage was completely open , with no curtain and the fly area and grid exposed to the audience . The proscenium arch was outlined with climb @-@ ready scaffolding . Wagner 's spare set was painted in shades of grey with street graffiti stenciled on the stage . The stage was raked , and a tower of abstract scaffolding upstage at the rear merged a Native American totem pole and a modern sculpture of a crucifix @-@ shaped tree . This scaffolding was decorated with found objects that the cast had gathered from the streets of New York . These included a life @-@ size papier @-@ mâché bus driver , the head of Jesus , and a neon marquee of the Waverly movie theater in Greenwich Village . Potts ' costumes were based on hippie street clothes , made more theatrical with enhanced color and texture . Some of these included mixed parts of military uniforms , bell bottom jeans with Ukrainian embroidery , tie dyed T @-@ shirts and a red white and blue fringed coat . Early productions were primarily reproductions of this basic design . 
 = = = Nude scene = = = 
 " Much has been written about that scene ... most of it silly , " wrote Gene Lees in High Fidelity . The scene was inspired by two men who took off their clothes to antagonize the police during an informal anti @-@ war gathering . During " Where Do I Go ? " , the stage was covered in a giant scrim , beneath which those choosing to participate in the scene removed their clothes . At the musical cue , " they [ stood ] naked and motionless , their bodies bathed in Fisher 's light projection of floral patterns . They chant [ ed ] of ' beads , flowers , freedom , and happiness . ' " It lasted only twenty seconds . Indeed , the scene happened so quickly and was so dimly lit that it prompted Jack Benny , during the interval at a London preview , to quip , " Did you happen to notice if any of them were Jewish ? " Nevertheless , the scene prompted threats of censorship and even violent reactions in some places . It also became fodder for pop @-@ cultural jokes . Groucho Marx quipped , " I was gonna go see it , and then I called up the theater . ... They said the tickets were $ 11 apiece . I told them I 'd call back , went into my bathroom , took off all my clothes , and looked at myself in the full @-@ length mirror . Then I called the theater and said , ' Forget it . ' " 
 The nudity was optional for the performers . The French cast was " the <unk> " of the foreign groups , while the London cast " found nudity the hardest to achieve . " The Swedish cast was reluctant to disrobe , but in Copenhagen , the tribe thought the nudity too tame and decided to walk naked up and down the aisle during the show 's prelude . In some early performances , the Germans played their scene behind a big sheet labeled " CENSORED " . Original Broadway cast member Natalie Mosco said , " I was dead set against the nude scene at first , but I remembered my acting teacher having said that part of acting is being private in public . So I did it . " According to Melba Moore , " It doesn 't mean anything except what you want it to mean . We put so much value on clothing . .... It 's like so much else people get uptight about . " Donna Summer , who was in the German production , said that " it was not meant to be sexual . ... We stood naked to comment on the fact that society makes more of nudity than killing . " Rado said that " being naked in front of an audience , you 're baring your soul . Not only the soul but the whole body was being exposed . It was very apt , very honest and almost necessary . " 
 = = Music = = 
 After studying the music of the Bantu at Cape Town University , MacDermot incorporated African rhythms into the score of Hair . He listened to " what [ the Bantu ] called <unk> ... [ which have a ] very characteristic beat , very similar to rock . Much deeper though .... Hair is very African – a lot of [ the ] rhythms , not the tunes so much . " <unk> stress beats on unexpected syllables , and this influence can be heard in songs like " What a Piece of Work Is Man " and " Ain 't Got No Grass " . MacDermot said , " My idea was to make a total funk show . They said they wanted rock & roll – but to me that translated to ' funk . ' " That funk is evident throughout the score , notably in songs like " Colored Spade " and " Walking in Space " . 
 MacDermot has claimed that the songs " can 't all be the same . You 've got to get different styles .... I like to think they 're all a little different . " As such , the music in Hair runs the gamut of rock : from the rockabilly sensibilities of " Don 't Put it Down " to the folk rock rhythms of " Frank Mills " and " What a Piece of Work is Man " . " Easy to Be Hard " is pure rhythm and blues , and protest rock anthems abound : " Ain 't Got No " and " The Flesh Failures " . The acid rock of " Walking in Space " and " Aquarius " are balanced by the mainstream pop of " Good Morning Starshine " . Scott Miller ties the music of Hair to the hippies ' political themes : " The hippies ... were determined to create art of the people and their chosen art form , rock / folk music was by its definition , populist . ... [ T ] he hippies ' music was often very angry , its anger directed at those who would prostitute the Constitution , who would sell America out , who would betray what America stood for ; in other words , directed at their parents and the government . " Theatre historian John Kenrick explains the application of rock music to the medium of the stage : 
 The same hard rock sound that had conquered the world of popular music made its way to the musical stage with two simultaneous hits – Your Own Thing [ and ] Hair .... This explosion of revolutionary proclamations , profanity and hard rock shook the musical theatre to its roots .... Most people in the theatre business were unwilling to look on Hair as anything more than a noisy accident . Tony voters tried to ignore Hair 's importance , shutting it out from any honors . However , some now insisted it was time for a change . New York Times critic Clive Barnes gushed that Hair was " the first Broadway musical in some time to have the authentic voice of today rather than the day before yesterday . " 
 The music did not resonate with everyone . Leonard Bernstein remarked " the songs are just laundry lists " and walked out of the production . Richard Rodgers could only hear the beat and called it " one @-@ third music " . John Fogerty said , " Hair is such a watered down version of what is really going on that I can ’ t get behind it at all . " Gene Lees , writing for High Fidelity , claimed that John Lennon found it " dull " , and he wrote , " I do not know any musician who thinks it 's good . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The score had many more songs than were typical of Broadway shows of the day . Most Broadway shows had about six to ten songs per act ; Hair 's total is in the thirties . This list reflects the most common Broadway lineup . 
 The show was under almost perpetual re @-@ write . Thirteen songs were added between the production at the Public Theater and Broadway , including " I Believe in Love " . " The Climax " and " Dead End " were cut between the productions , and " <unk> " and " You Are Standing on My Bed " were present in previews but cut before Broadway . The Shakespearean speech " What a piece of work is a man " was originally spoken by Claude and <unk> by MacDermot for Broadway , and " Hashish " was formed from an early speech of Berger 's . Subsequent productions have included " Hello There " , " Dead End " , and " Hippie Life " – a song originally written for the film that Rado included in several productions in Europe in the 1990s . The 2009 Broadway revival included the ten @-@ second " Sheila Franklin " and " O Great God of Power " , two songs that were cut from the original production . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 The first recording of Hair was made in 1967 featuring the off @-@ Broadway cast . The original Broadway cast recording received a Grammy Award in 1968 for Best Score from an Original Cast Show Album and sold nearly 3 million copies in the U.S. by December 1969 . The New York Times noted in 2007 that " The cast album of Hair was ... a must @-@ have for the middle classes . Its exotic orange @-@ and @-@ green cover art imprinted itself instantly and indelibly on the psyche .... [ It ] became a pop @-@ rock classic that , like all good pop , has an appeal that transcends particular tastes for genre or period . " The 1993 London revival cast album contains new music that has been incorporated into the standard rental version . 
 RCA Victor also released <unk> ( RCA Victor LSO @-@ 1163 ) : an album of songs that had been written for the show , but saw varying amounts of stage time . Some of the songs were cut between the Public and Broadway , some had been left off the original cast album due to space , and a few were never performed onstage . 
 Songs from Hair have been recorded by numerous artists , including Shirley Bassey , Barbra Streisand and Diana Ross . " Good Morning Starshine " was sung on a 1969 episode of Sesame Street by cast member Bob McGrath , and versions by artists such as Sarah Brightman , Petula Clark , and Strawberry Alarm Clock have been recorded . Artists as varied as Liza Minnelli and The Lemonheads have recorded " Frank Mills " , and Andrea McArdle , Jennifer Warnes , and Sérgio Mendes have each contributed versions of " Easy to Be Hard " . Hair also helped launch recording careers for performers Meat Loaf , Dobie Gray , Jennifer Warnes , Jobriath , Bert Sommer , Ronnie Dyson , Donna Summer and Melba Moore , among others . 
 The score of Hair saw chart successes , as well . The 5th Dimension released " Aquarius / Let the Sunshine In " in 1969 , which won Record of the Year in 1970 and topped the charts for six weeks . The Cowsills ' recording of the title song " Hair " climbed to # 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 @.@ while Oliver 's rendition of " Good Morning Starshine " reached # 3 . Three Dog Night 's version of " Easy to Be Hard " went to # 4 . Nina Simone 's 1968 medley of " Ain 't Got No / I Got Life " reached the top 5 on the British charts . In 1970 , ASCAP announced that " Aquarius " was played more frequently on U.S. radio and television than any other song that year . 
 Productions in England , Germany , France , Sweden , Japan , Israel , the Netherlands , Australia and elsewhere released cast albums , and over 1 @,@ 000 vocal and / or instrumental performances of individual songs from Hair have been recorded . Such broad attention was paid to the recordings of Hair that , after an unprecedented bidding war , ABC Records was willing to pay a record amount for MacDermot 's next Broadway adaptation Two Gentlemen of Verona . The 2009 revival recording , released on June 23 , debuted at # 1 on Billboard 's " Top Cast Album " chart and at # 63 in the Top 200 , qualifying it as the highest debuting album in Ghostlight Records history . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reception to Hair upon its Broadway premiere was , with exceptions , overwhelmingly positive . Clive Barnes wrote in the New York Times : " What is so likable about Hair ... ? I think it is simply that it is so likable . So new , so fresh , and so unassuming , even in its pretensions . " John J. O 'Connor of The Wall Street Journal said the show was " exuberantly defiant and the production explodes into every nook and cranny of the Biltmore Theater " . Richard Watts Jr. of the New York Post wrote that " it has a surprising if perhaps unintentional charm , its high spirits are contagious , and its young <unk> makes it difficult to resist . " 
 Television reviews were even more enthusiastic . Allan Jeffreys of ABC said the actors were " the most talented hippies you 'll ever see ... directed in a wonderfully wild fashion by Tom O 'Horgan . " Leonard Probst of NBC said " Hair is the only new concept in musicals on Broadway in years and it 's more fun than any other this season " . John Wingate of WOR TV praised MacDermot 's " dynamic score " that " blasts and soars " , and Len Harris of CBS said " I 've finally found the best musical of the Broadway season ... it 's that sloppy , vulgar , terrific tribal love rock musical Hair . " 
 A reviewer from Variety , on the other hand , called the show " loony " and " without a story , form , music , dancing , beauty or artistry .... It 's impossible to tell whether [ the cast has ] talent . Maybe talent is irrelevant in this new kind of show business . " Reviews in the news weeklies were mixed ; Jack Kroll in Newsweek wrote , " There is no denying the sheer kinetic drive of this new Hair ... there is something hard , <unk> , slightly corrupt about O 'Horgan 's virtuosity , like Busby Berkeley gone bitchy . " But a reviewer from Time wrote that although the show " <unk> with vitality [ it is ] crippled by being a <unk> musical and , like a boneless fish , it drifts when it should swim . " 
 Reviews were mixed when Hair opened in London . Irving Wardle in The Times wrote , " Its honesty and passion give it the quality of a true theatrical celebration – the joyous sound of a group of people telling the world exactly what they feel . " In The Financial Times , B. A. Young agreed that Hair was " not only a wildly enjoyable evening , but a thoroughly moral one . " However , in his final review before retiring after 48 years , 78 @-@ year @-@ old W. A. Darlington of The Daily Telegraph wrote that he had " tried hard " , but found the evening " a complete bore – noisy , ugly and quite desperately funny . " 
 Acknowledging the show 's critics , Scott Miller wrote in 2001 that " some people can 't see past the appearance of chaos and randomness to the brilliant construction and sophisticated imagery underneath . " Miller notes , " Not only did many of the lyrics not rhyme , but many of the songs didn 't really have endings , just a slowing down and stopping , so the audience didn 't know when to applaud .... The show rejected every convention of Broadway , of traditional theatre in general , and of the American musical in specific . And it was brilliant . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Social change = = 
 Hair challenged many of the norms held by Western society in 1968 . The name itself , inspired by the name of a Jim Dine painting depicting a comb and a few strands of hair , was a reaction to the restrictions of civilization and consumerism and a preference for naturalism . Rado remembers that long hair " was a visible form of awareness in the consciousness expansion . The longer the hair got , the more expansive the mind was . Long hair was shocking , and it was a revolutionary act to grow long hair . It was kind of a flag , really . " 
 The musical caused controversy when it was first staged . The Act I finale was the first time a Broadway show had seen totally naked actors and actresses , and the show was charged with the desecration of the American flag and the use of obscene language . These controversies , in addition to the anti – Vietnam War theme , attracted occasional threats and acts of violence during the show 's early years and became the basis for legal actions both when the show opened in other cities and on tour . Two cases eventually reached the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 = = = Legal challenges and violent reactions = = = 
 The touring company of Hair met with resistance throughout the United States . In South Bend , Indiana , the Morris Civic Auditorium refused booking , and in Evansville , Indiana , the production was picketed by several church groups . In Indianapolis , Indiana , the producers had difficulty securing a theater , and city authorities suggested that the cast wear body stockings as a compromise to the city 's ordinance prohibiting publicly displayed nudity . Productions were frequently confronted with the closure of theaters by the fire marshal , as in <unk> , Texas . Chattanooga 's 1972 refusal to allow the play to be shown at the city @-@ owned Memorial Auditorium was later found by the U.S. Supreme Court to be an unlawful prior restraint . 
 The legal challenges against the Boston production were appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court . The Chief of the Licensing Bureau took exception to the portrayal of the American flag in the piece , saying , " anyone who desecrates the flag should be whipped on Boston Common . " Although the scene was removed before opening , the District Attorney 's office began plans to stop the show , claiming that " lewd and lascivious " actions were taking place onstage . The Hair legal team obtained an injunction against criminal prosecution from the Superior Court , and the D.A. appealed to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court . At the request of both parties , several of the justices viewed the production and handed down a ruling that " each member of the cast [ must ] be clothed to a reasonable extent . " The cast defiantly played the scene nude later that night , stating that the ruling was vague as to when it would take effect . The next day , April 10 , 1970 , the production closed , and movie houses , fearing the ruling on nudity , began excising scenes from films in their exhibition . After the Federal appellate bench reversed the Massachusetts court 's ruling , the D.A. appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court . In a 4 – 4 decision , the Court upheld the lower court 's decision , allowing Hair to re @-@ open on May 22 . 
 In April 1971 , a bomb was thrown at the exterior of a theater in Cleveland , Ohio that had been housing a production , bouncing off the marquee and shattering windows in the building and in nearby storefronts . That same month , the families of cast member Jonathon Johnson and stage manager Rusty Carlson died in a fire in the Cleveland hotel where 33 members of the show 's troupe had been staying . The Sydney , Australia production 's opening night was interrupted by a bomb scare in June 1969 . 
 = = = Worldwide reactions = = = 
 Local reactions to the controversial material varied greatly . San Francisco 's large hippie population considered the show an extension of the street activities there , often blurring the barrier between art and life by meditating with the cast and frequently finding themselves onstage during the show . An 18 @-@ year @-@ old Princess Anne was seen dancing onstage in London , and in Washington DC , Henry Kissinger attended . In St. Paul , Minnesota , a protesting clergyman released 18 white mice into the lobby hoping to frighten the audience . Capt. Jim Lovell and Jack Swigert , after dubbing Apollo 13 's lunar module " Aquarius " after the song , walked out of the production at the Biltmore in protest of perceived anti @-@ Americanism and disrespect of the flag . 
 An Acapulco , Mexico production of Hair , directed by Castelli , played in 1969 for one night . After the performance , the theater , located across the street from a popular local bordello , was padlocked by the government , which said the production was " detrimental to the morals of youth . " The cast was arrested soon after the performance and taken to Immigration , where they agreed to leave the country , but because of legal complications they were forced to go into hiding . They were expelled from Mexico days later . 
 Hair effectively marked the end of stage censorship in the United Kingdom . London 's stage censor , the Lord Chamberlain , originally refused to license the musical , and the opening was delayed until Parliament passed a bill stripping him of his licensing power . In Munich , authorities threatened to close the production if the nude scene remained ; however , after a local Hair spokesman declared that his relatives had been marched nude into Auschwitz , the authorities relented . In Bergen , Norway , local citizens formed a human barricade to try to prevent the performance . 
 The Parisian production encountered little controversy , and the cast disrobed for the nude scene " almost religiously " according to Castelli , nudity being common on stage in Paris . Even in Paris there was nevertheless occasional opposition , however , such as when a member of the local Salvation Army used a portable loud speaker to exhort the audience to halt the presentation . 
 = = Beyond the 1960s = = 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 A Broadway revival of Hair opened in 1977 for a run of 43 performances . It was produced by Butler , directed by O 'Horgan and performed in the Biltmore Theater , where the original Broadway production had played . The cast included Ellen Foley , Annie Golden , <unk> Derricks and Kristen Vigard . Newcomer Peter Gallagher left the ensemble during previews to take the role of Danny Zuko in a tour of Grease . Reviews were generally negative , and critics accused the production of " showing its gray " . Few major revivals of Hair followed until the early 1990s . 
 A movie version of Hair , with a screenplay by Michael Weller , was directed by Miloš Forman and released in 1979 . Filmed primarily in New York City 's Central Park and Washington Square Park , the cast includes Treat Williams , Beverly D 'Angelo , John Savage , Foley and Golden . Several of the songs were deleted , and the film 's storyline departs significantly from the musical . The character of Claude is rewritten as an innocent draftee from Oklahoma , newly arrived in New York to join the military , and Sheila is a high @-@ society debutante who catches his eye . In perhaps the greatest diversion from the stage version , a mistake leads Berger to go to Vietnam in Claude 's place , where he is killed . 
 Rado and Ragni were unhappy with the film , feeling that Forman portrayed the hippies as " oddballs " and " some sort of aberration " without any connection to the peace movement , failing to capture the essence of the original stage production . They stated : " Any resemblance between the 1979 film and the original Biltmore version , other than some of the songs , the names of the characters , and a common title , eludes us . " In their view , the screen version of Hair has not yet been produced . 
 However , the film received generally favorable reviews . Writing in The New York Times , Vincent Canby called it " a rollicking musical memoir .... Weller 's inventions make this Hair seem much funnier than I remember the show 's having been . They also provide time and space for the development of characters who , on the stage , had to express themselves almost entirely in song .... [ T ] he entire cast is superb .... Mostly ... the film is a delight . " 
 = = = 1980s and 1990s = = = 
 A 20th anniversary concert event was held in May 1988 at the United Nations General Assembly to benefit children with AIDS . The event was sponsored by First Lady Nancy Reagan with Barbara Walters giving the night 's opening introduction . Rado , Ragni and MacDermot reunited to write nine new songs for the concert . The cast of 163 actors included former stars from various productions around the globe : Melba Moore , Ben Vereen , Treat Williams and Donna Summer , as well as guest performers Bea Arthur , Frank Stallone and Dr. Ruth Westheimer . Ticket prices ranged from $ 250 to $ 5 @,@ 000 and the proceeds went to the United States Committee for UNICEF and the Creo Society 's Fund for Children with AIDS . 
 A 1985 production of Hair mounted in Montreal was reportedly the 70th professional production of the musical . In November 1988 , Michael Butler produced Hair at Chicago 's Vic Theater to celebrate the shows ' 20th anniversary . The production was well received and ran until February 1989 . From 1990 to 1991 , Pink Lace Productions ran a U.S. national tour of Hair that included stops in South Carolina , Georgia , Tennessee and Kentucky . After Ragni died in 1991 , MacDermot and Rado continued to write new songs for revivals through the 1990s . Hair Sarajevo , AD 1992 was staged during the Siege of Sarajevo as an appeal for peace . Rado directed a $ 1 million , 11 city national tour in 1994 that featured actor Luther Creek . With MacDermot returning to oversee the music , Rado 's tour celebrated the show 's 25th anniversary . A small 1990 " bus and truck " production of Hair toured Europe for over 3 years , and Rado directed various European productions from 1995 to 1999 . 
 A production opened in Australia in 1992 and a short @-@ lived London revival starring John Barrowman and Paul Hipp opened at the Old Vic in London in 1993 , directed by Michael Bogdanov . While the London production was faithful to the original , a member of the production staff said the reason it " flopped " was because the tribe consisted of " Thatcher 's children who didn 't really get it " . Other productions were mounted around the world , including South Africa , where the show had been banned until the eradication of Apartheid . In 1996 , Butler brought a month @-@ long production to Chicago , employing the Pacific Musical Theater , a professional troupe in residence at California State University , Fullerton . Butler ran the show concurrently with the 1996 Democratic National Convention , echoing the last time the DNC was in Chicago : 1968 . A 30th Anniversary Off @-@ Off Broadway production was staged at Third Eye Repertory . It was directed by Shawn Rozsa . 
 = = = 2000s and 2010s = = = 
 In 2001 , the Reprise ! theatre company in Los Angeles performed Hair at the Wadsworth Theatre , starring Steven Weber as Berger , Sam Harris as Claude and Jennifer Leigh Warren as Sheila . That same year , Encores ! Great American Musicals in Concert ended its 2001 City Center season with a production of Hair starring Luther Creek , Idina Menzel and Tom Plotkin , and featuring Hair composer Galt MacDermot on stage playing the keyboards . An Actors ' Fund benefit of the show was performed for one night at the New Amsterdam Theater in New York City in 2004 . The Tribe included Shoshana Bean , Raul Esparza , Jim J. Bullock , Liz Callaway , Gavin Creel , Eden Espinosa , Harvey Fierstein , Ana Gasteyer , Annie Golden , Jennifer Hudson , Julia Murney , Jai Rodriguez , RuPaul , Michael McKean , Laura Benanti and Adam Pascal . 
 In 2005 , a London production opened at the Gate Theatre , directed by Daniel Kramer . James Rado approved an updating of the musical 's script to place it in the context of the Iraq War instead of the Vietnam War . Kramer 's modernized interpretation included " Aquarius " sung over a megaphone in Times Square , and nudity that called to mind images from Abu Ghraib . In March 2006 , Rado collaborated with director Robert Prior for a <unk> production of Hair in Toronto , and a revival produced by Pieter <unk> toured South Africa in 2007 . Directed by Paul Warwick Griffin , with choreography by Timothy Le Roux , the show ran at the <unk> Theatre in Johannesburg and at Theatre on the Bay in Cape Town . A two @-@ week run played at the Teatro Tapia in Old San Juan , Puerto Rico , in March 2010 , directed by <unk> Colón . 
 Michael Butler produced Hair at the MET Theatre in Los Angeles from September 14 through December 30 , 2007 . The show was directed and choreographed by Bo Crowell , with musical direction from Christian Nesmith ( son of Michael Nesmith ) . Butler 's production of Hair won the LA Weekly Theater Award for Musical of the Year . 
 For three nights in September 2007 , Joe 's Pub and the Public Theater presented a 40th anniversary production of Hair at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park . This concert version , directed by Diane Paulus , featured Jonathan Groff as Claude and Galt MacDermot on stage on the keyboards . The cast also included Karen Olivo as Sheila and Will Swenson as Berger . Actors from the original Broadway production joined the cast on stage during the encore of " Let the Sun Shine In . " Demand for the show was overwhelming , as long lines and overnight waits for tickets far exceeded that for other Delacorte productions such as Mother Courage and Her Children starring Meryl Streep and Kevin Kline . 
 Nine months later , The Public Theater presented a fully staged production of Hair at the Delacorte in a limited run from July 22 , 2008 to September 14 , 2008 . Paulus again directed , with choreography by Karole Armitage . Groff and Swenson returned as Claude and Berger , together with others from the concert cast . Caren Lyn Manuel played Sheila , and Christopher J. Hanke replaced Groff as Claude on August 17 . Reviews were generally positive , with Ben Brantley of The New York Times writing that " this production establishes the show as more than a vivacious period piece . Hair , it seems , has deeper roots than anyone remembered " . Time magazine wrote : " Hair ... has been reinvigorated and reclaimed as one of the great milestones in musical @-@ theatre history . ... Today Hair seems , if anything , more daring than ever . " 
 = = = = 2009 Broadway revival and 2010 U.S. National Tour = = = = 
 The Public Theater production transferred to Broadway at the Al Hirschfeld Theatre , beginning previews on March 6 , 2009 , with an official opening on March 31 , 2009 . Paulus and Armitage again directed and choreographed , and most of the cast returned from the production in the park . A pre @-@ performance ticket lottery was held nightly for $ 25 box @-@ seat tickets . The opening cast included Gavin Creel as Claude , Will Swenson as Berger , <unk> Levy as Sheila , Megan Lawrence as Mom and Sasha Allen as Dionne . Designers included Scott Pask ( sets ) , Michael McDonald ( costumes ) and Kevin Adams ( lighting ) . 
 Critical response was almost uniformly positive . The New York Daily News headline proclaimed " Hair Revival 's High Fun " . The review praised the daring direction , " colorfully kinetic " choreography and technical accomplishments of the show , especially the lighting , <unk> that " as a smile @-@ inducing celebration of life and freedom , [ Hair is ] highly communicable " ; but warning : " If you 're seated on the aisle , count on [ the cast ] to be in your face or your lap or ... braiding your tresses . " The New York Post wrote that the production " has emerged triumphant .... These days , the nation is fixated less on war and more on the economy . As a result , the scenes that resonate most are the ones in which the kids exultantly reject the rat race . " Variety enthused , " Director Diane Paulus and her prodigiously talented cast connect with the material in ways that cut right to the 1967 rock musical 's heart , generating tremendous energy that radiates to the rafters . ... What could have been mere nostalgia instead becomes a full @-@ immersion happening . ... If this explosive production doesn 't stir something in you , it may be time to check your pulse . " The Boston Globe dissented , saying that the production " felt canned " and " overblown " and that the revival " feels unbearably naive and unforgivably glib " . Ben Brantley , writing for The New York Times , reflected the majority , however , delivering a glowing review : 
 Having moved indoors to Broadway from the Delacorte Theater ... the young cast members ... show no signs of becoming domesticated . On the contrary , they ’ re tearing down the house . ... This emotionally rich revival ... delivers what Broadway otherwise hasn 't felt this season : the intense , unadulterated joy and anguish of that bi @-@ polar state called youth . ... Karole Armitage 's happy hippie choreography , with its group gropes and mass writhing , looks as if it 's being invented on the spot . But there 's intelligent form within the seeming formlessness . ... [ Paulus finds ] depths of character and feeling in [ the 1968 show about kids ] frightened of how the future is going to change them and of not knowing what comes next . ... Every single ensemble member emerges as an individual . ... After the show I couldn ’ t stop thinking about what would happen to [ the characters ] . Mr. MacDermot 's music , which always had more pop than acid , holds up beautifully , given infectious life by the onstage band and the <unk> blended voices of the cast . 
 The Public Theater struggled to raise the $ 5 @.@ 5 million budgeted for the Broadway transfer , because of the severity of the economic recession in late 2008 , but it reached its goal by adding new producing partners . Director Diane Paulus helped keep costs low by using an inexpensive set . The show grossed a healthy $ 822 @,@ 889 in its second week . On April 30 , 2009 on the Late Show with David Letterman , the cast recreated a performance on the same stage at the Ed Sullivan Theater by the original tribe . The production won the Tony Award for Best Revival of a Musical , the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Revival of a Musical and the Drama League Award for Distinguished Revival of a Musical . Its cast album won the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album . By August 2009 , the revival had recouped its entire $ 5 @,@ 760 @,@ 000 investment , becoming one of the fastest @-@ recouping musicals in Broadway history . 
 When the Broadway cast transferred to London for the 2010 West @-@ End revival , a mostly new tribe took over on Broadway on March 9 , 2010 , including former American Idol finalists Ace Young as Berger and Diana DeGarmo as Sheila . Kyle <unk> assumed the role of Claude , and Annaleigh Ashford played Jeanie . Sales decreased after the original cast transferred to London , and the revival closed on June 27 , 2010 after 29 previews and 519 regular performances . 
 A U.S. National Tour of the production began on October 21 , 2010 . Principals included Steel Burkhardt as Berger , Paris <unk> as Claude and Caren Lyn <unk> as Sheila . The tour received mostly positive reviews . The show returned to Broadway for an engagement at the St. James Theatre from July 5 through September 10 , 2011 . After that stop , the tour resumed . The tour ended on January 29 , 2012 . 
 = = = = 2010 West End revival = = = = 
 The 2009 Broadway production was duplicated at the Gielgud Theatre in London 's West End . Previews began on April 1 , 2010 with an official opening on April 14 . The producers were the Public Theater , together with Cameron Mackintosh and Broadway Across America . Nearly all of the New York cast relocated to London . A new addition to the London cast was Luther Creek as Woof . The London revival closed on September 4 , 2010 . 
 The production received mostly enthusiastic reviews . Michael Billington of The Guardian described it as " a vibrant , joyous piece of living theatre " , writing , " it celebrates a period when the joy of life was pitted against the forces of intolerance and the death @-@ dealing might of the military @-@ industrial complex . As Shakespeare once said : ' There 's sap in 't yet . ' " Charles Spencer in The Daily Telegraph agreed : " This is a timely and irresistibly vital revival of the greatest of all rock musicals . ... The verve and energy of the company ... is irresistible . " Michael Coveney of The Independent wrote that Hair is " one of the great musicals of all time , and a phenomenon that , I 'm relieved to discover , stands up as a period piece " . In The Times , Benedict Nightingale commented that " it 's exhilarating , as well as oddly poignant , when a <unk> cast dressed in everything from billowing kaftans to Ruritanian army jackets race downstage while delivering that tuneful salute to an age of Aquarius that still refuses to dawn . " Quentin Letts was a dissenting voice in the Daily Mail . Though praising the performances and the production , he wrote : " by the end the fraudulence of the gaiety becomes sickening . There is a lack of truthfulness in Hair which may not have been apparent when it was first performed in New York City in 1967 but which , today , is unavoidable . " 
 = = = = 2014 Hollywood Bowl = = = = 
 In August 2014 , the musical was given a three @-@ night engagement at the Hollywood Bowl . Directed by Adam Shankman , the all @-@ star cast included Kristen Bell as Sheila , Hunter Parrish as Claude , Benjamin Walker as Berger , Amber Riley as Dionne , Jenna Ushkowitz as Jeanie , Sarah Hyland as Crissy , Mario as Hud , and Beverly D 'Angelo and Kevin Chamberlin as Claude 's parents . 
 = = = International success = = = 
 Hair has been performed in most of the countries of the world . After the Berlin Wall fell , the show traveled for the first time to Poland , Lebanon , the Czech Republic and Sarajevo ( featured on ABC 's Nightline with Ted Koppel , when Phil Alden Robinson visited that city in 1996 and discovered a production of Hair there in the midst of the war ) . In 1999 , Michael Butler and director Bo Crowell helped produce Hair in Russia at the Stas <unk> Theatre located in Moscow 's Gorky Park . The Moscow production caused a similar reaction as the original did 30 years earlier because Russian soldiers were fighting in Chechnya at the time . 
 Rado wrote in 2003 that the only places where the show had not been performed were " China , India , Vietnam , the Arctic and Antarctic continents as well as most African countries . " Since then , an Indian production has been mounted . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 The New York Times noted , in 2007 , that " Hair was one of the last Broadway musicals to saturate the culture as shows from the golden age once regularly did . " Songs from the show continue to be recorded by major artists . In the 1990s , Evan Dando 's group The Lemonheads recorded " Frank Mills " for their 1992 record It 's A Shame About Ray , and Run DMC sampled " Where Do I Go " for their 1993 single " Down With the King " which went to # 1 on the Billboard rap charts and reached the top 25 in the Billboard Hot 100 chart . In 2004 , " Aquarius " was honored at number 33 on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs . 
 Songs from the musical have been featured in films and television episodes . For example , in the 2005 movie Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , the character Willy Wonka welcomed the children with lyrics from " Good Morning Starshine " . " Aquarius " was performed in the final episode of Laverne and Shirley in 1983 , where the character Carmine moves to New York City to become an actor , and auditions for Hair . " Aquarius / Let the Sunshine In " was also performed in the final scene in the film The 40 @-@ Year @-@ Old Virgin , and Three Dog Night 's recording of " Easy to Be Hard " was featured in the first part of David Fincher 's film Zodiac . On the Simpsons episode " The Springfield Files " , the townspeople , Leonard Nimoy , Chewbacca , Dana Scully and Fox Mulder all sing " Good Morning Starshine . " The episode " Hairography " of the show Glee includes a much @-@ criticized mash @-@ up of the songs " Hair " and " Crazy in Love " by Beyoncé . In addition , Head of the Class featured a two @-@ part episode in 1990 where the head of the English department is determined to disrupt the school 's performance of Hair . The continued popularity of Hair is seen in its number ten ranking in a 2006 BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the " [ United Kingdom ] ' s Number One Essential Musicals . " 
 Because of the universality of its pacifist theme , Hair continues to be a popular choice for high @-@ school and university productions . Amateur productions of Hair are also popular worldwide . In 2002 , Peter Jennings featured a Boulder , Colorado , high school production of Hair for his ABC documentary series " In Search of America " . A September 2006 community theater production at the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Count Basie Theater in Red Bank , New Jersey , was praised by original producer Michael Butler , who said it was " one of the best Hairs I have seen in a long time . " Another example of a recent large @-@ scale amateur production is the Mountain Play production at the 4 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Cushing Memorial Amphitheatre in Mount Tamalpais State Park in Mill Valley , California in the spring of 2007 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Hair was Broadway 's first concept musical , a form that dominated the musical theatre of the seventies , including shows like Company , Follies , Pacific Overtures and A Chorus Line . While the development of the concept musical was an unexpected consequence of Hair 's tenure on Broadway , the expected rock music revolution on Broadway turned out to be less than complete . 
 MacDermot followed Hair with three successive rock scores : Two Gentlemen of Verona ( 1971 ) ; Dude ( 1972 ) , a second collaboration with Ragni ; and Via Galactica ( 1972 ) . While Two Gentlemen of Verona found receptive audiences and a Tony for Best Musical , Dude failed after just sixteen performances , and Via Galactica flopped after a month . According to Horn , these and other such " failures may have been the result of producers simply relying on the label ' rock musical ' to attract audiences without regard to the quality of the material presented . " Jesus Christ Superstar ( 1970 ) and Godspell ( 1971 ) were two religiously themed successes of the genre . Grease ( 1971 ) reverted to the rock sounds of the 1950s , and black @-@ themed musicals like The Wiz ( 1975 ) were heavily influenced by gospel , R & B and soul music . By the late 1970s , the genre had played itself out . Except for a few outposts of rock , like Dreamgirls ( 1981 ) and Little Shop of Horrors ( 1982 ) , audience tastes in the 1980s turned to <unk> with pop scores , like Les Misérables ( 1985 ) and The Phantom of the Opera ( 1986 ) . Some later rock musicals , such as Rent ( 1996 ) and Spring Awakening ( 2006 ) , as well as jukebox musicals featuring rock music , like We Will Rock You ( 2002 ) and Rock of Ages ( 2009 ) , have found success . But the rock musical did not quickly come to dominate the musical theatre stage after Hair . Critic Clive Barnes commented , " There really weren 't any rock musicals . No major rock musician ever did a rock score for Broadway . ... You might think of the musical Tommy , but it was never conceived as a Broadway show . ... And one can see why . There 's so much more money in records and rock concerts . I mean , why bother going through the pain of a musical which may close in Philadelphia ? " 
 On the other hand , Hair had a profound effect not only on what was acceptable on Broadway , but as part of the very social movements that it celebrated . For example , in 1970 , Butler , Castelli and the various Hair casts contributed to fundraising for the World Youth Assembly , a United Nations @-@ sponsored organization formed in connection with the celebration of the 25th anniversary of the United Nations . The Assembly enabled 750 young representatives from around the world to meet in New York in July 1970 to discuss social issues . For about a week , cast members worldwide collected donations at every show for the fund . Hair raised around $ 250 @,@ 000 and ended up being the principal financier of the Assembly . Tribe members and Hair crews also contributed a days ' pay , and Butler contributed a days ' profits from these productions . Moreover , as Ellen Stewart , La MaMa 's founder , noted : 
 Hair came with blue jeans , comfortable clothing , colors , beautiful colors , sounds , movement . ... And you can go to AT & T and see a secretary today , and she 's got on blue jeans . ... You can go anywhere you want , and what Hair did , it is still doing twenty years later .... A kind of emancipation , a spiritual emancipation that came from [ O 'Horgan 's ] staging . ... Hair until this date has influenced every single thing that you see on Broadway , off @-@ Broadway , off @-@ off @-@ Broadway , anywhere in the world , you will see elements of the experimental techniques that Hair brought not just to Broadway , but to the entire world . 
 = The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge = 
 " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " is the third episode of the second series of the British dark comedy anthology television programme Inside No. 9 . It was written by Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton , and directed by Dan Zeff . It first aired on 9 April 2015 on BBC Two . The story follows a 17th @-@ century witch trial . Elizabeth Gadge , played by Ruth Sheen , stands accused of witchcraft by inhabitants of the village of Little Happens , including characters played by Sinead Matthews , Jim Howick , Paul Kaye and Trevor Cooper . Magistrate Sir Andrew Pike , played by David Warner , has summoned famed witch @-@ finders Mr Warren and Mr Clarke , played by Shearsmith and Pemberton , to try Elizabeth , but is more concerned with bringing people to the village than finding the truth . 
 The episode was not intended to be a parody of period dramas , but instead to reflect the absurdity of real witch trials . To that end , the characters take the events of the episode seriously , which leads to much of the humour . The writers ' influences included Witchfinder General , The Crucible , Monty Python and Hammer Horror films , while the names of the witch @-@ finders were a tribute to actor Warren Clarke . Many critics responded positively to the episode , praising the humour — especially that deriving from the use of archaic language — the writing and the performances . Some , however , considered " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " of lower quality than the previous two episodes . 
 = = Production = = 
 The second series of Inside No. 9 was written in 2014 , and then filmed from the end of 2014 into early 2015 . The writing process for " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " began with Shearsmith 's suggestion of a witch trial as a plot idea , and the writers then worked out the details of the setting . The episode was filmed , mostly in story order , on location in a barn at the Chiltern Open Air Museum . The same location had previously been used for Doctor Who and Horrible Histories . In addition , concurrent with the filming of " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " , a Drunk History sketch starring Luke Pasqualino — a previous Inside No. 9 guest star — was being filmed nearby . Shot in December , " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was the first episode of the second series to be filmed . The barn was extremely cold during filming ; Pemberton joked that , unlike on Titanic , they would not be digitally adding breath in the production process . 
 " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was written to mimic genuine witch trials , some transcripts of which Pemberton and Shearsmith had read as part of the writing process . The fixation of the characters on " teats " and " suckling " , for instance , was something Shearsmith had seen in authentic trials . One writing challenge concerned the need for new information to be revealed with each of the trial 's witnesses ; this is what shaped the structure of the script . For Shearsmith , given that the trials were already absurd , they cannot be parodied . The humour of the episode , for him , comes precisely from the fact that the characters take the events so seriously , and do not see this absurdity . Pemberton said that the pair aimed for authenticity , and did not seek to produce a spoof of a period piece . To that end , he was complimentary of Yves Barr , a costume designer with whom the writers had worked for a number of years , who did " a fantastic job creating this period on a shoestring " . Given that , in his view , " people don 't do this period " , Shearsmith was excited to film something set in the 17th century . The episode was the only period piece in the first two series , but the writers expressed willingness to do another ; they felt that the setting showed that they really could go anywhere with the programme . 
 As each episode of Inside No. 9 features new characters , the writers were able to attract actors who might have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " starred Pemberton and Shearsmith as Mr Warren and Mr Clarke respectively , along with David Warner as Sir Andrew Pike and Ruth Sheen as Elizabeth Gadge . Warner had previously worked with Pemberton and Shearsmith on The League of Gentlemen 's Apocalypse , and the writers thought him very well @-@ suited to the role as Sir Andrew Pike . Shearsmith considered Sheen a very capable actress , and complimented the way she played Gadge as a serious character ; Pemberton felt she added " gravitas " to the role . Sinead Matthews starred as Sarah Nutter , Jim Howick as Thomas Nutter , Paul Kaye as Richard Two @-@ Shoes , and Trevor Cooper as George Waterhouse . Shearsmith was particularly pleased to have Howick appearing in the episode . As he had appeared in Horrible Histories , he added , for Shearsmith , " a weight of royalty " . The " comic coupling " of Howick and Matthews had characters who were originally , mistakenly , named " Gadge " , but this did not fit with the characters ' relationship with the titular Elizabeth . The couple were renamed " Nutter " , a reference to Alice Nutter of the real @-@ world Pendle witch trials . 
 In addition to the credited actors , the crew had a crowd of extras for one day of filming . Around 12 extras were used ; budget constraints allowed this number for a day , or five extras for two days . This constraint led to a change in the script , seeing the crowd removed from the trial . Although uncredited , Goody Two @-@ Shoes was played by an actress who had appeared in Psychoville , one of Pemberton and Shearsmith 's previous productions , as Joanne Dunderdale , an understudy . The writers were complimentary of Cooper 's performance ; they said that he was almost " conducting " the crowd of extras , in that they were noisy when he was shouting , and quiet when he stopped . 
 In addition to the use of visual effects , the closing sequence required ADR due to the sound of rain on the original filming . The visual effects were the director Dan Zeff 's idea , and the writers were pleased that they were within budget . They also serve to tie the final shot to the opening shot of the episode , as both feature a raven . Scenes that were cut down in the editing process included the initial meeting between the <unk> — Warren and Clarke — and Sir Andrew Pike , and a private discussion between Warren and Clarke after the first day of the trial . The extended versions of the scenes featured an explanation about the Devil being found in everyday objects and a discussion about the stages of torture respectively . Shearsmith expressed frustration that these extra scenes could not be included on the DVD release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 17th century England , the magistrate Sir Andrew Pike ( Warner ) summons the witch @-@ finders Mr Warren ( Shearsmith ) and Mr Clarke ( Pemberton ) to the village of Little Happens . Elizabeth Gadge ( Sheen ) has been accused of witchcraft , and Pike is excited that the news has attracted the attention of outsiders . Pike and Warren already seem convinced of Gadge 's guilt , but Clarke remains sceptical . 
 Elizabeth 's case is brought to trial the following morning , with the assistance of the cobbler Richard Two @-@ Shoes ( Kaye ) . Elizabeth 's daughter Sarah ( Matthews ) and son @-@ in @-@ law Thomas Nutter ( Howick ) testify that they have witnessed <unk> sucking from the teat of a furry creature , and speaking to a mouse ( believed to be a demon ) . Elizabeth claims that Sarah and Thomas have falsely accused her , and want to be rid of her to make room in their house . George Waterhouse ( Cooper ) testifies against Elizabeth , and the accused is questioned . When others in the courtroom begin laughing at her responses , Warren declares that the next person to laugh will be executed as a witch . After an argument breaks out , the witch @-@ finders and Pike decide that the rest of the trial should be conducted in private . Elizabeth is pricked with a needle to test her for the devil 's mark . A remorseful Sarah tries to profess her mother 's innocence , but Warren does not believe her . Elizabeth confesses that she has been prostituting herself to Two @-@ Shoes , who wears a fur coat , but Two @-@ Shoes denies this , and the trial is adjourned . Throughout proceedings , Warren is accusatory while Clarke is more cautious ; Pike , meanwhile , is fascinated both by the lewd acts in which Elizabeth has supposedly engaged and by the witch @-@ finders ' torturous implements . 
 Clarke privately tells Warren that he thinks Elizabeth is innocent and that he is not sure that the pair are doing God 's work . Warren threatens that Clarke himself will be tried and convicted if he objects further . The trial resumes — Elizabeth having been tortured overnight — and Elizabeth 's mouse , Snowflake , is released , so that it might lead them to the witch . Warren has sprinkled crumbs in front of Elizabeth . When Snowflake approaches Elizabeth , Pike declares her a witch , and sentences her to be burned . Thomas and Sarah later say goodbye to a hooded and bound Elizabeth , who awaits execution . Clarke dismisses them . He removes the hood from the figure to reveal that he has bound Warren in Elizabeth 's place ; Clarke believes Warren has been tainted with evil , and that the latter is no longer doing God 's work . Clarke puts back the hood , and Pike enters , happy that the trial has seen a revival of trade and visitors to the village . Warren is taken away to be burnt . Clarke releases the real Elizabeth , but she reveals that she truly is a witch ; she breaks Clarke 's neck , killing him . There are sounds of excitement from outside as flames light Elizabeth 's face . She tells Snowflake that she will go to her master , then transforms into a raven and leaves . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " is a period piece tribute to Witchfinder General , The Blood on Satan 's Claw and The Crucible , while the names " Warren " and " Clarke " are a homage to British actor Warren Clarke , who , at time of production and airing , had recently died . The names were selected prior to Clarke 's death — specifically because they were amusing but period appropriate , and not because the actor had any link to the episode 's themes — but the writers chose to keep them as a tribute upon the death of Clarke , with whom Shearsmith had previously worked . The style and humour is reminiscent of Horrible Histories and Monty Python . For instance , one scene was directly inspired by the " laughing guard " scene in Monty Python 's Life of Brian . Pemberton and Shearsmith themselves , however , did not consider the episode to be particularly reminiscent of Monty Python . The humour is childish , but many of the jokes are " bawdy " and " adult " . 
 Though one critic said that the episode was " the first straight @-@ up comedic episode of the second series " , another said that the episode 's humour was balanced with tragedy and poignancy , arguing that the whole episode has an element of horror . This was especially true given that the story reflects actual happenings ; the depiction of torture was described as " genuinely upsetting " . Despite the sole setting of the barn , the episode evokes a degree of folk horror . " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was described by Jonathan Wright ( The Guardian ) and Phoebe Jane @-@ Boyd ( Den of Geek ) as like a Hammer Horror film with added humour , and writers for the Irish Examiner said that the episode should appeal to both horror and comedy fans . 
 Given that Gadge is revealed to actually be a witch , Howick asked Shearsmith whether the former 's character , Thomas , truly had witnessed Gadge engaging in some kind of supernatural activity . Shearsmith suggested that Thomas was motivated by greed . However , he begins to regret his choice when he witnesses Gadge being tortured . Pemberton , though , noted that the real @-@ life accusations of witchcraft must have been based on some level of belief . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics generally responded warmly to the episode , but some felt it compared poorly to others in the series . David Chater , writing for The Times , felt that " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was dissimilar from any previous episode of Inside No. 9 , but that it was " equally accomplished " , while in sister publication The Sunday Times , critics suggested that the change in style showed the writers ' versatility . Neela Debnath , writing for The Independent , called " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " a " hilariously dark little half @-@ hour of quintessentially British comedy " . Rupert Hawksley , writing for The Daily Telegraph , was more critical . He awarded " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " three out of five stars , saying that " despite a starry cast and a delightful twist and counter @-@ twist , [ the episode ] was nothing like as effective " as " La Couchette " and " The 12 Days of Christine " , the previous two episodes of the series . The episode , he claimed , was indicative of a " mid @-@ series lull " . The freelance journalist Dan Owen felt the episode was " entertaining fare , but too predictable and clichéd to prove genuinely memorable " , awarding it two out of four stars . He , too , said the episode felt like " a mid @-@ series misstep " . Shearsmith was unhappy with those who thought the episode a " dud " or a " misfire " , confessing that it was his favourite episode of the second series . Pemberton felt it was going to be difficult to follow " The 12 Days of Christine " , but Shearsmith was of the view that the episodes should not be in competition with each other . 
 The episode 's humour was praised by the majority of commentators . Julia Raeside , writing for The Guardian , said the writers " managed to pull together a loving tribute to [ their ] cult horror source material with an all @-@ out gag rate that most sitcoms would fail to keep up with " , claiming that " they get the look and tone just right and then inject it with the kind of comedy that is perfectly tailored to puncture the fictional world without deflating it " . Similarly , Debnath felt that the jokes , including " anachronistic references " and " dark <unk> " , were " bang on " . By contrast , Hawksley claimed that the episode had several " inspired moments " , including a " perfectly pitched " joke about selfies , but that the writers had failed to properly exploit the 17th @-@ century setting . Overall , though finding it " occasionally funny " , Hawksley thought the episode " fell some way short of what we have come to expect from Pemberton and Shearsmith " . For the comedy critic Bruce Dessau , the episode was " all the more hauntingly funny because it is played pretty straight " , but he noted that the character of Sir Andrew Pike allowed " some offbeat humour " . Chater called the episode " very , very funny " , and Philip Cunnington , of the Lancashire Evening Post , called it " one of the funniest half @-@ hours of TV so far this year " after the conclusion of the series . 
 Television critics praised the writing and acting of " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " . Though Owen felt that the ending " held little surprise " , Paddy Shennan , of the Liverpool Echo , said he " loved the fact that , for the third week running , [ he ] couldn 't work out the twist " . For Debnath , " the best was saved till last " , but the whole episode was " tightly written " . Patrick Mulkern ( Radio Times ) , too , said that " this dark tale soon works a devilish spell " . Christine Brandel , writing for entertainment website PopMatters , particularly praised the episode 's " beautifully done " dialogue , saying that " it feels authentic in its phrasing , even during the more bizarre ( and hilarious ) court scenes " . Owen , similarly , said " the dialogue was also frequently hilarious , with Shearsmith and Pemberton having a fine ear for the rhythms of Olde English and how best to have characters deadpan their way through some ridiculous sentences . " Hawksley praised Warner 's " effortlessly batty " performance as Sir Andrew Pike , and claimed that Sheen " brought an unsettling complexity " to the title character . Gerard Gilbert , of The Independent , claimed Warner was clearly " having a ball " as Pike , and Wright ( The Guardian ) said " Warner quite brilliantly makes the most of every line he 's given " . Brandel considered Warner one of the best guest stars of the series . 
 = = = Cited sources = = = 
 Pemberton , Steve ; Shearsmith , Reece ( 2015 ) . The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge ( episode commentary ) . Steve & Reece IN9 ( via SoundCloud ) . Retrieved 4 August 2015 . 
 = History of the Australian Capital Territory = 
 The history of the Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) as an administrative division of Australia began after the Federation of Australia in 1901 , when it was created in law as the site for Canberra , Australia 's capital city . The region has a long prior history of human habitation before the Territory 's creation , with evidence of Indigenous Australian settlement dating back at least 21 @,@ 000 years . The area formed the traditional lands associated with the <unk> People and several other linguistic groups , an association known through both early European settler accounts and the oral histories of the peoples themselves . 
 Following the colonisation of Australia by the British , the 19th century saw the initial European exploration and settlement of the area and their encounters with the local indigenous peoples , beginning with the first explorations in 1820 and shortly followed by the first European settlements in 1824 . At the outset the region was dominated by large properties used for sheep and cattle grazing , which had been granted to free settlers that had arrived in Australia from the United Kingdom and other European countries . These large properties were later broken up and subdivided in accordance with changes to land tenure arrangements , smaller farms and urban developments becoming more common . 
 In 1908 , the region was selected as the site of the nation 's future capital city . In 1909 , New South Wales formally ceded to the federal government the territory and additional land at Jervis Bay for the establishment of a sea port for the capital . The territory officially came under government control as the Federal Capital Territory on 1 January 1911 . The planning and construction of Canberra followed , with the Parliament of Australia moving there in 1927 . 
 The Territory officially became the Australian Capital Territory in 1938 . Canberra was built to accommodate the government , while the surrounding area was developed to support the city , including the construction of dams , the establishment of plantation forests and the creation of protected areas . An advisory council was established in 1930 , with some elected representation . 
 Initially , the growth of Canberra and the ACT was slow . The American architect Walter Burley Griffin won the competition to design Australia 's new capital and was appointed to oversee its construction . He was frequently dogged by disputes with Australian authorities and the onset of World War I , which hindered progress . In 1921 , Burley Griffin was fired , and multiple planning bodies were established , but achieved little , in part due to the Great Depression . 
 In the period after World War II , Prime Minister Robert Menzies regarded the state of Canberra as an embarrassment , and took it upon himself to champion its development . Under his leadership — which lasted more than a decade — the development of the capital was rapid . The National Capital Development Commission was created in 1957 with more power than its predecessors , and ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin , the centrepiece of Canberra , and construction was completed in 1964 after four years of work . 
 This prompted the development of the Parliamentary Triangle , a core part of Griffin 's design , and since then various buildings of national importance were constructed on the lakefront . The Australian National University was built , and sculptures and monuments were built . On average , the population of Canberra increased by more than 50 % every five years between 1955 and 1975 as the development of the capital became more concerted , and new residential land was released through the creation of new town centres in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 In 1949 , the territory gained its first representative in the Parliament , although at first with limited speaking and voting rights . In 1974 it gained a fully elected , but still advisory House of Assembly . In 1988 it gained the trappings of self @-@ government with a Legislative Assembly with most of the powers and responsibilities of an Australian state , although subject to a federal right of veto , similar to the arrangements adopted for the Northern Territory in 1978 . The Legislative Assembly legalised some things that were prohibited in other parts of Australia , such as prostitution and X @-@ rated pornography ; in 2006 , an attempt to allow civil unions for same @-@ sex couples was overruled by the federal government . 
 = = Pre @-@ European history = = 
 Indigenous Australian peoples have long inhabited what is now the ACT . Anthropologist Norman Tindale has suggested the principal group occupying the region were the Ngunnawal people , while the <unk> and <unk> lived immediately to the south , the <unk> to the east , the Gandangara to the north , and the Wiradjuri to the north @-@ west . 
 <unk> evidence from the <unk> rock shelter in Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve indicates habitation dating back at least 21 @,@ 000 years . It is possible that the area was inhabited for considerably longer , with evidence of an Aboriginal presence in south @-@ western New South Wales dating back around 40 @,@ 000 – 62 @,@ 000 years . Another site of significance in the reserve is the Bogong Rocks shelter , which contains the oldest evidence of Aboriginal occupation at a <unk> moth resting site . These insects were an important source of food for the Aboriginal peoples of the Southern Alps and would accumulate by the thousands in caves and rock crevices , where they were collected and later roasted in sand or ashes , and then eaten whole . 
 Numerous other culturally significant and <unk> notable sites are known across the territory , including shelters , rock art sites , stone artefact scatters , scarred trees and chert quarries . Tidbinbilla Mountain is believed to have long been used for Aboriginal initiation ceremonies . 
 = = 19th century exploration = = 
 Following European settlement , the growth of the new colony of New South Wales led to an increasing demand for arable land . Governor Lachlan Macquarie supported expeditions to open up new lands to the south of the capital Sydney , including one to find an overland route to Jervis Bay , an area which would later be incorporated into the ACT as its only coastal possession . In 1818 Charles Throsby , Hamilton Hume , James Meehan and William Kearns set out to find the route , a task accomplished that same year by Throsby and Kearns . 
 The 1820s saw further exploration in the Canberra area associated with the construction of a road from Sydney to the Goulburn plains , supervised by Throsby and his overseer , Joseph Wild . While working on the project , Throsby learned of a nearby lake and river from the local Aborigines , and he accordingly sent Wild to lead a small party to investigate the site . On 19 August 1820 , Wild ventured off from his two companions , and later that day arrived at the north shore of what is now known as Lake George . In October 1820 Governor Macquarie visited the site , and while he was in attendance Throsby decided to push on to reach the river that he had been informed of . Accompanied by Wild and James Vaughan , he journeyed south in search of the Murrumbidgee . The search was unsuccessful , but they did discover the Yass River , and it is surmised that they would have set foot on part of the future ACT . 
 A second expedition was mounted shortly thereafter , and Throsby 's nephew Charles Throsby Smith , Wild and Vaughan further explored the Molonglo ( <unk> ) and Queanbeyan ( <unk> ) Rivers , becoming the first Europeans to camp at the site . However , they failed to find the Murrumbidgee , and Smith declared that the river did not exist . The issue of the Murrumbidgee was solved in 1821 , when Charles Throsby mounted a third expedition and successfully reached the watercourse , on the way providing the first detailed account of the land where Canberra now resides . 
 The next significant expedition to the region came in 1823 , when Wild was employed by Brigade Major John Ovens and Captain Mark Currie to guide them to the Murrumbidgee . They travelled south along the river and named the area now known as Tuggeranong Isabella 's Plain , after Isabella Maria Brisbane ( 1821 – 1849 ) , the two @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Thomas Brisbane , the then Governor of New South Wales . Unable to cross the river near the current site of Tharwa , they continued on to the Monaro Plains . The last expedition in the region prior to settlement was undertaken by Allan Cunningham in 1824 . He reported that the region was suitable for grazing , and the settlement of the Limestone Plains followed immediately thereafter . 
 = = Early settlement = = 
 When the boundaries for settlement of New South Wales were determined , the Limestone Plains were opened up to settlers . The first land grant in the region was made to Joshua John Moore in 1823 , and settlement in the area began in 1824 with the construction of a homestead by his stockmen on what is now the Acton Peninsula . Moore formally purchased the site in 1826 and named the property Canberry , or Canberra , although he never visited it . His 4 km2 ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) claim covered much of the future North Canberra . 
 Adjacent to the eastern boundary on Moore 's claim was the settlement of Duntroon , occupied by James Ainslie on behalf of Robert Campbell . John Palmer was granted land in the region , which was taken up by his son George in 1826 . He established Palmerville near Ginninderra Creek in 1829 , and the " Squire " at Gungahlin was completed in 1861 . Palmerville in the Ginninderra district was the site of first school in the region , and operated from 1844 to 1848 . The first school in the future Canberra opened on the Duntroon Estate , next door to St John 's Church in what would become the suburb of Reid in the 20th century . Canberra 's first church , St John 's , was consecrated and opened for use in 1845 . 
 The Tuggeranong Plains , situated 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) south of the Molonglo River , were first settled in 1827 by Peter Murdoch . The <unk> Homestead ( also known as Tuggeranong Homestead ) was established in 1836 by Thomas <unk> , and the first buildings of the Lanyon estate , owned by John Lanyon and James Wright , were built in 1838 . Tharwa was settled in 1834 ; the homestead in this area was <unk> , established by James Wright in 1839 . Tharwa is the oldest official settlement in the ACT , having been proclaimed in 1862 . 
 Settlers moved further south into what is now the Namadgi National Park . William Herbert made a claim over part of the <unk> Valley at some point between 1826 and 1836 , while during the 1830s Garrett Cotter inhabited what would later be named the Cotter River Valley , in his honour . From the late 1830s , the <unk> Homestead and station were established . <unk> was settled in the early 1840s and the <unk> Homestead was erected around this time . By 1848 most of the major valleys of the Namadgi area had been settled . 
 Convict labour was widely used in the region , and the first bushrangers in the area were runaway convicts . John Tennant , the earliest and best @-@ known bushranger of the region , lived in a hideout on what is now known as Mount Tennant , behind Tharwa . From 1827 he raided the local homesteads , stealing stock , food and possessions until his arrest in 1828 ; He was later hung in Sydney for his crimes . The lawlessness of the region led to the appointment of the first resident magistrate on 28 November 1837 – <unk> Tasker Faunce , who was also known as " Ironman Faunce " since his time as a magistrate at Brisbane Water . The magistrate oversaw legal matters and issued liquor licences to several establishments , the first being the <unk> Inn on the Duntroon estate in 1841 . 
 A significant influx of population and economic activity occurred around the 1850s goldrushes , particularly the Kiandra rush of 1859 – 60 . The goldrushes prompted the establishment of communication between Sydney and the region by way of the Cobb & Co coaches , which transported mail and passengers . The first post offices opened in Ginninderra in 1859 and at Lanyon the following year . Bushranger activity continued with the goldrushes : Australian @-@ born bandits Ben Hall and the Clarke brothers were active in the area , targeting mail coaches and gold transportation . 
 Terence Aubrey Murray was born in Ireland in 1810 and came to Sydney with his father , a retired redcoat army officer , and siblings in 1827 . In 1837 , he acquired the Yarralumla sheep station , taking up residence in Yarralumla 's Georgian @-@ style homestead , which he extended . He was elected unopposed to represent the surrounding Counties of Murray , King and Georgiana in the first partially elective Legislative Council in 1843 . With the establishment of responsible government in 1856 , Murray became a member of the first Legislative Assembly , representing the electorate of Southern Boroughs – which included nearby Queanbeyan – and in 1859 he was elected to represent Argyle – which included another of his pastoral properties , <unk> , in the Collector area , north of Canberra . 
 The Robertson Land Acts and the Closer Settlement Acts altered the mechanism for granting land tenure and precipitated the break @-@ up of large properties in New South Wales . During the 1860s , in the wake of the new government legislation , small farmers nicknamed " selectors " moved into what would become the ACT , taking up parcels of ( usually inferior ) land which existed between the estates of the wealthy , established landholders . 
 During colonial times , prior to the establishment of the ACT , the European communities of Ginninderra , Molonglo and Tuggeranong settled in and farmed the surrounding land , raising sheep in the main but also breeding horses and growing grain . The region was also called the Queanbeyan / Yass district , after the two largest towns in the area . The villages of Ginninderra and Tharwa developed to service the local agrarian communities . In 1882 , the first allotments in the village of Hall – named after early pastoralist Henry Hall – were sold . By 1901 , it was an established town with a hotel , coachbuilder , blacksmith , butcher , shoemaker , saddler , dairy and two stores . 
 In 1886 , the agronomist William Farrer , established the research farm ' Lambrigg ' on the banks of the Murrumbidgee south of present @-@ day Tuggeranong . Farrer experimented with rust and drought @-@ resistant wheat ; the varieties he bred were widely used by Australian growers , and he was later credited with establishing Australia as a major producer . Tharwa Bridge , the oldest surviving bridge in the region , was opened in 1895 and was the first crossing over the Murrumbidgee River . By 1911 , when the region came under federal control , the population had grown to 1 @,@ 714 settlers . 
 = = Relations with indigenous people = = 
 During the first 20 years of settlement , there was only limited contact between the settlers and Aborigines . Joseph Franklin purchased land in the Brindabellas in 1849 and attempted to set up a cattle farm . His livestock was slaughtered by the local Aborigines and he was driven back out of the mountains . The rush of prospectors into the Kiandra area through the Brindabellas and the mountains to the west of the ACT as a result of the Kiandra goldrush led to conflict with the Aboriginal people . By the time Franklin returned to the Brindabellas in 1863 , the indigenous population had been significantly reduced . 
 Over the succeeding years , the Ngunnawal and other local Indigenous people effectively ceased to exist as cohesive and independent communities adhering to their traditional ways of life . Those who had not succumbed to disease and other predations either dispersed to the local settlements or were relocated to more distant Aboriginal reserves set up by the NSW government in the latter part of the 19th century . The children of mixed European @-@ Aboriginal families were generally expected to assimilate into the settlement communities . The Ngunnawal people were subsequently often considered to be " extinct " ; however , in a situation parallel to that of the Tasmanian Aborigines , people with claims to Ngunnawal ancestry continue to identify themselves as such . However , there have been contemporary instances of dispute within the community itself over who is properly considered to be a member of the Ngunnawal people . 
 = = Search for a capital city location = = 
 The district 's change from a New South Wales rural area to the national capital began with the debates over Federation during the 19th century . Prior to 1840 Sydney was the administrative centre for the colony , and thus it could be presupposed that any potential federal government would be seated there . However , this started to change when , buoyed by the Victorian Gold Rush , Melbourne grew rapidly , and by 1860 its population had overtaken that of Sydney . The discovery of gold also helped to increase Melbourne 's financial base , to the point where at one stage " nearly 5 % of all British imperial government revenue ... passed through [ Melbourne 's ] port " . Thus Melbourne soon possessed both the size and the economic clout to rival Sydney and to command additional administrative powers . 
 When Federation was first being discussed , views differed about the location of the capital . Early advocate for Australian federation , John Dunmore Lang , backed Sydney , but Henry Parkes , a prominent New South Wales politician and Premier , proposed the capital be founded on " neutral ground " , nominating the town of Albury as a location . ( Albury was located in New South Wales , yet its position on the Murray River placed it on the border between New South Wales and Victoria ) . 
 In 1898 , a referendum on a proposed Constitution was held in four of the colonies – New South Wales , Victoria , South Australia and Tasmania . Although the referendum achieved a majority in all four colonies , the New South Wales referendum failed to gain the minimum number of votes needed for the bill to pass . Following this result , a meeting of the four Premiers in 1898 heard from George Reid , the Premier of New South Wales , who argued that locating the future capital in New South Wales would be sufficient to ensure the passage of the Bill . This was accepted by the other three Premiers , and the proposed Australian Constitution was modified so that Section 125 specified that the national capital must be " within the state of New South Wales " . However , they also added the condition that it must be situated no less than 100 mi ( 160 @.@ 9 km ) from Sydney . In addition , if the bill passed , Melbourne would be the interim seat of government ( but not referred to as the " capital " ) until a location for the new capital had been determined . The 1899 referendum on this revised bill was successful , passing with sufficient numbers . 
 Nevertheless , this left open the question of where to locate the capital . Initially the Bombala district in the far south of NSW was proposed , to which southern Monaro , ( which incorporated Bombala ) , Orange and Yass were soon added . The NSW Premier , John See , offered to provide any of the three recommended sites as a future capital territory . Edmund Barton , the first Prime Minister of the new Federal Government , added another four sites to this list : Albury , Tamworth , Armidale and Tumut , and members of the new government toured the various sites in 1902 . The tour proved inconclusive , and upon their return the members decided to refer the problem to a Royal Commission , with the Minister for Home Affairs , William Lyne , pushing for Tumut or Albury as he preferred a site in his electorate . Subsequently , the Commission presented its report to Parliament in 1903 , recommending the sites of Albury , Tumut and Orange , in that order . However , there continued to be problems , as the House of Representatives backed the Tumut option , while the Senate preferred the town of Bombala . As a result of this disagreement the bill lapsed , and it was left to the second Parliament to choose a location for the capital . 
 The new Parliament met in 1904 and reached a compromise , choosing Dalgety , which , like Bombala , was located in the Monaro region . Thus , with the passage of the Seat of Government Act 1904 , it appeared that the matter had been settled . However , while the Federal Parliament supported Dalgety , the New South Wales government did not , and they proved unwilling to cede the amount of territory the Federal Government demanded . 
 Finally , in 1906 , New South Wales agreed to cede sufficient land , but on the condition that it was in the Yass @-@ Canberra region , this site being closer to Sydney . Following a tour of the region by several Senators and Members of the Commonwealth Parliament , in 1908 a new ballot was called in the Federal Parliament with eleven sites nominated . Initially , Dalgety remained at the forefront , but by the eighth round Yass @-@ Canberra had emerged as a new leader , and the site was confirmed in the ninth round of voting . Thus was passed the new Seat of Government Act 1908 , which repealed the 1904 Act and specified a capital in the Yass @-@ Canberra region . 
 Government Surveyor Charles Scrivener was deployed to the region in the same year in order to map out a specific site and , after an extensive search , settled upon the present location , about 300 km ( 186 @.@ 4 mi ) south @-@ west of Sydney in the foothills of the Australian Alps . 
 = = Establishment of the Territory in law ( 1910 ) = = 
 In 1909 , New South Wales transferred the land for the creation of the Federal Capital Territory to federal control through two pieces of legislation , the Seat of Government Acceptance Act 1909 and the Seat of Government Surrender Act 1909 . The Act transferred Crown land in the counties of Murray and Cowley to the Commonwealth , which amounted to an area about 2 @,@ 330 square kilometres ( 900 sq mi ) and eight parcels of land near Jervis Bay . All private land in the surrendered area had to be bought by the Commonwealth . The Seat of Government Acceptance Act also gave the Commonwealth rights to use and control the waters of the Queanbeyan and Molonglo Rivers . 
 In 1910 , the Seat of Government ( Administration ) Act 1910 created the legal framework for the Territory . The act specified that laws in the Territory could be made by the Commonwealth and that Ordinances could be made by the Governor @-@ General , and placed the ACT under the jurisdiction of the New South Wales Supreme Court . When the Act came into force on 1 January 1911 , control of the Territory was officially assumed by the Commonwealth . This Act remained the constitutional basis for law @-@ making in the ACT until the granting of self @-@ government in 1989 . 
 The Minister for Home Affairs , King O 'Malley , who was responsible for the legislation creating the ACT , also introduced a bill in 1910 making the ACT an alcohol @-@ free area ; this bill was passed by the Federal parliament and the law was not repealed until 1928 . Until that time local residents travelled to Queanbeyan , just across the New South Wales border , to drink on Saturday . In 1938 the Territory was formally renamed the Australian Capital Territory . 
 The Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act 1915 and the New South Wales Seat of Government Surrender Act 1915 created a Territory of Jervis Bay , which was administered as part of the Federal Capital Territory and with all laws of the Territory applicable . 
 = = = Resumption and disenfranchisement = = = 
 Prior to the final decision on the location of the new capital territory , the local landowners and residents of Queanbeyan looked favourably on the possibility of having the territory located nearby . Such a result , it was hoped , would bring improvements to local infrastructure , increase the demand for local goods and services , and raise land values . It was assumed that the existing freehold arrangements would remain , and that those whose land was not required for the city itself would be in a position to capitalise on the new circumstances . 
 Such was not the case . Legislation restricted land holdings in the new territory to leasehold , rather than freehold . This was intended to avoid land speculation and give the national government , as the lessor , greater control over development . Landowners were concerned that the legislation had a number of shortcomings : land valuations were fixed to the date when the Act passed ( 8 October 1908 ) , there was no compensation for improvements made to the land , and owners were not given first right of refusal when their old land was offered for lease . 
 Along with the loss of their land , local residents discovered that they had been disenfranchised . Now a part of the ACT , they had lost their vote in the New South Wales government , and their numbers were too small to warrant a seat in the new federal parliament . As a result , they had no representation in parliament through which to argue against the provisions of the legislation . 
 In response the residents formed the Vigilance Association with the intent of protecting their interests during the establishment of the new capital territory . Legal challenges to the resumption of the land were unsuccessful , but the Vigilance Association did win some concessions : the government agreed to pay for the improvements to the land , and did so at the value when the land was acquired ; and the landowners gained the right of first refusal on their old properties when they were put up for lease . As of 2010 all residential land in the ACT is held on a 99 @-@ year crown lease . 
 = = 20th century development of Canberra = = 
 One of the first federal facilities established in the Territory was the Royal Military College , established on the Campbells ' property Duntroon , which opened in 1911 . Prior to this , Australia 's military lacked formally trained officers , who were needed due to changes to the Australian military model that had emerged after Federation . 
 In the same year , an international competition to design the future capital was held , which was won by the Chicago architect Walter Burley Griffin in 1912 . Griffin 's proposal , rendered by his architect wife Marion Mahony Griffin , had an abundance of geometric patterns , incorporated concentric hexagonal and octagonal streets emanating from several centres . It had as its centrepiece an elaborate lake composed of smaller bodies of water , with extensive natural vegetation around it . Griffin 's proposal was " the grandest scheme submitted , yet it had an appealing simplicity and clarity " . The lakes and geometry were deliberately designed so that their orientation was related to various natural topographical landmarks . It was further intended that buildings of national significance and natural landmarks would align with these geometric axes . Later , Scrivener , as part of a government committee , was responsible for modifying Griffin 's winning design . He recommended a less elaborate and geometric shape , which Griffin opposed , saying that geometry was " one of the raison d 'etre of the ornamental waters " , but he was overruled . The new design was widely criticised as being ugly . 
 The official naming of Canberra occurred on 12 March 1913 , and construction began immediately . After official indecision over the plan , revisions and their implementation , Griffin was invited to Canberra to discuss the matter . He arrived in August 1913 and was appointed Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction for three years . Bureaucratic wrangling delayed Griffin 's work ; a Royal Commission in 1916 ruled his authority for executing the plan had been usurped by certain officials . Griffin had a strained working relationship with the Australian authorities , and a lack of federal government funding meant that by the time he left in 1920 , little significant work had been done on the city . Prime Minister Billy Hughes removed Griffin from his position . At the time of his removal , Griffin had revised his plan , overseen the earthworks of the major avenues , and established the <unk> Cork Plantation . 
 After Griffin 's departure , the Federal Capital Advisory Committee was established to advise the government of the construction efforts . The Committee had limited success meeting its goals ; however , the chairman , John Sulman , was instrumental in applying the ideas of the garden city movement to Griffin 's plan . The Committee was replaced in 1925 by the Federal Capital Commission . The role of the FCC was to prepare Canberra for the transfer of the Commonwealth Parliament and the public service from Melbourne to Canberra . The Federal Government officially relocated to the ACT from Melbourne on the formal opening of the Provisional Parliament House on 9 May 1927 . Among the new Parliament 's first acts was the repeal of the prohibition laws . At first the public service remained based in Melbourne , the various departments ' headquarters only gradually moving to Canberra over the space of several years . From 1938 to 1957 the National Capital Planning and Development Committee continued to plan the further expansion of Canberra ; however , the NCPDC did not have executive power , and decisions were made on the development of Canberra without the Committee 's consultation . A few major buildings were constructed during this period of NCPDC responsibility , such as the Australian War Memorial , which opened in 1941 . With the onset of the Great Depression , followed by World War II , development of the new capital was slow , and in the decade after the end of the war , Canberra was criticised for resembling a village , and its disorganised collection of buildings was deemed ugly . Canberra was often derisively described as " several suburbs in search of a city " . The Prime Minister , Robert Menzies , regarded the state of the national capital as an embarrassment . Over time his attitude changed from one of contempt to that of championing its development . He fired two ministers charged with the development of the city , feeling that their performance lacked intensity . Menzies ruled for over a decade and in that time the development of the capital sped up rapidly . 
 After World War II there was a shortage of housing and office space in Canberra , so a Senate Select Committee hearing was held in 1954 to address its development requirements . This Committee recommended the creation of a single planning body with executive power . Consequently , the NCPDC was replaced by the National Capital Development Commission in 1957 . The NCDC ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin , and construction was completed in 1964 after four years of work . The completion of the centrepiece of Griffin 's design finally the laid the platform for the development of Griffin 's Parliamentary Triangle . In the four decades since the initial construction of the lake , various buildings of national importance were constructed on the lakefront . According to the policy plan of the government , " The lake is not only one of the centrepieces of Canberra 's plan in its own right , but forms the immediate foreground of the National Parliamentary Area . " The newly built Australian National University , on the northern shores of the lake was expanded , and sculptures and monuments were built . 
 The completion of the central basin placed a waterway between Parliament House and the War Memorial and a landscaped boulevard was built along the land axis . A new National Library was constructed within the Parliamentary Triangle , followed by the High Court of Australia , the National Gallery and finally a new Parliament House in 1988 . In 2001 , the National Museum was built on the former lakeside site of the Royal Canberra Hospital . 
 On average , the population of Canberra increased by more than 50 % every five years between 1955 and 1975 as the development of the capital became more concerted . To accommodate the influx of residents , the NCDC oversaw the release of new residential land though the creation of new town centres : Woden opened in 1964 , followed by Belconnen in 1966 , Weston Creek in 1969 and Tuggeranong in 1973 . The NCDC was disbanded in 1988 , its planning authority transferred to the newly created ACT government and the new National Capital Authority , which was established to oversee Commonwealth interests in development of the national capital . Canberra has continued to grow with the further release of residential land in Gungahlin in the 1990s . 
 = = 20th century development outside of Canberra = = 
 A significant priority for the establishment of Canberra was the construction of water storage facilities . Cotter Dam was the first dam built on the Cotter River ; construction on this 18 @.@ 5 m ( 60 @.@ 7 ft ) concrete gravity dam started in 1912 and finished in 1915 . Its height was raised to 31 m ( 101 @.@ 7 ft ) in 1951 . <unk> of Canberra 's water began at Cotter Dam in 1955 ; operations were moved to the Mount Stromlo Water Treatment Plant in June 1967 . 
 Two additional dams were built on the Cotter : the <unk> Dam , a double @-@ curvature , concrete @-@ arch structure , was completed in 1961 ; and the Corin Dam , an earth and rock @-@ fill embankment dam , was built in 1968 . In 1979 Googong Dam was built on the Queanbeyan River in New South Wales . 
 Transport into and out of the ACT was an early development priority . In 1931 the Federal Highway linking the ACT to Goulburn was completed , and in 1936 an airfield was constructed at Duntroon . On 13 August 1940 Australia 's chief military officer and three senior ministers in the Menzies Government , James Fairbairn , Geoffrey Street and Henry Somer Gullett , were killed when their plane crashed on the southern approach to Canberra . 
 A 6 @.@ 5 km ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) branch from the Bombala railway line was built from Queanbeyan to Canberra station in 1914 and extended to Civic in June 1921 , but the bridge over the Molonglo River was washed away in 1922 and never rebuilt . Plans to build a railway to Yass were abandoned . A 1067 mm gauge construction railway was built in 1923 between the Yarralumla brickworks and the provisional Parliament House . It was later extended to Civic , but the whole line was closed in May 1927 . A railway connecting Canberra to Jervis Bay was planned , but never constructed . Several facilities were built in Jervis Bay including the Royal Australian Naval College ( HMAS Creswell ) erected in 1913 , the Jervis Bay Air Base Range , and a Botanic Gardens . 
 The native forest of the ACT was composed almost wholly of eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes , especially during the economic boom following World War II . By the early 1960s , logging had depleted the eucalypt , and concern about water quality in the Cotter River catchment led to the forests being closed . Interest in forestry had begun in 1915 , when T. C. G. Weston had commenced trials of a number of species including Pinus radiata on the slopes of Mount Stromlo . Plantation forestry began in earnest in 1926 with 2 km2 ( 0 @.@ 8 sq mi ) planted annually around Uriarra and Pierce 's Creek . 
 By 1938 the area planted yearly was 4 km2 ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) , with the favourable benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment . In 1967 the Australian Government approved a plan for a total 160 km2 ( 61 @.@ 8 sq mi ) of plantation in the ACT , which was achieved in 1970 . The ease of access to the plantations has made them popular recreation areas for Canberrans . Throughout the 20th century , significant areas of plantation forest were periodically lost to bushfires , with major fires occurring in 1939 , 1952 , 1979 , 1983 , 2001 and 2003 . 
 In 1936 about 8 @.@ 1 km2 ( 3 @.@ 1 sq mi ) of forest was set aside to create the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve , and in 1939 a koala enclose was built by the Institute of Anatomy . The government acquired land to establish a national park and fauna reserve in 1962 , expanding it to 36 @.@ 3 km2 ( 14 @.@ 0 sq mi ) and later , to its current size of 54 @.@ 5 km2 ( 21 @.@ 0 sq mi ) . In 1969 the first wildlife displays were created , and the park was officially gazetted in 1971 . In 1984 the Namadgi National Park was declared . It is 1 @,@ 061 km2 ( 409 @.@ 7 sq mi ) and takes up approximately 46 % of the ACT 's land . 
 In 1911 , Mount Stromlo was assessed as a possible site for a Commonwealth Solar Observatory , and it became the location of the facility in 1924 . It was operated as a Commonwealth government facility until 1957 , when it was transferred to the Australian National University ( ANU ) . From 1944 to 1968 it was also the site of the national time @-@ keeping service . By the early 1980s , Mount Stromlo , together with the ANU 's Siding Spring observatory , was producing Australia 's greatest astronomical research output . 
 The Australian Government signed an agreement with the United States in 1960 for the establishment of satellite @-@ tracking stations in the ACT . As a result of the agreement , three tracking stations were built in the ACT by NASA . The Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex was officially opened on 19 March 1965 by Prime Minister Menzies , and is the only station still in operation in the ACT , communicating with interplanetary spacecraft . 
 The <unk> Valley Tracking Station , which was for orbiting satellite support , opened in May 1965 in what is now part of Namadgi National Park , was closed down in 1985 . Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station , completed in December 1966 , was a communications relay station for Project Apollo , Skylab and interplanetary spacecraft from 1967 until 1981 , when its 26 m ( 85 @.@ 3 ft ) antenna was moved to the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex . It was closed in July 2009 and is now being dismantled . 
 = = Government and the ACT = = 
 The Australian Capital Territory Police was created in 1927 , the same year the federal government moved to the ACT , with eleven officers . The size of the force grew over subsequent decades with the development of Canberra , and oversaw law and order in the territory until 1979 . In that year , the ACT Police merged with the Commonwealth Police and the Federal Narcotics Bureau to form the Australian Federal Police ( AFP ) , which then took responsibility for law and order in Canberra . Since self @-@ government was granted in 1988 , the AFP has performed this under contract to the ACT government . 
 The ACT was given its first federal representation in 1949 , when it gained a seat in the House of Representatives , the Division of Australian Capital Territory , under the 1948 Representation Act which increased the size of the House of Representatives . The ACT member could only vote on matters directly affecting the Territory . In 1974 , the ACT and the Northern Territory were each allocated two Senate seats . In 1974 , the House of Representatives seat was divided into two , the Division of Canberra and Division of Fraser . A third , the Division of Namadgi , was created in 1996 , but was abolished in 1998 after an updated assessment of changes to the regional demographic distribution . Both House of Representatives seats have mostly been held by the Australian Labor Party , while ALP and the Liberal Party of Australia have always each held one Senate seat . 
 In 1930 , the ACT Advisory Council was established to advise the Minister for Territories on the community 's concerns and from 1934 the territory had its own Supreme Court . In 1974 the Council became a fully elected Legislative Assembly , advising the Minister of the Capital Territory , and in 1979 this renamed the House of Assembly . 
 = = = Movements towards self @-@ governance = = = 
 Although there was a push by residents of the ACT for a greater say in the management of the territory , this did not necessarily equate to a desire for self @-@ governance . John Overall , who served as the head of the NCDC from 1957 to 1972 , summarised the distinction in " Canberra : Yesterday , Today and Tomorrow " : 
 Canberra residents may have been demanding a greater say in their destiny , but they rejected attempts by the Federal Government to have them take control of their own affairs through self @-@ government . They appeared reluctant to accept the responsibility of governing themselves , or perhaps , the increased costs which they feared would inevitably follow the handover of power from the Federal Government to a local body . ... [ M ] ost realised that the end of direct control by the Federal Government would inevitably lead to higher taxes or a cut in services , as indeed was the case when self @-@ government finally occurred in the late 1980s . 
 Nevertheless , there were many residents in Canberra who wanted self @-@ government , and there were a number of forces pushing the territory in that direction . 
 The formation of the Legislative Assembly in 1974 was intended as the significant step towards self @-@ government , but the Whitlam Government , under whose auspices the Assembly was formed , tended to " override or ignore its wishes . " Similarly , the subsequent 1975 Fraser Government seemed uninterested in the Assembly . However , in February 1975 , Tony Staley accepted the post of Minister for the Capital Territory . Staley had been a supporter of self @-@ government for the ACT , and he proposed a model whereby Canberrans would rapidly gain control of much of the territory 's administration . The model found opposition , though , in part because it failed to adequately address the funding arrangements . 
 Although Staley 's plan did not eventuate , the next person to run the Ministry , Robert Ellicott , chose to hold a referendum on the issue . The 1978 referendum provided the residents of the territory with three options : 
 That self @-@ government be granted to the Territory by delegating functions to a locally elected legislative body . 
 That a locally elected legislative body be established in the Territory with local government @-@ type legislative and executive functions . 
 That the present arrangements for governing the Territory should continue for the time being . 
 A clear majority voted for continuing with the status quo – 63 @.@ 75 % , as opposed to 5 @.@ 72 % in favour of the local government model and 30 @.@ 54 % supporting the " state style " self @-@ government approach . 
 Overall identified a number of reasons why residents opposed self @-@ government . Along with the previously mentioned fear of increases in taxation or decreases in services , he argued that those living in the ACT would have felt that they already had a voice in the governance of the territory , through federal electoral representation . Canberra also had a high proportion of public servants who felt that they were already a part of the government , and knew how to work with the system . 
 In spite of the result , the referendum failed to end the debate . There were a number of pressures that continued to push the ACT towards self @-@ government , including : 
 National consistency of governance . In 1978 the Northern Territory achieved self @-@ government . The ACT was the only other mainland territory , with a population greater than that of the Northern Territory that was growing faster , so it was suggested that if self @-@ government was appropriate for the Northern Territory , then it must also be appropriate for the ACT . 
 The re @-@ enfranchisement of the community . Two inquiries had recommended that the ACT needed to provide the community with " the same sort of representative institutions that have been established in other parts of Australia " . 
 Financial pressures . The ACT had enjoyed high quality services through Federal Government funding , to the extent that the Federal Grants Commission report that Australia was subsiding the residents " to the tune of over $ 200 for every man , woman and child in the Territory . " Self @-@ government would allow the ACT to be placed on the same financial footing as that of the other states and the Northern Territory . This was identified by Bill Harris , the head of the ACT Administration just prior to self @-@ government , as the " fundamental reason " for the eventual realisation of self @-@ government in the Territory . 
 In 1988 , the new minister for the ACT , Gary Punch , received a report recommending the abolition of the NCDC and the formation of a locally elected government . Punch recommended that the Hawke government accept the report 's recommendations , and subsequently Clyde Holding introduced legislation to grant self @-@ government to the Territory in October 1988 . 
 = = = Self @-@ government = = = 
 The enactment on 6 December 1988 of the Australian Capital Territory ( Self @-@ Government ) Act 1988 @.@ established the framework for ACT Self @-@ government . The first election for the 17 @-@ member Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly was held on 4 March 1989 . The provisions of the Act establishing the ACT as a self @-@ governing territory within the Commonwealth of Australia commenced operation on 11 May 1989 , coinciding with the first sitting of the Legislative Assembly at 1 Constitution Avenue , Civic . The Australian Labor Party formed the ACT 's first government , led by Chief Minister Rosemary Follett , who made history as Australia 's first female head of government . Although since the commencement of self @-@ government , ACT law has continued to apply in general to the Jervis Bay Territory under section 4A of the Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act 1915 , the ACT as defined under the Self @-@ Government Act 1988 does not include Jervis Bay , which continues to be administered by the Commonwealth . Since 1992 , members of the Assembly have been elected by the Hare @-@ Clark proportional representation system from three multi @-@ member electorates , which replaced the modified D 'Hondt method used in the inaugural election , in which the 17 representatives were elected from a territory @-@ wide electorate . 
 Whereas the ACT 's federal electorates have been mainly held by Labor , the Liberal Party has been able to gain some footing in the ACT Assembly , and were in government for just over eight of the Assembly 's 21 @-@ year history . Most of this was during a period of six and half years from 1995 and 2001 , which ended when Labor gained a 14 @.@ 1 % swing at the polls . In contrast to the state elections , Labor has polled at least seven percentage points more than the Liberals at every federal election since 1990 , and their average lead since then has been 15 percentage points . 
 The initial years of self @-@ government were difficult and unstable . A majority of ACT residents had opposed self @-@ government and had it imposed upon them by the federal parliament , and at the first election , 4 of the 17 seats were won by anti @-@ self @-@ government single @-@ issue parties due to a protest vote by disgruntled <unk> , and a total of 8 were won by minor parties and independents . Follett and Labor won only four seats and had to form a minority government , as seven groups were represented in total . Some of the anti @-@ self @-@ government representatives sought to disrupt the territory 's legislature from the inside , and a no @-@ confidence motion toppled Labor after only seven months . Trevor Kaine and the Liberals ruled for 18 months before being deposed , and Follett 's Labor returned , the third government in 25 months . In 1992 , Labor won eight seats , and the minor parties and independents won only three . Stability increased , and in 1995 , Kate Carnell became the first elected Liberal chief minister . In 1998 Carnell became the first chief minister to be re @-@ elected . She was regarded as a proactive leader but resigned in 2000 after two independents who had supported her minority government withdrew their support . At the time , she had been embroiled in controversy over the funding of the Canberra Stadium and an accidental fatality caused by the Royal Canberra Hospital implosion . Labor have won the three elections since 2001 , and in 2004 formed the first majority government in the territory , but after the 2008 election were forced into minority government with the Greens . 
 In 2006 , the majority Labor government made sweeping changes to the education system , shutting down 23 schools across the territory . These were made in the face of sustained public opposition , and since then , there have been campaigns from opposition parties and the community to re @-@ open some of them . This included the 2008 election , where it was a major topic . 
 Since the 1993 creation of the National Native Title Tribunal , there have been four separate claims to Native Title lodged over alienated lands in the ACT by representatives of the Ngunnawal communities , in 1996 , 1997 , 1998 and 2002 . The first two of these were discontinued after reaching a Federal Court hearing , and the third was rejected as not meeting applicable provisions . The fourth claim was dismissed . 
 In 2001 , the ACT government entered into a cooperative agreement with the Aboriginal community over the management of Namadgi National Park . The deal no longer exists . 
 In the 1990s , a number of activities which are or were illegal in other Australian states were legalised in the ACT . These include the sale of X @-@ rated pornographic materials ( 1989 ) and prostitution in brothels ( 1992 ) , although brothels are only permitted to operate in the suburbs of Hume , Mitchell and Fyshwick . The personal use of cannabis was decriminalised in 1992 and abortion was decriminalised in 2002 . In 2006 , the ACT Government attempted to introduce a law recognising civil unions , but it was overturned by the federal government . 
 = = 2000s = = 
 The first years of the 21st century saw a period of extended drought in the ACT region , accompanied by several bushfires that caused widespread devastation . Over the 2001 Christmas period , five separate bushfires burnt over 16 km2 ( 6 @.@ 2 sq mi ) of forest in the ACT , including millions of dollars ' worth of plantation pine forest . 
 The drought conditions continued during the following years , and in 2003 the ACT burned again . The 2003 bushfires damaged around 70 % of the ACT 's area , including 99 % of the Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve and significant areas of government @-@ owned pine plantation . Four people were killed and 67 rural houses were destroyed , including 16 houses at Uriarra , 12 at Pierces Creek ; 414 houses in the outer suburbs of Canberra were razed . 
 More than 200 other houses were damaged , and numerous buildings of historical significance were lost , including the Mount Franklin Chalet , which was built in 1937 – 38 for the Canberra Alpine Club and was the first club @-@ built ski lodge in mainland Australia , and many others in the Namadgi National Park . Nil <unk> and Rock Valley Homestead , the two historic houses at Tidbinbilla , were destroyed . Most buildings of the Mount Stromlo Observatory , operated by the Australian National University , were destroyed , including the observatory 's Oddie telescope and its dome , which had been built in 1911 and was the first federal building in the ACT . 
 On 7 December 2013 , the ACT same @-@ sex marriage act came into effect , making the ACT the first legislature in Australia to allow same @-@ sex marriages . On 12 December 2013 , the High Court of Australia unanimously held this law to be invalid for inconsistency with the federal Marriage Act 1961 . However , all parties to the case had agreed and the Court accepted that the federal parliament 's power to make laws with respect to " marriage " , Constitution s 51 ( 21 ) , extends to same @-@ sex marriage . There can now be uniform federal law for marriages of any kind . 
 = = = Cited references = = = 
 = Mary Young Pickersgill = 
 Mary Pickersgill ( born Mary Young ; February 12 , 1776 – October 4 , 1857 ) , was the maker of the Star Spangled Banner Flag hoisted over Fort McHenry during the Battle of Baltimore in the War of 1812 . The daughter of another noted flag maker , Rebecca Young , Pickersgill learned her craft from her mother , and , in 1813 , was commissioned by Major George Armistead to make a flag for Baltimore 's Fort McHenry that was so large that the British would have no difficulty seeing it from a great distance . The flag was installed in August 1813 , and , a year later , during the Battle of Baltimore , Francis Scott Key could see the flag while negotiating a prisoner exchange aboard a British vessel , and was inspired to pen the words that became the United States National Anthem . 
 Pickersgill , widowed at the age of 29 , became successful enough in her flag making business , that , in 1820 , she was able to buy the house that she had been renting in Baltimore , and later became active in addressing social issues , such as housing and employment for disadvantaged women . From 1828 to 1851 , she was president of the Impartial Female Humane Society which had been founded in 1802 , incorporated in 1811 , and helped impoverished families with school vouchers for children and employment for women . Under Pickersgill 's leadership , this organization built a home for aged women and later added an Aged Men 's Home which was built adjacent to it . These , more than a century later , evolved into the Pickersgill Retirement Community of Towson , Maryland which opened in 1959 . 
 Pickersgill died in 1857 and was buried in the Loudon Park Cemetery in southwest Baltimore , where her daughter erected a monument for her , and where some civic @-@ minded organizations later erected a bronze plaque . The house where Pickersgill lived for 50 years , at the northwest corner of Albemarle and East Pratt Streets in downtown Baltimore , became known as the Star @-@ Spangled Banner Flag House in 1927 . The house was saved through the efforts of many preservation @-@ minded citizens who were motivated by the Centennial Celebrations of 1914 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania on February 12 , 1776 , Mary Young was the youngest of six children born to William Young and Rebecca Flower . Her mother , who became widowed when Mary was two years old , had a flag shop on Walnut Street in Philadelphia where she made ensigns , garrison flags and " Continental Colors " for the Continental Army . Her 1781 advertisement in the " Pennsylvania Packet " read , " All kinds of colours , for the Army and Navy , made and sold on the most reasonable Terms , By Rebecca Young . " Young moved her family to Baltimore , Maryland when Mary was a child , and it was from her mother that Mary learned the craft of flag making . 
 On October 2 , 1795 , at the age of 19 , Mary married John Pickersgill , a merchant , and moved back to Philadelphia with her husband . Of Mary 's four children , only one survived childhood , a daughter named Caroline . Mary 's husband traveled to London to work for the United States Government in the British Claims Office , but died in London on June 14 , 1805 , leaving Mary widowed at the age of 29 . In 1807 Mary then moved back to Baltimore with her daughter Caroline and her 67 @-@ year @-@ old mother Rebecca . 
 The small family rented a house at 44 Queen Street ( later 844 East Pratt Street , which became the Star Spangled Banner Flag House and 1812 Museum ) , where Pickersgill took in boarders and opened a flag @-@ making business , selling " silk standards , cavalry and division colours of every description . " Her customers included the United States Army , United States Navy , and visiting merchant ships . 
 = = The Fort McHenry flag = = 
 In 1813 the United States was at war with Great Britain , and Baltimore was preparing for an eventual attack as the fleet of the British Royal Navy had complete maritime control of the Chesapeake Bay . Major George Armistead , the U.S. Army commander of the Infantry and Artillery units that defended Fort McHenry in Baltimore , felt that the fort was prepared for an attack , except it lacked a flag . In a letter to the head of the Maryland Militia and military commander for Baltimore , Major General Samuel Smith , he wrote , " We , sir , are ready at Fort McHenry to defend Baltimore against invading by the enemy . That is to say , we are ready except that we have no suitable ensign to display over the Star Fort and it is my desire to have a flag so large that the British will have no difficulty seeing it from a distance . " A delegation consisting of Armistead , Smith , Brig. General John Stricker , and Commodore Joshua Barney , Pickersgill 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , visited with Pickersgill , and discussed the particulars of the desired flag . They commissioned Pickersgill to make two flags , " one American ensign , 30 X 42 feet , first quality bunting " and another flag 17 by 25 feet . " A task as large as the making of these flags was beyond the capability of one person to complete , and Pickersgill not only drew on members of her own household for help , but also contracted labor from the immediate neighborhood . In early summer 1813 , she began the job with the assistance of her daughter , Caroline , her two nieces , Eliza Young and Margaret Young , a free African American apprentice , Grace Wisher , and likely her elderly mother , Rebecca Young . An additional unnamed African American who boarded in the house is also listed as helping in some sources , as were additional local seamstresses who were hired during the summer . Often working late into the evening , until midnight at times , Pickersgill 's team was able to complete the job in six weeks . Pickersgill 's daughter , in an 1876 letter to Georgiana Armistead Appleton , the daughter of Major Armistead ( later breveted a lieutenant colonel ) , wrote these particulars about the flag : 
 The flag being so very large , mother was obliged to obtain permission from the proprietors of <unk> [ sic ] brewery which was in our neighborhood , to spread it out in their malt house ; and I remember seeing my mother down on the floor , placing the stars : after the completion of the flag , she superintended the topping of it , having it fastened in the most secure manner to prevent its being torn away by ( cannon ) balls : the wisdom of her precaution was shown during the engagement : many shots piercing it , but it still remained firm to the staff . Your father ( Col. Armistead ) declared that no one but the maker of the flag should mend it , and requested that the rents should merely be bound around . 
 The large flag contained over 400 yards ( 366 meters ) of fabric , and included 15 stripes and 15 stars , one for each of the 15 states of the union . The stars were made of cotton and the stripes and blue canton were of English wool bunting . Each stripe was two feet ( 60 cm ) wide and each of the stars measured 24 inches ( 60 cm ) across from tip to tip . The women did much of the work in the evening after the brewery closed , sometimes working until midnight , and Pickersgill delivered the flags to Fort McHenry on August 19 , 1813 , a full year before the Battle of Baltimore . 
 The main flag weighed about 50 pounds ( 23 kg ) , and it took 11 men to raise it onto a 90 @-@ foot ( 27 @-@ meter ) flagpole . The result was an enormous American flag that could be seen for several miles from the Fort . On October 27 , 1813 a receipt was given to Pickersgill and her niece Eliza Young in the amount of $ 405 @.@ 90 for the larger flag , and $ 168 @.@ 54 for the smaller one ( which was also used at Fort McHenry as a storm flag ) . The small flag may have been flying when the British initially attacked Fort McHenry during the Battle of Baltimore on September 13 , because of the inclement weather that night with the driving rainstorm ( which would have made the woolen bunting material soggy and too heavy to blow out in any breeze ) . However , it was Pickersgill 's large flag that was flying over the fort at daybreak on September 14 , 1814 , after the British had ceased firing on the fort . A diary entry from a British sub @-@ <unk> on board ship and recently returned from the North Point battlefield , George Glebe , described that sunny morning when the Americans at the distant fort " fired their ( " wake @-@ up " ) morning gun salute and raised a splendid ensign " over the battlements . While negotiating a prisoner exchange aboard a British ship , Francis Scott Key saw the flag , and this inspired him to pen the words to the poem " The Defence of Fort McHenry " that later became the National Anthem of the United States in 1931 . 
 After the 1814 battle , George Armistead took possession of the large flag , and after his death in 1818 his widow , Louisa Hughes Armistead , kept it . During her four decades of ownership , she allowed it to be displayed on a few occasions , and also removed pieces of it to be given as gifts , a common practice of the day . Following her death in 1861 the flag went to her daughter , Georgiana Armistead Appleton , and then later to her grandson , Eben Appleton . The flag was moved to various locations over a 40 @-@ year period until 1907 when Eben Appleton loaned it to the Smithsonian . In 1912 the loan became permanent , and the flag underwent a variety of restorations . Beginning in December 1998 , the flag began an $ 18 million conservation treatment ( not a restoration ) and now this flag that was hand crafted by Pickersgill and her helpers in 1813 is one of the most important artifacts , and the centerpiece of the redesigned National Museum of American History . 
 = = Later life = = 
 By 1820 Pickersgill had become sufficiently successful in her business to purchase the house she had been renting , and lived there for the remainder of her life . Her business success allowed her to become active in addressing social issues such as housing , job placement , and financial aid for disadvantaged women , decades before these issues became prominent concerns in society . The Impartial Female Humane Society had been established to help needy Baltimore families with educating their children , and to help destitute women find employment . Pickersgill served as the president of this society from 1828 to 1851 , and under her presidency a home for aged women was finally opened in West Baltimore in 1851 after a long planning and construction process . Following her tenure as president , a home for aged men was then established adjacent to the women 's home in 1869 . In 1959 the two homes were combined and moved from west Baltimore to Towson , Maryland , and in 1962 the new facility was named the " Pickersgill Retirement Community " in honor of the woman who had been instrumental in its creation . 
 Pickersgill died on October 4 , 1857 , and is buried in Loudon Park Cemetery in southwest Baltimore . Her daughter Caroline erected a monument for her , and later the genealogical heritage organization United States Daughters of 1812 and the Star Spangled Banner Flag House Association , which had organized to save and preserve the Flag House in 1927 , placed a bronze plaque at the foot of her grave . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Besides making the flag that inspired Francis Scott Key to compose the words to the United States National Anthem , Pickersgill is also remembered for her humanitarian contributions to society , evident in her decades @-@ long presidency of the Impartial Female Humane Society , which eventually evolved into the Pickersgill Retirement Community of Towson , Maryland . She is also remembered for her house , known as the Star @-@ Spangled Banner Flag House and later renamed the Flag House and Star @-@ Spangled Banner Museum , which stands at the corner of East Pratt Street and Albemarle Street in eastern downtown Baltimore and is a National Historic Landmark . 
 About the time of the American Bicentennial , noted artist Robert McGill Mackall created a painting depicting Mary Pickersgill and her helpers in the malt house of a brewery , sewing the " Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . A copy of the painting is maintained by the Maryland Historical Society . 
 Mary Pickersgill was the namesake of a World War II Liberty ship , the SS " Mary Pickersgill " , launched in 1944 . In addition , a type of flower is known as the Mary Pickersgill Rose . 
 Concerning Pickersgill 's famous flag , In 1998 , I. Michael Heyman , Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution wrote : 
 = = Family = = 
 Pickersgill 's uncle , Colonel Benjamin Flower , fought during the American Revolutionary War , and was presented a sword by General George Washington , commander of the Continental Army . The presentation was made for Flower 's masterful evacuation of Philadelphia during the British occupation of that city , the first American capital , in late 1776 . 
 Of Pickersgill 's five siblings , her oldest brother , William Young , was also a flag maker , and it is likely that his two daughters were Pickersgill 's nieces that assisted in making the Star Spangled Banner flag . Her sister , Hannah Young , married Captain Jesse <unk> , a privateer ship commander during the War of 1812 who was captured by the British , imprisoned in Havana , Cuba , and later escaped . 
 Pickersgill 's one surviving child , Caroline ( 1800 @-@ 1884 ) , married John Purdy ( 1795 @-@ 1837 ) . The couple apparently had no surviving children , because in a letter written late in her life to the daughter of George Armistead , Purdy called herself " widowed and childless . " She had become somewhat destitute late in life , and in the same letter requested some financial assistance , but also provided some history about her mother and the making of the Star @-@ Spangled Banner flag . 
 = Lady Gaga Live at Roseland Ballroom = 
 Lady Gaga Live at Roseland Ballroom was the first residency show by American singer Lady Gaga . Performed at the Roseland Ballroom in Manhattan , New York , the residency show began on March 28 and concluded on April 7 , 2014 , after completing seven shows . It was the final event hosted by the venue after it was announced that it was being closed down and being replaced with a 42 @-@ story skyscraper . Gaga revealed that Roseland was the only venue in New York City that she had never played , although she had visited there previously to watch shows . A poster announcing the event was released , showing an old image of Gaga taken before the time she became successful as a recording artist . 
 As an homage to the venue , the stage was decorated with roses . The multi @-@ leveled set @-@ up consisted of New York City fire escape routes . Other parts of the stage had a ladder reaching the mezzanine floors and a replica of an F train carriage . Gaga 's wardrobe was also rose themed , with leotards , hats and jackets , and instruments adorned with red roses . The main set list for the show encompassed songs from The Fame , The Fame Monster , Born This Way , and Artpop . Some tracks were performed in acoustic versions . 
 The shows received positive reviews from music critics . Reviewers were impressed by Gaga 's vocals , the choreography , and the overall presentation of the show . The shows were sold out with ticket prices being above the average costs of tickets at the venue . Billboard revealed that the seven dates had sold a total of 24 @,@ 532 tickets while grossing a total of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Two performances from the show were transmitted on the Late Show with David Letterman , while MTV and Logo TV collaborated to show the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes logistics for the residency . The final show on April 7 , 2014 was live @-@ streamed by Verizon Communications . 
 = = Background and announcement = = 
 The Roseland Ballroom opened in its first Manhattan location at 51st Street in 1919 , after moving from Philadelphia . It moved to its current location at 52nd Street in 1956 , as a converted skating rink . The venue began as a hall for ballroom dancing and orchestra groups , but later shifted its focus through various eras of popular music , including disco , grunge , and EDM . While the Roseland Ballroom has seen performances from a both up @-@ and @-@ coming bands and established acts , rumors have been circulating since 1996 about the venue 's demise , after Ginsberg filed plans to tear down its low @-@ rise , three @-@ story structure and replace it with a 59 @-@ story high @-@ rise . It was announced on October 19 , 2013 that the Roseland Ballroom would be closing in April 2014 , after over 50 years of operation at its current location . 
 On November 19 , 2013 , it was revealed that Gaga would perform the final shows at the venue with an intimate , four @-@ night residency on March 28 , March 30 , March 31 , and April 2 , 2014 . Tickets went on sale through Ticketmaster on November 25 ; tickets were priced at $ 50 for the floor and $ 200 for the mezzanine . Members of Gaga 's fan club were able to register for first access to tickets starting on November 19 . Users were selected at random to receive invitations and codes to purchase tickets on November 21 . Citi card members also had access to the pre @-@ sale starting November 22 . 
 According to Gaga , playing at the Roseland Ballroom was always a dream of hers . She explained to John Seabrook of The New Yorker that " It 's basically the only room in the city I haven 't played . " As a young girl , she could not afford tickets , but she did manage to win free tickets to a Franz Ferdinand show during her senior year of high school . Gaga recalled that she fell down during the show and got her nose broken , making her parents forbid her from visiting Roseland . After the singer 's career took off with the release of debut album , The Fame ( 2008 ) , she bypassed playing at the venue until its closure . Gaga revealed the official poster for the residency show on March 18 , 2014 . The poster features an image of Gaga that was taken in 2008 at the Lower East Side of New York City . According to Gaga : " We found him and used that same photo for my Roseland poster . " The poster also includes a quote from Gaga taken when the photograph was taken , that reads : " I 'm Lady Gaga . A singer / songwriter . You 're going to know me one day . " 
 = = Development and inspiration = = 
 Thematically , both the stage set up and the wardrobe consisted of lots of roses and was an homage to the venue and the name " Roseland " . Starting from arriving at Roseland in a nude bodysuit and mask , embellished with red roses , the outfits worn on the stage included characteristic attire worn by Gaga in her previous live performances . One of the dresses consisted of purple colored hot pants , fishnets , and a mask , all covered with purple roses , along with a metallic purple jacket to top it off . Photographer Terry Richardson took photos of the backstage activities which revealed that a second purple jacket was also worn by Gaga and it was bejeweled and emblazoned with the word " Gaga " on the rear side . The instruments used by the singer , such as a keyboard , was also decked similarly with red roses . Another dress included shoulder spikes reminiscent of the singer 's attire during her first studio album era , coupled with a hat made of black roses . A green colored wig was also worn by Gaga which she had introduced during the Artpop era . Gaga 's vocal coach Don Lawrence , who began working with her when she was 13 , assisted her before each show , either by being present there or through phone . One hour prior to the start of the show , Gaga practiced her vocal warm @-@ ups . 
 The stage was created to embody the New York City fire escape routes making it multi @-@ leveled and comparable to the self @-@ titled album cover by rock band Grateful Dead . It had a large red curtain to hide it from the audience and was similarly decked with roses . A rose draped ladder was placed at the left side of the stage which helped Gaga climb the mezzanine floors . A catwalk was constructed behind the stage , which was lined with more roses , and enabled her dancers to perform on them . A piano was placed in front of a window representing Gaga 's old apartment in New York City . The Lower East Side of New York was represented by the replica of a F train carriage on the auxiliary platform of Roseland named as the " Artpop Zone " , decked with neon lights and spelling out " 176 Stanton Street " , Gaga 's old address . A confetti cannon was also kept for the performance of " Applause " and the giant disco ball of the venue was used . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
