 The main set list for the show included songs from The Fame , The Fame Monster , Born This Way , and Artpop . The show began with Gaga appearing on top of the platforms and danced towards her piano to perform an acoustic version of " Born This Way " , before proceeding to dance on the rafters with her backup troupe to " Black Jesus + Amen Fashion " in her purple leotard and jacket . A costume change ensued and Gaga performed " Monster " wearing a crimson leather body suit and roses atop her head . She played the rose @-@ adorned keytar and gradually segued into " Bad Romance " . Middle of the performance , she ran to the left of the stage to climb a ladder to the <unk> floors , where she sang the final chorus and " Sexxx Dreams " followed with energetic dance moves . 
 Gaga moved towards the F train stage on the right , and sang the piano ballads " Dope " and " You and I " , interspersed with monologues about the venue , her beginnings as a singer in New York and addictions . The third costume change took place with the performance of " Just Dance " , where she wore yellow hot pants and metallic chest plates , while being accompanied by her full troupe of nine dancers . An intermediate break was introduced with Gaga playing another keytar . " Poker Face " followed , being played by Gaga on the piano . The song was rearranged to include lyrics about the venue and New York . " Artpop " was then played as an interlude . 
 The final song of the set was " Applause " , where Gaga wore another costume , this time the purple bikini and jacket . Towards the end of the performance , confetti rained on the audience and after a brief interlude Gaga appeared in a white jumpsuit for an encore of " G.U.Y. " The singer showed provocative dance moves while straddling her backup performers , and executed choreography similar to the song 's music video . The show ended with Gaga and her troupe taking a bow to the audience and thanking Roseland . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Andrew <unk> of Billboard called the show " electrifying " though he felt that " If SXSW served as a statement about how brands should fund artists ' creative expression , Gaga 's Roseland residency was about giving the people what they wanted ..... [ The ] night ended rather abruptly after almost exactly 60 minutes " . A writer for The Courier called the show " short but sweet " and praised her for never showing " signs of slowing down " throughout the show . James Montgomery of MTV News praised the overall show , calling it " heavy on the hits , sublimely sexual , suitably sentimental — both for her glory days and the iconic venue she 's closing with this seven @-@ night stand — and ridiculous in all the right ways " . He noted that the abrupt ending of the show was compensated by Gaga 's dancing and singing , which <unk> helped counteract the negative press she had been receiving since the release of Artpop . Glenn Gamboa from Newsday called the show " fierce " and " brainy " , saying that the singer " fired up " from the moment she took the stage , displaying an avant @-@ garde artistic sensibility . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called the show part of the " Supernova " phase of her career and explained , 
 Gaga grounds this sort of spectacle with her voice . She is still a fearsome singer when she chooses to be , which is to say rarely on records but often in concert ... What she gave the faithful was easy to digest : largely bulletproof pop , swinging back and forth between brooding , panting torch songs delivered at top volume and grand @-@ scale 1980s @-@ style digital rock with a nightclub twist . 
 Adam Markovitz from Entertainment Weekly declared that if the " Roseland show is any indication , Gaga 's not going anywhere anytime soon " , in spite of the overall negative reception towards her campaigns for Artpop . He welcomed the absence of any art @-@ related things in the show and commended the focus on music , Gaga 's vocals and abilities as an entertainer . Markovitz also complimented Gaga 's rapport with the audience members and rated the performances of " Just Dance " and " Bad Romance " as highlights . Markos Papadatos from Digital Journal website declared Gaga as a " pop muse " for the performances . He complimented the choice of songs in the set list calling them " eclectic " and felt they " displayed different sides to her craft " . He noticed that the singer 's vocal abilities were particularly prominent during the acoustic performances on piano . Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone observed that the compact space of Roseland did not allow for much choreography , but felt Gaga 's performance was " magical " , especially during " You and I " . 
 Hilary Hughes from USA Today also noticed Gaga 's vocal range , especially during the acoustic interpretation of " Dope " and " Just Dance " . Hughes concluded by saying that the simplest moments of the performances were the ones featuring toned down versions of her singles like " Born This Way " and " Poker Face " , rather than the extravagant choreography during " Bad Romance " and " G.U.Y. " Hardeep Phull from New York Post appreciated the stage setup and the homage to old New York industrial setting and gave positive feedback for Gaga 's choice to be an entertainer with the performances of " You and I " , " Just Dance " , and " Applause " . Jordan Runtagh from VH1 applauded Gaga 's camaraderie with her fans , also noting that " the abundance of movie cameras reminded us that this was a special moment , one that will go down in history . And not just because these are the last performances at this storied venue . It 's something more . " Runtagh believed that the performances solidified Gaga as a respectable entertainer and would generate further interest for the upcoming ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour . Amanda <unk> from The Guardian complimented Gaga 's vocals and her outfits , but felt that the show lacked " something outrageous " from the singer . She added that the most surprising incident of the night was when Gaga climbed a ladder to reach the mezzanine floors and sing from there . 
 = = Commercial reception and broadcasts = = 
 Jesse Lawrence from Forbes reported that the first and last shows at the venue were completely sold out , making it the two most expensive shows for Gaga 's economically secondary market . The average ticket price for the secondary market ( $ 375 @.@ 89 ) as well as the final show ( $ 195 @.@ 80 ) were all above the average cost of $ 186 @.@ 40 , with the price dropping as the shows drew nearer . Since Roseland was an admission only venue , costlier tickets were kept for the " Artpop Zone " since it had better views and seating arrangement , as well as a post @-@ show meet and greet with Gaga . In April 2014 , Jesse Lawrence from Forbes reported that following Gaga 's performance at Roseland Ballroom , the tour ticket prices for her ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour in the secondary markets went up by 5 @.@ 3 % , with major increase being visible at Philips Arena of Atlanta . Tickets at Madison Square Garden rose up to $ 338 @.@ 81 , which was 42 @.@ 6 % higher than the average price . Other locations were ticket prices saw an increase were MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas , TD Garden Arena in Boston and United Center in Chicago . In June 2014 , Billboard revealed that the seven dates had sold a total of 24 @,@ 532 tickets while grossing a total of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . It ranked at number 41 on the list . 
 On April 2 , 2014 , Gaga appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman along with guest Bill Murray . After the interview , the singer invited the whole audience to come and watch the show with her ; the performances of " G.U.Y. " and " Dope " was broadcast in the show . MTV and Logo TV collaborated to air various aspects of the preparation for the Roseland shows on April 4 . The behind @-@ the @-@ scenes program would air throughout the day on both channels , including the regular programming on partner channels like MTV Hits . Sway Calloway , an interviewer working with MTV News , had access to the background logistics of the show including rehearsals . They also visited Gaga 's old apartment , and looked at some of the art collection sent to the singer by her fans . The programs were streamed on MTV 's website as well as Gaga 's artist page , and the various social media channels owned by Logo . The final performance at Roseland on April 7 , 2014 , was live streamed for those not able to see the show . Verizon Communications had announced that the event would be streamed from 9 pm EST at the website <unk> Gaga herself announced the news in a video posted on her Twitter account . 
 = = Set list = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show 's opening night on March 28 , 2014 . 
 " Born This Way " ( Piano Version ) 
 " Black Jesus + Amen Fashion " 
 " Monster " 
 " Bad Romance " 
 " Sexxx Dreams " 
 " Dope " 
 " You and I " 
 " Just Dance " 
 " Poker Face " ( Piano Version ) 
 " Artpop " ( Interlude ) 
 " Applause " 
 " G.U.Y. " 
 = = Shows = = 
 = Campbell 's Soup Cans = 
 Campbell 's Soup Cans , which is sometimes referred to as 32 Campbell 's Soup Cans , is a work of art produced in 1962 by Andy Warhol . It consists of thirty @-@ two canvases , each measuring 20 inches ( 51 cm ) in height × 16 inches ( 41 cm ) in width and each consisting of a painting of a Campbell 's Soup can — one of each of the canned soup varieties the company offered at the time . The individual paintings were produced by a printmaking method — the semi @-@ mechanized screen printing process , using a non @-@ painterly style . Campbell 's Soup Cans ' reliance on themes from popular culture helped to usher in pop art as a major art movement in the United States . 
 Warhol , a commercial illustrator who became a successful author , publisher , painter , and film director , showed the work on July 9 , 1962 , in his first one @-@ man gallery exhibition as a fine artist in the Ferus Gallery of Los Angeles , California . The exhibition marked the West Coast debut of pop art . The combination of the semi @-@ mechanized process , the non @-@ painterly style , and the commercial subject initially caused offense , as the work 's blatantly mundane commercialism represented a direct affront to the technique and philosophy of abstract expressionism . In the United States the abstract expressionism art movement was dominant during the post @-@ war period , and it held not only to " fine art " values and aesthetics but also to a mystical inclination . This controversy led to a great deal of debate about the merits and ethics of such work . Warhol 's motives as an artist were questioned , and they continue to be topical to this day . The large public commotion helped transform Warhol from being an accomplished 1950s commercial illustrator to a notable fine artist , and it helped distinguish him from other rising pop artists . Although commercial demand for his paintings was not immediate , Warhol 's association with the subject led to his name becoming synonymous with the Campbell 's Soup Can paintings . 
 Warhol subsequently produced a wide variety of art works depicting Campbell 's Soup cans during three distinct phases of his career , and he produced other works using a variety of images from the world of commerce and mass media . Today , the Campbell 's Soup cans theme is generally used in reference to the original set of paintings as well as the later Warhol drawings and paintings depicting Campbell 's Soup cans . Because of the eventual popularity of the entire series of similarly themed works , Warhol 's reputation grew to the point where he was not only the most @-@ renowned American pop art artist , but also the highest @-@ priced living American artist . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = New York art scene = = = 
 Warhol arrived in New York City in 1949 , directly from the School of Fine Arts at Carnegie Institute of Technology . He quickly achieved success as a commercial illustrator , and his first published drawing appeared in the Summer 1949 issue of Glamour Magazine . In 1952 , he had his first art gallery show at the Bodley Gallery with a display of Truman Capote @-@ inspired works . By 1955 , he was tracing photographs borrowed from the New York Public Library 's photo collection with the hired assistance of Nathan Gluck , and reproducing them with a process he had developed earlier as a collegian at Carnegie Tech . His process , which foreshadowed his later work , involved pressing wet ink illustrations against adjoining paper . During the 1950s , he had regular showings of his drawings , and exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art ( Recent Drawings , 1956 ) . 
 = = = Pop art = = = 
 In 1960 , Warhol began producing his first canvases , which he based on comic strip subjects . In late 1961 , he learned the process of <unk> from Floriano Vecchi , who had run the Tiber Press since 1953 . Though the process generally begins with a stencil drawing , it often evolves from a blown up photograph which is then transferred with glue onto silk . In either case , one needs to produce a glue @-@ based version of a positive two @-@ dimensional image ( positive means that open spaces are left where the paint will appear ) . Usually , the ink is rolled across the medium so that it passes through the silk and not the glue . Campbell 's Soup cans were among Warhol 's first silkscreen productions ; the first were U.S. dollar bills . The pieces were made from stencils ; one for each color . Warhol did not begin to convert photographs to silkscreens until after the original series of Campbell 's Soup cans had been produced . 
 Although Warhol had produced silkscreens of comic strips and of other pop art subjects , he supposedly relegated himself to soup cans as a subject at the time to avoid competing with the more finished style of comics by Roy Lichtenstein . He once said " I 've got to do something that really will have a lot of impact that will be different enough from Lichtenstein and James Rosenquist , that will be very personal , that won 't look like I 'm doing exactly what they 're doing . " In February 1962 , Lichtenstein displayed at a sold @-@ out exhibition of cartoon pictures at Leo Castelli 's eponymous Leo Castelli Gallery , ending the possibility of Warhol exhibiting his own cartoon paintings . Castelli had visited Warhol 's gallery in 1961 and said that the work he saw there was too similar to Lichtenstein 's , although Warhol 's and Lichtenstein 's comic artwork differed in subject and techniques ( e.g. , Warhol 's comic @-@ strip figures were humorous pop culture caricatures such as Popeye , while Lichtenstein 's were generally of stereotypical hero and heroines , inspired by comic strips devoted to adventure and romance ) . Castelli chose not to represent both artists at that time , but he would , in 1964 , exhibit Warhol works such as reproductions of Campbell 's Tomato Juice Box , 1964 ( pictured above , left ) , and Brillo Soap Boxes . He would again exhibit Warhol 's work in 1966 . Lichtenstein 's 1962 show was quickly followed by Wayne Thiebaud 's April 17 , 1962 one @-@ man show at the Allan Stone Gallery featuring all @-@ American foods , which agitated Warhol as he felt it jeopardized his own food @-@ related soup can works . Warhol was considering returning to the Bodley gallery , but the Bodley 's director did not like his pop art works . In 1961 , Warhol was offered a three @-@ man show by Allan Stone at the latter 's 18 East 82nd Street Gallery with Rosenquist and Robert Indiana , but all three were insulted by this proposition . 
 Irving Blum was the first dealer to show Warhol 's soup can paintings . Blum happened to be visiting Warhol in May 1962 , at a time when Warhol was being featured in a May 11 , 1962 Time magazine article " The Slice @-@ of @-@ Cake School " ( that included a portion of Warhol 's <unk> 200 One Dollar Bills ) , along with Lichtenstein , Rosenquist , and Wayne Thiebaud . Warhol was the only artist whose photograph actually appeared in the article , which is indicative of his knack for manipulating the mass media . Blum saw dozens of Campbell 's Soup can variations , including a grid of One @-@ Hundred Soup Cans that day . Blum was shocked that Warhol had no gallery arrangement and offered him a July show at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles . This would be Warhol 's first one @-@ man show of his pop art . Warhol was assured by Blum that the newly founded Artforum magazine , which had an office above the gallery , would cover the show . Not only was the show Warhol 's first solo gallery exhibit , but it was considered to be the West Coast premiere of pop art . Andy Warhol 's first New York solo Pop exhibit was hosted at Eleanor Ward 's Stable Gallery November 6 – 24 , 1962 . The exhibit included the works Marilyn Diptych , Green Coca @-@ Cola Bottles , and Campbell 's Soup Cans . 
 = = The premiere = = 
 Warhol sent Blum thirty @-@ two 20 @-@ by @-@ 16 @-@ inch ( 510 mm × 410 mm ) canvases of Campbell 's Soup can portraits , each representing a particular variety of the Campbell 's Soup flavors available at the time . The thirty @-@ two canvases are very similar : each is a realistic depiction of the iconic , mostly red and white Campbell 's Soup can <unk> onto a white background . The canvases have minor variation in the lettering of the variety names . Most of the letterings are painted in red letters . Four varieties have black lettering : Clam Chowder has parenthetical black lettering below the variety name that said ( Manhattan Style ) , which means that the soup is <unk> and broth @-@ based instead of the cream @-@ based New England style ; Beef has parenthetical black lettering below the variety name that says ( With Vegetables and Barley ) ; Scotch Broth has parenthetical black lettering below the variety name that said ( A Hearty Soup ) ; and <unk> had black parenthetical lettering saying ( Italian @-@ Style Vegetable Soup ) . There are two varieties with red lettered parenthetical labels : Beef Broth ( Bouillon ) and <unk> ( Beef ) . The font sizes only vary slightly in the variety names . However , there are a few notable stylistic font differences . Old @-@ fashioned Tomato Rice is the only variety with lower case script . This lower case script appears to be from a slightly different font than the other variety name letters . There are other stylistic differences . Old @-@ fashioned Tomato Rice has the word Soup depicted lower on the can , in place of a portion of ornamental starlike symbols at the bottom that the other 31 varieties have . Also , Cheddar Cheese has two banner @-@ like addenda . In the middle @-@ left , a small golden banner says New ! , and a middle center golden banner says Great As A Sauce Too ! . 
 The exhibition opened on July 9 , 1962 , with Warhol absent . The thirty @-@ two single soup can canvases were placed in a single line , much like products on shelves , each displayed on narrow individual ledges . The contemporary impact was uneventful , but the historical impact is considered today to have been a watershed . The gallery audience was unsure what to make of the exhibit . A John <unk> <unk> article , which was in part spurred on by the responding display of dozens of soup cans by a nearby gallery with a display advertising them at three for 60 cents , encouraged people to take a stand on Warhol . Few actually saw the paintings at the Los Angeles exhibit or at Warhol 's studio , but word spread in the form of controversy and scandal due to the work 's seeming attempt to replicate the appearance of manufactured objects . Extended debate on the merits and ethics of focusing one 's efforts on such a mundane commercial inanimate model kept Warhol 's work in art world conversations . The pundits could not believe an artist would reduce the art form to the equivalent of a trip to the local grocery store . Talk did not translate into monetary success for Warhol . Dennis Hopper was the first of only a half dozen to pay $ 100 for a canvas . Blum decided to try to keep the thirty @-@ two canvases as an intact set and bought back the few sales . This pleased Warhol who had conceived of them as a set , and he agreed to sell the set for ten monthly $ 100 installments to Blum . Warhol had passed the milestone of his first serious art show . While this exhibition was on view in Los Angeles , Martha Jackson canceled another planned December 1962 New York exhibition . 
 The Ferus show closed on August 4 , 1962 , the day before Marilyn Monroe 's death . Warhol went on to purchase a Monroe publicity still from the film Niagara , which he later cropped and used to create one of his most well @-@ known works : his painting of Marilyn . Although Warhol continued painting other pop art , including Martinson 's coffee cans , Coca @-@ Cola bottles , S & H Green Stamps , and Campbell 's Soup cans , he soon became known to many as the artist who painted celebrities . He returned to Blum 's gallery to exhibit Elvis and Liz in October 1963 . His fans Dennis Hopper and Brooke Hayward ( Hopper 's wife at the time ) held a welcoming party for the event . 
 Since Warhol gave no indication of a definitive ordering of the collection , the sequence chosen by MoMA ( in the picture at the upper right of this article ) in the display from their permanent collection reflects the chronological order in which the varieties were introduced by the Campbell Soup Company , beginning with Tomato in the upper left , which debuted in 1897 . By April 2011 , the curators at the MoMA had reordered the varieties , moving Clam Chowder to the upper left and tomato to the bottom of the four rows . 
 = = Motivation = = 
 Several anecdotal stories supposedly explain why Warhol chose Campbell 's Soup cans as the focal point of his pop art . One reason is that he needed a new subject after he abandoned comic strips , a move taken in part due to his respect for the refined work of Roy Lichtenstein . According to Ted Carey — one of Warhol 's commercial art assistants in the late 1950s — it was Muriel Latow who suggested the idea for both the soup cans and Warhol 's early U.S. dollar paintings . 
 Muriel Latow was then an aspiring interior decorator , and owner of the Latow Art Gallery in the East 60s in Manhattan . She told Warhol that he should paint " Something you see every day and something that everybody would recognize . Something like a can of Campbell 's Soup . " Ted Carey , who was there at the time , said that Warhol responded by exclaiming : " Oh that sounds fabulous . " According to Carey , Warhol went to a supermarket the following day and bought a case of " all the soups " , which Carey said he saw when he stopped by Warhol 's apartment the next day . When the art critic G. R. Swenson asked Warhol in 1963 why he painted soup cans , the artist replied , " I used to drink it , I used to have the same lunch every day , for twenty years . " 
 Another account of Latow 's influence on Warhol holds that she asked him what he loved most , and because he replied " money " she suggested that he paint U.S. dollar bills . According to this story , Latow later advised that in addition to painting money he should paint something else very simple , such as Campbell 's Soup cans . 
 In an interview for London 's The Face in 1985 , David <unk> asked Warhol about flowers that Warhol 's mother made from tin cans . In his response , Warhol mentioned them as one of the reasons behind his first tin can paintings : 
 David <unk> : I heard that your mother used to make these little tin flowers and sell them to help support you in the early days . 
 Andy Warhol : Oh God , yes , it 's true , the tin flowers were made out of those fruit cans , that 's the reason why I did my first tin @-@ can paintings ... You take a tin @-@ can , the bigger the tin @-@ can the better , like the family size ones that peach halves come in , and I think you cut them with scissors . It 's very easy and you just make flowers out of them . My mother always had lots of cans around , including the soup cans . 
 Several stories mention that Warhol 's choice of soup cans reflected his own avid devotion to Campbell 's soup as a consumer . Robert Indiana once said : " I knew Andy very well . The reason he painted soup cans is that he liked soup . " He was thought to have focused on them because they composed a daily dietary staple . Others observed that Warhol merely painted things he held close at heart . He enjoyed eating Campbell 's soup , had a taste for Coca @-@ Cola , loved money , and admired movie stars . Thus , they all became subjects of his work . Yet another account says that his daily lunches in his studio consisted of Campbell 's Soup and Coca @-@ Cola , and thus , his inspiration came from seeing the empty cans and bottles accumulate on his desk . 
 Warhol did not choose the cans because of business relationships with the Campbell Soup Company . Even though the company at the time sold four out of every five cans of prepared soup in the United States , Warhol preferred that the company not be involved " because the whole point would be lost with any kind of commercial tie @-@ in . " However , by 1965 , the company knew him well enough that he was able to coax actual can labels from them to use as invitations for an exhibit . They even commissioned a canvas . 
 = = Message = = 
 Warhol had a positive view of ordinary culture and felt the abstract expressionists had taken great pains to ignore the splendor of modernity . The Campbell 's Soup Can series , along with his other series , provided him with a chance to express his positive view of modern culture . However , his deadpan manner endeavored to be devoid of emotional and social commentary . The work was intended to be without personality or individual expression . Warhol 's view is encapsulated in the Time magazine description of the ' Slice of Cake School , ' that " ... a group of painters have come to the common conclusion that the most banal and even vulgar trappings of modern civilization can , when transposed to canvas , become Art . " 
 His pop art work differed from serial works by artists such as Monet , who used series to represent discriminating perception and show that a painter could recreate shifts in time , light , season , and weather with hand and eye . Warhol is now understood to represent the modern era of commercialization and indiscriminate " sameness . " When Warhol eventually showed variation it was not " realistic . " His later variations in color were almost a mockery of discriminating perception . His adoption of the pseudo @-@ industrial silkscreen process spoke against the use of a series to demonstrate subtlety . Warhol sought to reject invention and nuance by creating the appearance that his work had been printed , and he systematically recreated imperfections . His series work helped him escape Lichtenstein 's lengthening shadow . Although his soup cans were not as shocking and vulgar as some of his other early pop art , they still offended the art world 's sensibilities that had developed so as to partake in the intimate emotions of artistic expression . 
 Contrasting against Caravaggio 's sensual baskets of fruit , Chardin 's plush peaches , or Cézanne 's vibrant arrangements of apples , the mundane Campbell 's Soup Cans gave the art world a chill . Furthermore , the idea of isolating eminently recognizable pop culture items was ridiculous enough to the art world that both the merits and ethics of the work were perfectly reasonable debate topics for those who had not even seen the piece . Warhol 's pop art can be seen as a relation to Minimal art in the sense that it attempts to portray objects in their most simple , immediately recognizable form . Pop art eliminates overtones and undertones that would otherwise be associated with representations . 
 Warhol clearly changed the concept of art appreciation . Instead of harmonious three @-@ dimensional arrangements of objects , he chose mechanical derivatives of commercial illustration with an emphasis on the packaging . His variations of multiple soup cans , for example , made the process of repetition an appreciated technique : " If you take a Campbell 's Soup can and repeat it fifty times , you are not interested in the retinal image . According to Marcel Duchamp , what interests you is the concept that wants to put fifty Campbell 's Soup cans on a canvas . " The regimented multiple can depictions almost become an abstraction whose details are less important than the panorama . In a sense , the representation was more important than that which was represented . Warhol 's interest in machinelike creation during his early pop art days was misunderstood by those in the art world , whose value system was threatened by mechanization . 
 In Europe , audiences had a very different take on his work . Many perceived it as a subversive and Marxist satire on American capitalism . If not subversive , it was at least considered a Marxist critique of pop culture . Given Warhol 's apolitical outlook in general this is not likely the true message . It is likely that his pop art was nothing more than an attempt to attract attention to his work . 
 In an effort to complement the message of his art , Warhol developed a pop persona after the mass media took note of his pop art . He began to manifest a teenage @-@ like image , immersing himself in pop culture such as Rock & Roll shows and fan magazines . Whereas previous artists used repetition to demonstrate their skill at depicting variation , Warhol coupled " repetition " with " monotony " as he professed his love of artwork themes . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Warhol followed the success of his original series with several related works incorporating the same theme of Campbell 's Soup cans subjects . These subsequent works along with the original are collectively referred to as the Campbell 's Soup cans series and often simply as the Campbell 's Soup cans . The subsequent Campbell 's Soup can works were very diverse . The heights ranged from 20 inches ( 510 mm ) to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . Generally , the cans were portrayed as if they were freshly produced cans without flaws . Occasionally , he chose to depict cans with torn labels , peeling labels , crushed bodies , or opened lids like those in the images in this section . Sometimes he added related items like a bowl of soup or a can opener , such as the one in the image on the right . Sometimes he produced images of related items without any soup cans such as Campbell 's Tomato Juice Box ( above right ) , which are not strictly a part of the series although a part of the theme . Many of these works were produced at his famous studio " The Factory . " 
 Irving Blum made the original thirty @-@ two canvases available to the public through an arrangement with the National Gallery of Art in Washington , DC by placing them on permanent loan two days before Warhol 's death . However , the original Campbell 's Soup Cans is now a part of the Museum of Modern Art permanent collection . A print called Campbell 's Soup Cans II is part of the permanent collection of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago . 200 Campbell 's Soup Cans , 1962 ( <unk> on canvas , 72 inches x 100 inches ) , in the private collection of John and Kimiko Powers is the largest single canvas of the Campbell 's Soup can paintings . It is composed of ten rows and twenty columns of numerous flavors of soups . Experts point to it as one of the most significant works of pop art both as a pop representation and as conjunction with immediate predecessors such as Jasper Johns and the successors movements of Minimal and Conceptual art . The very similar 100 Cans from the Albright @-@ Knox Art Gallery collection is shown above on the left . The earliest soup can painting seems to be Campbell 's Soup Can ( Tomato Rice ) , a 1960 ink , tempera , crayon , and oil canvas . 
 In many of the works , including the original series , Warhol drastically simplified the gold medallion that appears on Campbell 's Soup cans by replacing the paired allegorical figures with a flat yellow disk . In most variations , the only hint of three @-@ dimensionality came from the shading on the tin lid . Otherwise the image was flat . The works with torn labels are perceived as metaphors of life in the sense that even packaged food must meet its end . They are often described as expressionistic . 
 By 1970 , Warhol established the record auction price for a painting by a living American artist with a $ 60 @,@ 000 sale of Big Campbell 's Soup Can with Torn Label ( Vegetable Beef ) ( 1962 ) in a sale at Parke @-@ Bernet , the preeminent American auction house of the day ( later acquired by Sotheby 's ) . This record was broken a few months later by his rival for the <unk> 's attention and approval , Lichtenstein , who sold a depiction of a giant brush stroke , Big Painting No. 6 ( 1965 ) for $ 75 @,@ 000 . 
 In May 2006 , Warhol 's Small Torn Campbell Soup Can ( Pepper Pot ) ( 1962 ) sold for $ 11 @,@ 776 @,@ 000 and set the current auction world record for a painting from the Campbell Soup can series . The painting was purchased for the collection of Eli Broad , a man who once set the record for the largest credit card transaction when he purchased Lichtenstein 's " I ... I 'm Sorry " for $ 2 @.@ 5 million with an American Express card . The $ 11 @.@ 8 million Warhol sale was part of the Christie 's Sales of Impressionist , Modern , Post @-@ War and Contemporary Art for the Spring Season of 2006 that totaled $ 438 @,@ 768 @,@ 924 . 
 The broad variety of work produced using a semi @-@ mechanized process with many collaborators , Warhol 's popularity , the value of his works , and the diversity of works across various media and genre have created a need for the Andy Warhol Art Authentication Board to certify the authenticity of works by Warhol . 
 On April 7 , 2016 , seven Campbell 's Soup Cans prints were stolen from the Springfield Art Museum . The FBI announced a $ 25 @,@ 000 reward for information about the stolen art pieces . 
 = = Conclusion = = 
 Warhol 's production of Campbell 's Soup can works underwent three distinct phases . The first took place in 1962 , during which he created realistic images , and produced numerous pencil drawings of the subject . In 1965 , Warhol revisited the theme while arbitrarily replacing the original red and white colors with a wider variety of hues . In the late 1970s , he again returned to the soup cans while inverting and reversing the images . Some in the art world consider Warhol 's work completed after his 1968 shooting — which occurred the day before the Bobby Kennedy assassination — to be less significant than that done before it . 
 Today , the most well @-@ remembered Warhol Campbell 's Soup can works are from the first phase . Warhol is further regarded for his iconic serial celebrity silkscreens of such people as Elvis Presley , Marilyn Monroe and Liz Taylor , produced during his 1962 – 1964 <unk> phase . His most commonly repeated painting subjects are Taylor , Monroe , Presley , Jackie Kennedy and similar celebrities . In addition to being a notable fine artist , Warhol was a renowned cinematographer , author , and commercial illustrator . Posthumously , he became the subject of the largest single @-@ artist art museum in the United States in 1994 . Many Warhol art exhibits include footage of his cinematic directorial efforts ( e.g. , The Museum of Contemporary Art 's ANDY <unk> / <unk> : Stars , Deaths , Disasters , 1962 – 1964 that ran from March 18 , 2006 – June 18 , 2006 ) . Some say his contributions as an artist pale in comparison to his contributions as a film @-@ maker . Others make it clear that he was not the most conventionally skilled artist of his day . Nonetheless , his techniques were emulated by other highly respected artists and his works continue to command high prices . 
 = Jeannette Piccard = 
 Jeannette Ridlon Piccard ( January 5 , 1895 – May 17 , 1981 ) was an American high @-@ altitude balloonist , and in later life an Episcopal priest . She held the women 's altitude record for nearly three decades , and according to several contemporaneous accounts was regarded as the first woman in space . 
 Piccard was the first licensed female balloon pilot in the U.S. , and the first woman to fly to the stratosphere . Accompanied by her husband , Jean — a member of the Piccard family of balloonists and the twin brother of Auguste Piccard — she reached a height of 10 @.@ 9 miles ( 17 @.@ 5 km ) during a record @-@ breaking flight over Lake Erie on October 23 , 1934 , retaining control of the balloon for the entire flight . After her husband 's death in 1963 , she worked as a consultant to the director of NASA 's Johnson Space Center for several years , talking to the public about NASA 's work , and was posthumously inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1998 . 
 From the late 1960s onwards , Piccard returned to her childhood interest in religion . She was ordained a deacon of the Episcopal Church in 1971 , and on July 29 , 1974 , became one of the Philadelphia Eleven , the first women to be ordained priests — though the ordinations were regarded as irregular , performed by bishops who had retired or resigned . Piccard was the first of the women to be ordained that day , because at 79 she was the oldest , and because she was fulfilling an ambition she had had since she was 11 years old . When asked by Bishop John Allin , the head of the church , not to proceed with the ceremony , she is said to have told him , " Sonny , I 'm old enough to have changed your nappies . " In September 1976 , the church voted to allow women into the priesthood , and Piccard served as a priest in Saint Paul , Minnesota , until she died at the age of 86 . One of her granddaughters , the Rev. Kathryn Piccard , also an Episcopal priest , said of her : " She wanted to expand the idea of what a respectable lady could do . She had the image of the street @-@ wise old lady . " 
 = = Family and education = = 
 Born in Chicago , Illinois , Piccard was one of nine children born to Emily Ridlon and John Ridlon , who was president of the American Orthopaedic Association . She had a lifelong interest in science and religion . When she was 11 , her mother asked her what she wanted to be when she grew up . Piccard 's reply — " a priest " — sent her mother running out of the room in tears . 
 Piccard studied philosophy and psychology at Bryn Mawr College , where in 1916 she wrote an essay titled " Should Women Be Admitted to the Priesthood of the Anglican Church ? " She received her bachelor 's degree in 1918 , and went on to study organic chemistry at the University of Chicago , receiving her master 's degree in 1919 . That same year she met and married Jean Felix Piccard , who was teaching at the university . 
 Piccard was the mother of a house full of boys . Robert R. Gilruth , one of her students and collaborators , said later in his oral history that he remembered a breakfast he had with the Piccards in a St. Cloud , Minnesota hotel before a balloon launching , " I don 't know how many there were . It seems like there was a dozen .... I remember the youngest one took the corn flake box and dumped it on his father 's head . Of course , Piccard just brushed it off his head and said , ' No , no . ' " " He was very gentle . He loved his boys , and he thought boys would be boys , I guess . " The Piccards had three sons of their own , John , Paul , and Donald ( who would become a famous balloonist and ballooning innovator in his own right ) , as well as foster children . The Piccard family archive in the Library of Congress mentions correspondence from foster children whom the Piccards took in , although nothing else seems to be known about them . 
 The Piccards taught at the University of Lausanne from 1919 – 26 . In 1926 they returned to the United States , where Jean Piccard taught organic chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . The couple lived in Massachusetts , New Jersey , Delaware , and Pennsylvania before settling in Minneapolis in 1936 when Jean Piccard joined the faculty of the University of Minnesota . She received a doctorate in education from the University of Minnesota in 1942 , and a certificate of study from the General Theological Seminary in 1973 . 
 Gilruth made a point of describing Piccard in his oral history . He said , " She was very bright , had her own doctor 's degree , and was at least half of the brains of that family , technical as well as otherwise . … She was always in the room when he was lecturing or otherwise , almost always . She was something . She was good . " David DeVorkin , curator of the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum , wrote a history of manned scientific ballooning . In DeVorkin 's view , the Piccards " entrepreneurship and subsequent success " in ballooning was due to " their enormous persistence … and considerable confidence , pluck , and luck " . 
 = = Stratosphere flight = = 
 = = = Auguste and Jean Piccard = = = 
 When he visited the United States for a lecture tour , Auguste Piccard was already a Belgian national celebrity for his 1931 and 1932 stratosphere flights that set off what a United Press correspondent called a " race for supremacy in the stratosphere " , and he became a celebrity in America . He entertained the idea of flying in the U.S. until at least mid @-@ February 1933 , but he received generous funding for a flight in Belgium , and instead turned the project and his power of attorney over to his twin brother Jean . DeVorkin wrote that Jean Piccard lived his whole life in the shadow of his brother , whose success in ballooning he wanted to emulate . Jean had lost his job developing explosives at the Hercules Powder Company , and had no prospects for employment — let alone during the Great Depression — so he was happy to take on the project . 
 = = = Balloon and Thomas Settle flights = = = 
 The Century of Progress hydrogen gas balloon was the largest in the world , conceived for the 1933 Century of Progress International Exposition , a world 's fair held in Chicago to celebrate the city 's centennial . The fair 's organizers planned a balloon flight to the stratosphere and hoped to lure Auguste as pilot — the Piccard name certainly had high publicity value . Dow Chemical constructed the magnesium @-@ alloy gondola . Goodyear @-@ Zeppelin built the balloon of rubberized cloth . Union Carbide provided the hydrogen for lifting and liquid oxygen for pressurizing the gondola 's interior . The National Broadcasting Company and the Chicago Daily News were sponsors , and newspapers publicized the event . At 105 feet ( 32 m ) wide and 600 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 17 @,@ 000 m3 ) , the balloon 's envelope took 700 hydrogen cylinders to fill . 
 Jean Piccard , however , became an annoyance . When he tried independently to find funding from DuPont , he told them the conditions for the balloon 's takeoff in Chicago could be dangerous , and was turned down . When he tried to go over the flight organizers heads by contacting the president of the fair ( who was a friend of Jeannette Piccard 's father ) over what he considered a slight , the president refused to see him . He battled with an associate of the fair 's director of concessions who wanted Jean out of the picture and then wanted Auguste to return to the U.S. to fly . Eventually , Jean was demoted from inflight science observer to not flying at all . 
 During the negotiations , the organizers agreed to give Jean and Jeannette the balloon and gondola after its initial flight , in exchange for Jean remaining on the ground . Goodyear and Arthur Compton , who served as the flight 's director of science , decided to use a U.S. Navy pilot , although Jean , who had served as a balloonist during World War I in the Swiss Army but did not have a U.S. license , thought he would be co @-@ pilot until two months before flight day . The Piccard name ( which bore considerable publicity value ) was kept prominently when the flight was named " The Piccard @-@ Compton Stratosphere Ascension from Soldier Field " . 
 Gradually , the idea of a Navy pilot won , and Jean signed a memorandum of understanding with the organizers that said he would remain on the ground , " permitting Commander Settle to go alone . The reduction in weight thereby produced will most assuredly enable Commander Settle to reach a higher altitude " . On the night of August 4 , 1933 , in front of forty thousand spectators in Soldier Field , as the balloon was being inflated , the fair 's general manager said : 
 The sportsmanship and unselfishness displayed by Dr. Jean Piccard in surrendering his place in the balloon so that a greater altitude may be achieved through the lessened weight of himself and his equipment — is a note of sacrifice that will not be forgotten . 
 Lt. Cmdr. Thomas ( Tex ) G. W. Settle of the U.S. Navy made the first flight solo in the balloon at 3 : 00 a.m. on August 5 , but his ascent was aborted shortly after takeoff because a gas release valve malfunctioned . The balloon then belonged to the Piccards but the armed forces again decided to use it ( Jean , who at the time disliked the military , wrote to Auguste in December 1933 , " The Navy and the Army are very stupid … " ) . Jean wrote to the gondola manufacturer in September 1933 : 
 Mrs. Piccard and I cannot see that our lives are so very valuable .... Without a job , without a laboratory on the ground we are not in a position to render any service to humanity 
 On November 20 , 1933 , with only a few hundred onlookers this time , Settle and Maj. Chester L. Fordney of the U.S. Marine Corps flew the Century of Progress balloon from Akron , Ohio , reaching 61 @,@ 237 feet ( 18 @,@ 665 m ) , a new Fédération Aéronautique Internationale ( FAI ) altitude record . It was the first successful flight from U.S. soil to the stratosphere , and Settle and Fordney became the first Americans to reach the stratosphere . They landed in a marsh near Bridgeton , New Jersey , only a few miles from the Piccards ' home . 
 = = = Planning and pilot 's license = = = 
 After Settle 's record flight , the balloon was again returned to the Piccards , who decided to fly it to the stratosphere on their own . Jean would concentrate on the science , while Jeannette would pilot the balloon . DeVorkin wrote that , " Energetic and forceful , she seemed to have a better chance of obtaining a pilot 's license than Jean , who was preoccupied with restoring the gondola and balloon and convincing scientists to provide instruments to fly " . She studied at Ford Airport in Dearborn , Michigan under Edward J. Hill , a balloonist and Gordon Bennett Cup winner , who agreed to serve as flight director for the Piccards ' planned stratospheric flight . Henry Ford offered the use of his hangar and brought Orville Wright ( with his brother Wilbur , inventor of the airplane and first human to fly a heavier @-@ than @-@ air powered aircraft ) to observe a flight of Jeannette 's in 1933 . Her son Don was a crew member that day and shook hands with Wright , " I was a little kid and he [ paid ] attention to me . " On June 16 , 1934 , Jeannette flew her first solo flight . Later that year , the National Aeronautic Association made her the first woman licensed balloon pilot in the U.S. Auguste wrote to Jean in June 1934 , " Hopefully you will make your flight ahead of other competitors . It would be nice , if the name of Piccard through Jeannette , would once more be placed on the record list of the <unk> " 
 When she was interviewed near the end of her life , and asked why she hadn 't hired a pilot and why she had decided to become a pilot herself , Jeannette replied , " How much loyalty can you count on from someone you hire ? " When she was asked if she had parachute training , Jeannette said , " No … if , on the first time you jump , you don 't succeed , there 's no use trying again . " 
 = = = Search for funding = = = 
 High altitude ballooning was a dangerous undertaking , partly because human lungs cannot function unaided over 40 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 m ) , and partly because the lifting gas used , hydrogen , is flammable . Jeannette said later that , " The National Geographic Society would have nothing to do with sending a woman — a mother — in a balloon into danger " . Longtime Piccard family backer Goodyear were reluctant to support their flight . Dow Chemical asked that their trade names and logo be removed from publicity and from the Century of Progress balloon . 
 Gilruth said , " I remember that Piccard was very , very hurt by the National Geographic that would not give them a dime .... Both he and Jeanette said that they were discriminated against by the National Geographic . That 's not a good word . They were not aided in any way by the National Geographic , and they felt it was not really warranted . They felt they should have gotten some help from them .... [ He ] didn 't say why , but they certainly didn 't feel they 'd been handled fairly . " The Piccards struggled to gain financial support until the Grigsby @-@ <unk> Radio Company advanced them several thousand dollars . The Detroit Aero Club and People 's Outfitting Company also backed them . To supplement their sponsorship , Jeannette designed and sold commemorative stamps and souvenir programs and folders . She also raised a good deal of money by selling their story in press releases to the North American Newspaper Alliance . 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 Forty @-@ five thousand spectators came to see the Piccards off on October 23 , 1934 , at 6 : 51 am , about two hours behind schedule . Jeannette piloted the reconditioned Century of Progress , and the couple took along their pet turtle , Fleur de Lys . After a brief pre @-@ launch ceremony , during which the Piccards received a bouquet from their sons and a small band played The Star @-@ Spangled Banner , they lifted off from Ford Airport , assisted by airmen on the ground who pushed the gondola . Jean changed the flight path and shortened the flight time because of cloudy skies , which reduced the amount of scientific work they were able to do . Jeannette made " unplanned and impulsive <unk> " and the Piccards failed to make complete records of their actions during the flight . The newspaper alliance had offered to pay them US $ 1 @,@ 000 if they broke the altitude record , so they jettisoned all of their sandbags , attempting to go higher . They reached 57 @,@ 579 feet ( 17 @,@ 550 m ) or about 10 @.@ 9 miles ( 17 @.@ 5 km ) up , travelled for eight hours on a journey over Lake Erie , and landed about 300 miles ( 480 km ) away from Dearborn , near Cadiz , Ohio . She had to choose a landing on elm trees , realizing that meant the Century of Progress would never fly again . The balloon separated from the gondola and was ripped . Jean sustained small fractures to his ribs , left foot , and ankle . According to Jeannette 's description in Time magazine : " What a mess ! I wanted to land on the White House lawn . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Her flight set the women 's altitude record , and held it for 29 years , until Valentina Tereshkova in 1963 became the first woman in space , orbiting the Earth 48 times solo in the Soviet Union 's Vostok 6 . According to the editors of Flying magazine , in their book Sport Flying , published by Ziff @-@ Davis in 1976 , Jeannette was " the first woman in space , a claim allowed even by Valentina Tereshkova . " She was also the first woman to pilot a flight to the stratosphere , and according to her obituary in The New York Times , the first person to do so through a layer of clouds . Jean created the liquid oxygen converter and frost @-@ resistant window which he thought was later used in Boeing 's B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress , and used blasting caps and TNT for releasing the balloon at launch and for remote release of external ballast from inside the sealed cabin . This was the first use of pyrotechnics for remote @-@ controlled actuating devices in aircraft , a revolutionary and unpopular idea at the time . Later , Gilruth – who became the director of the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center – approved and used them in spacecraft . Also aboard the balloon , where every pound counts , were two instruments for studying cosmic radiation – one designed by Jean 's friend and mentor William Francis Gray Swann , and Robert Millikan 's 540 lb ( 240 kg ) ionization chamber . Neither Swann nor Millikan were satisfied with the flight 's scientific results , a lesson for manned flights that repeated for decades . 
 = = Later life , death of Jean Piccard = = 
 Jean and Jeannette felt they had succeeded by reaching the stratosphere , and they became popular lecturers . They prepared brochures and souvenirs to attract attention to the flight , one titled " Who Said We Couldn 't Do It . " But they had developed perhaps unreasonable expectations that lucrative university positions would come to them . Both wrote to dozens of colleges and universities , aiming high — even at college presidencies , trying to secure positions , but they received only rejections . In December 1934 , Jeannette wrote to Swann to ask if Jean might become a member of the chemistry staff of Bartol Research at the Franklin Institute , and also offered her services , but was turned down . Luckily , they met a new advocate while on lecture tour to Minneapolis . Thanks to John Akerman of the department of aeronautical engineering at the University of Minnesota , Jean became an untenured professor in Minnesota by 1936 , teaching and doing aeronautical studies until 1946 when he received tenure . During 1943 , Jeannette was briefly an executive secretary at the housing section of the Minnesota Office of Civil Defense . 
 In 1946 until mid @-@ 1947 , the Piccards were consultants to General Mills ( the cereal company and dominant industry in Minneapolis ) working under Otto Winzen , who Jean had met through the university . Winzen and Jean proposed a stratosphere flight with 100 cluster balloons and secured a government contract with the Navy . Featured in Navy press releases , Jean was named a project scientist responsible for gondola design and for testing the balloon film materials . But he balked , both at making weekly status reports that made him feel like a lower @-@ level employee , and at the prospect of General Mills owning the patents to his ideas . Working as a consultant , Jeannette threatened to break off ties with the Navy and General Mills unless she was allowed to fly with Jean . Unfortunately this began a rift between General Mills and the Piccards . They were both were fired in 1947 , for they were too critical of Winzen and General Mills staff . 
 Jean retired from the University of Minnesota when he was 68 , never giving up his dream of returning to the stratosphere . DeVorkin quoted a newspaper in 1952 , " to Adventurer Piccard , no gondola probing the unexplored purple twilight of the stratosphere would be complete without him and his wife in it " . Jean died in 1963 . 
 Gilruth asked Jeannette to work as a consultant at NASA . She accepted and lived in a house in Houston she shared with another woman . Jeannette spoke to the scientific community and to the public at NASA about the space program from 1964 to 1970 , when Project Apollo was created and Apollo 11 made the first manned Moon landing in 1969 . Gilruth then noticed a shift in her interests , away from space and towards religion . 
 = = Episcopal priest = = 
 = = = Ordination = = = 
 In 1971 , one year after the Episcopal Church admitted female deacons , Piccard was ordained a deacon and , on July 29 , 1974 at age 79 , under controversial circumstances , she was ordained a priest . In Philadelphia , at the Church of the Advocate , three retired bishops – Daniel Corrigan , former church head of domestic missions , Robert L. De Witt of the diocese of Pennsylvania , and Edward Randolph Welles II of the diocese of West Missouri – ordained eleven women priests , cheered by a large congregation . A fourth bishop , José Antonio Ramos of Costa Rica , was there but was out of his jurisdiction . All eleven women risked suspension as deacons , and the four bishops " could be suspended or deposed by a church trial court " for ignoring a church canon prohibiting retired bishops from performing " episcopal acts " unless asked by a local bishop . Five Episcopal priests objected at the point in the service when Corrigan asked if there was " any impediment " to the ordinations , one calling the ordinations a " perversion " and another calling them " unlawful and <unk> " . 
 Piccard was the first of the eleven women ordained because she was the oldest and she was fulfilling a lifelong dream . Carter Heyward – another of the group who were known as " irregulars " and sometimes called the " Philadelphia Eleven " – became the 1974 Ms. magazine Woman of the Year . Suzanne Hiatt later said " In retrospect , to have been ordained ' irregularly ' is the only way for women to have done it . " Alison Cheek , Heyward , and Piccard joined in the consecration , and Piccard gave the absolution , in a celebration of the Eucharist at Riverside Church in Manhattan in November 1974 . Philip McNairy of the Diocese of Minnesota , who wanted women in the priesthood , was concerned that the eleven were hurting the cause of the other women deacons , who numbered over one hundred at the time . 
 = = = Fallout , women recognized = = = 
 A proposal to recognize women priests had been narrowly defeated at the triennial general convention of 1973 held in Louisville , Kentucky . John M. Allin of Mississippi , the new ( as of June ) presiding bishop of the Episcopal Church , which had 3 @.@ 1 million members at the time , called an emergency meeting of the House of Bishops in Chicago in August 1974 . Jeannette told Allin , " Sonny , I 'm old enough to have changed your nappies . " 
 Harold B. Robinson , a bishop in the diocese of Western New York , and two colleagues set in motion charges accusing the three bishops of breaking their vows and violating church laws . They withdrew charges when the House of Bishops , in a carefully worded resolution that passed 129 to 9 with 8 <unk> , challenged the ordinations and decried the bishops ' actions , calling them understandable but " wrong " . But the church was moving in this direction already , and the general convention of 1976 held in Minneapolis voted to open the priesthood to women . 
 = = = Life as a priest = = = 
 Jeannette served as a deacon or irregular at St. Philip 's Episcopal Church in Saint Paul , Minnesota from 1975 – 1977 . In 1977 the Episcopal Church recognized her ordination . Kathryn Piccard , her granddaughter , who also became an Episcopal priest , was later quoted in The New York Times as saying , " She wanted to expand the idea of what a respectable lady could do . She had the image of the street @-@ wise old lady . " Jeannette became a volunteer chaplain at St. Luke 's Hospital , now United Hospital , and assistant pastor to Denzil Carty at Episcopal Church on <unk> , both in Saint Paul . From 1968 until 1981 she was an honorary member of the Seabury @-@ Western Theological Seminary board of trustees . 
 Jeannette died of cancer on May 17 , 1981 at the Masonic Memorial Hospital in Minneapolis , Minnesota , aged 86 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Jeannette received the Harmon Trophy in 1934 . The National Aeronautic Association gave her a Certificate of Reward & Performance in 1935 . In 1965 she received the first William Randolph Lovelace II Award from the American Astronautical Society ( AAS ) . The University of Minnesota Alumni Association gave her an Outstanding Achievement Award in 1968 and engraved her name on their wall of honor . Graduate Women in Science , also known as Sigma Delta Epsilon , made her an honorary member " For Excellence In Scientific Research " in 1971 . Hobart and William Smith Colleges gave her an honorary doctorate . She received the Robert R. Gilruth Award in 1970 from the North Galveston County Chamber of Commerce . 
 She was posthumously inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1998 , and she and her husband were nominated to the FAI Ballooning Commission Hall of Fame . The Balloon Federation of America renamed its award the Piccard Memorial Trophy . Pat Donohue wrote Solo Flight , a one @-@ woman play about Jeannette 's life . The Bryn Mawr College Library has the Jeanette Ridlon Piccard Book Fund , which provides funds for the purchase of books on the history of religion . 
 = City Lights = 
 City Lights is a 1931 American pre @-@ Code silent romantic comedy film written , directed by , and starring Charlie Chaplin . The story follows the misadventures of Chaplin 's Tramp as he falls in love with a blind girl ( Virginia Cherrill ) and develops a turbulent friendship with an alcoholic millionaire ( Harry Myers ) . 
 Although sound films were on the rise when Chaplin started developing the script in 1928 , he decided to continue working with silent productions . Filming started in December 1928 , and ended in September 1930 . City Lights marked the first time Chaplin composed the film score to one of his productions and it was written in six weeks with Arthur Johnston . The main theme used as a leitmotif for the blind flower girl is the song " La <unk> " ( " Who ’ ll Buy my Violets " ) from Spanish composer José Padilla . Chaplin lost a lawsuit to Padilla for not crediting him . 
 City Lights was immediately successful upon release on January 30 , 1931 with positive reviews and box office receipts of $ 5 million . Today , critics consider it not only the highest accomplishment of Chaplin 's career , but one of the greatest films ever made . In 1991 , the Library of Congress selected City Lights for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . In 2007 , the American Film Institute 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ranked City Lights as the 11th greatest American film of all time . In 1949 , the critic James Agee referred to the final scene in the film as the " greatest single piece of acting ever committed to celluloid " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The officials of a city unveil a new statue , only to find The Tramp sleeping on it . They shoo him away and he wanders the streets , destitute and homeless , and is soon tormented by two newsboys . He happens upon a beautiful Flower Girl ( Virginia Cherrill ) , not realizing at first that she is blind , and buys a flower . Just when she is about to give him his change , a man gets into a nearby luxury car and is driven away , making her think that the Tramp has departed . The Tramp tiptoes away . 
 That evening , the Tramp runs into a drunken millionaire ( Harry Myers ) who is attempting suicide on the waterfront . ( It is later mentioned that his wife has sent for her bags . ) The Tramp eventually convinces The Millionaire he should live . He takes the Tramp back to his mansion and gives him a change of clothes . They go out for a night on the town , where the Tramp inadvertently causes much havoc . Early the next morning , they return to the mansion and encounter the Flower Girl en route to her vending spot . The Tramp asks The Millionaire for some money , which he uses to buy all the girl 's flowers and then drives her home in the Millionaire 's Rolls @-@ Royce . 
 After he leaves , the Flower Girl tells her grandmother ( Florence Lee ) about her wealthy acquaintance . When the Tramp returns to the mansion , the Millionaire has sobered @-@ up and does not remember him , so he has the butler order him out . Later that day , the Millionaire meets the Tramp again while intoxicated and invites him home for a lavish party . The next morning , having sobered again and planning to leave for a cruise , the Millionaire again has the Tramp tossed out . 
 Returning to the Flower Girl 's apartment , the Tramp spies her being attended by a doctor . Deciding to take a job to earn money for her , he becomes a street sweeper . Meanwhile , the grandmother receives a notice that she and the girl will be evicted if they cannot pay their back rent by the next day , but she hides it . The Tramp visits the girl on his lunch break and sees a newspaper story about a Viennese doctor who has devised an operation that cures blindness . He then finds the eviction notice and reads it aloud at the girl 's request . He reassures her that he will pay the rent . But he returns to work late and is fired . 
 As he is walking away , a boxer persuades him to stage a fake fight , promising to split the $ 50 prize money . Just before the bout , however , the man receives a telegram warning him that the police are after him . He flees , leaving the Tramp a no @-@ nonsense replacement opponent . Despite a valiant effort , the Tramp is knocked out . 
 Some time later , he meets the drunken millionaire who has just returned from Europe . The Millionaire takes him to the mansion , and after he hears the girl 's plight , he gives the Tramp $ 1 @,@ 000 to give to the girl for her operation . Unbeknownst to the Millionaire and the Tramp , two burglars were hiding in the house when they entered . Upon hearing about the cash , they knock out the millionaire and take the rest of his money . The Tramp telephones for the police , but the robbers flee before they arrive , and the butler assumes he stole the money . The Millionaire cannot remember the Tramp or giving him the $ 1 @,@ 000 . The Tramp narrowly escapes and gives the money to the girl , saying he will be going away for a while . Later , he is arrested in front of the newsboys who taunted him earlier , and he is then jailed . 
 Months later , the Tramp is released . Searching for the girl , he returns to her customary street corner but does not find her . With her sight restored , the girl has opened up a flourishing flower shop with her grandmother . When a rich customer comes into the shop , the girl briefly wonders if he is her mysterious benefactor . But when he leaves with no acknowledgement , she realizes again she is wrong . While retrieving a flower from the gutter outside the shop , the Tramp is again tormented by the two newsboys . As he turns to leave , he finds himself staring at the girl through the window . His despair turns to elation and he forgets about the flower . Seeing that he has crushed the flower he retrieved , the girl kindly offers him a fresh one and a coin . Embarrassed , the Tramp tries to shuffle away , but the girl stops him and hands him the flower , which he shyly takes . When the girl takes hold of his hand to place the coin in it , she recognizes the touch of his hand and realizes he is no stranger . " You ? " she says , and he nods , asking , " You can see now ? " She tearfully replies , " Yes , I can see now " , and holds the Tramp 's hand close to her chest . <unk> and elated , the Tramp smiles at the girl shyly as the film fades to black . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Virginia Cherrill as A Blind Girl 
 Florence Lee as Her Grandmother 
 Harry Myers as An Eccentric Millionaire 
 Al Ernest Garcia as His Butler ( credited as Allan Garcia ) 
 Hank Mann as A <unk> 
 Charlie Chaplin as A Tramp 
 Uncredited : 
 Robert Parrish as Newsboy 
 Henry Bergman as Mayor and Blind Girl 's Downstairs Neighbor 
 Albert Austin as Street Sweeper / Burglar 
 Jean Harlow Extra , nightclub scene ( cut from film ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Chaplin 's feature The Circus , released in 1928 , was his last film before the motion picture industry embraced sound recording and brought the silent movie era to a close . As his own producer and distributor ( part owner of United Artists ) , Chaplin could still conceive City Lights as a silent film . Technically the film was a crossover , as its soundtrack had synchronized music , sound effects , and some unintelligible sounds that copied speech pattern films . The dialogue was presented on intertitles . Chaplin was first contacted by inventor Eugene Augustin Lauste in 1918 about making a sound film , but he never ended up meeting with Lauste . Chaplin was dismissive about " talkies " and told a reporter that he would " give the talkies three years , that 's all . " He was also concerned about how to adjust the Little Tramp to sound films . 
 In early 1928 , Chaplin began writing the script with Harry Carr . The plot gradually grew from an initial concept Chaplin had considered after the success of The Circus , where a circus clown goes blind and has to conceal his handicap from his young daughter by pretending that his inability to see are pratfalls . This inspired the Blind Girl . The first scenes Chaplin thought up were of the ending , where the newly cured blind girl sees the Little Tramp for the first time . A highly detailed description of the scene was written , as Chaplin considered it to be the center of the entire film . 
 For a subplot , Chaplin first considered a character even lower on the social scale , a black newsboy . Eventually he opted for a drunken millionaire , a character previously used in the 1921 short The Idle Class . The millionaire plot was based on an old idea Chaplin had for a short in which two millionaires pick up the Little Tramp from the city dump and show him a good time in expensive clubs before dropping him back off at the dump , so when he woke up , the Tramp would not know if it was real or a dream . This was rewritten into a millionaire who is a friend of the Tramp when drunk but does not recognize him when sober . 
 Chaplin officially began pre @-@ production of the film in May 1928 and hired Australian art director Henry Clive to design the sets that summer . Chaplin eventually cast Clive in the role of the millionaire . Although the film was originally set in Paris , the art direction is inspired by a mix of several cities . Robert Sherwood said that " it is a weird city , with confusing resemblances to London , Los Angeles , Naples , Paris , Tangiers and Council Bluffs . It is no city on earth and it is all cities . " 
 On August 28 , 1928 , Chaplin 's mother Hannah Chaplin died at the age of 63 . Chaplin was distraught for several weeks and pre @-@ production did not resume until mid fall of 1928 . Psychologist Stephen Weissman has hypothesized that City Lights is highly autobiographical , with the blind girl representing Chaplin 's mother , while the drunken millionaire represents Chaplin 's father . Weissman also compared many of the film 's sets with locations from Chaplin 's real childhood , such as the statue in the opening scene resembling St. Mark 's Church on Kennington Park Road and Chaplin referring to the waterfront set as the Thames Embankment . 
 Chaplin had interviewed several actresses to play the blind flower girl but was unimpressed with them all . While seeing a film shoot with bathing women in a Santa Monica beach , he found a casual acquaintance , Virginia Cherrill . Cherrill waved and asked if she would ever get the chance to work with him . After a series of poor auditions from other actresses , Chaplin eventually invited her to do a screen test . She was the first actress to subtly and convincingly act blind on camera due to her near @-@ sightedness , and Cherrill signed a contract on November 1 , 1928 . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Filming for City Lights officially began on December 27 , 1928 , after Chaplin and Carr had worked on the script for almost an entire year . As a filmmaker , Chaplin was known for being a perfectionist ; he was noted for doing many more " takes " than other directors at the time . Production began with the first scene at the flower stand where the Little Tramp first meets the Blind Flower Girl . The scene took weeks to shoot , and Chaplin first began to have second thoughts about casting Cherrill . Years later , Cherrill said , " I never liked Charlie and he never liked me . " In his autobiography , Chaplin took responsibility for his on @-@ set tensions with Cherrill , blaming the stress of making the film for the conflict . Filming the scene continued until February 1929 and again for ten days in early April before Chaplin put the scene aside to be filmed later . He then shot the opening scene of the Little Tramp waking up in a newly unveiled public statue . This scene involved up to 380 extras and was especially stressful for Chaplin to shoot . During this part of shooting , construction was being done at Chaplin Studios because the city of Los Angeles had decided to widen La Brea Avenue and Chaplin was forced to move several buildings away from the road . 
 Chaplin then shot the sequence where the Little Tramp first meets the millionaire and prevents him from committing suicide . During filming , Henry Clive suddenly decided that he did not want to jump into the tank of cold water in the scene , causing Chaplin to storm off the set and fire Clive . He was quickly replaced by Harry Myers , who Chaplin had known while under contract at Keystone Studios . Chaplin finished shooting the sequence on July 29 , 1929 with exteriors at Pasadena Bridge . Chaplin then shot a sequence that was eventually cut from the film involving the Little Tramp attempting to retrieve a stick that was stuck in a wall . The scene included a young Charles Lederer ; Chaplin later praised the scene , but insisted that it needed to be cut . He then continued filming the scenes with the millionaire until September 29 , 1929 . 
 In November , Chaplin began working with Cherrill again in some of the Flower Girl 's less dramatic scenes . While waiting for her scenes for several months , Cherrill had become bored and openly complained to Chaplin . During the filming of one scene , Cherrill asked Chaplin if she could leave early so that she could go to a hair appointment . Chaplin fired Virginia Cherrill and replaced her with Georgia Hale , Chaplin 's co @-@ star in The Gold Rush . However , Hale 's screen tests proved that she was unsuitable for the role . Chaplin also briefly considered sixteen @-@ year @-@ old actress Violet <unk> , but he was talked out of this idea by his collaborators . Chaplin finally re @-@ hired Cherrill to finish City Lights . She demanded and got a raise to $ 75 per week . Approximately seven minutes of test footage of Hale survives and is included on the DVD release ; excerpts were first seen in the documentary Unknown Chaplin along with an unused opening sequence . 
 Chaplin then cast Florence D. Lee as the Blind Girl 's grandmother and shot scenes with Cherrill and Lee for five weeks . In late 1929 , Chaplin re @-@ shot the first Flower Shop scene with Cherrill . This time , the scene was completed in six days and Chaplin was happy with Cherrill 's performance . Chaplin had been shooting the film for a year and was only a little more than half way finished . From March to April 1930 , Chaplin shot the scenes inside of the millionaire 's house at the Town House on Wilshire Boulevard . He hired Joe Van Meter and Albert Austin , whom he had known since his days working for Fred Karno , as the burglars . In the late spring of 1930 , Chaplin shot the last major comedy sequence : the boxing match . Chaplin hired Keystone actor Hank Mann to play the Tramp 's opponent . The scene required 100 extras and Chaplin took four days to rehearse and six to shoot the scene and was shot between June 23 and 30 . Chaplin was initially nervous over the attendance for this scene so he invited his friends to be extras . Over 100 extras were present . Chaplin ’ s performance in the scene was so humorous that more people arrived daily to be an extra . 
 In July and August , Chaplin finished up six weeks of smaller scenes , including the two scenes of the Tramp being harassed by newsboys , one of whom was played by a young Robert Parrish . 
 In September 1930 , Chaplin finished the shooting of the final scene which took six days . Chaplin said that he was happy with Cherrill 's performance in the scene , and that she had eventually understood the role . When talking about his directing style on set , Chaplin stated that " everything I do is a dance . I think in terms of dance . I think more so in City Lights . " 
 From October to December 1930 , Chaplin edited the film and created the title cards . When he completed the film , silent films had become generally unpopular . But City Lights was one of the great financial and artistic successes of Chaplin 's career , and it was his personal favorite of his films . Especially fond of the final scene , he said , " [ I ] n City Lights just the last scene ... I ’ m not acting .... Almost apologetic , standing outside myself and looking ... It ’ s a beautiful scene , beautiful , and because it isn ’ t over @-@ acted . " 
 The amount of film used for the picture was uncharacteristic for the time and was a sign of the long production process . Chaplin shot 314 @,@ 256 feet of film , and the completed film ran 8 @,@ 093 feet . This made a shooting ratio of over 38 feet of film for each foot of film that made it in the final version . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 City Lights marked the first time Chaplin composed the film score to one of his productions . While Chaplin preferred his films to have live sound by the 1930s most theaters had gotten rid of their orchestras . Many of his critics claimed he was doing it to grab more credit . Chaplin , whose parents and many members of the Chaplin family were both musicians , was struggling with the professional musicians he hired and took it upon himself to compose the score himself . It was written in six weeks with Arthur Johnston and included over one hundred musical cues . Chaplin told a reporter that " I really didn 't write it down . I la @-@ <unk> and Arthur Johnson wrote it down , and I wish you would give him credit because he did a very good job . It is all simple music , you know , in keeping with my character . " The intention was to have a score that would translate the characters ' emotions through its melodies . The score was recorded in five days with musical arranger Alfred Newman . 
 The main theme used as a leitmotif for the blind flower girl is the song " La <unk> " ( " Who ’ ll Buy my Violets " ) from Spanish composer José Padilla . Chaplin was unable to secure the original song performer , Raquel Meller , in the lead role , but used her song anyway as a major theme . Chaplin lost a lawsuit to Padilla ( which took place in Paris , where Padilla lived ) for not crediting him . Some modern editions released for video include a new recording by Carl Davis . 
 = = Release , reception , and legacy = = 
 Two weeks prior to the premiere , Chaplin decided to have an unpublicized preview at Los Angeles ' Tower Theatre . It went poorly , attracting a small and unenthusiastic crowd . Better results were seen at the gala premiere on January 30 , 1931 at the Los Angeles Theater . Albert Einstein and his wife were the guests of honor , and the film received a standing ovation . It next premiered at the George M. Cohan Theater in New York where Chaplin closely supervised the release , spending the day doing interviews , and previously spending $ 60 @,@ 000 on the advertising , as he was frustrated with what UA 's publicists had come up with . Chaplin demanded half of the total gross , and considering audiences would be more attracted by the film itself than its technology , he demanded higher ticket prices compared to talkies . 
 Chaplin was nervous about the film 's reception because , by this time , silent films were becoming obsolete , and the preview had undermined his confidence . Nevertheless , City Lights became one of Chaplin 's most financially successful and critically acclaimed works . Following the good reception by American audiences , with earnings of $ 2 million , a quarter of which came from its 12 @-@ week run at the Cohan , Chaplin went on a sixteen @-@ date world tour between February and March 1932 , starting with a premiere at London 's Dominion Theatre on February 27 . The film was enthusiastically received by Depression @-@ era audiences , earning $ 5 million during its initial release . 
 Reviews were mostly positive . A film critic for the Los Angeles Examiner said that " not since I reviewed the first Chaplin comedies way back in the two @-@ reel days has Charlie given us such an orgy of laughs . " The New York Times reviewer Mordaunt Hall considered it " a film worked out with admirable artistry " . Variety declared it was " not Chaplin 's best picture " but that certain sequences were " hilarious . " The New Yorker wrote that it was " on the order of his other [ films ] , perhaps a little better than any of them " and that it gave an impression " not often - oh , very seldom - found in the movies ; an indefinable impression perhaps best described as a quality of charm . " On the other hand , Alexander <unk> of The Nation was highly critical of City Lights , objecting to the silent format and over @-@ sentimentality and describing it as " Chaplin 's feeblest " . 
 The popularity of City Lights endured , with the film 's re @-@ release in 1950 again positively received by audiences and critics . In 1949 , the critic James Agee wrote in Life magazine , that the final scene was the " greatest single piece of acting ever committed to celluloid . " Richard Meryman called the final scene one of the greatest moments in film history . Charles Silver , Curator of Film at the Museum of Modern Art , stated that the film is so highly regarded because it brought forth a new level of lyrical romanticism that had not appeared in Chaplin 's earlier works . He adds that like all romanticism , it is based in the denial of the real world around it . When the film premiered , Chaplin was much older , he was in the midst of another round of legal battles with former spouse Lita Grey , and the economic and political climate of the world had changed . Chaplin uses the Girl 's blindness to remind the Tramp of the precarious nature of romanticism in the real world , as she unknowingly assaults him multiple times . Film.com critic Eric D. Snider said that by 1931 , most Hollywood filmmakers either embraced talking pictures , resigned themselves to their inevitability , or just gave up making movies , yet Chaplin held firm with his vision in this project . He also noted that few in Hollywood had the clout to make a silent film at that late date , let alone do it well . One reason was that Chaplin knew the Tramp could not be adapted to talking movies and still work . 
 Several well @-@ known directors have praised City Lights . Orson Welles said it was his favorite film . In a 1963 interview in the American magazine Cinema , Stanley Kubrick rated City Lights as fifth among his top ten films . In 1972 , the renowned Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky placed City Lights as fifth among his top ten and said of Chaplin , " He is the only person to have gone down into cinematic history without any shadow of a doubt . The films he left behind can never grow old . " George Bernard Shaw called Chaplin " the only genius to come out of the movie industry " . Celebrated Italian director Federico Fellini often praised this film , and his Nights of Cabiria refers to it . In the 2003 documentary Charlie : The Life and Art of Charles Chaplin , Woody Allen said it was Chaplin 's best picture . Allen is said to have based the final scene of his 1979 film Manhattan on its final scene . Chaplin biographer Jeffrey Vance has summarized all the best criticism and all the notable filmmakers who have singled out City Lights as their favorite Chaplin film throughout the decades in the Criterion Collection audio commentary track for the film . Vance has written that among all the praise afforded the film can be added that " City Lights also holds the distinction of being Chaplin 's own favorite of all his films . " 
 French experimental musician and film critic Michel Chion has written an analysis of City Lights , published as Les Lumières de la ville . Slavoj Žižek used the film as a primary example in his essay " Why Does a Letter Always Arrive at Its Destination ? " . Chaplin 's original " Tramp " suit from the film was donated by him to the Museum of Natural History of Los Angeles County . 
 City Lights was released as a dual format Blu @-@ ray and DVD by the Criterion Collection in 2013 with an audio commentary track by Chaplin biographer and scholar Jeffrey Vance 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 1952 , Sight and Sound magazine revealed the results of its first poll for " The Best Films of All Time " ; City Lights was voted # 2 , after Vittorio <unk> 's Bicycle Thieves . In 2002 , City Lights ranked 45th on the critics ' list . That same year , directors were polled separately and ranked the film as 19th overall . In 1992 , the Library of Congress selected City Lights for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " In 2007 , the American Film Institute 's tenth anniversary edition of 100 Years ... 100 Movies ranked City Lights as the 11th greatest American film of all time , an improvement over the 76th position on the original list . AFI also chose the film as the best romantic comedy of American cinema in 2008 's " 10 Top 10 " . The Tramp was number 38 on AFI 's list of the 50 Best Heroes , and the film ranked at 38th among the funniest films , 10th among the greatest love stories , and 33rd on the most inspiring films . 
 = 2000 UEFA Cup Final riots = 
 The 2000 UEFA Cup Final Riots , also known as the Battle of Copenhagen , were a series of riots in City Hall Square in Copenhagen , Denmark , between fans of English football team Arsenal and Turkish side Galatasaray around the 2000 UEFA Cup Final on 17 May 2000 . The scuffles , in which four people were stabbed , also involved fans from other clubs and were viewed by the media as part of a retaliation for the killing of two Leeds United fans by Galatasaray supporters the month before . 
 The events of the day started early in the morning when skirmishes broke out in a bar , which led to an Arsenal fan being stabbed . Later in the day , Galatasaray fans occupied City Hall Square before heading towards Arsenal fans in bars nearby . The Galatasaray fans were later attacked from behind by members of British hooligan firms seeking revenge for the Istanbul stabbings . Despite deploying 2 @,@ 000 officers to the area and having prior warning of potential trouble , the police were unable to control the riot until they fired tear gas at the rioters . This led to 19 injuries , including 4 stabbings , and 60 arrests with similar events occurring in England and Turkey in the aftermath of the riots . 
 The riots were condemned by football authorities with threats of expulsion of national football teams from European competition being given out if similar events happened again . The Danish police also were criticized for their handling of the riots . 
 = = History = = 
 Arsenal qualified for the final by defeating French club Lens in their semi @-@ final . Galatasaray beat English team Leeds United but their matches were marred by violence : two Leeds United fans were stabbed to death before their semi @-@ final first leg at Galatasaray 's Ali Sami Yen Stadium in Istanbul on 6 April 2000 . The events happened at 22 : 00 in Istanbul 's Taksim Square during a fight between Leeds fans and Galatasaray fans . Leeds fans had been drinking in bars reportedly taunting local people and Turkish police intervened to stop fights breaking out . There were reports that a Galatasaray fan had run to a telephone to call for support when he saw Leeds fans arriving . Galatasaray fans entered the area shortly afterwards which precipitated a fight between the two sets of supporters . This led to the two Leeds fans being stabbed . 
 It was not clear how the fight started , with reports of it either being started by Leeds fans throwing beer glasses and insulting the Turkish flag , or being started by Galatasaray fans throwing chairs . Police arrested Ali <unk> Demir and three other men for the stabbings . Demir was later found guilty of murder and was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment . As a result of the stabbings , Leeds United banned Galatasaray fans from attending the second leg at Elland Road , claiming that the safety of fans could not be guaranteed . The ban was supported by UEFA and only 80 tickets were issued to Galatasaray for officials and representatives of the Turkish government . 
 The stabbings caused anger throughout the United Kingdom , and subsequently members of Arsenal 's hooligan firms The Herd and The <unk> , wanted to avenge the deaths of the Leeds fans , and telephoned other British hooligan firms , inviting them to join them in Copenhagen to attack Galatasaray fans . It was reported that members of Leeds United 's Leeds United Service Crew and Chelsea 's Chelsea Headhunters , along with hooligans supporting Rangers , Cardiff City and Swansea City all travelled to Denmark to join Arsenal fans in attacks on Galatasaray fans . This led to the final being considered " high risk " ; 2 @,@ 000 members of the Danish police were assigned to the game , with assistance from members of British and Turkish police forces . 
 = = Events = = 
 On the Wednesday at 1 : 00 , Galatasaray fans attacked a bar in Strøget in Copenhagen , where some Arsenal fans were located . The Arsenal fans left the club to confront the Galatasaray fans , which led to a fight lasting for an hour before riot police managed to control it and arrested 4 Britons and 4 Turks . In the fight , Paul Dineen , an Arsenal fan , was stabbed , leading to Arsenal offering fans refunds if they did not want to fly to the game . Dineen was released from hospital later in the day and attended the match as a guest of the Arsenal directors . 
 Throughout the day large numbers of fans , both English and Turkish , were seen throughout the city and at the airport . Later , large numbers of Galatasaray fans congregated in Copenhagen 's City Hall Square , raising the Turkish flag in the square . Arsenal fans congregated in nearby bars . Galatasaray fans attempted to provoke the Arsenal fans in the bars , and the two sides began chanting at each other until bottles were thrown from both sides around 16 : 00 . The Danish police then moved in to separate the fans , and moved the Galatasaray fans back towards the square . 
 Then , in a calculated attack , approximately 500 Arsenal fans attacked from the main road behind the Galatasaray fans . This caused a severe riot in the city square , with several restaurant facilities used by fans to fight each other , with iron bars and knives also being used . This lasted 20 minutes before the Danish police attempted to break up the melee with dogs and tear gas . The violence , which included fans from other English clubs and Turks living in Denmark , lasted for 45 minutes . There were further clashes at the airport the day after the game . 
 At Parken Stadium , where the final was to be played , the police erected iron fencing outside to separate the Arsenal and Galatasaray fans as a precaution . UEFA also requested that fences be put up around the perimeter of the pitch . The riots did not spread to the stadium , although there was an attempt to pull down the fences by fans heading towards the Arsenal area of the stadium before police stopped them . 
 After the match , which Galatasaray won 4 – 1 on penalties , approximately 300 Arsenal fans in the Finsbury Park area of Islington in London attacked Turkish restaurants and businesses , with bottles being used to break windows . They then broke into an apartment building to threaten Kosovan refugees with a knife , mistakenly believing them to be Turkish . Six people were arrested and three Metropolitan Police officers were injured . In Turkey , nine people were accidentally shot and injured by Galatasaray fans firing guns in celebration despite police warning them not to . 
 = = Injuries and arrests = = 
 In all , four people were stabbed during the riots : two English , one Turkish and one Dutch fan . A Danish police officer and a Turkish cameraman were also injured in the riots . In total , nineteen people were injured and sixty people were arrested , with 15 of the arrested being subsequently banned from attending Euro 2000 . Nineteen of the arrested were British , thirty @-@ six were Turkish and the rest of the arrested included people from Sweden , Germany and the Netherlands . The British fans were later released without charge but were forbidden from returning to Denmark . The rest were fined an equivalent of $ 500 and banned from Denmark for a year . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after the riots , the executive director of the Football Association , David Davies , issued an apology for the violence . The Copenhagen riots followed a long line of similar events involving English football fans , and in June , UEFA 's executive committee listed the Heysel Stadium disaster , disorders in Charleroi and Brussels , the killing of the two Leeds fans in Istanbul , and the Copenhagen riots and warned the British government that if there was any more rioting then England would be expelled from Euro 2000 . In response , Prime Minister Tony Blair stated , " Hopefully this threat will bring to their senses anyone tempted to continue the mindless thuggery that had brought such shame to the country . " The Prime Minister of Turkey , <unk> Ecevit also made a call for fans to avoid violence after the riots , stating " Sports should be an initiative for friendship , not for fighting " . In August 2000 , Arsenal banned thirty @-@ seven people involved in the Copenhagen riot from Arsenal 's Highbury stadium . Leeds United also banned three of their fans from Elland Road after they had been identified in pictures of the riots . 
 In the United Kingdom , Arsenal fans were originally blamed for the violence as the police had fixed blame on them . In Turkey , the media portrayed Galatasaray fans as acting in self @-@ defence , with criticism directed at the British fans for allegedly attacking members of the press . However , there were conflicting reports , with claims that some Galatasaray fans were instigating some of the violence . Later on , British media blame also transferred towards Galatasaray fans . 
 The Danish police were also criticised for their handling of the riots . Their policing of City Hall Square in the days running up to the final was described as " non @-@ existent " by Dineen . It was noted by Turkish newspaper , <unk> that cannabis was being freely traded in the city square during the time before the riots , and the police did nothing about it . Arsenal fans also criticised the police , claiming that they had been slow to intervene and were " too soft " on the hooligans . It was claimed that the police failed to control the riots , and that they had been undermanned and outmanoeuvered , to which Mogens <unk> , the police chief in Copenhagen admitted that the police had been " under @-@ prepared " . This came after Arsenal had warned the police before the final that there could be hooligans travelling to Copenhagen . 
 In the United Kingdom , the Daily Mirror newspaper printed pictures of Arsenal fans alleged to have been part of the violence . It later arose that the majority of the people in the photos were either not involved or had been acting in self @-@ defence . The photos led to some postmen working for Royal Mail losing their jobs because they had been seen in the photos and in television coverage , even though they had not been arrested . Michael Doherty , the chairman of the Communication Workers Union , and his brother Tom took Royal Mail to an Employment Tribunal for unfair dismissal claiming they had been acting in self @-@ defence . In 2001 , the tribunal ruled in their favour , and ordered Royal Mail to reinstate them . In 2012 , the editor of the Daily Mirror at the time , Piers Morgan apologised for printing the pictures . 
 In 2013 , Arsenal invited Galatasaray to compete at their annual Emirates Cup tournament . Some Arsenal fans reacted negatively to the news , claiming that there was still bad blood between the two sets of supporters and were concerned that there would be a resumption of hostilities between them . 
 = Hypopituitarism = 
 Hypopituitarism is the decreased ( hypo ) secretion of one or more of the eight hormones normally produced by the pituitary gland at the base of the brain . If there is decreased secretion of most pituitary hormones , the term <unk> ( pan meaning " all " ) is used . 
 The signs and symptoms of hypopituitarism vary , depending on which hormones are <unk> and on the underlying cause of the abnormality . The diagnosis of hypopituitarism is made by blood tests , but often specific scans and other investigations are needed to find the underlying cause , such as tumors of the pituitary , and the ideal treatment . Most hormones controlled by the secretions of the pituitary can be replaced by tablets or injections . Hypopituitarism is a rare disease , but may be significantly underdiagnosed in people with previous traumatic brain injury . The first description of the condition was made in 1914 by the German physician Dr Morris Simmonds . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The hormones of the pituitary have different actions in the body , and the symptoms of hypopituitarism therefore depend on which hormone is deficient . The symptoms may be subtle and are often initially attributed to other causes . In most of the cases , three or more hormones are deficient . The most common problem is insufficiency of follicle @-@ stimulating hormone ( FSH ) and / or luteinizing hormone ( LH ) leading to sex hormone abnormalities . Growth hormone deficiency is more common in people with an underlying tumor than those with other causes . 
 Sometimes , there are additional symptoms that arise from the underlying cause ; for instance , if the hypopituitarism is due to a growth hormone @-@ producing tumor , there may be symptoms of acromegaly ( enlargement of the hands and feet , coarse facial features ) , and if the tumor extends to the optic nerve or optic chiasm , there may be visual field defects . Headaches may also accompany pituitary tumors , as well as pituitary apoplexy ( infarction or hemorrhage of a pituitary tumor ) and lymphocytic <unk> ( autoimmune inflammation of the pituitary ) . <unk> , in addition to sudden headaches and rapidly worsening visual loss , may also be associated with double vision that results from compression of the nerves in the adjacent cavernous sinus that control the eye muscles . 
 Pituitary failure results in many changes in the skin , hair and nails as a result of the absence of pituitary hormone action on these sites . 
 = = = Anterior pituitary = = = 
 Deficiency of all anterior pituitary hormones is more common than individual hormone deficiency . 
 Deficiency of luteinizing hormone ( LH ) and follicle @-@ stimulating hormone ( FSH ) , together referred to as the gonadotropins , leads to different symptoms in men and women . Women experience <unk> or amenorrhea ( infrequent / light or absent menstrual periods respectively ) and infertility . Men lose facial , scrotal and trunk hair , as well as suffering decreased muscle mass and anemia . Both sexes may experience a decrease in libido and loss of sexual function , and have an increased risk of osteoporosis ( bone fragility ) . Lack of LH / FSH in children is associated with delayed puberty . 
 Growth hormone ( GH ) deficiency leads to a decrease in muscle mass , central obesity ( increase in body fat around the waist ) and impaired attention and memory . Children experience growth retardation and short stature . 
 <unk> hormone ( ACTH ) deficiency leads to adrenal insufficiency , a lack of production of glucocorticoids such as cortisol by the adrenal gland . If the problem is chronic , symptoms consist of fatigue , weight loss , failure to thrive ( in children ) , delayed puberty ( in adolescents ) , hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar levels ) , anemia and hyponatremia ( low sodium levels ) . If the onset is abrupt , collapse , shock and vomiting may occur . ACTH deficiency is highly similar to primary Addison 's disease , which is cortisol deficiency as the result of direct damage to the adrenal glands ; the latter form , however , often leads to hyperpigmentation of the skin , which does not occur in ACTH deficiency . 
 Thyroid @-@ stimulating hormone ( TSH ) deficiency leads to hypothyroidism ( lack of production of thyroxine ( T4 ) and triiodothyronine ( T3 ) in the thyroid ) . Typical symptoms are tiredness , intolerance to cold , constipation , weight gain , hair loss and slowed thinking , as well as a slowed heart rate and low blood pressure . In children , hypothyroidism leads to delayed growth and in extreme inborn forms to a syndrome called cretinism . 
 <unk> ( PRL ) plays a role in breastfeeding , and inability to breastfeed may point at abnormally low prolactin levels . 
 = = = Posterior pituitary = = = 
 <unk> hormone ( ADH ) deficiency leads to the syndrome of diabetes insipidus ( unrelated to diabetes mellitus ) : inability to concentrate the urine , leading to polyuria ( production of large amounts of clear urine ) that is low in solutes , dehydration and — in compensation — extreme thirst and constant need to drink ( polydipsia ) , as well as <unk> ( high sodium levels in the blood ) . ADH deficiency may be masked if there is ACTH deficiency , with symptoms only appearing when cortisol has been replaced . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) deficiency generally causes few symptoms , as it is only required at the time of childbirth and breastfeeding . 
 = = Causes = = 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The pituitary gland is located at the base of the brain , and intimately connected with the hypothalamus . It consists of two lobes : the posterior pituitary , which consists of nervous tissue branching out of the hypothalamus , and the anterior pituitary , which consists of hormone @-@ producing epithelium . The posterior pituitary secretes antidiuretic hormone , which regulates osmolarity of the blood , and oxytocin , which causes contractions of the uterus in childbirth and participates in breastfeeding . 
 The pituitary develops in the third week of embryogenesis from interactions between the diencephalon part of the brain and the nasal cavity . The brain cells secrete <unk> @-@ 8 , <unk> and BMP @-@ 4 , and the oral cavity BMP @-@ 2 . Together , these cellular signals stimulate a group of cells from the oral cavity to form Rathke 's pouch , which becomes independent of the nasal cavity and develops into the anterior pituitary ; this process includes the suppression of production of a protein called Sonic hedgehog by the cells of Rathke 's pouch . The cells then differentiate further into the various hormone @-@ producing cells of the pituitary . This requires particular transcription factors that induce the expression of particular genes . Some of these transcription factors have been found to be deficient in some forms of rare combined pituitary hormone deficiencies ( <unk> ) in childhood . These are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Each transcription factor acts in particular groups of cells . Therefore , various genetic mutations are associated with specific hormone deficiencies . For instance , <unk> ( also known as Pit @-@ 1 ) mutations cause specific deficiencies in growth hormone , prolactin and TSH . In addition to the pituitary , some of the transcription factors are also required for the development of other organs ; some of these mutations are therefore also associated with specific birth defects . 
 Most of the hormones in the anterior pituitary are each part of an axis that is regulated by the hypothalamus . The hypothalamus secretes a number of releasing hormones , often according to a circadian rhythm , into blood vessels that supply the anterior pituitary ; most of these are stimulatory ( thyrotropin @-@ releasing hormone , corticotropin @-@ releasing hormone , gonadotropin @-@ releasing hormone and growth hormone @-@ releasing hormone ) , apart from dopamine , which suppresses prolactin production . In response to the releasing hormone rate , the anterior pituitary produces its hormones ( TSH , ACTH , LH , FSH , GH ) which in turn stimulate effector hormone glands in the body , while prolactin ( PRL ) acts directly on the breast gland . Once the effector glands produce sufficient hormones ( thyroxine , cortisol , estradiol or testosterone and IGF @-@ 1 ) , both the hypothalamus and the pituitary cells sense their abundance and reduce their secretion of stimulating hormones . The hormones of the posterior pituitary are produced in the hypothalamus and are carried by nerve endings to the posterior lobe ; their feedback system is therefore located in the hypothalamus , but damage to the nerve endings would still lead to a deficiency in hormone release . 
 Unless the pituitary damage is being caused by a tumor that <unk> a particular hormone , it is the lack of pituitary hormones that leads to the symptoms described above , and an excess of a particular hormone would indicate the presence of a tumor . The exception to this rule is prolactin : if a tumor compresses the pituitary stalk , a decreased blood supply means that the <unk> cells , which produce prolactin , are not receiving dopamine and therefore produce excess prolactin . Hence , mild elevations in prolactin are attributed to stalk compression . Very high prolactin levels , though , point more strongly towards a <unk> ( prolactin @-@ secreting tumor ) . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of hypopituitarism is made on blood tests . Two types of blood tests are used to confirm the presence of a hormone deficiency : basal levels , where blood samples are taken – usually in the morning – without any form of stimulation , and dynamic tests , where blood tests are taken after the injection of a stimulating substance . Measurement of ACTH and growth hormone usually requires dynamic testing , whereas the other hormones ( LH / FSH , prolactin , TSH ) can typically be tested with basal levels . There is no adequate direct test for ADH levels , but ADH deficiency can be confirmed indirectly ; oxytocin levels are not routinely measured . 
 Generally , the finding of a combination of a low pituitary hormone together with a low hormone from the effector gland is indicative of hypopituitarism . Occasionally , the pituitary hormone may be normal but the effector gland hormone decreased ; in this case , the pituitary is not responding appropriately to effector hormone changes , and the combination of findings is still suggestive of hypopituitarism . 
 = = = Basal tests = = = 
 Levels of LH / FSH may be suppressed by a raised prolactin level , and are therefore not interpretable unless prolactin is low or normal . In men , the combination of low LH and FSH in combination with a low testosterone confirms LH / FSH deficiency ; a high testosterone would indicate a source elsewhere in the body ( such as a testosterone @-@ secreting tumor ) . In women , the diagnosis of LH / FSH deficiency depends on whether the woman has been through the menopause . Before the menopause , abnormal menstrual periods together with low estradiol and LH / FSH levels confirm a pituitary problem ; after the menopause ( when LH / FSH levels are normally elevated and the ovaries produce less estradiol ) , inappropriately low LH / FSH alone is sufficient . Stimulation tests with GnRH are possible , but their use is not encouraged . 
 For TSH , basal measurements are usually sufficient , as well as measurements of thyroxine to ensure that the pituitary is not simply suppressing TSH production in response to hyperthyroidism ( an overactive thyroid gland ) . A stimulation test with thyrotropin @-@ releasing hormone ( TRH ) is not regarded as useful . <unk> can be measured by basal level , and is required for the interpretation of LH and FSH results in addition to the confirmation of hypopituitarism or diagnosis of a prolactin @-@ secreting tumor . 
 = = = Stimulation tests = = = 
 Growth hormone deficiency is almost certain if all other pituitary tests are also abnormal , and insulin @-@ like growth factor 1 ( IGF @-@ 1 ) levels are decreased . If this is not the case , IGF @-@ 1 levels are poorly predictive of the presence of GH deficiency ; stimulation testing with the insulin tolerance test is then required . This is performed by administering insulin to lower the blood sugar to a level below 2 @.@ 2 mmol / l . Once this occurs , growth hormone levels are measured . If they are low despite the stimulatory effect of the low blood sugars , growth hormone deficiency is confirmed . The test is not without risks , especially in those prone to seizures or are known to have heart disease , and causes the unpleasant symptoms of hypoglycemia . Alternative tests ( such as the growth hormone releasing hormone stimulation test ) are less useful , although a stimulation test with arginine may be used for diagnosis , especially in situations where an insulin tolerance test is thought to be too dangerous . If GH deficiency is suspected , and all other pituitary hormones are normal , two different stimulation tests are needed for confirmation . 
 If morning cortisol levels are over 500 nmol / l , ACTH deficiency is unlikely , whereas a level less than 100 is indicative . Levels between 100 @-@ 500 require a stimulation test . This , too , is done with the insulin tolerance test . A cortisol level above 500 after achieving a low blood sugar rules out ACTH deficiency , while lower levels confirm the diagnosis . A similar stimulation test using corticotropin @-@ releasing hormone ( CRH ) is not sensitive enough for the purposes of the investigation . If the insulin tolerance test yields an abnormal result , a further test measuring the response of the adrenal glands to synthetic ACTH ( the ACTH stimulation test ) can be performed to confirm the diagnosis . Stimulation testing with <unk> is an alternative . Some suggest that an ACTH stimulation test is sufficient as first @-@ line investigation , and that an insulin tolerance test is only needed if the ACTH test is equivocal . The insulin tolerance test is discouraged in children . None of the tests for ACTH deficiency are perfect , and further tests after a period of time may be needed if initial results are not conclusive . 
 Symptoms of diabetes insipidus should prompt a formal fluid deprivation test to assess the body 's response to dehydration , which normally causes concentration of the urine and increasing osmolarity of the blood . If these parameters are unchanged , desmopressin ( an ADH analogue ) is administered . If the urine then becomes concentrated and the blood osmolarity falls , there is a lack of ADH due to lack of pituitary function ( " cranial diabetes insipidus " ) . In contrast , there is no change if the kidneys are unresponsive to ADH due to a different problem ( " <unk> diabetes insipidus " ) . 
 = = = Further investigations = = = 
 If one of these tests shows a deficiency of hormones produced by the pituitary , magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan of the pituitary is the first step in identifying an underlying cause . MRI may show various tumors and may assist in delineating other causes . Tumors smaller than 1 cm are referred to as <unk> , and larger lesions are called <unk> . Computed tomography with radiocontrast may be used if MRI is not available . Formal visual field testing by perimetry is recommended , as this would show evidence of optic nerve compression by a tumor . 
 Other tests that may assist in the diagnosis of hypopituitarism , especially if no tumor is found on the MRI scan , are ferritin ( elevated in hemochromatosis ) , angiotensin converting enzyme ( ACE ) levels ( often elevated in sarcoidosis ) , and human chorionic gonadotropin ( often elevated in tumor of germ cell origin ) . If a genetic cause is suspected , genetic testing may be performed . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Treatment of hypopituitarism is threefold : removing the underlying cause , treating the hormone deficiencies , and addressing any other repercussions that arise from the hormone deficiencies . 
 = = = Underlying cause = = = 
 Pituitary tumors require treatment when they are causing specific symptoms , such as headaches , visual field defects or excessive hormone secretion . <unk> surgery ( removal of the tumor by an operation through the nose and the <unk> sinuses ) may , apart from addressing symptoms related to the tumor , also improve pituitary function , although the gland is sometimes damaged further as a result of the surgery . When the tumor is removed by craniotomy ( opening the skull ) , recovery is less likely – but sometimes this is the only suitable way to approach the tumor . After surgery , it may take some time for hormone levels to change significantly . <unk> the pituitary hormone levels is therefore performed 2 to 3 months later . 
 <unk> may respond to dopamine agonist treatment – medication that mimics the action of dopamine on the <unk> cells , usually bromocriptine or <unk> . This approach may improve pituitary hormone secretion in more than half the cases , and make supplementary treatment unnecessary . 
 Other specific underlying causes are treated as normally . For example , hemochromatosis is treated by <unk> , the regular removal of a fixed amount of blood . Eventually , this decreases the iron levels in the body and improves the function of the organs in which iron has accumulated . 
 = = = Hormone replacement = = = 
 Most pituitary hormones can be replaced indirectly by administering the products of the effector glands : hydrocortisone ( cortisol ) for adrenal insufficiency , levothyroxine for hypothyroidism , testosterone for male hypogonadism , and estradiol for female hypogonadism ( usually with a progestogen to inhibit unwanted effects on the uterus ) . Growth hormone is available in synthetic form , but needs to be administered parenterally ( by injection ) . <unk> hormone can be replaced by desmopressin ( <unk> ) tablets or nose spray . Generally , the lowest dose of the replacement medication is used to restore wellbeing and correct the deranged results , as excessive doses would cause side @-@ effects or complications . Those requiring hydrocortisone are usually instructed to increase their dose in physically stressful events such as injury , hospitalization and dental work as these are times when the normal supplementary dose may be inadequate , putting the patient at risk of adrenal crisis . 
 Long @-@ term follow up by specialists in endocrinology is generally needed for people with known hypopituitarism . Apart from ensuring the right treatment is being used and at the right doses , this also provides an opportunity to deal with new symptoms and to address complications of treatment . 
 Difficult situations arise in deficiencies of the hypothalamus @-@ pituitary @-@ gonadal axis in people ( both men and women ) who experience infertility ; infertility in hypopituitarism may be treated with subcutaneous infusions of FSH , human chorionic gonadotropin – which mimics the action of LH – and occasionally GnRH . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Several hormone deficiencies associated with hypopituitarism may lead to secondary diseases . For instance , growth hormone deficiency is associated with obesity , raised cholesterol and the metabolic syndrome , and estradiol deficiency may lead to osteoporosis . While effective treatment of the underlying hormone deficiencies may improve these risks , it is often necessary to treat them directly . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Several studies have shown that hypopituitarism is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and some also an increased risk of death of about 50 % to 150 % the normal population . It has been difficult to establish which hormone deficiency is responsible for this risk , as almost all patients studied had growth hormone deficiency . The studies also do not answer the question as to whether the hypopituitarism itself causes the increased mortality , or whether some of the risk is to be attributed to the treatments , some of which ( such as sex hormone supplementation ) have a recognized adverse effect on cardiovascular risk . 
 The largest study to date followed over a thousand people for eight years ; it showed an 87 % increased risk of death compared to the normal population . <unk> of higher risk were : female sex , absence of treatment for sex hormone deficiency , younger age at the time of diagnosis , and a diagnosis of <unk> . Apart from cardiovascular disease , this study also showed an increased risk of death from lung disease . 
 Quality of life may be significantly reduced , even in those people on optimum medical therapy . Many report both physical and psychological problems . It is likely that the commonly used replacement therapies still do not completely mimic the natural hormone levels in the body . Health costs remain about double those of the normal population . 
 Hypopituitarism is usually permanent . It requires lifelong treatment with one or more medicines . But you can expect a normal life span . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 There is only one study that has measured the prevalence ( total number of cases in a population ) and incidence ( annual number of new cases ) of hypopituitarism . This study was conducted in Northern Spain and used hospital records in a well @-@ defined population . The study showed that 45 @.@ 5 people out of 100 @,@ 000 had been diagnosed with hypopituitarism , with 4 @.@ 2 new cases per year . 61 % were due to tumors of the pituitary gland , 9 % due to other types of lesions , and 19 % due to other causes ; in 11 % no cause could be identified . 
 Recent studies have shown that people with a previous traumatic brain injury , spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage ( a type of stroke ) or radiation therapy involving the head have a higher risk of hypopituitarism . After traumatic brain injury , as much as a quarter have persistent pituitary hormone deficiencies . Many of these people may have subtle or non @-@ specific symptoms that are not linked to pituitary problems but attributed to their previous condition . It is therefore possible that many cases of hypopituitarism remain undiagnosed , and that the annual incidence would rise to 31 per 100 @,@ 000 annually if people from these risk groups were to be tested . 
 = = History = = 
 The pituitary was known to the ancients , such as Galen , and various theories were proposed about its role in the body , but major clues as to the actual function of the gland were not advanced until the late 19th century , when acromegaly due to pituitary tumors was described . The first known report of hypopituitarism was made by the German physician and pathologist Dr Morris Simmonds . He described the condition on autopsy in a 46 @-@ year @-@ old woman who had suffered severe puerperal fever eleven years earlier , and subsequently suffered amenorrhea , weakness , signs of rapid aging and anemia . The pituitary gland was very small and there were few remnants of both the anterior and the posterior pituitary . The eponym Simmonds ' syndrome is used infrequently for acquired hypopituitarism , especially when cachexia ( general ill health and malnutrition ) predominates . Most of the classic causes of hypopituitarism were described in the 20th century ; the early 21st century saw the recognition of how common hypopituitarism could be in previous head injury victims . 
 Until the 1950s , the diagnosis of pituitary disease remained based on clinical features and visual field examination , sometimes aided by <unk> and X @-@ ray tomography . Nevertheless , the field of pituitary surgery developed during this time . The major breakthrough in diagnosis came with the discovery of the radioimmunoassay by Rosalyn <unk> and Solomon Berson in the late 1950s . This allowed the direct measurement of the hormones of the pituitary , which as a result of their low concentrations in blood had previously been hard to measure . Stimulation tests were developed in the 1960s , and in 1973 the triple bolus test was introduced , a test that combined stimulation testing with insulin , GnRH and TRH . Imaging of the pituitary , and therefore identification of tumors and other structural causes , improved radically with the introduction of computed tomography in the late 1970s and magnetic resonance imaging in the 1980s . 
 = 2012 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2012 Atlantic hurricane season was extremely active , tied with 1887 , 1995 , 2010 , and 2011 for having the third @-@ most named storms on record . The season officially began on June 1 and ended on November 30 , dates that conventionally delimit the period during each year in which most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic Ocean . However , Alberto , the first system of the year , developed on May 19 – the earliest date of formation since Tropical Storm Ana in 2003 . A second tropical cyclone , Beryl , developed later that month . This was the first occurrence of two pre @-@ season named storms in the Atlantic basin since 1951 . It moved ashore in North Florida on May 29 with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , making it the strongest pre @-@ season storm to make landfall in the Atlantic basin . This season marked the first time since 2009 where no tropical cyclones formed in July . Another record was set by Hurricane Nadine later in the season ; the system became the fourth @-@ longest @-@ lived tropical cyclone ever recorded in the Atlantic , with a total duration of 22 @.@ 25 days . The final storm to form , Tony , dissipated on October 25 – however , Hurricane Sandy , which formed before Tony , became extratropical on October 29 . 
 Pre @-@ season forecasts by the Colorado State University ( CSU ) called for a below average season , with 10 named storms , 4 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes . The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) issued its first outlook on May 24 , predicting a total of 9 – 15 named storms , 4 – 8 hurricanes , and 1 – 3 major hurricanes ; both agencies noted the possibility of an El Niño , which limits tropical cyclone activity . Following two pre @-@ season storms , the CSU updated their forecast to 13 named storms , 5 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes , while the NOAA upped their forecast numbers to 12 – 17 named storms , 5 – 8 hurricanes , and 2 – 3 major hurricanes on August 9 . Despite this , activity far surpassed the predictions . 
 Impact during the 2012 season was widespread and significant . In mid @-@ May , Beryl moved ashore the coastline of Florida , causing 3 deaths . In late June and early August , Tropical Storm Debby and Hurricane Ernesto caused 10 and 13 deaths after striking Florida and the Yucatán , respectively . In mid @-@ August , the remnants of Tropical Storm Helene killed two people after making landfall in Mexico . At least 41 deaths and $ 2 @.@ 39 billion were attributed to Hurricane Isaac , which struck Louisiana on two separate occasions in late August . However , by far the costliest and deadliest cyclone of the season was Hurricane Sandy , which formed on October 22 . After striking Cuba at Category 3 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , the hurricane moved ashore the southern coastline of New Jersey . Sandy left 286 dead and $ 75 billion worth of damage in its wake , making it the second @-@ costliest Atlantic hurricane on record , behind only Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . Collectively , the season 's storms caused at least 355 fatalities and about $ 79 @.@ 2 billion in damage , making 2012 the deadliest season since 2008 and the costliest since 2005 . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 In advance of , and during , each hurricane season , several forecasts of hurricane activity are issued by national meteorological services , scientific agencies , and noted hurricane experts . These include forecasters from the United States NOAA 's National Hurricane and Climate Prediction Center 's , Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray and their associates at CSU , Tropical Storm Risk , and the United Kingdom 's Met Office . The forecasts include weekly and monthly changes in significant factors that help determine the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a particular year . As stated by NOAA and CSU , an average Atlantic hurricane season between 1981 and 2010 contained roughly 12 tropical storms , 6 hurricanes , 3 major hurricanes , and an Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) Index of 66 – 103 units . NOAA typically categorizes a season as either above @-@ average , average , or below @-@ average based on the cumulative ACE Index ; however , the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a hurricane season is considered occasionally as well . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 7 , 2011 , Tropical Storm Risk ( TSR ) , a public consortium consisting of experts on insurance , risk management , and seasonal climate forecasting at University College London , issued an extended @-@ range forecast predicting an above @-@ average hurricane season . In its report , TSR noted that tropical cyclone activity could be about 49 % above the 1950 – 2010 average , with 14 @.@ 1 ( ± 4 @.@ 2 ) tropical storms , 6 @.@ 7 ( ± 3 @.@ 0 ) hurricanes , and 3 @.@ 3 ( ± 1 @.@ 6 ) major hurricanes anticipated , and a cumulative ACE index of 117 ( ± 58 ) . Later that month on December 21 , Weather Services International ( WSI ) issued an extended @-@ range forecast predicting a near average hurricane season . In its forecast , WSI noted that a cooler North Atlantic Oscillation not seen in a decade , combined with weakening La Niña , would result in a near @-@ average season with 12 named storms , 7 hurricanes , and 3 major hurricanes . They also predicted a near @-@ average probability of a hurricane landfall , with a slightly elevated chance on the Gulf Coast of the United States and a slightly reduced chance along the East Coast of the United States . On April 4 , 2012 , Colorado State University ( CSU ) issued their updated forecast for the season , calling for a below @-@ normal season due to an increased chance for the development of an El Niño during the season . In April 2012 , TSR issued their update forecast for the season , slightly revising down their predictions as well . 
 On May 24 , 2012 , NOAA released their forecast for the season , predicting a near @-@ normal season , with nine to fifteen named storms , four to eight hurricanes , and one to three major hurricanes . NOAA based its forecast on higher wind shear , cooler temperatures in the Main Development Region of the Eastern Atlantic , and the continuance of the " high activity " era – known as the Atlantic multidecadal oscillation warm phase – which began in 1995 . Gerry Bell , lead seasonal forecaster at NOAA 's Climate Prediction Center , added the main uncertainty in the outlook was how much below or above the 2012 season would be , and whether the high end of the predicted range is reached dependent on whether El Niño develops or stays in its current Neutral phase . That same day , the United Kingdom Met Office ( UKMO ) issued a forecast of a below @-@ average season . They predicted 10 named storms with a 70 % chance that the number would be between 7 and 13 . However , they do not issue forecasts on the number of hurricanes and major hurricanes . They also predicted an ACE index of 90 with a 70 % chance that the index would be in the range 28 to 152 . On May 30 , 2012 , the Florida State University for Ocean @-@ Atmospheric Prediction Studies ( FSU COAPS ) issued its annual Atlantic hurricane season forecast . The organization predicted 13 named storms , including 7 hurricanes , and an ACE index of 122 . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season outlooks = = = 
 On June 1 , Klotzbach 's team issued their updated forecast for the 2012 season , predicting thirteen named storms and five hurricanes , of which two of those five would further intensify into major hurricanes . The university stated that there was a high amount of uncertainty concerning whether or not an El Niño would develop in time to hinder tropical development in the Atlantic basin . They also stated there was a lower than average chance of a major hurricane impacting the United States coastline in 2012 . On June 6 , Tropical Storm Risk released their second updated forecast for the season , predicting fourteen named storms , six hurricanes , and three major hurricanes . In addition , the agency called for an Accumulated Cyclone Energy index of 100 . Near @-@ average sea surface temperatures and slightly elevated trade winds for cited for lower activity compared to the 2010 and 2011 hurricane seasons . Tropical Storm Risk continued with their forecast of a near @-@ average probability of a United States impact during the season using the 1950 – 2011 long @-@ term normal , but a slightly below @-@ average chance of a United States landfall by the recent 2002 – 2011 normal . 
 On August 9 , 2012 , the NOAA issued their mid @-@ season outlook for the remainder of the 2012 season , upping their final numbers . The agency predicted between twelve and seventeen named storms , five to eight hurricanes , and two to three major hurricanes . Gerry Bell cited warmer @-@ than @-@ normal sea surface temperatures and the continuation of the high activity era across the Atlantic basin since 1995 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 2012 . It was an above average season in which 19 tropical cyclones formed . All nineteen depressions attained tropical storm status , and ten of these became hurricanes . Two hurricanes further intensified into major hurricanes . The season was above average most likely because of neutral conditions in the Pacific Ocean . Three hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 354 deaths and 68 billion in damage . Additionally , Hurricanes Leslie and Rafael also caused losses and fatalities , though neither struck land . The last storm of the season , dissipated on October 29 , over a month before the official end of hurricane season on November 30 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began in the month of May , with Tropical Storms Alberto and Beryl . This was the first occurrence of two pre @-@ season tropical storms in the Atlantic since 1951 . Additionally , Beryl is regarded as the strongest pre @-@ season tropical cyclone landfall in the United States on record . In June , there were also two systems , Hurricane Chris and Tropical Storm Debby . However , no tropical cyclones developed in the month of July , the first phenomenon since 2009 . Activity resumed on August 1 , with the development of Hurricane Ernesto . With a total of eight tropical storms in August , this ties the record set in 2004 . 
 There were only two tropical cyclones that formed in September , though three systems that existed in that month originated in August . Michael became the first major hurricane of the season on September 6 , when it peaked as a Category 3 hurricane . Hurricane Nadine developed September 10 and became extratropical on September 21 . However , Nadine re @-@ developed on September 23 and subsequently lasted until October 3 . With a total duration of 24 days , Nadine was the fourth @-@ longest lasting Atlantic tropical cyclone on record , behind the 1899 San Ciriaco hurricane , Hurricane Ginger in 1971 , and Hurricane Inga in 1969 . In October , there were five tropical cyclones – Tropical Storms Oscar , Patty , and Tony – as well as Hurricanes Rafael and Sandy . This was well average , yet not record activity for the month of October . Hurricane Sandy outlived the final named storm , Tony , and became extratropical on October 29 , ending cyclonic activity in the 2012 season . 
 = = = Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) = = = 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 133 , which was well above the 1981 – 2010 average of 92 . Broadly speaking , ACE is a measure of the power of a tropical or subtropical storm multiplied by the length of time it existed . Therefore , a storm was a long duration , such as Nadine , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , such as Michael , will have high values of ACE . It is only calculated for full advisories on specific tropical and subtropical systems reaching or exceeding wind speeds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) . Accordingly , tropical depressions are not included here . After the storm has dissipated , typically after the end of the season , the NHC reexamines the data , and produces a final report on each storm . These revisions can lead to a revised ACE total either upward or downward compared to the operational value . Until the final reports are issued , ACEs are , therefore , provisional . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Alberto = = = 
 On May 18 , a non @-@ tropical area of low pressure formed from a stationary front offshore the Carolinas , becoming stationary just offshore of South Carolina while producing organized convective activity over the next day . It quickly gained tropical characteristics over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream , and by 1200 UTC on May 19 , the system became Tropical Storm Alberto . Alberto was the first named storm to form during May in the Atlantic basin since Arthur in 2008 . Combined with Aletta , this was the first such occurrence where more than one tropical cyclone in both the Atlantic and East Pacific – located east of 140 ° W – attained tropical storm intensity prior to the start of their respective hurricane seasons . 
 At 2250 UTC on May 19 , a ship near Alberto reported winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , indicating the storm was stronger than previously assessed . Early on May 20 , a minimum barometric pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) was reported . Little strengthening occurred over the next few hours , and in fact , slight weakening occurred that night as southeasterly shear and dry air began to impact the system , leaving the center exposed to the east of the circulation . After remaining a minimal tropical storm for about 24 hours , the storm weakened to a tropical depression early on May 22 as it moved northeastward out to sea . Early on May 22 , Alberto degenerated into a remnant area of low pressure after failing to maintain convection . At the time , it was located about 170 miles ( 270 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . While the storm was active , Alberto produced 3 to 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 52 m ) waves , prompting several ocean rescues . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beryl = = = 
 On May 22 , a weak disturbance formed southwest of Cuba . The disturbance moved north as it became a low @-@ pressure system on May 25 . It was located offshore of North Carolina and it developed into Subtropical Storm Beryl on May 26 . The storm slowly acquired tropical characteristics as it tracked across warmer waters and an environment of decreasing vertical wind shear . Late on May 27 , Beryl transitioned into a tropical cyclone less than 120 miles ( 190 km ) from North Florida . Around that time , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . Early on May 28 , it made landfall near Jacksonville Beach , Florida , with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . The storm was the strongest pre @-@ season tropical cyclone to make landfall on record . It quickly weakened to a tropical depression , dropping heavy rainfall while moving slowly across the Southeastern United States . A cold front turned Beryl to the northeast , and the storm became extratropical on May 30 , while located near the southeast coast of North Carolina . 
 The precursor to Beryl produced heavy rainfall in Cuba , causing flooding and mudslides which damaged or destroyed 1 @,@ 156 homes and resulted in two deaths . Torrential rain affected South Florida and the Bahamas . After forming , Beryl produced rough surf along the US southeastern coast , leaving one person from Folly Beach , South Carolina missing . Upon making landfall in Florida , the storm produced strong winds that left 38 @,@ 000 people without power . High rains alleviated drought conditions and put out wildfires along the storm 's path . A fallen tree killed a man driving in Orangeburg County , South Carolina . In northeast North Carolina , Beryl spawned an EF1 tornado that snapped trees and damaged dozens of homes near the city of Peletier . Overall damage was minor , estimated at $ 148 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Hurricane Chris = = = 
 On June 17 , a low pressure area cut off from a stationary frontal boundary near Bermuda . Due to warm seas and light wind shear , the system became Subtropical Storm Chris on June 19 . After deep convection became persistent , the National Hurricane Center reclassified it as Tropical Storm Chris on June 19 . Despite being over ocean temperatures of 72 ° F ( 22 ° C ) , it strengthened into a hurricane on June 21 . Later that day , Chris peaked with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 974 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . After encountering colder waters , it weakened back to a tropical storm on June 22 . Chris transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 1200 UTC , after interacting with another extratropical low pressure area to its south . 
 The precursor of Chris produced several days of rainfall in Bermuda from June 14 to 17 , totaling 3 @.@ 41 in ( 87 mm ) at the L.F. Wade International Airport . On June 15 , the system produced heavy precipitation , reaching 2 @.@ 59 in ( 66 mm ) at the same location , a daily record . Combined with high tides , localized flooding occurred in poor drainage areas , especially in Mills Creek . Sustained winds peaked at 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) and gusts reached 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) . On June 17 , as the system was rapidly organizing , gale warnings were issued for the island of Bermuda . After transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , the pressure gradient associated with Chris and a nearby non @-@ tropical low produced gale @-@ force winds over the Grand Banks of Newfoundland . Additionally , swells in the area reached 10 to 13 ft ( 3 to 4 m ) . 
 Until 2016 , Chris was the earliest named " C " storm in recorded history , however , when Tropical Storm Colin formed on June 5 , 2016 , that record was broken . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Debby = = = 
 A trough of low pressure in the central Gulf of Mexico developed into Tropical Storm Debby at 1200 UTC on June 23 , while located about 290 miles ( 470 km ) south @-@ southeast of the mouth of the Mississippi River . Despite a projected track toward landfall in Louisiana or Texas , the storm headed the opposite direction , moving slowly north @-@ northeast or northeastward . It steadily strengthened , and at 1800 UTC on June 25 , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . Dry air , westerly wind shear , and upwelling prevented further intensification . Instead , Debby weakened , and late on June 26 , it was a minimal tropical storm . At 2100 UTC , the storm made landfall near Steinhatchee , Florida with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Debby continued to weaken while crossing Florida and became extratropical on June 27 . Its remnants shortly after emerge into the Atlantic and finally dissipated on June 30 . 
 Tropical Storm Debby dropped immense amounts of precipitation near its path . Rainfall peaked at 28 @.@ 78 inches ( 731 mm ) in Curtis Mill , Florida , located in southwestern Wakulla County . The Sopchoppy River , which reached its record height , flooded at least 400 structures in Wakulla County . Additionally , the Suwannee River reached its highest level since Hurricane Dora in 1964 . Further south in Pasco County , the Anclote River and Pithlachascotee River overflowed , flooding communities with " head deep " water and causing damage to 106 homes . An additional 587 homes were inundated after the Black Creek overflowed in Clay County . Several roads and highways in North Florida were left impassable , Interstate 10 and U.S. Route 90 . Coastal flooding also inundated U.S. Routes 19 and 98 . In Central and South Florida , damage was primarily caused by tornadoes , one of which caused a fatality . Overall , Debby resulted in at least $ 210 million in losses and 10 deaths , 8 in Florida and one each in Alabama and South Carolina . 
 = = = Hurricane Ernesto = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Five on August 1 , while located about 810 miles ( 1 @,@ 305 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Wind shear initially caused the depression to remain weak , though by August 2 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Ernesto . The next day , Ernesto entered the Caribbean Sea . As the storm approached the western Caribbean on August 5 , wind shear and dry air briefly halted strengthening ; convection diminished , exposing the low @-@ level circulation , which had become somewhat less defined . After the wind shear and dry air decreased , Ernesto regained deep convection and became a hurricane on August 6 . Early on August 8 , it made landfall in Costa Maya , Quintana Roo as with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . A few hours later , a minimum barometric pressure of 973 mbar ( 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) was recorded . After weakening to a tropical storm and moving into the Bay of Campeche , the storm struck Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz on August 9 . It weakened over Mexico and dissipated on August 10 . The remnants contributed to the development of Tropical Storm Hector in the eastern Pacific . 
 Despite light rainfall and gusty winds on islands such as Barbados , Martinique , and Puerto Rico , impact from Ernesto in the Lesser Antilles was negligible . Rip currents along the coast of the Florida Panhandle resulted in at least 10 lifeguard rescues at Pensacola Beach , while a portion of a store in the same city was washed away . In Mexico , officials reported that 85 @,@ 000 people in Majahual lost power ; roads were damaged elsewhere in state of Quintana Roo . Freshwater flooding occurred along the coast of the Bay of Campeche , including in Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz . Flooding and several landslides lashed mountainous areas of Veracruz , Puebla , and Oaxaca . Officials indicated that 10 @,@ 000 houses were partially damaged by flooding in Veracruz . Flooding occurred well inland in association with the remnants of Ernesto . In Guerrero , at least 81 municipalities were impacted and 5 fatalities were reported . Overall , Ernesto was responsible for 12 deaths and about $ 174 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Florence = = = 
 Early on August 2 , a well @-@ defined tropical wave , although accompanied with disorganized convection , exited the west coast of Africa . Located in a region of low wind shear and warm waters of 79 – 81 ° F ( 26 – 27 ° C ) , a low pressure area developed and became increasingly better defined as it drifted west @-@ northwest . Due to a further organized appearance on microwave and geostationary satellite imagery , it is estimated Tropical Depression Six formed at 1800 UTC on August 3 , while located about 130 miles ( 210 km ) south @-@ southwest of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . After formation , a subsequent increase in wind shear led to slow organization ; despite this , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Florence at 0600 UTC the following day . 
 A central dense overcast pattern and prominent spiral banding developed later on August 4 , indicating that the storm was strengthening . At 0000 UTC on August 5 , Florence attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 002 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . However , weakening soon occurred as dry air diminished the coverage and intensity of convection . Early on August 6 , Florence was downgraded to a tropical depression . The low @-@ level circulation subsequently became exposed and the cyclone degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant area of low pressure at 1200 UTC , while located about midway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Helene = = = 
 A well @-@ defined tropical wave crossed the west coast of Africa on August 5 . It fluctuated in convective organization over the next four days . Late on August 9 , the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Seven , while located about midway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles . While moving rapidly westward , the depression began disorganizing due to southwesterly wind shear . The depression degenerated into an open tropical wave on August 10 , after a Hurricane Hunters flight failed to locate a closed circulation . Thus , the depression degenerated into an open tropical wave . The remnant tropical wave produced heavy rainfall in Trinidad and Tobago , causing flooding and mudslides in Diego Martin on island of Trinidad . Two fatalities , as well as widespread damage resulted from the flooding and mudslides , with losses exceeding TT $ 109 million ( US $ 17 million ) . 
 The remnants were monitored for possible redevelopment over the following days ; however , on August 14 , the system moved inland over Central America and was no longer expected to regenerate . Despite earlier predictions , the remnants of the storm moved over the Bay of Campeche and began to consolidate on August 16 . A Hurricane Hunter aircraft into the system indicated that it regenerated into a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on August 17 , just six hours before strengthening into Tropical Storm Helene . Shortly thereafter , it peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Early on August 18 , Helene weakened back to a tropical depression while moving northwestward . At 1200 UTC it made landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , Mexico . Helene quickly weakened and dissipated at 0000 UTC on August 19 . In Mexico , Helene brought moderate rains to areas previously affected by Hurricane Ernesto . Two communities within the city of Veracruz reported street flooding . 
 = = = Hurricane Gordon = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 10 . After passing over Cape Verde , it moved generally west @-@ northwestward and crossed a region of colder seas . As a result , tropical cyclogenesis was impeded and convective activity remained minimal . As the low pressure system turned to a more northerly direction , it reentered warmer waters . The environment was favorable for further organization , and the system attained deeper convection and a better @-@ defined circulation . It is estimated that Tropical Depression Eight developed at 1200 UTC on August 15 , while located about 690 miles ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . The depression strengthened , and approximately twelve hours later , became Tropical Storm Gordon . 
 After becoming a tropical storm on August 15 , Gordon turned eastward and continued to intensify due to relatively light wind shear . By August 18 , it was upgraded to a hurricane . The storm peaked with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) on the following day , before weakening from colder ocean temperatures and increasing shear . At 0530 UTC August 20 , Gordon struck Santa Maria Island in the Azores , about six and a half hours before weakening to a tropical storm . Later that day , it transitioned into an extratropical low pressure area . Several homes sustained broken doors and windows , and streets were covered with fallen trees . Some areas temporarily lost power when the storm moved over , though electricity was restored hours later . Torrential rains triggered localized flooding , as well as a few landslides . 
 = = = Hurricane Isaac = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Nine at 0600 UTC on August 21 , while located about 720 miles ( 1 @,@ 160 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . The depression headed just north of due west and twelve hours later , strengthened into Tropical Storm Isaac . After intensifying somewhat further , Isaac passed through the Leeward Islands on August 22 . A few islands reported tropical storm force winds and light rainfall , but no damage occurred . Unfavorable conditions , primarily dry air , as well as a reformation of the center caused Isaac to remain disorganized in the eastern Caribbean Sea . Early on August 25 , it made landfall near Jacmel , Haiti as a strong tropical storm . Strong winds and heavy rain impacted numerous camps set up after the 2010 Haiti earthquake , with about 6 @,@ 000 people losing shelter . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 houses were destroyed , resulting in about $ 8 million in damage ; there were 24 deaths confirmed . In neighboring Dominican Republic , 864 houses were damaged and cross loses reached approximately $ 30 million ; five deaths were reported . Isaac became slightly disorganized over Haiti and re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean Sea later on August 25 , hours before striking Guantánamo Province , Cuba with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . There , 6 homes were destroyed and 91 sustained damage . 
 Later on August 25 , Isaac emerged into the southwestern Atlantic Ocean over the Bahama Banks . Initially , the storm posed a threat to Florida and the 2012 Republican National Convention , but passed to the southwest late on August 26 . However , its outerbands spawned tornadoes and dropped isolated areas of heavy rainfall , causing severe local flooding , especially in Palm Beach County . Neighborhoods in The Acreage , Loxahatchee , Royal Palm Beach , and Wellington were left stranded for up to several days . Tornadoes in the state destroyed 1 structure and caused damage to at least 102 others . Isaac reached the Gulf of Mexico and began a strengthening trend , reaching hurricane status on August 28 . At 0000 UTC on the following day , the storm made landfall near the mouth of the Mississippi River in Louisiana with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Three hours later , a dropsonde reported a barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Isaac briefly moved offshore , but made another landfall near Port Fourchon with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at 0800 UTC on August 29 . A combination of storm surge , strong winds , and heavy rainfall left 901 @,@ 000 homes without electricity , caused damage to 59 @,@ 000 houses , and resulted in losses to about 90 % of sugarcane crops . Thousands of people required rescuing from their homes and vehicles due to flooding . The New Orleans area was relatively unscathed , due to levees built after hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 . Isaac slowly weakened while moving inland , and dissipated over Missouri on September 1 . The remnants of Isaac continued generally eastward over southern Illinois before moving southward over Kentucky . On September 3 , the mid @-@ level circulation of the storm split into two parts , with one portion continuing southward into the Gulf of Mexico and the other eastward over Ohio . The remnants brought rainfall to some areas impacted by an ongoing drought . Throughout the United States , damage reached about $ 2 @.@ 35 billion and there were 9 fatalities , most of which was incurred within the state of Louisiana . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Joyce = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on August 19 . The system produced sporadic and disorganized convection for a few days while it moved westward across the eastern tropical Atlantic . Late on August 21 , a well @-@ defined surface low developed in association with the tropical wave , though the associated deep convection was not sufficiently organized . However , by 0600 UTC on August 22 , the system organized enough to be designated Tropical Depression Ten , while located about 690 miles ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cape Verde . The depression was steered toward the west @-@ northwest along the southern periphery of a deep @-@ layer subtropical ridge . 
 Initially , the depression was within a region of with light southwesterly shear , 81 – 82 ° F ( 27 – 28 ° C ) seas , and modestly moist mid @-@ level air . Under these conditions , the depression intensified slowly , becoming Tropical Storm Joyce at 1200 UTC on August 23 . Later that day , Joyce peaked with maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . However , deep convection soon began to diminish around 0000 UTC on August 24 , when the system weakened to a tropical depression . An environment of dry air , coupled with an increase of southwesterly vertical shear induced primarily by an upper @-@ level low to the northwest of Joyce , continued to adversely affect the storm on August 24 . Joyce degenerated into a remnant low pressure area around 1200 UTC that day and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Hurricane Kirk = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the coast of Africa on August 22 , accompanied by a broad area of low pressure . The system moved slowly westward , and the associated convective activity began organizing on August 24 near Cape Verde . However , little additional development occurred during the next three days as the circulation of the low was elongated and poorly defined . The system turned northwestward late on August 25 and continued in that direction until August 27 . Despite the presence of vertical wind shear , convection became more concentrated . The circulation became better @-@ defined , indicating that Tropical Depression Eleven developed at 1800 UTC on August 28 , while located about 1 @,@ 290 miles ( 2 @,@ 080 km ) southwest of the western Azores . 
 The depression initially moved westward before turning northwestward on August 29 in response to a weakness in the subtropical ridge . Minimal intensification was predicted , due to dry air and wind shear . It strengthened into Tropical Storm Kirk on the following day , but persistent wind shear slowed intensification . After a decrease in shear , Kirk quickly strengthened into a hurricane on August 30 . A small eye appeared in satellite imagery on August 31 as the storm peaked with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 970 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . Kirk weakened later that day while moving northward through a break in the subtropical ridge . On September 1 , it fell to tropical storm intensity while recurving into the westerlies . Accelerating northeastward , Kirk weakened further due to increasing shear and decreasing sea surface temperatures . At 0000 UTC September 3 , it merged with a frontal system located about 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) north of the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Leslie = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Twelve while located nearly 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) east of the Leeward Islands on August 30 . About six hours later , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Leslie . Tracking steadily west @-@ northwestward , it slowly intensified due to only marginally favorable conditions . By September 2 , the storm curved north @-@ northwestward while located north of the Leeward Islands . Thereafter , a blocking pattern over Atlantic Canada caused Leslie to drift for four days . Late on September 5 , Leslie was upgraded to a hurricane , shortly before strengthening to its peaking intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 968 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . However , due to its slow movement , the storm caused upwelling , which decreased ocean temperatures , weakening Leslie to a tropical storm on September 7 . 
 The storm drifted until September 9 , when it accelerated while passing east of Bermuda . Relatively strong winds on the island caused hundreds of power outages and knocked down tree branches , electrical poles , and other debris . Re @-@ intensification occurred , with Leslie becoming a hurricane again , before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone near Newfoundland on September 11 . In Atlantic Canada , heavy rains fell in both Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . In the latter , localized flooding occurred , especially in the western portions of the province . Also in Newfoundland , strong winds ripped off roofs , downed trees , and left 45 @,@ 000 homes without power . Additionally , a partially built house was destroyed and several incomplete homes were damaged in Pouch Cove . Overall , Leslie caused about $ 10 @.@ 1 million in damage and no fatalities . 
 = = = Hurricane Michael = = = 
 A shortwave disturbance spawned a well @-@ defined low pressure area on September 2 while located about 840 miles ( 1 @,@ 350 km ) southwest of the Azores . The low moved southwestward and developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen at 0600 UTC on September 3 . It moved westward and then northwestward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Michael at 0600 UTC on September 4 , while located about 1 @,@ 235 miles ( 1 @,@ 990 km ) southwest of the Azores . Initially , it was predicted by the National Hurricane Center that the depression would only strengthened slightly and then become extratropical by September 6 , due to an anticipated increase in wind shear . Later on September 6 , the system entered a region of weak steering currents , causing it to drift northeastward . In the 24 hours proceeding 1200 UTC on September 5 , the storm rapidly intensified . Late on September 5 , it was upgraded to a hurricane , before becoming a Category 2 hurricane early on the following day . 
 At 1200 UTC on September 6 , the storm reached Category 3 hurricane strength and attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 964 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Michael was thus the first major hurricane of the season . Thereafter , it weakened back to a Category 2 hurricane later on September 6 . The storm curved back to the northwest and briefly weakened to a Category 1 hurricane on September 8 . The cyclone turned westward on September 9 and resumed weakening later that day , due to encountering wind shear generated by the outflow of nearby Hurricane Leslie . Michael weakened to a tropical storm while accelerating northward on September 11 , several hours before degenerated into remnant low pressure area , while located well west of the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Nadine = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen on September 10 , while located about 885 miles ( 1 @,@ 425 km ) west of Cape Verde . Initially , it moved west @-@ northwest , intensifying into Tropical Storm Nadine early on September 12 . During the next 24 hours , the storm intensified quickly , reaching winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) by early on September 13 ; Nadine maintained this intensity for the next 36 hours . A break in the subtropical ridge caused the storm to curved northwestward , followed by a turn to the north on September 14 . Later that day , the storm was upgraded to a hurricane . On September 15 , it turned eastward to the north of the ridge . By the following day , Nadine began weakening and was downgraded to a tropical storm early on September 17 . The storm then curved east @-@ northeastward and eventually northeastward , posing a threat to the Azores . Although Nadine veered east @-@ southeastward , it did cause relatively strong winds on the islands . 
 Late on September 21 , Nadine curved southward , shortly before degenerating into non @-@ tropical low @-@ pressure area . After moving into an area of more favorable conditions , it regenerated into Tropical Storm Nadine early on September 23 . The storm then drifted and moved aimlessly in the northeastern Atlantic , turning west @-@ northwestward on September 23 and southwestward on September 25 . Thereafter , Nadine curved westward on September 27 and northwestward on September 28 . During that five @-@ day period , minimal change in intensity occurred , with Nadine remaining a weak to moderate tropical storm . However , by 1200 UTC on September 28 , the storm re @-@ strengthened into a hurricane . Slow intensification continued , with Nadine peaking with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 978 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) on September 30 . Thereafter , Nadine began weakened after turning southward , and was downgraded to a tropical storm on October 1 . The storm then curved southeastward and then east @-@ northeastward ahead of a deep @-@ layer trough . After strong wind shear and cold waters left Nadine devoid of nearly all deep convection , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on October 4 , while located about 195 miles ( 315 km ) southwest of the central Azores . The low rapidly moved northeastward , degenerated into a trough of low pressure , and was absorbed by a cold front later that day . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Oscar = = = 
 A tropical wave and an accompanying low pressure area emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 28 . Minimal organization occurred until October 2 , when deep convection developed and began organizing . At 0600 UTC on October 3 , the system became Tropical Depression Fifteen , while located about 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) west of Cape Verde . A mid @-@ level ridge near Cape Verde and a mid to upper @-@ level low pressure northeast of the Leeward Islands forced the depression to move north @-@ northwestward at roughly 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) . After further consolidation of convection near its low @-@ level center , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Oscar later on October 3 . 
 Although strong wind shear began exposing the low @-@ level center of circulation to the west of deep convection , Oscar continued to intensify . Oscar curved northeastward and accelerated on October 4 , in advance of an approaching cold front . At 0600 UTC on October 5 , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Six hours later , ASCAT Scatterometer and satellite data indicated that Oscar degenerated into a trough while located well northwest of Cape Verde , which was absorbed by the cold front early on October 6 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Patty = = = 
 A weak surface trough detached from a quasi @-@ stationary frontal system on October 6 , while located between 345 and 460 miles ( 555 and 740 km ) north of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands . The trough approached the southern Bahamas and acquired a closed circulation late on October 10 , developing into Tropical Depression Sixteen early on the following day . Initially , the National Hurricane Center predicted no further intensification , citing strong vertical wind shear . However , the depression strengthened and by 0600 UTC on October 11 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Patty , while centered about 175 miles ( 282 km ) east @-@ northeast of San Salvador Island in The Bahamas . 
 Although it reached tropical storm status , the National Hurricane Center noted that Patty was " on borrowed time " , as the storm was predicted to eventually succumb to unfavorable conditions . At 0000 UTC on October 12 , Patty attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . Later that day , increasing vertical wind shear caused the storm to weaken . Early on October 13 , Patty was downgraded to a tropical depression , about six hours before degenerating into a trough of low pressure . 
 = = = Hurricane Rafael = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on October 5 . It slowly organized while moving westward and crossed the Lesser Antilles between October 11 and October 12 . The system was classified as Tropical Storm Rafael at 1800 UTC on October 12 , while located about 200 miles ( 320 km ) south @-@ southeast of St. Croix . Though initially disorganized due to wind shear , a subsequent decrease allowed for significant convective activity to develop by October 14 . While moving north @-@ northwestward the following day , Rafael intensified into a hurricane . A cold front moving off the East Coast of the United States caused the system to turn northward and eventually northeastward by October 16 , at which time it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 969 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . As the cyclone entered a more stable atmosphere and into increasingly cooler seas , Rafael became extratropical by late on October 17 . 
 Although a disorganized tropical cyclone , Rafael produced flooding across the northeastern Caribbean islands . As much as 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rain fell across portions of the Lesser Antilles , causing mudslides and landslides , as well river flooding . In addition , the heavy rains led to significant crop loss . Near @-@ hurricane @-@ force winds were recorded on Saint Martin , while tropical storm @-@ force gusts occurred widespread . Lightning activity as a result of heavy thunderstorms caused many fires and power outages . One fatality occurred when a woman in Guadeloupe unsuccessfully attempted to drive her car across a flooded roadway . As Rafael passed just to the east of Bermuda as a hurricane , light rainfall was recorded . Gusts over 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) left hundreds of houses without electricity . Large swells from the system caused significant damage to the coastline of Nova Scotia , while many roads were washed away or obscured with debris . However , damage was minimal overall , reaching about $ 2 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Sandy = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Eighteen at 1200 UTC on October 22 , while located about 350 miles ( 560 km ) south @-@ southwest of Kingston , Jamaica . Six hours later , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Sandy . Initially , the storm headed southwestward , but re @-@ curved to the north @-@ northeast due to mid to upper @-@ level trough in the northwestern Caribbean Sea . A gradual increase in organization and deepening occurred , with Sandy becoming a hurricane on October 24 . Several hours later , it made landfall near Bull Bay , Jamaica as a moderate Category 1 hurricane . In that country , there was 1 fatality and damage to thousands of homes , resulting in about $ 100 million in losses . After clearing Jamaica , Sandy began to strengthen significantly . At <unk> UTC on October 25 , it struck near Santiago de Cuba in Cuba , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) ; this made Sandy the second major hurricane of the season . In the province of Santiago de Cuba alone , 132 @,@ 733 homes were damaged , of which 15 @,@ 322 were destroyed and 43 @,@ 426 lost their roofs . The storm resulted in 11 deaths and $ 2 billion in damage in Cuba . It also produced widespread devastation in Haiti , where over 27 @,@ 000 homes were flooded , damaged , or destroyed , and 40 % of the corn , beans , rice , banana , and coffee crops were lost . The storm left $ 750 million in damage , 54 deaths , and 21 people missing . 
 The storm weakened slightly while crossing Cuba and emerged into the southwestern Atlantic Ocean as a Category 2 hurricane late on October 25 . Shortly thereafter , it moved through the central Bahamas , where three fatalities and $ 300 million in damage was reported . Early on October 27 , it briefly weakened to a tropical storm , before re @-@ acquiring hurricane intensity later that day . In the Southeastern United States , impact was limited to gusty winds , light rainfall , and rough surf . The outerbands of Sandy impacted the island of Bermuda , with a tornado in Sandys Parish damaging a few homes and businesses . Movement over the Gulf Stream and baroclinic processes caused the storm to deepen , with the storm becoming a Category 2 hurricane again at 1200 UTC on October 29 . Although it soon weakened to a Category 1 hurricane , the barometric pressure decreased to 940 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . At 2100 UTC , Sandy became extratropical , while located just offshore New Jersey . The center of the now extratropical storm moved inland near Brigantine late on October 29 . In the Northeastern United States , damage was most severe in New Jersey and New York . Within the former , 346 @,@ 000 houses were damaged or destroyed , while nearly 19 @,@ 000 businesses suffered severe losses . In New York , an estimated 305 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . Severe coastal flooding occurred in New York City , with the hardest hit areas being New Dorp Beach , Red Hook , and the <unk> ; eight tunnels of the subway system were inundated . Heavy snowfall was also reported , peaking at 36 inches ( 910 mm ) in West Virginia . Additionally , the remnants of Sandy left 2 deaths and $ 100 million in damage in Canada , with Ontario and Quebec being the worst impacted . Overall , 286 fatalities were attributed to Sandy . Damages totaled $ 71 @.@ 4 billion in the United States and $ 75 billion overall , making Sandy the second @-@ costliest Atlantic hurricane in recorded history , behind only Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Tony = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on October 11 . The wave split , with a portion later developing into Hurricane Sandy , while the other drifted slowly in the eastern Atlantic . The latter portion interacted with an upper @-@ level trough , which developed into a surface low pressure area on October 21 . After acquiring deeper convection , the system was as Tropical Depression Nineteen at 1800 UTC on October 22 . The depression headed northward along the eastern periphery of a cutoff low pressure area . Although wind shear was not very strong , the depression initially failed to strengthen . Nonetheless , the depression organized further and intensified into Tropical Storm Tony at 0000 UTC on October 24 . 
 A mid @-@ level trough to the northwest and a ridge to the east caused the storm to curve northeastward on October 24 . Tony strengthened further , and by 1200 UTC on October 24 , attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . The storm maintained this intensity for about 24 hours while moving east @-@ northeastward and accelerating . On October 25 , Tony began to weaken due to a combination of increasing vertical wind shear and decreasing sea surface temperatures . Later that day , the circulation of Tony began to entrain cooler and drier air , while shear displaced the deep convection well away from the center . By 1800 UTC on October 25 , the storm was declared extratropical after it took on a frontal cyclone appearance on satellite imagery . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms in the North Atlantic in 2012 . The names not retired from this list will be used again in the 2018 season . This is the same list used in the 2006 season . The names Kirk , Oscar , Patty , Rafael , Sandy , and Tony were used for Atlantic storms for the first time in 2012 . The name Kirk replaced Keith after 2000 , but was not used in 2006 . Two names , Valerie and William , were not used during the course of the year . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On April 11 , 2013 , at the 35th session of the RA IV hurricane committee , the name " Sandy " was retired due to the damage and deaths it caused , and will not be used for another Atlantic hurricane . Sandy was replaced with Sara for the 2018 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 The following table lists all of the storms that formed in the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 2012 USD . 
 = Eppur Si <unk> ( The West Wing ) = 
 " Eppur Si <unk> " is the sixteenth episode of The West Wing 's fifth season , and episode 104 from the start . It originally aired on NBC March 3 , 2004 . Events centre on a controversy relating to the National Institutes of Health , involving President Bartlet ’ s middle daughter Ellie . Written by Alexa Junge and directed by Llewellyn Wells , the episode contains guest appearances by Michael Gaston and Deirdre Lovejoy , as well as characters from Sesame Street . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Republican Congresswoman Barbara Layton ( Lovejoy ) starts a campaign against publicly funded NIH projects into sexual diseases . The attack is based on a list of seemingly useless projects , but by association , her real target becomes the president 's daughter Ellie , who is working on a study into the Human papillomavirus that researched conditions for prostitutes in Puerto Rico . The President is infuriated at having a family member dragged into political battles , and Toby tries to discredit the attack by finding its source . At first the list seems to originate from a far @-@ right group called the " Traditional Values Alliance " , but Toby 's assistant Rena uncovers an updated list that shows it came from within the administration . Toby immediately suspects the Vice President 's office . When confronted , Will takes full responsibility , and assures that the list was compiled purely for internal use and not leaked on purpose . Will suspects that his boss might have leaked the material on purpose , however , and Russell in private agrees he has ties to the Republicans on health issues and notes that having some distance from the President isn 't a bad thing for him . Will is left utterly disgusted with the VP . 
 Meanwhile , President Bartlet tries to persuade Ellie to speak to the press to contain the incidence , but Ellie insists she is not as comfortable with the spotlight as the other members of the family . She later watches her mother do a light @-@ hearted appearance on Sesame Street , to defend her right to practice medicine even after voluntarily giving up her licence . This inspires her to follow her father 's advice , and give a passionate public statement about the necessity of a politically independent scientific community . 
 In parallel storylines , Josh tries to end a deadlock on the appointment of a 6th Circuit federal court judge . His old friend Eric Hayden ( Gaston ) has been waiting for a year for confirmation from the Republican @-@ led Congress , and is offered the position of dean of Georgetown 's law school . But Josh suggests making a temporary recess appointment that will at least put the issue on the agenda and Hayden agrees . When Josh goes to suggest this to Leo he is told that the issue will have to wait for one of the Supreme Court justices has died . Assuming it is the ailing Chief Justice Roy Ashland that has passed , Josh is surprised to learn that it is 52 @-@ year old Justice Owen Brady , taken by a heart attack . C.J. , meanwhile , tries to make things right with resurfaced college boyfriend Ben , whom she has been forced to ignore due to her workload . Based on Ben 's reaction at the end of their very brief conversation , C.J. regrets her approach and fears that she may have caused things with Ben to end before they could even begin . Upon voicing this concern to Toby he advices her to go to Ben and fix it . Ryan Pierce , the intern working for Josh , ( uncharacteristically ) fails to show up for work . Josh had failed to even notice until Donna voices her concern as she tries , unsuccessfully , to get a hold of Ryan . 
 = = Social and cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode refers to the president quoting Galileo Galilei , leaving the Roman Inquisition after having recanted his heliocentric theory of the universe . " Eppur si muove " – " And yet it moves " . The story – as Ellie points out – is probably apocryphal , but evidence shows that it was current as early as a decade after Galileo ’ s trial . 
 The advocacy group " Traditional Values Alliance " is a thinly veiled version of the real @-@ life " Traditional Values Coalition " ( TVC ) . TVC sent a letter of protest to NBC producers , reacting to their portrayal on the show . In particular it was the association with a group stating that " The Lord Hates Homosexuals " that provoked the coalition , reading in this an allusion to the controversial anti @-@ gay pastor Fred Phelps . TVC , the group pointed out in its letter , had clearly distanced itself from Phelps and his methods . 
 The restaurant , " 1789 " , that Ben and C.J. planned lunch at is a real restaurant in Washington . 
 = Gianni Schicchi = 
 Gianni Schicchi ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is a comic opera in one act by Giacomo Puccini to an Italian libretto by <unk> Forzano , composed in 1917 – 18 . The libretto is based on an incident mentioned in Dante 's Divine Comedy . The work is the third and final part of Puccini 's Il trittico ( The Triptych ) — three one @-@ act operas with contrasting themes , originally written to be presented together . Although it continues to be performed with one or both of the other trittico operas , Gianni Schicchi is now more frequently staged either alone or with short operas by other composers . The aria " O mio babbino caro " is one of Puccini 's best known , and one of the most popular arias in opera . 
 Puccini had long considered writing a set of one @-@ act operas which would be performed together in a single evening , but faced with a lack of suitable subjects and opposition from his publisher , he repeatedly put the project aside . However , by 1916 Puccini had completed the one @-@ act tragedy Il tabarro and , after considering various ideas , he began work the following year on the solemn , religious , all @-@ female opera Suor Angelica . Gianni Schicchi , a comedy , completes the triptych with a further contrast of mood . The score combines elements of Puccini 's modern style of harmonic dissonance with lyrical passages reminiscent of Rossini , and it has been praised for its inventiveness and imagination . 
 When Il trittico premiered at New York 's Metropolitan Opera in December 1918 , Gianni Schicchi became an immediate hit , whereas the other two operas were received with less enthusiasm . This pattern was broadly repeated at the Rome and London premieres and led to commercial pressures to abandon the less successful elements . Although on artistic grounds Puccini opposed performing the three operas except as the original triptych , by 1920 he had given his reluctant consent to separate performances . Gianni Schicchi has subsequently become the most @-@ performed part of Il trittico and has been widely recorded . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 A man named Gianni Schicchi is only briefly referred to in Dante 's Inferno Canto XXX . In that canto , Dante visits the Circle of Impersonators and sees a man savagely attacking another . Dante is told that the attacker is Schicchi , condemned to Hell for impersonating Buoso Donati and making his will highly favorable to Schicchi . 
 The plot used in the opera derives from an 1866 edition of The Divine Comedy by philologist Pietro <unk> , which contained an appendix with commentary attributed to an anonymous Florentine of the 14th century . In this version , Buoso wishes to make a will , but is put off doing so by his son , Simone . Once it is too late , Simone fears that Buoso , before his illness , may have made a will unfavourable to him . Simone calls on Schicchi for advice , and Schicchi has the idea of impersonating Buoso and making a new will . Simone promises Schicchi he will be well rewarded , but Schicchi takes no chances , " leaving " a considerable sum and Buoso 's mule to himself ( though most goes to Simone ) , and makes the bequests conditional on Simone 's distributing the estate within fifteen days , otherwise everything will go to charity . 
 Both Schicchi and Buoso Donati were historical characters . Dante 's verses , and the opera , are based on an actual incident that took place in 13th century Florence . Dante had several reasons for his harsh treatment of Schicchi : Dante 's wife , Gemma , was of the Donati family ; the poet himself was of pure Florentine descent . He despised members of the peasant class such as Schicchi . Dante 's class prejudice displays itself in several episodes in the Inferno : in one , three noble Florentines , who have died and gone to Hell , ask Dante for news of their home city . A disgusted Dante tells them that the city is now dominated by the nouveau riche . 
 According to Burton Fisher , Puccini and Forzano borrowed heavily from the commedia dell 'arte tradition in Gianni Schicchi . Schicchi himself recalls the roguish Harlequin , while his daughter Lauretta , whose romance is nearly foiled by Buoso 's relatives , resembles <unk> . Simone is drawn from Pantaloon , while the poverty @-@ stricken Betto recalls the buffoonish valet Zany . Doctor Spinelloccio recalls the classic doctor from the commedia dell 'arte , <unk> even to his Bolognese origin . The Moor whose death momentarily scares the relatives , and his captain , are stock characters from commedia dell 'arte . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Place : Florence 
 Time : 1299 . 
 As Buoso Donati lies dead in his curtained four @-@ poster bed , his relatives gather round to mourn his passing , but are really more interested in learning the contents of his will . Among those present are his cousins Zita and Simone , his poor @-@ relation brother @-@ in @-@ law Betto , and Zita 's nephew Rinuccio . Betto mentions a rumour he has heard that Buoso has left everything to a monastery ; this disturbs the others and precipitates a frantic search for the will . The document is found by Rinuccio , who is confident that his uncle has left him plenty of money . He withholds the will momentarily and asks Zita to allow him to marry Lauretta , daughter of Gianni Schicchi , a newcomer to Florence . Zita replies that if Buoso has left them rich , he can marry whom he pleases ; she and the other relatives are anxious to begin reading the will . A happy Rinuccio sends little Gherardino to fetch Schicchi and Lauretta . 
 As they read , the relatives ' worst fears are soon realised ; Buoso has indeed bequeathed his fortune to the monastery . They break out in woe and indignation and turn to Simone , the oldest present and a former mayor of Fucecchio , but he can offer no help . Rinuccio suggests that only Gianni Schicchi can advise them what to do , but this is scorned by Zita and the rest , who sneer at Schicchi 's humble origins and now say that marriage to the daughter of such a peasant is out of the question . Rinuccio defends Schicchi in an aria " Avete torto " ( You 're mistaken ) , after which Schicchi and Lauretta arrive . Schicchi quickly grasps the situation , and Rinuccio begs him for help , but Schicchi is rudely told by Zita to " be off " and take his daughter with him . Rinuccio and Lauretta listen in despair as Schicchi announces that he will have nothing to do with such people . Lauretta makes a final plea to him with " O mio babbino caro " ( Oh , my dear papa ) , and he agrees to look at the will . After twice scrutinizing it and concluding that nothing can be done , an idea occurs to him . He sends his daughter outside so that she will be innocent of what is to follow . 
 First , Schicchi establishes that no one other than those present knows that Buoso is dead . He then orders the body removed to another room . A knock announces the arrival of the doctor , Spinelloccio . Schicchi conceals himself behind the bed curtains , mimics Buoso 's voice and declares that he 's feeling better ; he asks the doctor to return that evening . Boasting that he has never lost a patient , Spinelloccio departs . Schicchi then unveils his plan in the aria " Si <unk> dal <unk> " ( Run to the notary ) ; having established in the doctor 's mind that Buoso is still alive , Schicchi will disguise himself as Buoso and dictate a new will . All are delighted with the scheme , and <unk> Schicchi with personal requests for Buoso 's various possessions , the most treasured of which are " the mule , the house and the mills at <unk> " . A funeral bell rings , and everyone fears that the news of Buoso 's death has emerged , but it turns out that the bell is tolling for the death of a neighbour 's Moorish servant . The relatives agree to leave the disposition of the mule , the house and the mills to Schicchi , though each in turn offers him a bribe . The women help him to change into Buoso 's clothes as they sing the lyrical trio " <unk> , <unk> " ( Undress , little boy ) . Before taking his place in the bed , Schicchi warns the company of the grave punishment for those found to have falsified a will : exile from Florence together with the loss of a hand . 
 The notary arrives , and Schicchi starts to dictate the new will , declaring any prior will null and void . To general satisfaction he allocates the minor bequests , but when it comes to the mule , the house and the mills , he orders that these be left to " my devoted friend Gianni Schicchi " . <unk> , the family can do nothing while the lawyer is present , especially when Schicchi slyly reminds them of the penalties that discovery of the ruse will bring . Their outburst of rage when the notary leaves is countered by a love duet from Lauretta and Rinuccio , " Lauretta mia " ; there is now no bar to their marriage , since Schicchi can provide a full dowry . Schicchi chases the relatives out of what is now his house , and when he returns stands moved at the sight of the two lovers . He turns to the audience and asks them to agree that no better use could be found for Buoso 's wealth . Although the poet Dante has condemned him to hell for this trick , Schicchi asks the audience to forgive him in light of " extenuating circumstances . " 
 = = Composition history = = 
 The one @-@ act opera genre had become increasingly popular in Italy following the 1890 competition sponsored by publisher Edoardo <unk> for the best such work , which was won by the young Pietro Mascagni 's Cavalleria rusticana . With Tosca essentially completed by November 1899 , Puccini sought a new project . Among sources he considered , before proceeding with Madama Butterfly , were three works by French dramatist Alphonse Daudet that Puccini thought might be made into a trilogy of one @-@ act operas . 
 After Butterfly premiered in 1904 , Puccini again had difficulty finding a new subject . He further considered the idea of composing three one @-@ act operas to be performed together , but found his publisher , Giulio Ricordi , firmly opposed to such a project , convinced that it would be expensive to cast and produce . The composer then planned to work with his longtime librettist , Giuseppe Giacosa , on an opera about Marie Antoinette , a project frustrated by the librettist 's illness . Puccini wrote in November 1905 , " Will we go back to it ? [ Maria <unk> ] If I find three one @-@ act works that suit me , I 'll put off M.A. " Puccini pursued neither project , as Giacosa 's illness led to his death in September 1906 . 
 In March 1907 , Puccini wrote to Carlo <unk> , Ricordi 's representative in Naples , proposing three one @-@ act operas based on scenes from stories by Russian novelist Maxim Gorky . By May the composer had set aside this proposal to concentrate on the project which became La <unk> del West , although he did not wholly abandon the idea of a multiple @-@ opera evening . His next idea in this vein , some years later , was for a two @-@ opera bill , one tragic and one comic ; he later expanded this to include a third opera with a mystic or religious tone . By November 1916 Puccini had completed the " tragic " element , which became Il tabarro , but he still lacked ideas for the other two works . He considered staging Il tabarro in combination with his own early work Le <unk> , or with other two @-@ act operas which might be used to round out the evening 's entertainment . Finally , librettist <unk> Forzano presented the composer with two works of his own , which became Suor Angelica and Gianni Schicchi . The latter would be Puccini 's first setting of a comic text ; although his earlier operas , for example La bohème , contain comic episodes , these are merely ancillary to the drama to provide contrast . 
 Forzano wrote to Tito Ricordi , Giulio 's son , on 3 March 1917 : 
 I sent the libretto of Suor Angelica to Maestro Puccini some days ago . He has declared himself – kind as he is – very satisfied ... I have also finished a brief outline of a plot based on Gianni Schicchi . You know the Maestro 's opinion of this subject , which is rich in possibilities and whose comic nature is quite out of the ordinary . 
 In fact , Puccini was at first less than enthusiastic about the idea for this comic opera – Florence as a setting did not appeal to him , and he feared the public would have little interest in the subject . However , he soon became interested , and did some work on the piece even while composing Suor Angelica . The religious @-@ themed opera was completed in September 1917 , and Puccini turned his full attention to Gianni Schicchi , although the war news and the 1918 influenza pandemic , in which Puccini lost a sister , distracted him from his work . The first draft was completed on 20 April 1918 , and Puccini continued to refine and orchestrate it through the summer of 1918 . 
 With the trilogy complete , Puccini had to decide on a place for the premiere . In 1918 , travel was risky and uncertain . Puccini received an offer from Buenos Aires which he refused , unwilling to have so complex a work first performed overseas in his absence . He finally agreed that the premiere could take place at the Metropolitan Opera in New York , without his being there , on the basis of performing instructions which he supplied to the conductor . Gianni Schicchi proved to be the last opera completed by Puccini . 
 = = Performance history = = 
 = = = Early performances = = = 
 Gianni Schicchi was first performed at the Metropolitan Opera on 14 December 1918 , with Roberto <unk> conducting , as the final part of Il trittico . While the sold @-@ out house showed polite enthusiasm for Il tabarro and Suor Angelica , Gianni Schicchi was , in the words of the New @-@ York Tribune 's critic , " received with uproarious delight " . In the Evening Sun , W.J. Henderson called it " one of the most delightful bits ever put upon the Met stage " . The undoubted " pearl of the evening " , he said , was Lauretta 's aria " O mio babbino caro " which , despite a public notice forbidding encores , was repeated through popular insistence . The only singer to appear in all three works was American soprano Marie Tiffany , who played one of the lovers in Il tabarro , a lay sister in Suor Angelica , and Nella in Gianni Schicchi . Il trittico was performed at the Met 's Philadelphia opera house on 17 December with the same cast , before returning to New York for five more performances during the 1918 / 19 season . 
 At the time of the New York premiere , Il trittico was in rehearsal in Rome in preparation for an Italian premiere at the Teatro Costanzi . Puccini wrote Tito Ricordi that the rehearsals were going slowly , but that the orchestra sounded fine , at least in Gianni Schicchi . The Italian premiere , more important to Puccini than the New York world premiere , took place on 11 January 1919 . Gianni Schicchi was again warmly received , more so than the first two operas of Il trittico . Among those dissatisfied by the triptych was Puccini 's friend , the conductor Arturo Toscanini , who was in the audience for the Rome premiere . Toscanini was disgusted by the verismo of Il tabarro , and left the performance after the first curtain . This caused a rift in his relationship with Puccini , who stated that he would not allow " this god " to conduct the London premiere , though the two were later reconciled . At the Rome premiere , the part of Rinuccio was sung by the Canadian tenor Edward Johnson , a future general manager of the Met . Johnson later recalled that , at the composer 's request , he had dragged a mock @-@ reluctant Puccini from the wings to acknowledge the house 's applause . 
 In 1919 , Puccini visited London to discuss plans for the following year 's Covent Garden premiere of Il trittico . This took place on 18 June 1920 ; King George V and Queen Mary were present , and called Puccini to their box to give him their congratulations . With Toscanini not considered , Puccini hoped that Sir Thomas Beecham would conduct the premiere , but he declined and Gaetano <unk> conducted . Once again , only Gianni Schicchi was received with real warmth . 
 Other early performances included the October 1920 production of Il trittico in German , at the Vienna State Opera . In the years following the premiere , Puccini made modifications to the three operas , but Gianni Schicchi required few . The principal change was to Rinuccio 's arioso , " Avete torto " , which was set in a higher pitch to take better advantage of the tenor voice . 
 By 1920 Puccini was facing increasing pressure , not only from impresarios but also from his publishing firm , Casa Ricordi , to allow Il trittico to be broken up and presented separately . Opera houses first wanted to omit Suor Angelica , which had proven the least popular of the three , but some wished to omit Il tabarro as well . Puccini had left London confident that Il trittico would gain a place in the Covent Garden repertoire , but soon learned that the opera house 's director , Henry V. Higgins , had removed Suor Angelica , feeling that the audience disliked it . In fact , Higgins would never stage it again . Puccini vociferously objected , as did his longtime London friend , Sybil Seligman , to no avail . Higgins then decided to remove Il tabarro , and stage Gianni Schicchi together with a Russian ballet presentation . Puccini retorted , " This is a real betrayal " , but in the end gave in and permitted the performance . Puccini , however , was still convinced that the three works should be performed together , and that his original conception was being " brutally torn to pieces " . The Metropolitan Opera joined in the dismemberment : after 1920 , it would not again present the three operas together until 1975 . 
 = = = Later performances = = = 
 Gianni Schicchi returned to the Met in 1926 , after Puccini 's death , shorn of the other two parts of its operatic triptych , but instead mated to Ruggero Leoncavallo 's two @-@ act opera Pagliacci . The 1926 production , by Wilhelm von <unk> , featured sets by Joseph Novak . In the following years at the Met , Gianni Schicchi would form part of a bill with such diverse works as Engelbert Humperdinck 's Hänsel und Gretel , Italo <unk> 's L 'amore dei tre re , and even be incestuously mated with Puccini 's own La bohème . In 1952 , Novak 's sets were revised by Wilhelm von <unk> in a production which remained in service until 1958 . 
 Among the leading singers associated with the opera , Tito Gobbi was particularly prominent in the 1950s and 1960s . He first sang the role of Schicchi in the Rome production in 1951 ; in subsequent years he appeared in further Rome seasons , in Bologna , and at La Scala , Milan , where Renata Scotto sang Lauretta in Carlo <unk> 's production . Gobbi directed and sang in the 1969 production at the Teatro Comunale di Firenze , and later that year performed in and directed the same version at the August 1969 Edinburgh Festival . 
 In 1974 , the Met gave Gianni Schicchi its first new production since 1926 . The production , by Fabrizio <unk> , was paired with the Met debut of Bartók 's Bluebeard 's Castle . The following year , the Met revived Il trittico in the original form , combining the <unk> production with new productions for the other two operas by the same director . The 1975 Schicchi featured Renata Scotto as Lauretta . Scotto also played the two other Il trittico heroines , a feat she repeated later that season , on tour , and when the three operas were again presented by the Met in 1981 . When the production was revived again by the Met in 1989 , Teresa Stratas sang the " trittico hat @-@ trick " . Lili <unk> sang the mezzo @-@ soprano leads in all three operas ( Zita in Gianni Schicchi ) and Cornell MacNeil played Schicchi . 
 Glyndebourne Festival Opera put on a 2004 double bill of Gianni Schicchi and Rachmaninoff 's The <unk> Knight , in which the sets for the two operas ( designed by Vicki Mortimer ) are back @-@ to @-@ back on a turntable . In 2007 Los Angeles Opera announced that it would be staging Il trittico in the 2008 / 2009 season , with Woody Allen making his operatic directing debut in Gianni Schicchi . The production starred baritone Sir Thomas Allen , soprano Laura <unk> , and tenor <unk> Pirgu . The 2007 Royal Opera House production by Richard Jones updated the action to a shabby 1940s Italy of " <unk> chamber pots , garish floral wallpaper and damp ceilings " , with Bryn Terfel in the title role " a masterpiece of monstrous vulgarity " . In the 2009 revival of this production , Schicchi was sung by Thomas Allen , while Gwynne Howell , as Simone , celebrated 40 years with the Royal Opera . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In reviewing the New York premiere , the critics greeted Gianni Schicchi warmly ; most reviewers found it to be the best of the three operas . New York Herald Tribune critic Henry Krehbiel described it as " so uproariously funny ... so full of life , humor , and ingenious devices " . The New York Times reviewer James Huneker considered the opera to be " a rollicking , madcap scherzo , overflowing with merry <unk> ... And the last shall be first . " Huneker praised De Luca as " a most engaging rascal , fit for a minor niche in <unk> 's gallery " . The Times critic also was amused by <unk> Malatesta as " The ' Kid ' Gherardino , who is spanked by the irate family " . 
 Rome 's critics gave Il trittico as a whole a warmer reception , but still saw Gianni Schicchi as the best of the three . Alberto <unk> in La <unk> noted , " In terms of harmonic technique , Il tabarro and Schicchi advance quite startling elements of novelty . Nothing that contemporary art has produced escapes the studious and astute Giacomo Puccini . " <unk> also stated that while many critics were waiting for the first two operas with their fists drawn , Gianni Schicchi disarmed these " hired assassins " with a " single glance " . An anonymous reviewer in L <unk> nazionale felt that the three works comprised a unified whole , but feared that Puccini was becoming less inventive . L <unk> nazionale was a nationalist newspaper , and praised Puccini for returning to an Italian subject " after so many useless Japanese , American , Parisian digressions " . 
 Modern productions , including those in an updated context , have been generally well received . Describing the 2004 Glyndebourne pairing with The <unk> Knight as " flip sides of the same coin " , reviewer Edward <unk> in The Independent found the Schicchi performance " a triumph of ensemble directing and playing , ... wickedly observed , sharp , focussed and funny " . The New York Times gave a positive review to the Woody Allen 2008 production , which is set in a crowded tenement in which the boy Gherardino is practising knife thrusts . However , the critic questioned Allen 's altered ending , in which Schicchi is stabbed by Zita as he addresses the audience . Los Angeles Times critic Mark Swed deemed Allen 's production one of the top ten moments in classical music for 2008 , and applauded it for " hilarious wit and engaging musicality " . Allen Rich of Variety praised the piece , though he disliked Allen 's idea of beginning the opera with a montage of old film clips , with credits featuring mock @-@ Italian names . 
 = = Music = = 
 Verdi said of Puccini , early in the latter 's career , that " the symphonic element dominates in him " , and Gianni Schicchi has been compared by later analysts to that of the final presto movement of a three @-@ movement symphony . With the fast @-@ moving pace of the work , the set pieces are given a simpler melodic structure than those in the other two parts of the triptych . On stage , with the commedia dell 'arte references , a humorous atmosphere is established from the very beginning . However , the music itself is of the 20th century ; Edward Greenfield refers to its " dissonant modernity " , with simultaneous clashing chords suggesting that " Puccini was beginning to think in bi @-@ tonal terms " . Alongside these dissonant passages are others which opera scholar Julian Budden calls " bland , schoolroom <unk> " . 
 Puccini 's score is built around a series of motifs which recur through the opera , generally representing characters , situations and moods though sometimes without specific associations . The opening motif is a rapid burst of rhythmic music , described by Greenfield as of " almost <unk> sharpness " , which quickly transforms into a mock @-@ solemn dirge depicting the hypocritical grief of the Donati relatives . This juxtaposition of the humorous and the solemn pervades the opera ; critic Ernest Newman suggests that it " keeps us perpetually suspended between the comic and the tragic " . Other principal motifs include the theme associated with the lovers Rinuccio and Lauretta , introduced in Rinuccio 's first solo " Salvati ! Salvati ! " , and a short , formal woodwind statement which represents Donati 's will . Rinuccio sings the name " Gianni Schicchi " to a jaunty four @-@ note phrase which becomes Schicchi 's personal motif , and it is heard again as Schicchi knocks on the door before his first appearance . The best @-@ known theme in the opera , that associated with Lauretta , is introduced in the second part of Rinuccio 's aria " Avete torto " . The theme is briefly played on clarinet and violin as Lauretta enters with Schicchi , before its full expression in O mio babbino caro . 
 Budden dismisses the view that Lauretta 's aria , at the midpoint of the opera , was a concession to popular taste ; rather , " its position at the turning point of the action is precisely calculated to provide a welcome moment of lyrical repose " . Andrew Davis , in his book on Puccini 's late style , notes that Lauretta 's aria , and the two interruptions by the young lovers ( " Addio , speranza bella " ) as Schicchi mulls over the will , constitute interruptions in the Romantic style , delivered during a lengthy sequence of non @-@ Romantic music . Another interruption , both dramatically and musically , is that provided by the appearance of Doctor Spinelloccio . The doctor 's dissonant harmonies contrast sharply with the scena music for Schicchi and symbolise Spinelloccio 's place as an outsider to the dramatic action of the opera . 
 The music historian Donald Jay Grout has written that in this opera Puccini 's comic skill is " seen at its most spontaneous , incorporating smoothly all the characteristic harmonic devices of his later period . " Greenfield remarks on the score 's inventiveness , imagination and flawless timing . Several critics have likened Gianni Schicchi to Verdi 's Falstaff , as both are masterpieces of operatic comedy from composers more usually associated with tragedy . Both composers took the conventions of comic opera into consideration , choosing a baritone for the principal role , setting the tenor @-@ soprano love story against family opposition to the marriage , and constructing a hoax which permits the happy ending . Charles Osborne cites in particular the trio for three female voices , <unk> , <unk> , as equal to anything in Falstaff , " its exquisite harmonies almost turning the unprepossessing women into Wagnerian Rhine maidens " , and its lilting melody reminiscent of Rossini . 
 = = Arias and musical numbers = = 
 Although the score is through @-@ composed , within the general structure of the opera there are several identifiable numbers : four solos given to the three main characters , a trio and a brief love duet . Only Lauretta 's O mio babbino caro , the best @-@ known of the solos , is separable from its context and can be sung as a concert piece . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Despite its popularity as a stage work , Gianni Schicchi was not available as a recording until after the Second World War , a neglect described by a Gramophone reviewer as " extraordinary " . One of the earliest recordings , a Turin Radio 1950 broadcast performance conducted by Alfredo <unk> , was praised for its lively presentation but was considered by the critic Philip Hope @-@ Wallace to be " too rough a piece of recording to be warmly recommended " . By contrast , the 1958 recording under Gabriele Santini , with a cast including Tito Gobbi and Victoria de los Ángeles , was still being discussed nearly 50 years later as the classic performance , with Gobbi 's singing at a standard rarely equalled . Among more recent recordings , that of the complete Trittico with the London Symphony Orchestra under Antonio Pappano ( 1998 ) has been generally recommended . There are numerous video recordings now available . 
 = = English @-@ language sequel = = 
 American composer Michael Ching wrote a one @-@ act English @-@ language sequel , Buoso 's Ghost , which had its first full staging with the Pittsburgh Opera in 1996 , and its official premiere at Opera Memphis in 1997 . Starting where Gianni Schicchi ends , the new opera , with a libretto by the composer , opens with Schicchi 's final chords and carries the plot forward by following the sinister dealings of Buoso Donati 's family , who apparently had poisoned Buoso , and the continued machinations of Schicchi , who tries to exploit this growing suspicion on his part . Opera News noted that Ching uses " a more modern musical mode , yet avoiding excessive atonality . The score subtly introduces brief tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek quotations from other works , ranging from Mozart to Sondheim , plus one unmistakable interjection of Shostakovich . " It has been performed throughout the U.S. as an ideal pairing with Gianni Schicchi . 
 = Joseph F. Glidden House = 
 The Joseph F. Glidden House is located in the United States in the DeKalb County , Illinois city of DeKalb . It was the home to the famed inventor of barbed wire Joseph Glidden . The barn , still located on the property near several commercial buildings , is said to be where Glidden perfected his improved version of barbed wire which would eventually transform him into a successful entrepreneur . The Glidden House was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1973 . The home was designed by another barbed wire patent holder in DeKalb , Jacob Haish . 
 The property contains the house and two outbuildings ; the barn and the remains of an old windmill foundation . Constructed in 1861 , the Glidden House adheres mostly to a French Colonial style of architecture . The raised basement and full @-@ length porch are two of the architectural elements found on the Glidden House that are consistently found in French Colonial homes . The barn , a building of high historical significance , was not included as part of the National Register listing for the property until 2002 , nearly 30 years after the original nomination was approved . 
 = = House = = 
 The land that the Glidden House stands on is what remains of Joseph Glidden 's once large DeKalb County farm . His holdings stretched along Lincoln Highway , both the north and south sides , from the Kishwaukee River in the east to present @-@ day Annie Glidden Road on the west . The Glidden Farm went as far north as today 's Lucinda Avenue . The farm 's south border , near where Glidden would grant the Galena and Chicago Union Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way through DeKalb in the early 1990s was near present @-@ day Taylor Street . 
 The two @-@ story Joseph F. Glidden House is constructed from locally fired brick , which is relatively soft . The softness of the brick has caused it to weather in a non @-@ uniform fashion . The brick is said to have been fired at a small brickyard which once existed on the Kishwaukee River in DeKalb , near the present @-@ day Lincoln Highway bridge . The home stands on a stone foundation and was designed by local carpenter and eventual barbed wire competitor to Glidden , Jacob Haish . Construction was completed in 1861 and the home is a prominent example of Illinois French Colonial architecture . 
 = = = History = = = 
 The land where the Glidden House stands once held a log structure , which Glidden lived in when he first came to DeKalb at the beckoning of his cousin Russell Huntley . The house was built in 1861 for barbed wire entrepreneur Joseph Farwell Glidden . As his personal residence , the house , and its accompanying barn , were closely associated with his invention , really just an improvement , of barbed wire . Glidden 's improvement upon a wire board fence developed by Henry Rose was of vast importance in the settlement of the United States west of the Mississippi . It was after Glidden saw Rose exhibit his wire at a fair in 1873 that he was struck with the idea of attaching barbs to wire strand fencing . Glidden is said to have experimented with some of his ideas in the basement kitchen of the Glidden House . He noticed that whenever he tried to attach barbs directly to strands of wire they slid along the length of the wire ; Glidden realized he needed a way to crimp the barbs . He began tinkering around the home 's kitchen . Glidden fit two hair pins to the shaft of a coffee mill , one centered and the other off @-@ center . He found that by placing the wire between the pins and turning the crank a uniform barb resulted . How to crimp the barbs to the wire was solved , in the barn , by tying one end of the wire and another length of wire to a poplar tree on the grounds of the Glidden House and the other ends of the wires to a grindstone . The grindstone was used to twist the wires together and prevent the barbs from slipping . 
 Day @-@ to @-@ day life at the Glidden House was mostly carried out in the home 's basement which contained a full kitchen , dining room , and living room . The upper floors were used for guests and for sleeping quarters . In 1877 Glidden 's daughter , Elva , married William H. Bush in the homestead . 
 As of 2006 extensive restoration work had been completed on the home . The front porch was repaired and restored and inside , the hardwood floors have been replaced and refinished . In addition , the front parlors have been repainted and restored . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The home was mostly designed in a French Colonial style , though it contains some elements of Greek Revival architecture . French Colonial architecture was more popular in the American South than it ever was in the northern tier of states . 
 = = = = Exterior = = = = 
 The two @-@ story brick structure is supported by a fieldstone foundation and still features its original front porch . The porch spans the length of the building 's front ( south ) facade , at a height of about 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . The porch is supported by four wooden pillars , which rest on stone bases . The stairs leading to the front porch are supported by two similar wooden posts , which , like the house , are set into fieldstone bases . The first step on the stairs was originally a limestone block embedded in the ground . The porch roof is supported by six wooden , bracketed pillars . The pillars are simple , with the brackets coming from the boxed capitals . At the rear of the porch wooden pilasters set at each end help to support the roof . Differentiating the home from the traditional French Colonial design is the porch roof , which is separate from the main roof . 
 The house stands mostly as it did in 1861 save a few alterations . The front porch was screened in at the time the building was added to the National Register of Historic Places , the screens have since been removed . At the rear of the house a small porch was enclosed . In 1909 or 1910 there were major subtractions and replacements . Removed were a cast @-@ iron widow 's walk along the roof ridge and a large gable dormer , decorated in the same manner as the cornice decorating the roof trim . The present dormer replaced the larger one and is more of a low @-@ shed type . 
 The roof itself is a low gable and dominated by single stack , straddle ridge chimneys at its east and west ends . The boxed roof trim is a decorated cornice . The low @-@ shed dormer is covered with green asphalt . The old widow 's walk , which a neighbor dubbed Glidden 's " <unk> " , was balustraded and set just above the dormer . 
 = = = = Interior = = = = 
 The interior of the building is also similar to how it appeared when the house was constructed . However , a few changes have been made . In 1910 the two marble fireplaces were replaced by brick . The flooring has been replaced as needed . The home 's basement , once the main living area , has since been converted several times for other uses . 
 On the first floor of the home the rooms remain much the same as they were when Glidden lived in the house . An original multi @-@ paneled wooden door remains at the entry from the porch to the central hall . The door , however , was altered , having glass panels installed to admit more light . The staircase is also original and its newel posts resemble those found in the Isaac and Harriet Ellwood House , another Haish designed home , and the <unk> House , whose architect is unknown though it was quite possibly Haish , both in DeKalb . 
 On the house 's east side are three rooms , whose original presence is open to debate . The three rooms are interconnected , another common French colonial element . The room adjacent the porch was used as the Glidden 's dining room and is where the large brick fireplace , which replaced the marble one in 1909 , is located . The 1909 fireplace is of the American Craftsman style . At the end of the hall , near the kitchen , there is a full bathroom . 
 The western part of the first floor is dominated by a large formal living room . The room has two entrances , one at the front of the hall , near the front door and the other at the back end of the hall . This was the room in which Elva Glidden married in the late 19th century . After 1941 the rear part of the living room , or " west " room , was walled off and a second kitchen added . When Jessie Glidden , the last Glidden to occupy the old homestead , moved in 1998 , the west room was restored to its original size and the second kitchen removed . 
 The basement , and for part of the home 's history , the main living area , is accessed via a staircase at the back of the first @-@ floor hall . The steep stairs still show years of wear . One of the rooms off the main basement is the kitchen where Glidden is said to have experimented with the coffee grinder and his wife 's hair pins , eventually leading to his brand of barbed wire . 
 The second @-@ floor served as the main sleeping quarters . It consists of a few simple bedrooms , all historically without closets . The upstairs hall contains a door which once accessed a staircase to the widow 's walk , what remains of the space has been used as a closet for over a century . 
 = = Outbuildings = = 
 The property has two remaining outbuildings . The barn is where Glidden invented his famous improvement on barbed wire . Dubbed " The Winner , " his barbed wire became the most popular version of the invention . Barbed wire is considered to be one of the most important factors in American progress and settlement . 
 The other outbuilding on the property along historic Lincoln Highway are the remnants of a once dominating windmill . Though only the foundation remains , it gives a glimpse of how impressive the structure must have once been . 
 = = = Barn = = = 
 The Glidden Barn , located to the rear and east of the home , was thought to have been added to the National Register of Historic Places when the original nomination for the house was approved in 1973 . However , in the late 1990s , the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency revealed that the nomination included only the house . The Glidden Historical Center initiated the process of adding the barn to the Register . Those moves were approved by the Illinois Historic Sites Advisory Council in 2002 and the barn officially became part of the National Register . 
 The barn was built sometime around 1871 , possibly even before , and is constructed of the same soft brick that makes up the exterior of the home . Tradition in the Glidden family holds that the barn , like the house itself , was designed and built by prominent local carpenter Jacob Haish . The famous barn , one of DeKalb County 's oldest remaining , stands a full two @-@ stories high , measuring around 50 feet ( 15 m ) tall , with a width of 30 feet ( 9 m ) . 
 In February 2007 the Glidden Homestead and Historical Center kicked off a fundraising drive . The drive is aimed at raising US $ 2 million to expand the Joseph F. Glidden House site to include museum space and a media center . Some of the funds will be used to help restore the barn and expand historical center museum space into the building . 
 = = = = Architecture = = = = 
 The Glidden barn is of pole and beam construction . The second @-@ floor interior is dominated by two large transverse wooden beams . It is of the three @-@ bay , English tradition , the west bay containing a space for a stairwell leading to a hayloft and seven stalls . It is constructed of red brick and stands on a foundation of limestone . Glidden 's barn took full advantage of the term vernacular ; the brick was locally manufactured and the limestone locally quarried . 
 The east bay of the barn contains an animal stall in its northeast corner and a fully enclosed office in its opposite corner . The second @-@ floor hayloft is supported by the two massive transverse beams . The full @-@ sized loft is accessible via an enclosed staircase against the south wall . The building 's exterior roof is fully supported by the brick walls . The result is a loft which is an entirely open space save for some pole and beam construction supporting the laminated beams , which act as tie rods at the base of the roof . The barn roof is a common gable roof pitched at a 45 degree angle , it was originally covered with wooden shingles , those have been replaced over the years with asphalt . 
 The barn features extensive windows , somewhat unique outside of dairy barns , with a total of 14 eight @-@ paned , double @-@ hung windows dispersed over three sides of the rectangular structure , north , south and east . On the west side , facing the house , are seven smaller single @-@ pane windows . The double @-@ hung windows are topped with segmented arches constructed from a double row of bricks ; the north and south main entrances are also topped with segmented brick arches , each of three rows of bricks . 
 = = = Windmill building = = = 
 Only the foundation remains of the property 's windmill . What is left , ten rows of stone above the ground , is completely invisible when the home is viewed by passers @-@ by on Lincoln Highway . The windmill started to fall into disrepair around the 1930s or 40s . The original , specific use of the windmill is unknown . 
 = Judas ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Judas " is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga , from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . It was released four days ahead of schedule by Interscope Records on April 15 , 2011 . Written and produced by Lady Gaga and RedOne , " Judas " is a dance and electro house song about a woman in love with a man who betrayed her . It embodies the incidents that have haunted Gaga in the past , and its core meaning refers to the negative parts of her life that she cannot escape . Gaga has further explained that the song was also about honoring one 's inner darkness in order to bring oneself into the light . The artwork for the single was designed by Gaga in Microsoft Word . In spite of a polarizing impact on several religious groups , the song was generally well received by critics , who likened the song to " Bad Romance " with some noting it should have been the album 's lead single . 
 " Judas " received generally positive reviews from most music critics . The song has a similar sound to Gaga 's previous RedOne @-@ produced tracks , including " Poker Face " , " LoveGame " , " Bad Romance " , and " Alejandro " . It contains three distinct hooks and a house @-@ influenced break down . Gaga explained that the lines spoken during the breakdown talk about her as beyond redemption , regarding the traditional views of what a woman should be . " Judas " initially had a strong sales opening , but was less successful commercially in comparison to Gaga 's previous singles . The song reached the top ten of the charts in most major music markets , and also reached the top of the charts in South Korea . 
 A music video for the song was filmed in April 2011 , co @-@ directed by Gaga and Laurieann Gibson and co @-@ starring Norman Reedus . It has a Biblical storyline where Reedus played Judas Iscariot and Gaga played Mary Magdalene . The video portrays them as modern day missionaries going to Jerusalem . It included the Biblical story of Judas betraying Jesus , and ended with Gaga as Magdalene getting stoned to death . Before its release , the Catholic League condemned Gaga for the use of religious imagery and her role in the video . However , the video was generally praised by critics and nominated for two awards at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . Gaga has performed " Judas " on a number of television shows , including The Graham Norton Show , Saturday Night Live , Good Morning America 's " Summer Concert Series " , the French X Factor as well as on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Judas " was revealed as the name of the second single in Gaga 's interview for Vogue . Gaga confirmed the release of " Judas " as the second single , on Ryan Seacrest 's radio show on February 14 , 2011 , and also revealed RedOne as the co @-@ producer of the song . At the 53rd Grammy Awards , he told MTV News that if the previous single from Born This Way , the title track , polarized people , " Judas " was expected to shock them more . On the talk show Last Call with Carson Daly , Gaga explained to the host that " Judas " was about always falling in love with the wrong man over and over again . " ' Judas ' is a very , very dark song . It 's rad " , she added . With MSN Canada , Gaga revealed the metaphors and the meaning behind the song : 
 <unk> ' is a metaphor and an analogy about forgiveness and betrayal and things that haunt you in your life and how I believe that it 's the darkness in your life that ultimately shines and illuminates the greater light that you have upon you . Someone once said to me , ' If you have no shadows then you 're not standing in the light . ' So the song is about washing the feet of both good and evil and understanding and forgiving the demons from your past in order to move into the greatness of your future . I just like really aggressive metaphors — harder , thicker , darker — and my fans do as well . So it is a very challenging and aggressive metaphor , but it is a metaphor . 
 Gaga further elaborated on the inspiration behind the song as walking towards the light force in her life and peering towards the devil in the back , while clutching onto the source of the light . " I sing about what a holy fool I am , and that although moments in my life are so cruel and relationships can be so cruel I ’ m still in love with Judas . I still go back again to those evil things , " she said . During her interview with Google , Gaga added to the song 's meaning as honoring one 's inner darkness in order to bring themselves into the light . One has to learn to forgive themselves in order to move on with their life . With Popjustice she clarified that she has a lot of things that have haunted her from her past , including her choices , men , drug abuse , being afraid to go back to New York , confronting old romances . Hence " Judas " represented something that was not good for her , something she could not escape . Gaga said : " I keep going back and forth between the darkness and the light in order to understand who I am . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Garibay said that " Judas " sounded similar to many of Gaga 's previous singles , like " Poker Face " , " LoveGame " , " Bad Romance " , and " Alejandro " . According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV , " Judas " finds Gaga in a similar territory music @-@ wise but vocally she is in completely new territory ; according to Popjustice , in the verses and pre @-@ chorus , Gaga hurls herself into a decadent half @-@ sung , half @-@ rapped Jamaican Patois style . " Jason Gregory of Gigwise called the song a " heavy slice of electro @-@ house of the highest order " . The song contains three hooks , and begins with Gaga singing the line " Oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh , I 'm in love with Judas " , accompanied by building synths . This is followed by a thumping electronic beat , as Gaga sings , " <unk> / Juda @-@ a @-@ ah / Gaga " . The utterance of these words are reminiscent of the opening verse in " Bad Romance " . Gaga 's vocals are partially spoken , and at times have a Caribbean accent . The first verse follows as : " When he comes to me I am ready / I 'll wash his feet with my hair if he needs / Forgive him when his tongue lies through his brain / Even after three times , he betrays me / I 'll bring him down , a king with no crown . " The tone lightens up on the song 's chorus , which is influenced by ' 80s pop in its melody , as the beat picks up a bit and Gaga sings , " I 'm just a holy fool / Oh , baby , it 's so cruel / But I 'm still in love with Judas , baby . " 
 After the second verse and chorus , the song features a break down influenced by house music . Gaga chants the lines in the same way she does in the middle of " Born This Way " . Then she sings , " I wanna love you / But something 's pulling me away from you / Jesus is my virtue , Judas is the demon I cling to , I cling to . " In this section , Gaga 's vocals drew comparison to that of Rihanna 's by Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone . He also added that her voice sounded less dark and dramatic and was full of " bubbly sweetness " . Popjustice wrote that the breakdown sounded like tribal @-@ techno , and the whole song was " a turbo @-@ charged <unk> wrongness anthem " . Dan Martin from NME wrote that the breakdown was in the dubstep genre with the chorus being " pure @-@ pop " . There were some similarities and influences of " Bad Romance " in the song , which Gaga said was deliberate . She explained that while sometimes it is important for her to push herself in new directions , she did want her characteristic sound to be imbibed in her records . " I wanted [ ' Judas ' ] to be an evolution from where I ’ ve been before but in terms of the formula I wanted there to be something about ' Judas ' that reminded people of what I ’ ve done in the past , " she added . According to the sheet music published on Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is written in the time signature of common time , and is composed in the key of C minor with a tempo of 131 beats per minute . Gaga 's voice ranges from the tonal nodes of B ♭ 3 to E ♭ 5 and the song follows a basic sequence of A ♭ – Fm7 – Cm – B ♭ – Cm as its chord progression . 
 Gaga had posted some of the lyrics of the song in February 2011 , and next month she revealed more lyrics for " Judas " in the Google interview . Gaga also confirmed that the song was influenced by the Biblical Judas Iscariot . According to Popjustice , lyrically on the surface " Judas " is a song about being double @-@ crossed and contemplating revenge , but being repeatedly drawn to awfulness . The middle eight of the song , with the lyrics " But in the cultural sense I just speak in future tense . Judas kiss me if <unk> , or wear an ear condom next time " , talks about Gaga being beyond the ability to redeem herself , in terms of the traditional views of what a woman is supposed to be . " But I don 't want to redeem myself , because in the cultural sense I believe that I 'm just before my time . And if you don 't like it , wear an ear condom , " she explained . The main portion of the song is about Gaga in private and the middle eight is about Gaga in public , two themes that are explored elsewhere on the parent album too . 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 In the 42nd episode of Gaga 's web video series , called Transmission Gagavision , it was revealed that the single 's accompanying cover artwork was designed by Gaga in Microsoft Word and featured a black background with the word " Judas " written in red capital letters in Impact font . Below it was a red Christian cross with a heart in the middle . Gaga photographed the design on her computer screen using her cellular telephone " for texture , " which resulted in visible pixels on the letters and cross , as well as a faint reflection of her face and hands holding the phone , to appear on the cover . The episode showed Gaga sitting in a meeting with her creative team Haus of Gaga , discussing the specifics of her album release . Scattered around Gaga were a number of photographs , which were speculated by MTV as something " Judas " -related . On one photo the word " Judas " was printed with a cross on it . Jocelyn Vena from MTV felt that the artwork could have easily appeared in director Baz Luhrmann 's version of Romeo and Juliet ( 1996 ) . 
 On the 41st episode of Transmission Gagavision , Gaga announced that the song was going to be released soon . She added the abstract message along with the announcement : " Let the cultural baptism begin . If they were not who you were taught they would be , would you still believe ? " " Judas " was scheduled to be sent to mainstream airplay on April 19 , 2011 , and digital retailers on the same day , but after the track was leaked to the internet , its release was brought forward to April 15 , 2011 . This was done to counteract the pre @-@ release leaks . Before the release , Gaga tweeted about the single , saying : " # <unk> ! I 've learned love is like a brick , you can build a house or sink a dead body . " On April 15 , 2011 , hours before the song was played on radio she again tweeted : " Even After Three Times He <unk> Me , " she wrote , harking back to the song 's lyrics about love and betrayal . In the United Kingdom , the song premiered on The Capital FM Network on April 15 , 2011 , during their program Home Run . Gaga addressed the leak in the 43rd episode of Transmission Gagavision , likening it to a disembodiment , saying , " A slow death ! Just put me out of my <unk> misery , just put that sh-- out . They were tearing [ the song ] limb for limb . First it was the arm of the song , then the liver .... " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Judas " was generally well received by most music critics . Jonathan Van Meter from Vogue gave the song a positive review , saying the song sounded like it was written for The Ronettes , but was set to a " <unk> " dance beat . MTV 's James Dinh noted that the song was very similar in its composition to " Bad Romance " . Popjustice also compared it to " Bad Romance " describing it as " a highly evolved , Titanium @-@ plated ' Bad Romance ' from the year 2511 travelling half a millennium back in time to save music from a tidal wave of ' in the club ' <unk> pop drivel , and that 's ' Judas ' . " Kevin O <unk> from Spin felt that the song sounded like a rowdy , industrial @-@ disco banger , and described Gaga 's performance as " insanely over the top : She alternates between rapping , a robotic monotone , and a crow @-@ like squawk — before gliding into a more conventional chorus that hews closer to ' Bad Romance ' . " He complimented the primal energy of the music of " Judas , " and felt that the breakdown was one of the weirdest moments to hit the pop music scene in 2011 . Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson noted that the disconnection and deviation from Gaga 's previous single " Born This Way " was more pronounced with " Judas " . Musically he felt that " Judas " had the same " glitter @-@ jackhammer level as ' Born This Way ' , though the big anthemic chords are almost inverted — not unlike Inner City 's Big Fun vs. Good Life . It 's a good twin , evil twin thing . " Henderson continued that the song conjured the imagery of a disturbed vision of hell , and in a warped sense the song seemed more forward @-@ thinking to him and less of a message , " than the ' gay = great ' equation at the heart of ' Born This Way ' . " 
 Amos Barshad from New York declared that the song reminded him of being drunk and dancing in a remote discothèque in Berlin . NME 's Dan Martin was of the opinion that " Judas " was the song that Gaga should have come back with . But he understood why she did not choose it as the lead single from Born This Way , given the fact that the song was characteristic of Gaga 's music . Pointing the same thing , Matthew Perpetua from Rolling Stone wrote that the song played to Gaga 's established musical sensibilities . He added that although " Judas " certainly had its own charms and " at least three insanely catchy hooks it leans hard on Gaga 's signature moves . " Maura Johnston of The Village Voice summarized the song as a twin of " Bad Romance " describing its " instantly memorable wordless vocalizing , a pummeling beat , lyrics about a romance that is , well , bad . " Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey gave the song five out of five stars , commending the " blasphemously camp " chorus and comparing it to be worthy of Eurovision – " a Scooch @-@ meets @-@ Lordi affair that , unsurprisingly , takes a few listens to get your head around . " Mark Lepage from The Gazette praised the song and understood that as Gaga 's music has progressed , so has her themes and inspirations , indicated by the conflicted relationship she has with the character Judas in the song . Rick Fulton , while writing in the Daily Record , compared it to " ' Like a Prayer ' on steroids " and gave it three out of five points . NME called the song " Gaga 's worst single so far " . 
 = = Plagiarism allegations = = 
 On August 4 , 2011 , Rebecca Francescatti , a Chicago @-@ based songwriter , filed a lawsuit against Gaga and Interscope for allegedly ripping off the song " Juda " from her album , It 's All About You . According to NBC Chicago , the bassist that worked on the song with Gaga , Brian Gaynor , also plays for Francescatti . A copy of the lawsuit revealed Francescatti seeks a cut from the profits " Judas " has earned , on a song that " copied and incorporated substantial , original portions " of the work . 
 In June 2014 , the lawsuit was dismissed without trial by a Federal Judge in an act of Summary Judgment in Chicago , stating , in part , " The differences [ between the songs " Juda " and " Judas " ] so outweigh the purported similarities between the melodies that they cannot be said to be even remotely similar ” “ We agree with Defendants that the songs do not have common lyrics , the themes are different , and they do not sound at all alike musically . ” “ Thus , we find the similarity of expression to be , quite clearly , ‘ totally lacking . ’ The ( two songs ) are so utterly dissimilar that reasonable minds could not differ as to a lack of substantial similarity between them . ” 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After its release to the digital outlets and radio , Billboard theorized that " Judas " would need to sell between 350 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 copies in two and a half days , and make a large number of radio listener impressions through the end of the airplay tracking period on April 19 , 2011 , in order to debut at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . The song debuted at number 30 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart with 1 @,@ 405 detections on 118 of the Pop Songs panel 's 132 reporting stations , translating to an opening audience of 13 @.@ 6 million . For the issue dated April 30 , 2011 , " Judas " debuted at number four on Hot Digital Songs chart with 162 @,@ 000 copies sold . It debuted at its peak position of number ten on the Hot 100 — Gaga 's third debut in the top 10 — and started at number 48 on the Radio Songs chart with 26 million audience . The next week " Judas " dropped two places on the Hot 100 , while selling 156 @,@ 000 downloads ( down 4 % ) in its first full week at retail . However , on Radio Songs , " Judas " jumped from number 48 to number 36 ( 34 million impressions , up 29 % ) , while also moving up to number 19 on the Pop Songs chart , reaching a peak of number 15 to date . " Judas " also debuted on the Hot Dance Club Songs Chart at number 38 , and on Adult Pop Songs at number 40 , for the issue dated May 14 , 2011 . It has since reached the top of the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Judas " has sold 984 @,@ 000 copies of digital downloads in the US as of April 2016 . " Judas " , " Marry the Night " and " G.U.Y. " have been her only singles to not sell over one million copies . 
 In Canada , " Judas " debuted at number nine on the Canadian Hot 100 with three days of sales , entering the Digital Songs chart of Canada at number five with 16 @,@ 000 copies sold . The next week it moved up one position to its peak of number eight , while becoming the greatest gainer on the chart in terms of airplay . The song moved from number 66 to number 23 on the Canadian Hot 100 Airplay chart , with a 161 % increase in audience . In the United Kingdom , " Judas " debuted at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart on April 17 , 2011 , with 20 @,@ 729 copies . The next week it moved to number nine . The song debuted at number nine on the French Singles Chart with 5 @,@ 719 copies of the single , and has since reached a peak of seven . In New Zealand , " Judas " debuted at number 13 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on April 18 , 2011 , and also debuted at number six on the ARIA Singles Chart of Australia , which became its peak there . " Judas " was certified platinum in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In Ireland and Finland , " Judas " achieved a top @-@ five debut at positions four and three respectively . Other top @-@ ten debuts happened at Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Norway and Spain . In Japan " Judas " debuted at number seven on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart . The song debuted and peaked at number 23 in the German Singles Chart , ending her consecutive top @-@ ten placings in that charts since her debut " Just Dance " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " Judas " was filmed on April 2 – 3 , 2011 , and was directed by Gaga and her choreographer , Laurieann Gibson . The following Sunday , Gaga had tweeted , " Directing Judas video with my sister @ <unk> is the most exciting artistic moment of my career . It 's the greatest work we 've done . Day 2 . " Her stylist Thierry Mugler and creative director Nicola Formichetti announced on the coming Monday that the shooting for the video was over . With MTV , Gibson explained the idea behind the video : 
 " I will tell you now , first off , I 'm Christian , and my career is evidence of God in my life , and I think that most people are already thinking that Gaga and the blasphemy and they 're <unk> the approach and I think they 'll be very shocked to find out how huge and really groundbreaking the message is and how freeing the message is for all the right reasons . And it 's really going to shock the world . " 
 The cast included Norman Reedus as Judas , while Gaga played the part of Mary Magdalene . Gibson and Gaga wanted to make sure the video 's direction was perfect — so they directed it themselves . Gibson explained that while working with Nick Knight on the music video for " Born This Way " , they had felt that the ideas presented did not execute in a way they wanted . But with the music video of " Judas " , the whole idea and the inspiration was clear enough . They had initially approached a director , but the dates did not work out with him , so Gaga 's manager asked her and Gibson to direct the video instead . 
 Gibson said she took a moment before agreeing , as she had just wrapped up work on Gaga 's Monster Ball HBO special but she could not resist in the end . " It 's a phenomenal video : really powerful , really impactful . She 's such a strong , committed artist . Her loyalty to me is something I will be forever grateful for . We 're spiritually connected . We need each other ... and ' Judas ' is ultimately a representation of our true bond , " she added . With The Hollywood Reporter , Gibson explained that within the video they created a new Jerusalem . The shock value in the video was purposefully added , but ultimately the story was about oppression ; and about following one 's heart and the glory of being free . With NME magazine Gaga revealed that the video involved motorbikes and a death sequence . She also described the portrayal of her character as being " beyond repentance " , which evolved from the continuous media accusations towards her that " [ she 's ] <unk> or pretentious or this and that . [ The video ] is my way of saying ' I 've crossed the line , I won 't even try to repent . Nor should I ' . " Forgiveness and destiny also played a part in the video , and Gaga wanted to portray a Federico Fellini @-@ esque story with apostles being revolutionaries in a modern @-@ day Jerusalem . They are led to Jesus , by Gaga as Magdalene . Although initially reported to be premiered during an episode of the tenth season of American Idol , the music video premiered on May 5 , 2011 , on E ! News at 7 pm . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with a motorcycle gang cruising down a freeway , wearing studded leather jackets . The motorcycle gang are the Twelve Apostles who followed Jesus , including Judas . Gaga as Mary Magdalene clutches onto a Jesus @-@ like figure ( Rick Gonzalez ) who wears a golden crown of thorns . Among the riders is Judas ( Norman Reedus ) , who crosses Gaga 's bike as she looks meaningfully towards him . The gang passes under a flyover , when the song starts . They reach their rustic hideout called " Electric Chapel " where Gaga dances wearing a red sarong and a bikini top with crosses covering her nipples . Gaga 's character watches curiously as the wily Judas enters the biker club and immediately gets involved in a brawl . While trying to protect Jesus from the fights she attempts to warn him about his apostle 's impending betrayal , but becomes hypnotized by Judas ' allure . The storyline is interspersed with choreographed dance sequences and close @-@ ups of Gaga with stark imagery , including artistic eye make @-@ up , which was compared to the Egyptian Eye of Horus . Her flowing blonde hair is accented by a red bandana , blue leather top and puffy white dress in different parts of the clip . The blue top worn by Gaga displays the " Sacred Heart " , a depiction of what Jesus is said to have revealed as a symbol of his love for humanity . During the second verses , Gaga points towards Peter during the line " Build a house " , and towards herself during " Or sink a dead body " . 
 After the second chorus , in a climatic sequence , the singer holds a gun up to Judas ' mouth , and a stick of red lipstick bursts out and smears his lips . The scene portrays Gaga 's choice to refuse to shoot Judas through the heart . As the breakdown ends , the music stops and Gaga is seen in a bathtub with Jesus and Judas , washing their feet and cleaning it with her hair . The sequence is interspersed with Gaga standing lonely on a rock as waves engulf her , the scene being reminiscent of artist Sandro Botticelli 's The Birth of Venus and Jesus marching towards his fatal destiny . The music restarts and Judas is shown pouring beer in the bathtub . Next Jesus is shown standing on a stage , surrounded by his supporters , the setting being inspired by scaffoldings present around newly constructed buildings in New York . Gaga kneels in front of Jesus and tries to explain something to him , but he places his palm on her head as Judas looks on . After Judas delivers the fateful kiss upon Jesus ' cheeks , marking him for his death , Gaga falls on the ground with a silent , anguished cry . The video ends with the death of neither Judas nor Jesus , but of Gaga as she 's stoned to death by the crowd . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Before its release , the Catholic League 's president William Anthony Donohue criticized the music video for its portrayal of Gaga as Mary Magdalene . He spoke exclusively to <unk> about Gaga 's focus on Judas and Mary Magdalene , calling her " increasingly irrelevant " compared to people with " real talent " , and attacked her for seemingly purposefully debuting the song and video close to Holy Week and Easter . Gaga noted in an interview with E ! that the video was not meant to cause controversy in any way , jokingly adding " the only controversial thing about this video is that I 'm wearing Christian Lacroix and Chanel in the same frame . This video is not meant to be an attack on religion . I respect and love everyone 's beliefs . I 'm a religious and spiritual person who 's obsessed with religious art . I 'm obsessed with it . " After its release , the Catholic League released a further statement stating : 
 " In her ' Judas ' video , Lady Gaga plays fast and loose with Catholic iconography , and generates several untoward statements , but she typically dances on the line without going over it . The faux @-@ baptismal scene is a curious inclusion , as is her apparent fondness for the Jesus character . But if anyone thinks the Catholic League is going to go ballistic over Lady Gaga 's latest contribution , they haven 't a clue about what really constitutes anti @-@ Catholicism . The video is a mess , incoherent , it leaves the viewer more perplexed than moved . " 
 Jason Lipshutz from Billboard described it as a " motorcycle mayhem meets biblical betrayal . " MTV News ' James Montogomery called the video as a pure pop clip , " albeit one that looks great and is sure to earn the ire of a few folks on the religious right . " He added that " Judas " is , at its sacred heart , an artistic explosion contained within the confines of a traditional pop clip . Christian Blauvelt from Entertainment Weekly did not like the video at first , calling it her weakest effort to date and attributing it to Gibson 's choreography and the literal storyline . However , he admitted that after watching the video a few times , he became fond of it . Tris McCall from The Star @-@ Ledger felt that there was neither anything blasphemous about the video , nor anything too daring about it . McCall explained that the dancing in the video is a " pleasure to watch " , but would have been better if the camera work was more professional . According to him , the only eye @-@ catching prop in the video was the gun that turned into a lipstick . Matthew Perpetua from Rolling Stone was certain that the video would offend some Christians for its irreverent and highly sexualized take on Jesus Christ ; he also said that Gaga interpreted the Biblical story in her own style . Oscar Moralde from Slant Magazine complimented the production of the video by calling it " visually stunning " , while adding that " ' Judas ' is the work of a repertory , not a revolutionary . It takes familiar swatches from Gaga 's palette ( the leather @-@ and @-@ chain aesthetic of " Telephone " ; the plaintive , tear @-@ stained camera stare of " Bad Romance " ) and puts them all together for a competently executed work . " Phil Fox Rose , while reviewing the video for The Washington Post , gave it a positive review stating that he found it " moving , both artistically and spiritually . " He then went on to explain how the religion related accusations against Gaga were completely biased . VH1 found that the video was inspired by Madonna 's " Like a Prayer " , the films Our Lady of the Assassins , The Wild Angels and Romeo + Juliet , and the American television series Lost . NME named ' Judas ' the fourth worst music video ever , describing it as " an attempt to jump on the Madonna / Catholicism bandwagon that so incredibly misjudged it 's quite comical . " . 
 Laurieann Gibson 's choreography to the song that was used in the music video was received positively . The video was nominated for Best Choreography at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . Gaga 's fan bases hailed the choreography with many videos of them interpreting the choreography on YouTube . One notable video is of two Australian boys Jesse and Jermaine D <unk> dancing to the choreography in their bedroom , which was posted by Gaga on her Twitter page in May 2011 . Gaga tweeted : " <unk> choreography by two sexy boys ! Swoon ! This is why I love my fans , you don 't skip a beat . " 
 At the 2011 MuchMusic Video Awards , Gaga won the Best International Artist Video award for " Judas " . The song 's music video also received two nominations at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , in the categories of Best Choreography and Best Art Direction ; however , the video won neither at the award show , losing to Beyoncé Knowles ' " Run The World ( Girls ) " in Best Choreography , and Adele 's " Rolling in the Deep " in Best Art Direction . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On April 17 , 2011 , Gaga performed " Judas " at a nightclub called Kennedy Lounge , in Tampa , Florida , after her Monster Ball show in the city 's St. Pete Times Forum . Gaga performed " Judas " live on television for the first time on Ellen on April 28 , 2011 . She was accompanied by a string of male dancers , wearing black monk @-@ like garments , by her side . The song was performed as a dance @-@ filled number , with Gaga singing the lines while wearing a blue latex ensemble . According to James Dinh from MTV , the " choreography [ of the performance ] seemingly more difficult than in her usual performances , the singer showcased her best high @-@ energy moves . " As the music came to a close , she struck a pose before planting a kiss on the cheek of DeGeneres , who playfully replicated her stance . At the 2011 Cannes Film Festival , Gaga sang the song for French television show Le Grand Journal . Wearing a gold @-@ embellished ensemble , a red hood and a black @-@ and @-@ white hairstyle , Gaga performed an energetic version of the song accompanied by her male dancers , on a stage in front of the Mediterranean Sea . She explained to host Michel <unk> that the inspiration behind her look was the religious imagery and fashion portrayed in the " Judas " music video . " I 've been wearing very romantic , very biblical arrangements , and I always throw in some punk rock for good measure , " Gaga added . 
 " Judas " was performed by Gaga on The Graham Norton Show on May 13 , 2011 , and two days later on Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . " Judas " was the final song of the setlist , and she finished her performance by taking a bow with her dancers and musicians , as confetti rained on the crowd . Gaga sang " Judas " on the season finale of Saturday Night Live on May 21 , 2011 , after performing the piano version of " The Edge of Glory " . She was dressed in a black shiny top and knee high boots , with a metallic headgear . On May 27 , 2011 , Gaga also performed the song on Good Morning America as a part of their " Summer Concert Series " . She wore a black sheer dress with a gold bejewelled jacket , and gold @-@ studded bikini top and bottom . The stage was filled with steam billowing out of controlled machines . Gaga performed " Judas " on the X Factor in Paris on June 14 , 2011 , as a medley with " The Edge of Glory " . The performance started with Gaga playing a keytar for " The Edge of Glory " , wearing a fringed coat as well as a teal wig . She then removed the keytar and fringed coat , revealing a lingerie outfit which included a thong , and transitioned into " Judas " . A medley of " Judas " and " Born This Way " was the closing performance on the Paul O 'Grady Live show . Ryan Love of Digital Spy had a preview of the show 's recording , and felt that this was the best performance of the two songs by Gaga . The song was performed on The Born This Way Ball . She performed the song after a speech about betrayal and loyalty . The song was performed atop of one of the turrets of the castle . A shortened version was performed , cutting out the second verse and chorus . The song contained elements of the DJ White Shadow Remix . 
 On the Born This Way Ball tour 's venue in Manila , Philippines , Lady Gaga faced threats of incarceration and lawsuits from nearly 200 Christians from the <unk> Youth Philippines organization . The group marched to protest about her " blasphemous " music , taking particular offense to the song " Judas " , which they assert demeans Jesus Christ . Responding to the protests , Gaga said in an official statement , " I ’ m not a creature of your government , Manila , " and performed " Judas " anyway . Following the controversy , Roman Catholic legal authorities greenlighted the concerts for Monday , May 21 , 2012 and the following Tuesday , restricting nudity and acts deemed vulgar from the performance . Gaga was also injured while performing " Judas " in Auckland . She was struck accidentally on stage with a metal pole by one of her back @-@ up dancers , giving her a concussion . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Gang Studios ( Paris , France ) 
 Mixed at Henson Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California ) 
 Personnel 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter , producer , background vocals 
 RedOne – songwriter , producer , vocal editing , vocal arrangement , background vocals , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , recording 
 Trevor Muzzy – recording , vocal editing , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , audio mixing 
 Dave Russell – additional recording 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering 
 Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Jumping Flash ! 2 = 
 Jumping Flash ! 2 ( Japanese : <unk> ! , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ! 2 ) is a first @-@ person shooter platform video game developed by Exact and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation in 1996 . It is the direct sequel to Jumping Flash ! , which was released the previous year . It was later ported for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable via the PlayStation Network in 2009 . 
 The game revolves around the robotic rabbit protagonist Robbit as he searches for lost Muu Muus , which are scattered throughout different levels in the game by the game 's new antagonist , Captain Kabuki . Robbit must explore each expansive new world to recapture all the lost Muu Muus . As with its predecessor , the game is presented in a first @-@ person perspective . Much of the interface was transferred from the first Jumping Flash ! to the second in order to save time during development . New features include a much longer draw distance , updated enemy AI and a meter displaying whether or not Robbit can triple @-@ jump . 
 Similar to its predecessor , Jumping Flash ! 2 was well received by critics , who praised the game for its updated interface , advanced graphics and gameplay that " really [ excelled ] beyond the competition " . However , also like its predecessor , it was criticised for its short length , lack of challenging gameplay and close similarities to the first game . Despite this , Jumping Flash ! 2 gained enough popularity to spawn a final sequel , Robbit Mon Dieu . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game is set after an undisclosed amount of time after the first instalment in the series , Jumping Flash ! . After Robbit denounces Baron Aloha 's plans to take over Crater Planet ( events from the first game ) , Aloha flees for his life and returns to his home planet , Little Muu . 
 While planning his revenge , however , Aloha 's turn to face the fear of having his planet attacked comes . A hostile alien invader known as Captain Kabuki ( voiced by Lorelei King ) descends upon Little Muu and starts taking it apart , piece by piece , contrasting on what Aloha himself had once tried to do to Crater Planet in the first game . Aloha flees the onslaught in his space pod , and lands on an asteroid far away from Little Muu , where he calls for help from his sworn enemy , Universal City Hall . Once again , Robbit is dispatched to help , and manages to free the parts of Little Muu which Kabuki has taken , and ultimately faces Kabuki one @-@ on @-@ one in mortal combat . Robbit defeats Kabuki , resulting in the latter escaping . 
 Still carrying a grudge against Robbit , Aloha seeks Kabuki and convinces him to form an alliance so that they can destroy Robbit together . In exchange , Aloha will pay Kabuki a large amount of money , and Kabuki , also desiring revenge against Robbit , agrees . Aloha and Kabuki attack Little Muu together , prompting Robbit to take action again . Eventually , Robbit and Kabuki battle each other one last time , and Robbit manages to destroy Kabuki once and for all while Aloha flees for his life once again . At the end of the game , Aloha returns to Little Muu , but is disowned by all the Muu Muus , who now resent him for teaming with Kabuki ( who had tried to destroy them all ) and trying to destroy Robbit , who had saved their lives . They throw him out of the bar and tell him to never come back . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Jumping Flash ! 2 is virtually identical to its predecessor ; the game is presented in a first @-@ person perspective , and the player can move freely in three @-@ dimensional world and rotate the camera in any direction . The user interface resembles much of the characteristics of its predecessor ; the top part of the screen shows the time remaining , the player 's score , and one of four of Robbit 's AI sidekicks who offers the player warnings , reminders and hints . 
 Despite its similarities however , the gameplay offered many new changes . Instead of collecting four Jet Pods , the player @-@ character must rescue four MuuMuus in each level before exiting . Another new addition is the new interface , which displays one of Robbit 's travelling AI companions , a health bar , a timer and a jump @-@ meter that displays whether or not the player is eligible for a triple jump . Other new additions include the power orbs as an added power @-@ up and the ability to obtain Performance Medals . A certain Performance Medal may be awarded depending on how the player completes a level . For example , playing through a single level without firing any weapons will reward the player with the Flower Child medal . There are a total of twelve medals to collect . 
 Identical to its predecessor however , the core of the gameplay is centred on the player 's ability to make Robbit jump and shoot projectiles at enemies . Robbit can jump up to three times ( as indicated by the new interface ) , allowing him to reach extreme heights in the game . As with the first instalment , Jumping Flash ! 2 introduced new in @-@ game power ups and weapons such as a powerful laser beam , missiles and trip mines . In addition to the new weapons , the player can find and use the older weapons in form of fireworks to deal massive damage to enemies . Other weapons include cherry bombs , rockets and Roman candles . The player still has the ability to shoot low @-@ powered projectiles where a target reticle is centred in the middle of the screen . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 As with the first instalment , Jumping Flash ! 2 was developed by Japanese developer Exact Co . , Ltd however Ultra Co . , Ltd was not involved in development . The game engine and most of the interface were transferred from its predecessor to Jumping Flash ! 2 in order to save time during the development . Despite the initial similarities the developers decided to give Jumping Flash ! 2 a much larger draw distance , higher quality textures , and updated enemy AI in order to give the game a more memorable first @-@ person 3D perspective . Jumping Flash ! 2 was not designed to be a technology demonstrator , unlike its predecessor . 
 The music for both the first game and Jumping Flash ! 2 was composed by Japanese video games and anime music composer Takeo Miratsu . Many of the tracks were included with tracks from the previous game ( which Miratsu also composed the music for ) on the Jumping Flash ! 2 Original Soundtrack . The soundtrack was published by <unk> Records in Japan in 1996 . Jumping Flash ! 2 was re @-@ released as a downloadable game for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable via the PlayStation Network in 2009 , with the same controls and interface as the 1996 release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Jumping Flash ! 2 was received mostly positive review scores ( similar to its predecessor ) from critics and magazines alike . Many critics praised the new innovation the game offered ; IGN staff was impressed by the game 's newly expanded worlds and the inclusion of bonus worlds which were not included in the first game , however noted that despite not significantly different from the first , the game " still delivers " . Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu awarded the game as among the top 120 games reviewed by the publication in 2000 . Matthew House of GamePro also criticised the game on its difficulty and length ; stating that " while some games are extremely frustrating , this sequel is astonishingly easy the lack of the game 's challenging gameplay " . House however praised its playability and its improved graphic engine , respectively giving the game a score of three and a half stars out of five stars . 
 Shawn Sackenheim of GamePro also found the main downfall of the game too short and too easy , however he noted the new Time Attack mode and the expansion of the storyline to be an interesting new feature that extended playability . Sackenheim established that despite the minor add @-@ ons and overhauled textures , Jumping Flash ! 2 was essentially a technical update of the 1995 original . Other criticisms conclude that the game was too short despite Game Revolution citing that the game offered a total of 32 levels if including the " repetitive " epilogue . Game Revolution also noted that Jumping Flash ! 2 was a " very worthy sequel with better graphics , higher jumps , and lots more levels " , and that upon release the game the gameplay " really [ excelled ] beyond the competition " . 
 = Burkhan Khaldun = 
 The Burkhan Khaldun ( Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ) is one of the Khentii Mountains in the Khentii Province of northeastern Mongolia . The mountain or its locality is believed to be the birthplace of Genghis Khan as well as the location of his tomb . It is also the birthplace of one of his most successful generals , Subutai . The mountain is part of the 12 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 600 sq mi ) Khan Khentii Strictly Protected Area established in 1992 . It had strong religious significance before Genghis Khan made it a powerful landmark , but is considered the most sacred mountain in Mongolia since it was designated as sacred by Genghis Khan . It was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site on 4 July 2015 under the title " Great Burkhan Khaldun Mountain and its surrounding sacred landscape . " Under a Presidential Decree of 1955 the worship of this mountain has been formalised and the mountain declared a national monument . Its ecosystem is complex with unique biodiversity with flora of the Central Asian steppe . It has 50 species of fauna and 253 species of birds . 
 = = Location = = 
 Burkhan Khaldun is situated in the north @-@ east of Mongolia in the middle of the Khentii mountain range . The mountain is integral to the Khan Khentii Strictly Protected Area established in 1992 and which extends over an area of 12 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 600 sq mi ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Burkhan Khaldun means the " God Mountain " ( in Cyrillic ) and is also called Khentii Khan ( The King of the Khentii Mountain range ) . It is one of the Khentii Mountains in the Khentii Province of northeastern Mongolia . It is the highest mountain of the region , rising to an elevation of 2 @,@ 362 metres ( 7 @,@ 749 ft ) , and is crescent @-@ shaped . It is the source of several rivers : the <unk> and <unk> rivers flow into the Amur , which has its outfall in the Pacific Ocean ; and the rivers <unk> , <unk> and <unk> flow northwards to join the <unk> , which empties into the Arctic Ocean . It is in a complex ecosystem with unique biodiversity which is defined as a " transition zone from Siberian permafrost land forms to great steppe " . 
 = = History = = 
 Genghis Khan ( also known as <unk> Khan ) lost his battle against the <unk> ( one of the major tribal confederations ( <unk> ) of the Mongols ) and escaped death by seeking protection in the sacred precincts of the Burkhan Khaldun mountains . An old woman saved him and a few others . As mark of great reverence to the mountain , which in Mongolia is considered a highly sacred mountain of spiritual significance , and to the sun above , he offered his respects to the spirits of the mountain around him , sprayed milk into the air and sprinkled it on the earth . He removed his girdle strap , unwinding it from his outfit , and then put it around his neck . Symbolically by this act he surrendered his Mongolian man 's pride and expressed his submission to the gods . He also took off his hat , crossed his hand across his chest and knelt in obeisance nine times offering worship to the sun and the mountain . He spent three days in the mountain offering prayers and thus established a strong bond of spirituality with the mountain and derived special strength from it . In the Secret History of the Mongols , Genghis Khan , who later became the " World Conqueror " believing in his own destiny , had said : 
 Genghis Khan then started his campaign to unify the land and people of Mongolia as a strong force . He gave the Burkhan Khaldun the status of a royal sacred mountain . The history is chronicled in the “ Secret History of the Mongols ” , which UNESCO recognised in 1990 as a " literary creation of outstanding universal significance " . In this document Burkhan Khaldun is described in detail and finds mention 27 times , which signifies the unique position of the mountain in Mongolia ‘ s heritage . This document establishes the authenticity of the site , stating : 
 A Presidential Decree of 1955 formalised the worship of the Burkhan Khaldun Mountain as a national monument . Special worship is offered to the mountain according to a prescribed procedure at the Main " Ovoo of the Heaven " ; it is reserved for a few officials of the state and local administration , shamans and a few Buddhist lamas ( monks ) . 
 = = World heritage status = = 
 Burkhan Khaldun was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site at the 39th session of the World Heritage Committee on 4 July 2015 under the title " Great Burkhan Khaldun Mountain and its surrounding sacred landscape " , covering an area of 443 @,@ 739 hectares ( 1 @,@ 096 @,@ 500 acres ) and an additional buffer zone of 271 @,@ 651 hectares ( 671 @,@ 260 acres ) , categorised under Criterion ( iv ) for its unique cultural tradition of mountain worship and nature worship of past several millennium , and ( vi ) for its universally known historical and literary epic of immense importance . 
 = = Religious significance = = 
 This mountain has a spiritual significance unmatched by any other mountain in Mongolia , and is given the symbolic status of the “ cradle ” of Mongolia 's nationhood fully representing the " heritage and traditional ways of life of nomadic people of Mongolia " . The ( unconfirmed ) Mongolian belief that Genghis Khan was born here and is buried somewhere in this mountain has added to the sanctity of the mountain , particularly since Khan offered worship here and declared the mountain as the most sacred in the country . It has given authenticity to the spiritual nature of the mountain , and as a result regular pilgrimage is under taken by the people to the three sacred major <unk> or stone cairns fixed at the sacred sites along a specified route where Mongolian shamanic worship is offered . The specified route is unique and covers : Main Ovoo of Heaven at the pinnacle of the mountain via <unk> <unk> ( " Three Forbidden Precincts " ) ; the <unk> Mod ( " Two Trees of Entrance " ) ; the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Threshold Pass of Heaven " ) ; the catchment of the <unk> River and the Sacred <unk> Rivers ; and finally to the <unk> ( " Lowest " ) Ovoo . 
 = = Flora = = 
 The flora found in the mountain belongs to the Central Asian steppe and consists of coniferous forests of the taiga . The plant species reported are 28 listed in the Mongolian Red Book , 15 very rare species , and 28 species listed as rare species . The species listed in the IUCN Red List are also found here and these are : 2 critically endangered species , 4 endangered species and 8 vulnerable species . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 In the faunal geographical province of the Burkhan Khaldun Mountain in the Khentii district the fauna reported are more than " 50 species of 27 genera of six orders including five species of mammals / insectivores , 4 species of hymenoptera , four species of <unk> , 19 species of rodents , 13 species of predators , five species of ungulate , one species of reptile , and 253 species of birds . According to the Mongolian Red Data Book : the very rare mammal species are musk deer ( <unk> <unk> ) and moose ( Alces alces ) ; the very rare bird species are the Siberian white crane ( Grus <unk> ) , Greater spotted eagle ( Aquila clanga ) , Pallas ’ s fish eagle ( Haliaeetus <unk> ) , white @-@ naped crane ( Grus <unk> ) and hooded crane ( Grus <unk> ) ; the fish species is the Amur sturgeon ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = USS Milwaukee ( CL @-@ 5 ) = 
 USS Milwaukee ( CL @-@ 5 ) was an Omaha @-@ class light cruiser built for the United States Navy during the 1920s . The ship spent most of her early career assigned to the Asiatic and Battle Fleets . In 1941 she was assigned to the Neutrality Patrol until she was refitted in New York in late 1941 . She escorted a troop convoy to the Pacific in early 1942 before returning to the South Atlantic where she patrolled for German commerce raiders and blockade runners . In November , she intercepted one of the latter , but it scuttled itself before it could be captured . In 1944 she was temporarily transferred to the Soviet Navy and commissioned as Murmansk . The ship was returned by the Soviets in 1949 and sold for scrap in December . 
 = = Description = = 
 Milwaukee was 550 feet ( 170 m ) long at the waterline and 555 feet 6 inches ( 169 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 55 feet 4 inches ( 16 @.@ 9 m ) and a mean draft of 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 1 m ) . Her standard displacement was 7 @,@ 050 long tons ( 7 @,@ 160 t ) and 9 @,@ 150 long tons ( 9 @,@ 300 t ) at full load . Her crew consisted of 29 officers and 429 enlisted men . The ship was fitted with a powerful echo sounder . 
 The ship was powered by four Westinghouse geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam generated by 12 Yarrow boilers . The engines were rated at 90 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 67 @,@ 000 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . At deep load she carried 1 @,@ 852 long tons ( 1 @,@ 882 t ) of fuel oil that provided her a range of 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Milwaukee mounted a dozen 53 @-@ caliber six @-@ inch guns ; four in two twin gun turrets and eight in tiered casemates fore and aft . Her secondary armament initially consisted of two 50 @-@ caliber three @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts , but this was doubled to four guns during construction . Milwaukee was initially built with the capacity to carry 224 mines , but these were removed early in her career to make more space for crew accommodations . The ship carried above @-@ water two triple and two twin torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . The triple mounts were fitted on the upper deck , aft of the aircraft catapults , and the twin mounts were one deck lower , covered by hatches in the side of the hull . These lower mounts proved to be very wet and were removed , and the openings plated over , before the start of World War II . Another change made before the war was to increase the 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) guns to four , all mounted in the ship 's waist . 
 The ship lacked a full @-@ length waterline armor belt . The sides of her boiler and engine rooms and steering gear were protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armor . The transverse bulkheads at the end of her machinery rooms were 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick forward and three inches thick aft . The deck over the machinery spaces and steering gear had a thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches . The gun turrets were only protected against muzzle blast and the conning tower had 1 @.@ 5 inches of armor . Milwaukee carried two floatplanes aboard that were stored on the two catapults . Initially these were probably Vought VE @-@ 9s , but the ship operated Curtiss SOC Seagulls from 1935 and Vought OS2U Kingfishers after 1940 . 
 = = = Wartime changes = = = 
 After 1940 the lower aft six @-@ inch guns were removed and the casemates plated over . The ship 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented by two quadruple 1 @.@ 1 @-@ inch gun mounts by early 1942 , although these were replaced by twin Bofors 40 mm gun mounts later in the war . At about the same time , Milwaukee received eight Oerlikon 20 mm cannon . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 The contract for Milwaukee , the third ship named for the city of Milwaukee , Wisconsin , was signed on 27 August 1917 and the ship was laid down by Todd Dry Dock & Construction Co . , at their Tacoma , Washington shipyard on 13 December 1918 . She was launched on 24 March 1921 and was commissioned on 20 June 1923 . During the ship 's shakedown cruise , she visited Sydney , Australia during the Pan @-@ Pacific Scientific Congress which opened on 23 August . With her new depth – finding equipment , Milwaukee surveyed the floor of the Pacific en route . " The Milwaukee Seamounts in the Northern Pacific are named after a set of soundings taken by Milwaukee in 1929 . " 
 During Fleet Problem VI , she collided with her sister ship Detroit in Guantanamo Bay , Cuba , on 1 February 1926 , although neither ship was seriously damaged . Milwaukee and the destroyer Goff assisted victims of a fierce hurricane which had devastated the Isle of Pines in October 1926 . She was assigned to Cruiser Division 2 of the Asiatic Fleet in 1928 . During an engagement with " enemy " cruisers during Fleet Problem IX on 16 April 1930 , the ship was ruled to have been knocked out by the exercise 's umpires . Three years later , during Fleet Problem XIV , Milwaukee was spotted by fighters from the aircraft carrier Saratoga and sunk by some of the opposing cruisers . In 1933 , the ship was assigned to Cruiser Division 3 of the Battle Fleet . After the Panay Incident in December 1937 , Milwaukee made a cruise through the Western Pacific from January to April 1938 . 
 While steaming north of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico on 14 February 1939 , Milwaukee discovered the deepest place in the Atlantic Ocean . The spot — which has a depth of 28 @,@ 680 feet ( 8 @,@ 740 m ) — is now known as the " Milwaukee Deep " . By January 1941 , the ship had returned to Cruiser Division 2 which was now assigned to the Caribbean Patrol , commanded by Rear Admiral Jonas H. Ingram , part of the Neutrality Patrol established after the war began . Cruiser Division 2 was ordered to patrol the Atlantic between Trinidad , the Cape Verde Islands and the eastern bulge of Brazil in April , although Milwaukee was not immediately available . The ship , escorted by the destroyers Somers and Jouett , began her first patrol in May , making a port visit to Recife , Brazil on 1 June , before returning to San Juan , Puerto Rico . These patrols continued in the same manner for most of the rest of the year . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = South Atlantic = = = = 
 Milwaukee , commanded by Captain Forrest B. Royal , was being overhauled in the Brooklyn Navy Yard when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December . The ship escorted a convoy to the Caribbean from New York on 31 December and then escorted eight troop transports from the Panama Canal to the Society Islands . She rejoined the South Atlantic Patrol Force upon her return and spend the next two years making patrols between Brazil and the African coast . On 19 May she received an SOS from the Brazilian cargo ship SS Commandante Lyra , which had been torpedoed by the Italian submarine Barbarigo off the coast of Brazil . Milwaukee found the freighter abandoned , burning , and listing to port . She rescued 25 survivors from their lifeboats , including the ship 's master . Reinforced by her sister Omaha and the destroyer McDougal , the fires were brought under control , cargo was jettisoned to lighten the ship , and Commandante Lyra was towed to Fortaleza , Brazil . 
 Rear Admiral O. M. Read assumed command of Cruiser Division 2 in October and hoisted his flag aboard Milwaukee . On 21 November , Milwaukee , her sister Cincinnati and the destroyer Somers intercepted the German blockade runner Anneliese <unk> . When Somers had closed to 4 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 nmi ; 6 @.@ 4 km ) , the German ship scuttled herself to prevent capture . Milwaukee rescued 62 of the ship 's crew . On 2 May 1943 , while the ship was under repair at Recife , her crew helped to fight a fire on the oil tanker SS Livingston Roe . Milwaukee and Omaha collided on 31 May off the coast of Brazil , although the extent of the damage is not known . The ship sailed for the Brooklyn Navy Yard on 8 February 1944 , preparatory to her temporary transfer to the Soviet Union in lieu of Italian ships allotted after the Italian surrender that could not be delivered . She escorted a convoy to Belfast , Northern Ireland on 8 March before forming part of the escort of Convoy JW 58 during her voyage to Murmansk beginning on 29 March . 
 = = = Soviet service = = = 
 On 20 April , the ship was transferred on loan to the Soviet Northern Fleet in Murmansk . She was commissioned in the Soviet Navy as Murmansk and performed convoy and patrol duty in the Arctic Ocean for the remainder of the war . Afterward , she became a training ship and participated in the 1948 fleet maneuvers . On 16 March 1949 , Milwaukee was transferred back to the United States . She was the first of 15 American warships returned by Russia . She entered the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard on 18 March 1949 , and was sold for scrapping on 10 December to the American <unk> , Inc. of Wilmington , Delaware . 
 = Les Holden = 
 Leslie Hubert ( Les ) Holden , MC , AFC ( 6 March 1895 – 18 September 1932 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War I and later a commercial aviator . A South Australian , he joined the Light Horse in May 1915 , serving in Egypt and France . In December 1916 , he volunteered for the Australian Flying Corps and qualified as a pilot . As a member of No. 2 Squadron on the Western Front , he gained the sobriquets " Lucky Les " and " the homing pigeon " after a series of incidents that saw him limping back to base in bullet @-@ riddled aircraft . He was awarded the Military Cross , and went on to achieve five aerial victories flying Airco DH.5s and Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s. 
 Promoted to captain , Holden finished the war as an instructor with No. 6 ( Training ) Squadron in England , where his work earned him the Air Force Cross . After leaving the Australian Flying Corps in 1919 , he became a manager at the family firm of Holden 's Motor Body Builders and joined the part @-@ time Citizen Air Force , before setting up as a commercial pilot and establishing his own air service . In 1929 , he located Charles Kingsford Smith and Charles Ulm in the north @-@ west Australian desert after the pair was reported missing on a flight to England in the Southern Cross . Holden began transport operations in New Guinea in 1931 . He was killed the following year in a passenger plane crash in Australia . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Leslie Hubert Holden was born on 6 March 1895 in East Adelaide , South Australia , to travelling businessman Hubert William Holden and his wife Annie Maria . Les was the nephew of Henry Holden , who later founded the Adelaide @-@ based firm Holden 's Motor Body Builders with his son Edward . Hubert Holden landed a partnership with Nestlé in 1905 , and the family moved to Turramurra , New South Wales . Les completed his education at Sydney Church of England Grammar School , and joined Nestlé in 1911 as a salesman . By the time Australia entered World War I in August 1914 , he was an assistant manager . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Holden enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force on 26 May 1915 , and was posted to the 4th Light Horse Brigade as a private . He departed for Egypt aboard the transport A29 Suevic on 13 June . Serving as a driver first in the Middle East and then on the Western Front , his mechanical ability and sense of adventure led him to volunteer for the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) in December 1916 . After qualifying as a pilot in England , he was commissioned a lieutenant and posted to No. 2 Squadron . Commanded by Major Oswald Watt , No. 2 Squadron 's personnel included many former Lighthorsemen , as well as mechanics from the AFC 's first combat formation , the Mesopotamian Half Flight . The force trained extensively in England commencing in January 1917 , before deploying to the Western Front that September . Holden was involved in the AFC 's first day of combat in France ; just after noon on 2 October , in the vicinity of Saint @-@ Quentin , he and his wingman engaged a German two @-@ seater that managed to escape . 
 Because its Airco DH.5s were handicapped as fighters by engine problems and low speed , No. 2 Squadron was employed mainly in ground support duties . During the fog @-@ shrouded opening day of the Battle of Cambrai on 20 November , Holden bombed and machine @-@ gunned a German communications trench from altitudes as low as 20 or 30 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 or 9 @.@ 1 metres ) . He returned to a forward airfield near Havrincourt Wood with his plane " a flying wreck " , in the words of the official history of Australia in the war . " Every part of it was shot full of holes , including petrol @-@ tank , tail @-@ plane , both longerons , and part of the undercarriage , while the elevator control was shot clean away . " Two days later he repeated the exercise with similar consequences for his aircraft — " clear evidence of the dangers of the work and of his own good luck " , as the official history put it . This brace of close calls gained him the nicknames " Lucky Les " and " the homing pigeon " . He was recommended for the Military Cross on 3 December for his actions of 20 November . The award was promulgated in the London Gazette on 4 February 1918 , and the citation appeared on 5 July : 
 Lt. Leslie Hubert Holden , F.C. 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . Whilst on a special mission he dropped a bomb direct on a support trench full of the enemy , causing them to scatter , and another bomb upon a strong point which was holding up our advance . He also bombed a large group of enemy infantry , and turned his machine gun on them from a height of 100 feet . He rendered very valuable service throughout the operations . 
 Holden claimed his first aerial victory while No. 2 Squadron was still flying DH.5s , before it began converting to Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s in December 1917 . On 18 February 1918 , he shared in one of the unit 's first two victories in the S.E.5 , helping send an Albatros down in a spin . He claimed another three aircraft shot down over the following month , giving him a total of five victories . At least one of these took place during the Spring Offensive , on 22 March , when all available Allied aircraft were thrown into battle to stem the German advance . 
 Royal Air Force policy required pilots to be rotated to home establishment for rest and instructional duties after nine to twelve months in combat . Promoted to captain in March 1918 , Holden was posted to England in May as a flying instructor with No. 6 ( Training ) Squadron at Minchinhampton . His unit was part of the 1st Training Wing , led by Lieutenant Colonel Watt , the former commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron . Holden briefly took command of No. 6 Squadron from 25 July to 11 August . He was awarded the Air Force Cross , promulgated on 3 June 1919 , for his skill as an instructor . 
 = = Post @-@ war career and legacy = = 
 No. 6 Squadron was disbanded in March 1919 . Along with many other Australian Flying Corps personnel including Colonel Watt , Major Roy King , and Captain Garnet Malley , Holden departed for Australia on 6 May aboard the troopship Kaisar @-@ i @-@ Hind , disembarking in Sydney on 19 June . He was discharged from the AFC on 18 August 1919 . After taking part in the Commonwealth Government 's Peace Loan flights , he joined Holden 's Motor Body Builders as its Sydney manager . In May 1921 , he served with Malley and other veteran pilots as a pall @-@ bearer at Watt 's funeral in Randwick . Holden married Kathleen <unk> at St Mark 's Anglican Church in Darling Point on 3 June 1924 ; the couple had three daughters . On 19 June 1925 , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) established the Citizen Air Force as a part @-@ time active reserve , and Holden became one of its first recruits . Ranked flight lieutenant , he served as a pilot with No. 3 Squadron , which operated Airco DH.9s and S.E.5s. Formed at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , it transferred to the newly opened RAAF Richmond , New South Wales , during 29 – 30 June ; Holden and Malley touched down at Richmond with the first two S.E.5s on the 30th . 
 Still hankering after a full @-@ time career in flying , Holden enlisted the help of friends to purchase a de Havilland <unk> Giant Moth in 1928 . He named it Canberra , and used it to start a charter operation out of Mascot Aerodrome in Sydney . Holden became a national celebrity in April 1929 when he successfully undertook an aerial search of the north @-@ western Australian wilderness to locate Charles Kingsford Smith and Charles Ulm , after the pair had gone missing on a flight from Sydney to England in the Southern Cross . Two other searchers , Keith Anderson and Bob Hitchcock , were lost in their aircraft , the Kookaburra . The media of the day turned on Smith and Ulm , accusing them of a publicity stunt , and the Sydney Citizens ' Relief Committee , which had commissioned Holden to undertake the rescue operation , withheld payment of his expenses . He nevertheless continued flying commercially , and is credited with making — in September 1931 — possibly the first flight from Sydney to New Guinea , where he started an air freight service . Returning to Sydney the following year , he established Holden 's Air Transport Services . He also acquired two more aircraft for his New Guinea operations , a Waco and a Moth , to supplement the Canberra . 
 On 18 September 1932 , Holden was travelling as a passenger aboard a New England Airways <unk> Puss Moth from Sydney to Brisbane when it crashed at Byron Bay in northern New South Wales , killing him instantly . The other occupants , pilot Ralph Virtue and the joint owner of the Canberra , Holden 's schoolfriend Dr George Hamilton , also perished . Investigations determined that the Puss Moth , VH @-@ UPM , had gone down as a result of wing failure caused by aileron flutter . A crowded memorial service for Holden and Hamilton took place at Sydney Church of England Grammar School on 20 September ; they were cremated that afternoon at Rookwood Cemetery , where eighteen aircraft piloted by friends and associates of the pair overflew the chapel . Holden was survived by his wife and children . His father Hubert carried on operating Holden 's Air Transport Services , floating it as a public corporation and serving as chairman . Les Holden , George Hamilton , and one of their schoolmates who had also recently died , Henry Braddon , were commemorated with a memorial stained @-@ glass window at the Sydney Church of England Grammar School chapel in 1934 . Holden was also honoured by Holden Street , built in the Sydney suburb of Maroubra in 1943 . 
 = Habitat = 
 A habitat is an ecological or environmental area that is inhabited by a particular species of animal , plant , or other type of organism . The term typically refers to the zone in which the organism lives and where it can find food , shelter , protection and mates for reproduction . It is the natural environment in which an organism lives , or the physical environment that surrounds a species population . 
 A habitat is made up of physical factors such as soil , moisture , range of temperature , and light intensity as well as biotic factors such as the availability of food and the presence or absence of predators . Every organism has certain habitat needs for the conditions in which it will thrive , but some are tolerant of wide variations while others are very specific in their requirements . A habitat is not necessarily a geographical area , it can be the interior of a stem , a rotten log , a rock or a clump of moss , and for a parasitic organism it is the body of its host , part of the host 's body such as the digestive tract , or a single cell within the host 's body . 
 Habitat types include polar , temperate , subtropical and tropical . The terrestrial vegetation type may be forest , steppe , grassland , semi @-@ arid or desert . Fresh water habitats include marshes , streams , rivers , lakes , ponds and estuaries , and marine habitats include salt marshes , the coast , the intertidal zone , reefs , bays , the open sea , the sea bed , deep water and submarine vents . 
 Habitats change over time . This may be due to a violent event such as the eruption of a volcano , an earthquake , a tsunami , a wildfire or a change in oceanic currents ; or the change may be more gradual over millennia with alterations in the climate , as ice sheets and glaciers advance and retreat , and as different weather patterns bring changes of precipitation and solar radiation . Other changes come as a direct result of human activities ; deforestation , the ploughing of ancient grasslands , the diversion and damming of rivers , the draining of marshland and the dredging of the seabed . The introduction of alien species can have a devastating effect on native wildlife , through increased predation , through competition for resources or through the introduction of pests and diseases to which the native species have no immunity . 
 = = Definition and etymology = = 
 The word " habitat " has been in use since about 1755 and derives from the Latin third @-@ person singular present indicative of <unk> , to inhabit , from <unk> , to have or to hold . Habitat can be defined as the natural environment of an organism , the place in which it is natural for it to live and grow . It is similar in meaning to a <unk> , an area of uniform environmental conditions associated with a particular community of plants and animals . 
 = = Environmental factors = = 
 The chief environmental factors affecting the distribution of living organisms are temperature , humidity , climate , soil type and light intensity , and the presence or absence of all the requirements that the organism needs to sustain it . Generally speaking , animal communities are reliant on specific types of plant communities . 
 Some plants and animals are generalists , and their habitat requirements are met in a wide range of locations . The small white butterfly ( Pieris rapae ) for example is found on all the continents of the world apart from Antarctica . Its larvae feed on a wide range of <unk> and various other plant species , and it thrives in any open location with diverse plant associations . The large blue butterfly is much more specific in its requirements ; it is found only in chalk grassland areas , its larvae feed on Thymus species and because of complex lifecycle requirements it inhabits only areas in which Myrmica ants live . 
 Disturbance is important in the creation of biodiverse habitats . In the absence of disturbance , a climax vegetation cover develops that prevents the establishment of other species . Wildflower meadows are sometimes created by conservationists but most of the flowering plants used are either annuals or biennials and disappear after a few years in the absence of patches of bare ground on which their seedlings can grow . Lightning strikes and toppled trees in tropical forests allow species richness to be maintained as pioneering species move in to fill the gaps created . Similarly coastal habitats can become dominated by kelp until the seabed is disturbed by a storm and the algae swept away , or shifting sediment exposes new areas for colonisation . Another cause of disturbance is when an area may be overwhelmed by an invasive introduced species which is not kept under control by natural enemies in its new habitat . 
 = = Types of habitat = = 
 Terrestrial habitat types include forests , grasslands , wetlands and deserts . Within these broad biomes are more specific habitats with varying climate types , temperature regimes , soils , altitudes and vegetation types . Many of these habitats grade into each other and each one has its own typical communities of plants and animals . A habitat may suit a particular species well , but its presence or absence at any particular location depends to some extent on chance , on its dispersal abilities and its efficiency as a coloniser . 
 Freshwater habitats include rivers , streams , lakes , ponds , marshes and bogs . Although some organisms are found across most of these habitats , the majority have more specific requirements . The water velocity , its temperature and oxygen saturation are important factors , but in river systems , there are fast and slow sections , pools , bayous and backwaters which provide a range of habitats . Similarly , aquatic plants can be floating , semi @-@ submerged , submerged or grow in permanently or temporarily saturated soils besides bodies of water . Marginal plants provide important habitat for both invertebrates and vertebrates , and submerged plants provide oxygenation of the water , absorb nutrients and play a part in the reduction of pollution . 
 Marine habitats include brackish water , estuaries , bays , the open sea , the intertidal zone , the sea bed , reefs and deep water zones . Further variations include rock pools , sand banks , mudflats , brackish lagoons , sandy and pebbly beaches , and seagrass beds , all supporting their own flora and fauna . The benthic zone or seabed provides a home for both static organisms , anchored to the substrate , and for a large range of organisms crawling on or burrowing into the surface . Some creatures float among the waves on the surface of the water , or raft on floating debris , others swim at a range of depths , including organisms in the demersal zone close to the seabed , and myriads of organisms drift with the currents and form the plankton . 
 A desert is not the kind of habitat that favours the presence of amphibians , with their requirement for water to keep their skins moist and for the development of their young . Nevertheless , some frogs live in deserts , creating moist habitats underground and hibernating while conditions are adverse . Couch 's spadefoot toad ( Scaphiopus <unk> ) emerges from its burrow when a downpour occurs and lays its eggs in the transient pools that form ; the tadpoles develop with great rapidity , sometimes in as little as nine days , undergo metamorphosis , and feed voraciously before digging a burrow of their own . 
 Other organisms cope with the drying up of their aqueous habitat in other ways . Vernal pools are ephemeral ponds that form in the rainy season and dry up afterwards . They have their specially @-@ adapted characteristic flora , mainly consisting of annuals , the seeds of which survive the drought , but also some uniquely adapted perennials . Animals adapted to these extreme habitats also exist ; fairy shrimps can lay " winter eggs " which are resistant to desiccation , sometimes being blown about with the dust , ending up in new depressions in the ground . These can survive in a dormant state for as long as fifteen years . Some killifish behave in a similar way ; their eggs hatch and the juvenile fish grow with great rapidity when the conditions are right , but the whole population of fish may end up as eggs in diapause in the dried up mud that was once a pond . 
 Many animals and plants have taken up residence in urban environments . They tend to be adaptable generalists and use the town 's features to make their homes . Rats and mice have followed man around the globe , pigeons , peregrines , sparrows , swallows and house martins use the buildings for nesting , bats use roof space for roosting , foxes visit the garbage bins and squirrels , coyotes , raccoons and skunks roam the streets . About 2 @,@ 000 coyotes are thought to live in and around Chicago . A survey of dwelling houses in northern European cities in the twentieth century found about 175 species of invertebrate inside them , including 53 species of beetle , 21 flies , 13 butterflies and moths , 13 mites , 9 lice , 7 bees , 5 wasps , 5 cockroaches , 5 spiders , 4 ants and a number of other groups . In warmer climates , termites are serious pests in the urban habitat ; 183 species are known to affect buildings and 83 species cause serious structural damage . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 A microhabitat is the small @-@ scale physical requirements of a particular organism or population . Every habitat includes large numbers of microhabitats with subtly different exposure to light , humidity , temperature , air movement , and other factors . The lichens that grow on the north face of a boulder are different to those that grow on the south face , from those on the level top and those that grow on the ground nearby ; the lichens growing in the grooves and on the raised surfaces are different from those growing on the veins of quartz . Lurking among these miniature " forests " are the microfauna , each species of invertebrate with its own specific habitat requirements . 
 There are numerous different microhabitats in a wood ; coniferous forest , broad @-@ leafed forest , open woodland , scattered trees , woodland verges , clearings and glades ; tree trunk , branch , twig , bud , leaf , flower and fruit ; rough bark , smooth bark , damaged bark , rotten wood , hollow , groove and hole ; canopy , shrub layer , plant layer , leaf litter and soil ; buttress root , stump , fallen log , stem base , grass tussock , fungus , fern and moss . The greater the structural diversity in the wood , the greater the number of microhabitats that will be present . A range of tree species with individual specimens of varying sizes and ages , and a range of features such as streams , level areas , slopes , tracks , clearings and felled areas will provide suitable conditions for an enormous number of biodiverse plants and animals . For example , in Britain it has been estimated that various types of rotting wood are home to over 1700 species of invertebrate . 
 For a parasitic organism , its habitat is the particular part of the outside or inside of its host on or in which it is adapted to live . The life cycle of some parasites involves several different host species , as well as free @-@ living life stages , sometimes providing vastly different microhabitats . One such organism is the trematode ( flatworm ) <unk> <unk> , present in brackish water marshes in the southeastern United States . Its first intermediate host is a snail and the second , a glass shrimp . The final host is the waterfowl or mammal that consumes the shrimp . 
 = = Extreme habitats = = 
 Although the vast majority of life on Earth lives in <unk> ( moderate ) environments , a few organisms , most of them microbes , have managed to colonise extreme environments that are unsuitable for most higher life forms . There are bacteria , for example , living in Lake <unk> , half a mile below the ice of Antarctica ; in the absence of sunlight , they must rely on organic material from elsewhere , perhaps decaying matter from glacier melt water or minerals from the underlying rock . Other bacteria can be found in abundance in the Mariana Trench , the deepest place in the ocean and on Earth ; marine snow drifts down from the surface layers of the sea and accumulates in this undersea valley , providing nourishment for an extensive community of bacteria . 
 Other microbes live in habitats lacking in oxygen , and are dependent on chemical reactions other than photosynthesis . Boreholes drilled 300 m ( 1 @,@ 000 ft ) into the rocky seabed have found microbial communities apparently based on the products of reactions between water and the constituents of rocks . These communities have been little studied , but may be an important part of the global carbon cycle . Rock in mines two miles deep also harbour microbes ; these live on minute traces of hydrogen produced in slow oxidizing reactions inside the rock . These metabolic reactions allow life to exist in places with no oxygen or light , an environment that had previously been thought to be devoid of life . 
 The intertidal zone and the photic zone in the oceans are relatively familiar habitats . However the vast bulk of the ocean is <unk> to air @-@ breathing humans , with scuba divers limited to the upper 50 m ( 160 ft ) or so . The lower limit for photosynthesis is 100 to 200 m ( 330 to 660 ft ) and below that depth the prevailing conditions include total darkness , high pressure , little oxygen ( in some places ) , scarce food resources and extreme cold . This habitat is very challenging to research , and as well as being little studied , it is vast , with 79 % of the Earth 's biosphere being at depths greater than 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . With no plant life , the animals in this zone are either detritivores , reliant on food drifting down from surface layers , or they are predators , feeding on each other . Some organisms are pelagic , swimming or drifting in mid @-@ ocean , while others are benthic , living on or near the seabed . Their growth rates and metabolisms tend to be slow , their eyes may be very large to detect what little illumination there is , or they may be blind and rely on other sensory inputs . A number of deep sea creatures are bioluminescent ; this serves a variety of functions including predation , protection and social recognition . In general , the bodies of animals living at great depths are adapted to high pressure environments by having pressure @-@ resistant biomolecules and small organic molecules present in their cells know as <unk> , which give the proteins the flexibility they need . There are also unsaturated fats in their membranes which prevent them from solidifying at low temperatures . 
 Hydrothermal vents were first discovered in the ocean depths in 1977 . They result from seawater becoming heated after seeping through cracks to places where hot magma is close to the seabed . The under @-@ water hot springs may gush forth at temperatures of over 340 ° C ( 640 ° F ) and support unique communities of organisms in their immediate vicinity . The basis for this teeming life is chemosynthesis , a process by which microbes convert such substances as hydrogen sulfide or ammonia into organic molecules . These bacteria and Archaea are the primary producers in these ecosystems and support a diverse array of life . About 350 species of organism , dominated by molluscs , polychaete worms and crustaceans , had been discovered around hydrothermal vents by the end of the twentieth century , most of them being new to science and endemic to these habitats . 
 Besides providing locomotion opportunities for winged animals and a conduit for the dispersal of pollen grains , spores and seeds , the atmosphere can be considered to be a habitat in its own right . There are metabolically active microbes present that actively reproduce and spend their whole existence airborne , with hundreds of thousands of individual organisms estimated to be present in a cubic metre of air . The airborne microbial community may be as diverse as that found in soil or other terrestrial environments , however these organisms are not evenly distributed , their densities varying spatially with altitude and environmental conditions . <unk> has been little studied , but there is evidence of nitrogen fixation in clouds , and less clear evidence of carbon cycling , both facilitated by microbial activity . 
 There are other examples of extreme habitats where specially adapted lifeforms exist ; tar pits teeming with microbial life ; naturally occurring crude oil pools inhabited by the larvae of the petroleum fly ; hot springs where the temperature may be as high as 71 ° C ( 160 ° F ) and cyanobacteria create microbial mats ; cold seeps where the methane and hydrogen sulfide issue from the ocean floor and support microbes and higher animals such as mussels which form symbiotic associations with these anaerobic organisms ; salt pans harbour salt @-@ tolerant microorganisms and also <unk> <unk> , a <unk> fungus ; ice sheets in Antarctica which support fungi <unk> spp . , and snowfields on which algae grow . 
 = = Habitat change = = 
 Whether from natural processes or the activities of man , landscapes and their associated habitats change over time . There are the slow geomorphological changes associated with the geologic processes that cause tectonic uplift and subsidence , and the more rapid changes associated with earthquakes , landslides , storms , flooding , wildfires , coastal erosion , deforestation and changes in land use . Then there are the changes in habitats brought on by alterations in farming practices , tourism , pollution , fragmentation and climate change . 
 Loss of habitat is the single greatest threat to any species . If an island on which an endemic organism lives becomes uninhabitable for some reason , the species will become extinct . Any type of habitat surrounded by a different habitat is in a similar situation to an island . If a forest is divided into parts by logging , with strips of cleared land separating woodland blocks , and the distances between the remaining fragments exceeds the distance an individual animal is able to travel , that species becomes especially vulnerable . Small populations generally lack genetic diversity and may be threatened by increased predation , increased competition , disease and unexpected catastrophe . At the edge of each forest fragment , increased light encourages secondary growth of fast @-@ growing species and old growth trees are more vulnerable to logging as access is improved . The birds that nest in their crevices , the epiphytes that hang from their branches and the invertebrates in the leaf litter are all adversely affected and biodiversity is reduced . Habitat fragmentation can be ameliorated to some extent by the provision of wildlife corridors connecting the fragments . These can be a river , ditch , strip of trees , hedgerow or even an underpass to a highway . Without the corridors , seeds cannot disperse and animals , especially small ones , cannot travel through the hostile territory , putting populations at greater risk of local extinction . 
 Habitat disturbance can have long @-@ lasting effects on the environment . Bromus tectorum is a vigorous grass from Europe which has been introduced to the United States where it has become invasive . It is highly adapted to fire , producing large amounts of flammable detritus and increasing the frequency and intensity of wildfires . In areas where it has become established , it has altered the local fire regimen to such an extant that native plants cannot survive the frequent fires , allowing it to become even more dominant . A marine example is when sea urchin populations " explode " in coastal waters and destroy all the macroalgae present . What was previously a kelp forest becomes an urchin barren that may last for years and this can have a profound effect on the food chain . Removal of the sea urchins , by disease for example , can result in the seaweed returning , with an over @-@ abundance of fast @-@ growing kelp . 
 = = Habitat protection = = 
 The protection of habitats is a necessary step in the maintenance of biodiversity because if habitat destruction occurs , the animals and plants reliant on that habitat suffer . Many countries have enacted legislation to protect their wildlife . This may take the form of the setting up of national parks , forest reserves and wildlife reserves , or it may restrict the activities of humans with the objective of benefiting wildlife . The laws may be designed to protect a particular species or group of species , or the legislation may prohibit such activities as the collecting of bird eggs , the hunting of animals or the removal of plants . A general law on the protection of habitats may be more difficult to implement than a site specific requirement . A concept introduced in the Unites States in 1973 involves protecting the critical habitat of endangered species , and a similar concept has been incorporated into some Australian legislation . 
 International treaties may be necessary for such objectives as the setting up of marine reserves . Another international agreement , the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals , protects animals that migrate across the globe and need protection in more than one country . However , the protection of habitats needs to take into account the needs of the local residents for food , fuel and other resources . Even where legislation protects the environment , a lack of enforcement often prevents effective protection . Faced with food shortage , a farmer is likely to plough up a level patch of ground despite it being the last suitable habitat for an endangered species such as the San Quintin kangaroo rat , and even kill the animal as a pest . In this regard , it is desirable to educate the community on the uniqueness of their flora and fauna and the benefits of ecotourism . 
 = = <unk> habitat = = 
 A monotypic habitat is one in which a single species of animal or plant is so dominant as to virtually exclude all other species . An example would be sugarcane ; this is planted , burnt and harvested , with herbicides killing weeds and pesticides controlling invertebrates . The monotypic habitat occurs in botanical and zoological contexts , and is a component of conservation biology . In restoration ecology of native plant communities or habitats , some invasive species create monotypic stands that replace and / or prevent other species , especially indigenous ones , from growing there . A dominant colonization can occur from retardant chemicals exuded , nutrient monopolization , or from lack of natural controls such as herbivores or climate , that keep them in balance with their native habitats . The yellow starthistle , Centaurea solstitialis , is a botanical monotypic @-@ habitat example of this , currently dominating over 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 km2 ) in California alone . The non @-@ native freshwater zebra mussel , Dreissena polymorpha , that colonizes areas of the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River watershed , is a zoological monotypic @-@ habitat example ; the predators that control it in its home @-@ range in Russia are absent and it proliferates abundantly . Even though its name may seem to imply simplicity as compared with <unk> habitats , the monotypic habitat can be complex . Aquatic habitats , such as exotic <unk> beds , support a similarly rich fauna of macroinvertebrates to a more varied habitat , but the creatures present may differ between the two , affecting small fish and other animals higher up the food chain . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Dennis in Florida = 
 The effects of Hurricane Dennis in Florida included 14 deaths and $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 2005 US $ ) in damage . The tropical wave that became Hurricane Dennis formed on June 29 , 2005 , and proceeded westward across the Atlantic Ocean . It became a tropical depression on July 4 , a tropical storm on July 5 , and a hurricane on July 7 . Dennis rapidly intensified to attain Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and made landfall in Cuba where it weakened to Category 1 status , before re @-@ emerging in the Gulf of Mexico and re – intensifying . The storm made landfall as a Category 3 hurricane on Santa Rosa Island on July 10 . 
 As Dennis was impacting Cuba , the outer rainbands affected the Florida Keys causing moderate wind gusts peaking at 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) on Sombrero Key . In central Florida , Dennis produced numerous tornadoes , one severely damaging a house . In Punta Gorda , three people were found dead in a car submerged in a ditch flooded by heavy rain . Dennis made landfall in the Florida Panhandle , causing moderate damage , although not as severe as previously predicted . Wind gusts peaked at 121 mph ( 195 km / h ) , and maximum rainfall reached 7 @.@ 08 inches ( 180 mm ) . Storm surge of 6 – 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 7 m ) inundated parts of St. Marks and nearby locations . During the height of the storm , approximately 236 @,@ 000 customers in the Florida Panhandle were without electric power . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On July 7 , a tropical storm watch was issued for Florida 's Gulf coast from Bonita Beach southward , and for Florida 's Atlantic coast from Golden Beach to Ocean Reef . Later that day , a hurricane watch was issued for the Florida Keys and Florida Bay . By 2100 UTC , the hurricane watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning for the Florida Keys . Subsequently , a tropical storm watch was issued for Florida 's west coast north of Bonita Beach to Longboat Key which was discontinued at 2100 UTC . At the same time , a hurricane watch was issued for Steinhatchee River , Florida to the mouth of the Pearl River . By 0900 UTC on July 9 , the hurricane watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning just prior to the discontinuing of the hurricane watch for the Florida Keys . At 2100 UTC on July 9 , the tropical storm warning was lifted for Florida 's coast from Golden Beach to Flamingo , and for the Florida Keys from the Seven Mile Bridge eastward . By July 10 , all advisories for the Keys were discontinued and the hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning for Florida 's coast east of the Ochlockonee River to the Steinhatchee River . By July 11 , all advisories were discontinued . 
 About 50 @,@ 000 tourists in the Keys were forced to evacuate by July 8 . Governor Jeb Bush declared a statewide emergency , and evacuations started in the Florida Keys , a highly exposed chain of islands connected to the mainland by a single road and a series of bridges , stating that people " should have enough water , enough food , non @-@ perishable food , batteries of course for 72 hours so people could safely weather the storm " . Residents of the Florida Keys who did not evacuate were advised to remain indoors due to dangerous weather conditions that were predicted . 
 At Cape Canaveral , the space shuttle Discovery was considered to be safe on its launching pad after concerns of unfavorable weather , and NASA re @-@ scheduled a liftoff the following week ; however , shuttle managers eventually decided to begin moving Discovery from the launching pad to ride out the storm . In Miami , the Booker T. Washington Senior High School opened as a voluntary evacuation shelter for all pre @-@ registered special needs residents . Also , the MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa evacuated its aircraft to McConnell Air Force Base near Wichita . 
 In the Florida Panhandle , Governor Jeb Bush warned " This is serious . This is a very dangerous storm . " As Bush announced that hundreds of tractor @-@ trailers would be carrying ice , water and generators to staging areas in north central Florida , he stated " Here we go again " , referring to the large number of storms which had threatened Florida in the years prior to Dennis . 700 @,@ 000 people in the Florida panhandle were evacuated in the days prior to Dennis , 100 @,@ 000 of them in Escambia County alone . As a result of the large evacuations , more than 200 truckloads provided about 1 @.@ 8 million US gallons ( 6 @,@ 800 m3 ) of gasoline . The Red Cross put dozens of volunteers on standby to go into regions affected by the storm , and open shelters . The Red Cross also moved 60 mobile canteens , each capable of serving 30 @,@ 000 hot meals a day , to the staging points of Hattiesburg and Jackson . National guardsmen were mobilized , and four emergency medical teams , each capable of setting up a small field hospital , were on standby . Also , at Eglin Air Force Base , about 20 @,@ 000 military personnel were evacuated , and at Hurlburt Field , home to Air Force 's 16th Special Operations Wing , a mandatory evacuation was ordered for all 15 @,@ 000 airmen and their families . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = South Florida and Florida Keys = = = 
 In southern Florida , damage was mostly limited to moderate wind gusts ; in Miami @-@ Dade County , gusty winds knocked out several traffic lights along U.S. 1 , the only route to and from the Florida Keys . A man died in Ft . Lauderdale when he stepped on a downed electrical wire and was electrocuted . Also , 100 @,@ 000 homes in Miami Dade County were without electric power . 
 In the Florida Keys , Dennis passed to the west as a Category 2 hurricane producing winds of 59 miles per hour ( 95 km / h ) on Carysfort Reef Light . Rainfall peaked at 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) in the Monroe County Upper Keys . Damage in the Keys totaled $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 2005 USD ) , mostly to landscape and electric utility equipment . During the height of the storm , 211 @,@ 000 customers were without electric power in South Florida and the Keys . 
 Sand Key reported sustained winds of 62 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) with a gust to 78 miles per hour ( 126 km / h ) at <unk> UTC on July 9 , while the " C @-@ MAN " station at Sombrero Key reported sustained winds of 74 miles per hour ( 119 km / h ) with a gust of 87 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) at 0800 UTC on July 9 . These strong winds pushed a vintage DC @-@ 3 plane about 300 yards ( 1000 ft ) down the tarmac at the Key West airport , which was closed during the storm . Maximum storm surge topped out at 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . In addition , a man drowned in a rip current off of Hollywood Beach . 
 One beneficial effect of Hurricane Dennis was the rolling of the former USS Spiegel Grove . Spiegel Grove was sunk in Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary in an attempt to create an artificial reef . However , the ship turned over and landed on the bottom upside down . Efforts to roll the ship were partially successful , bringing it onto its starboard side , but Hurricane Dennis completed the roll , bringing Spiegel Grove into its intended upright position . 
 = = = Central Florida = = = 
 Damage was mostly minor and limited to outer rainbands and tornadoes in Central Florida . In the Tampa Bay area , several tornadoes were reported to have touched down causing minor damage such as downed trees and power lines . On July 8 , five tornadoes were officially reported , three of which caused damage . The most notable one left a path of damage one @-@ half mile wide , severely damaging a house . That same day , a wind gust of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) was reported at Pinellas . On July 9 , four tornadoes officially touched down , with the most notable one downing numerous trees and some powerlines . In Punta Gorda , three people were found dead in a car submerged in a ditch flooded by heavy rain . The road was covered with 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of water and caused the vehicle to hydroplane into a ditch where it flipped upside down . The victims were still wearing their seat belts when found . 
 = = = Florida Panhandle = = = 
 Hurricane Dennis made landfall as a Category 3 hurricane on Santa Rosa Island on July 10 . At Navarre Beach , sustained winds of 98 miles per hour ( 158 km / h ) were reported with a peak gust of 121 miles per hour ( 195 km / h ) , while a tower at the Pensacola Airport reported sustained winds of 82 miles per hour ( 132 km / h ) and a peak gust of 96 miles per hour ( 154 km / h ) . At the Pensacola Airport , a minimum pressure reading of 956 @.@ 3 mb was recorded and at Navarre , a pressure reading of 965 @.@ 2 mb was seen . Additionally , an unofficial storm chaser reported a minimum pressure of 942 mb at Pace , Florida . The most severe property damage occurred from Walton County to Wakulla County , where 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . Numerous boats were ripped from the dock and either floated out to sea , or were washed ashore . In McDavid , the tin roof of the recreation center for Ray 's Chapel was ripped off as about 12 people stood in the hallway . Also , several historic sites were damaged or destroyed by Dennis ; Angelo 's on Ochlockonee Bay , a landmark restaurant , was completely washed away . Beach front cottages on St. Teresa were either damaged or destroyed and several beach dunes on St. George Island were washed away by the pounding surf . On Holiday Island , several houses and apartment buildings were severely damaged . 
 On Santa Rosa Island , the hurricane produced a storm surge of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) , over washing parts of the low @-@ lying island on the eastern and western shores . In Apalachee Bay , storm surge of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) inundated parts of St. Marks and nearby locations , which was higher than previously anticipated and was thought to be enhanced by an oceanic trapped shelf wave that propagated northward along Florida 's west coast . As a result , sea water washed ashore up to eight blocks inland . The surge , in combination with the high surf , caused moderate beach erosion and wiped out 80 percent of the sea turtle 's nests . Along the coast , severe beach erosion occurred as a result of the storm , mostly in Walton , Bay , Gulf , Franklin and Wakulla counties . As a result of the pounding surf , the Navarre pier was ripped apart in two places . 
 Milton received 7 @.@ 08 inches ( 180 mm ) of rain , which is the highest reported rainfall total in Florida caused by Dennis . Rainfall across the Florida Panhandle ranged from 3 inches ( 76 mm ) to 7 inches ( 180 mm ) , while rainfall across the central and southern portions of the state ranged from 1 inch ( 25 mm ) to 5 inches ( 130 mm ) near Tampa . In southern Leon County , flooding was reported with several areas under 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of water . At St. George Island , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of road and numerous buildings were damaged or destroyed . Parts of U.S. Route 98 were washed out by flood waters . 
 As a result of the storm , over 236 @,@ 000 customers in the Florida Panhandle were without electric power . An indirect death occurred when a three @-@ year @-@ old boy was accidentally crushed to death when his father ran him over with a car as the family was evacuating . Two more people died from carbon monoxide poisoning in Escambia county . In all , two people were directly killed while several others were killed indirectly , and total damage amounted to $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 2005 USD ) . Directly after the storm , Bay , Dixie , Franklin , Gulf , Taylor , Wakulla and Walton counties were declared federal disaster areas . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the aftermath of the hurricane , president George W. Bush declared 13 counties – Bay , Calhoun , Escambia , Franklin , Gulf , Holmes , Jackson , Monroe , Okaloosa , Santa Rosa , Wakulla , Walton and Washington – in Florida as federal disaster areas . Applicants , including units of local government , in 19 counties became eligible for Public Assistance funds for emergency services and debris removal and to help restore or rebuild essential public facilities . On July 10 , President Bush ordered the release of federal disaster funds and emergency resources for Florida to aid people effected by Dennis . One day after the storm made landfall , four disaster recovery centers were opened by disaster officials , two in Escambia County , and two in Santa Rosa County . Supplies of food , water and ice were supplied from staging areas to distribution centers throughout the Florida Panhandle . The American Red Cross and other voluntary agencies assisted with food and water distribution as well as emergency needs and housing . Subsequently , an additional disaster relief center was opened in Santa Rosa County . Just days after the storm , six additional counties became eligible for federal disaster aid . 
 Voluntary agencies such as AmeriCorps , the Christian Contractors Association and the United Way provided assistance to residents who have temporary roofing and repair needs . Shortly after , three additional disaster relief centers opened on July 16 , with one being in Franklin County , one in Okaloosa County , and another in Wakulla County . Within a week , over 2 @,@ 100 individuals visited the Disaster Recovery Centers in Escambia and Santa Rosa counties . Another disaster recovery center opened in Franklin County on July 7 , and by July 18 , over $ 3 million ( 2005 USD ) in individual assistance applications for rental , housing and other needs assistance were approved . On July 23 , Dixie and Levy counties became eligible federal funds under its Public Assistance program for damages . By July 28 , all disaster recovery centers ceased operations on Sundays , although on August 4 , Gadsden County became eligible for Public Assistance funding . Two more disaster recovery centers opened on August 4 , one in Dixie County and one in Taylor County . By August 18 , over $ 24 million ( 2005 USD ) in individual assistance funds were collected for victims of Hurricane Dennis . On October 13 , the last disaster recovery centers ceased operations , although individual assistance funds were still being collected . 
 = Cho Ki @-@ chon = 
 Cho Ki @-@ chon ( Korean : <unk> ; 6 November 1913 – 31 July 1951 ) was a Russian @-@ born North Korean poet . He is regarded as " a founding father of North Korean poetry " whose distinct Soviet @-@ influenced style of lyrical epic poetry in the socialist realist genre became an important feature of North Korean literature . He was nicknamed " Korea 's Mayakovsky " after the writer whose works had had an influence on him and which implied his breaking from the literature of the old society and his commitment to communist values . After a remark made by Kim Jong @-@ il on his 2001 visit to Russia , North Korean media has referred to Cho as the " Pushkin of Korea " . 
 Cho was dispatched by the Soviet authorities to liberated Korea when the Red Army entered in 1945 . By that time , he had much experience of Soviet literature and literature administration . The Soviets hoped that Cho would shape the cultural institutions of the new state based on the Soviet model . For the Soviets , the move was successful and Cho did not only that but also significantly developed socialist realism as it would become the driving force of North Korean literature and arts . 
 Cho offered some of the earliest contributions to Kim Il @-@ sung 's cult of personality . His most famous work is Mt . Paektu ( 1947 ) , a lyrical epic praising Kim Il @-@ sung 's guerrilla activities and promoting him as a suitable leader for the new North Korean state . Other notable works by Cho include " Whistle " , a seemingly non @-@ political love poem which was later adapted as a popular song that is known in both North and South Korea . 
 During the Korean War , Cho wrote wartime propaganda poems . He died during the war in a United Nations force bombing raid . He and his works are still renowned in North Korean society . 
 = = Life and career = = 
