 = = Route description = = 
 Delaware Route 44 heads to the southeast of DE 300 on Everetts Corner Road . It passes through a mix of woodland and farmland before reaching the town of Hartly . In Hartly , the route intersects DE 11 , where it becomes Main Street , and passes by homes . It then heads to the east out of Hartly on Hartly Road , passing through more rural areas . The route continues to its eastern terminus at DE 8 near Pearsons Corner . 
 DE 44 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 4 @,@ 478 vehicles at the eastern terminus at DE 8 to a low of 1 @,@ 552 vehicles at the Fords Corner Road intersection northwest of Hartly . The entire length of DE 44 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 44 existed as an unimproved county road . The road east of Hartly was improved into a state highway by 1924 . By 1932 , the portion of road west of Hartly became a state highway . DE 44 was designated by 1936 to follow its current alignment . The route has not changed since its inception . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Genome @-@ wide association study = 
 In genetic epidemiology , a genome @-@ wide association study ( GWA study , or GWAS ) , also known as whole genome association study ( WGA study , or <unk> ) , is an examination of many common genetic variants in different individuals to see if any variant is associated with a trait . <unk> typically focus on associations between single @-@ nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) and traits like major diseases . 
 These studies compare the DNA of participants having varying phenotypes for a particular trait or disease . Participants in a GWAS study may be people with a disease ( cases ) and similar people without ( controls ) , or they may be people with different phenotypes for a particular trait , for example blood pressure . This approach is known as phenotype @-@ first , in which the participants are classified first by their clinical manifestation ( s ) , as opposed to genotype @-@ first . Each person gives a sample of DNA , from which millions of genetic variants are read using SNP arrays . If one type of the variant ( one allele ) is more frequent in people with the disease , the variant is said to be associated with the disease . The associated SNPs are then considered to mark a region of the human genome that may influence the risk of disease . In contrast to methods that specifically test one or a few genetic regions , the GWA studies investigate the entire genome . The approach is therefore said to be non @-@ candidate @-@ driven in contrast to gene @-@ specific candidate @-@ driven studies . GWA studies identify SNPs and other variants in DNA associated with a disease , but they cannot on their own specify which genes are causal . 
 The first successful GWAS was published in 2005 . It investigated patients with age @-@ related macular degeneration and found two SNPs with significantly altered allele frequency compared to healthy controls . As of 2011 , hundreds or thousands of individuals are tested , over 1 @,@ 200 human GWA studies have examined over 200 diseases and traits , and almost 4 @,@ 000 SNP associations have been found . Several GWA studies have received criticism for omitting important quality control steps , rendering the findings invalid , but modern publications address these issues . However , the methodology itself still has opponents . 
 = = Background = = 
 Any two human genomes differ in millions of different ways . There are small variations in the individual nucleotides of the genomes ( SNPs ) as well as many larger variations , such as deletions , insertions and copy number variations . Any of these may cause alterations in an individual 's traits , or phenotype , which can be anything from disease risk to physical properties such as height . Around the year 2000 , prior to the introduction of GWA studies , the primary method of investigation was through inheritance studies of genetic linkage in families . This approach had proven highly useful towards single gene disorders . However , for common and complex diseases the results of genetic linkage studies proved hard to reproduce . A suggested alternative to linkage studies was the genetic association study . This study type asks if the allele of a genetic variant is found more often than expected in individuals with the phenotype of interest ( e.g. with the disease being studied ) . Early calculations on statistical power indicated that this approach could be better than linkage studies at detecting weak genetic effects . 
 In addition to the conceptual framework several additional factors enabled the GWA studies . One was the advent of <unk> , which are repositories of human genetic material that greatly reduced the cost and difficulty of collecting sufficient numbers of biological specimens for study . Another was the International HapMap Project , which , from 2003 identified a majority of the common SNPs interrogated in a GWA study . The <unk> structure identified by HapMap project also allowed the focus on the subset of SNPs that would describe most of the variation . Also the development of the methods to genotype all these SNPs using genotyping arrays was an important prerequisite . 
 = = Methods = = 
 The most common approach of GWA studies is the case @-@ control setup , which compares two large groups of individuals , one healthy control group and one case group affected by a disease . All individuals in each group are <unk> for the majority of common known SNPs . The exact number of SNPs depends on the genotyping technology , but are typically one million or more . For each of these SNPs it is then investigated if the allele frequency is significantly altered between the case and the control group . In such setups , the fundamental unit for reporting effect sizes is the odds ratio . The odds ratio is the ratio of two odds , which in the context of GWA studies are the odds of disease for individuals having a specific allele and the odds of disease for individuals who do not have that same allele . When the allele frequency in the case group is much higher than in the control group , the odds ratio is higher than 1 , and vice versa for lower allele frequency . Additionally , a P @-@ value for the significance of the odds ratio is typically calculated using a simple chi @-@ squared test . Finding odds ratios that are significantly different from 1 is the objective of the GWA study because this shows that a SNP is associated with disease . 
 There are several variations to this case @-@ control approach . A common alternative to case @-@ control GWA studies is the analysis of quantitative phenotypic data , e.g. height or biomarker concentrations or even gene expression . Likewise , alternative statistics designed for dominance or recessive penetrance patterns can be used . Calculations are typically done using bioinformatics software such as <unk> and <unk> , which also include support for many of these alternative statistics . Earlier GWAS focused on the effect of individual SNPs . However , the empirical evidence shows that complex interactions among two or more SNPs , <unk> , might contribute to complex diseases . Moreover , the researchers tries to integrate GWA data with other biological data such as protein protein interaction network to extract more informative results . 
 A key step in the majority of GWA studies is the imputation of genotypes at SNPs not on the genotype chip used in the study . This process greatly increases the number of SNPs that can be tested for association , increases the power of the study , and facilitates meta @-@ analysis of GWAS across distinct cohorts . Genotype imputation is carried out by statistical methods that combine the GWAS data together with a reference panel of haplotypes . These methods take advantage of sharing of haplotypes between individuals over short stretches of sequence to impute alleles . Existing software packages for genotype imputation include <unk> and <unk> . 
 In addition to the calculation of association , it is common to take into account any variables that could potentially confound the results . Sex and age are common examples of confounding variables . Moreover , it is also known that many genetic variations are associated with the geographical and historical populations in which the mutations first arose . Because of this association , studies must take account of the geographical and ethnical background of participants by controlling for what is called population stratification . 
 After odds ratios and P @-@ values have been calculated for all SNPs , a common approach is to create a Manhattan plot . In the context of GWA studies , this plot shows the negative logarithm of the P @-@ value as a function of genomic location . Thus the SNPs with the most significant association stands out on the plot , usually as stacks of points because of <unk> structure . Importantly , the P @-@ value threshold for significance is corrected for multiple testing issues . The exact threshold varies by study , but the conventional threshold is 5 × 10 − 8 to be significant in the face of hundreds of thousands to millions of tested SNPs . GWA studies typically perform the first analysis in a discovery cohort , followed by validation of the most significant SNPs in an independent validation cohort . 
 = = Results = = 
 Attempts have been made at creating comprehensive catalogues of SNPs that have been identified from GWA studies . As of 2009 , SNPs associated with diseases are numbered in the thousands . 
 The first GWA study , conducted in 2005 , compared 96 patients with age @-@ related macular degeneration ( ARMD ) with 50 healthy controls . It identified two SNPs with significantly altered allele frequency between the two groups . These SNPs were located in the gene encoding complement factor H , which was an unexpected finding in the research of ARMD . The findings from these first GWA studies have subsequently prompted further functional research towards therapeutical manipulation of the complement system in ARMD . Another landmark publication in the history of GWA studies was the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium ( <unk> ) study , the largest GWA study ever conducted at the time of its publication in 2007 . The <unk> included 14 @,@ 000 cases of seven common diseases ( ~ 2 @,@ 000 individuals for each of coronary heart disease , type 1 diabetes , type 2 diabetes , rheumatoid arthritis , Crohn 's disease , bipolar disorder , and hypertension ) and 3 @,@ 000 shared controls . This study was successful in uncovering many new disease genes underlying these diseases . 
 Since these first landmark GWA studies , there have been two general trends . One has been towards larger and larger sample sizes . At the end of 2011 , the largest sample sizes were in the range of 200 @,@ 000 individuals . The reason is the drive towards reliably detecting risk @-@ SNPs that have smaller odds ratios and lower allele frequency . Another trend has been towards the use of more narrowly defined phenotypes , such as blood lipids , <unk> or similar biomarkers . These are called intermediate phenotypes , and their analyses may be of value to functional research into biomarkers . 
 A central point of debate on GWA studies has been that most of the SNP variations found by GWA studies are associated with only a small increased risk of the disease , and have only a small predictive value . The median odds ratio is 1 @.@ 33 per risk @-@ SNP , with only a few showing odds ratios above 3 @.@ 0 . These magnitudes are considered small because they do not explain much of the heritable variation . This heritable variation is known from heritability studies based on <unk> twins . For example , it is known that 80 – 90 % of height is heritable . Of these 80 @-@ 90 % , however , the GWA studies only account for a minority . 
 = = Clinical applications = = 
 A challenge for future successful GWA study is to apply the findings in a way that accelerates drug and diagnostics development , including better integration of genetic studies into the drug @-@ development process and a focus on the role of genetic variation in maintaining health as a blueprint for designing new drugs and diagnostics . Several studies have looked into the use of risk @-@ SNP markers as a means of directly improving the accuracy of prognosis . Some have found that the accuracy of prognosis improves , while others report only minor benefits from this use . Generally , a problem with this direct approach is the small magnitudes of the effects observed . A small effect ultimately translates into a poor separation of cases and controls and thus only a small improvement of prognosis accuracy . An alternative application is therefore the potential for GWA studies to elucidate pathophysiology . 
 One such success is related to identifying the genetic variant associated with response to anti @-@ hepatitis C virus treatment . For genotype 1 hepatitis C treated with <unk> interferon @-@ alpha @-@ 2a or <unk> interferon @-@ alpha @-@ 2b combined with ribavirin , a GWA study has shown that SNPs near the human <unk> gene , encoding interferon lambda 3 , are associated with significant differences in response to the treatment . A later report demonstrated that the same genetic variants are also associated with the natural clearance of the genotype 1 hepatitis C virus . These major findings facilitated the development of personalized medicine and allowed physicians to customize medical decisions based on the patient 's genotype . 
 The goal of elucidating pathophysiology has also led to increased interest in the association between risk @-@ SNPs and the gene expression of nearby genes , the so @-@ called expression quantitative trait loci ( eQTL ) studies . The reason is that GWAS studies identify risk @-@ SNPs , but not risk @-@ genes , and specification of genes is one step closer towards actionable drug targets . As a result , major GWA studies of 2011 typically included extensive eQTL analysis . One of the strongest eQTL effects observed for a GWA @-@ identified risk SNP is the <unk> locus . Functional follow up studies of this locus using small interfering RNA and gene knock @-@ out mice have shed light on the metabolism of low @-@ density lipoproteins , which have important clinical implications for cardiovascular disease . 
 = = Limitations = = 
 GWA studies have several issues and limitations that can be taken care of through proper quality control and study setup . Lack of well defined case and control groups , insufficient sample size , control for multiple testing and control for population stratification are common problems . Particularly the statistical issue of multiple testing wherein it has been noted that " the GWA approach can be problematic because the massive number of statistical tests performed presents an unprecedented potential for false @-@ positive results " . Ignoring these <unk> issues has been cited as contributing to a general sense of problems with the GWA methodology . In addition to easily <unk> problems such as these , some more subtle but important issues have surfaced . A high @-@ profile GWA study that investigated individuals with very long life spans to identify SNPs associated with longevity is an example of this . The publication came under scrutiny because of a discrepancy between the type of genotyping array in the case and control group , which caused several SNPs to be falsely highlighted as associated with longevity . The study was subsequently retracted . 
 In addition to these preventable issues , GWA studies have attracted more fundamental criticism , mainly because of their assumption that common genetic variation plays a large role in explaining the heritable variation of common disease . This aspect of GWA studies has attracted the criticism that , although it could not have been known prospectively , GWA studies were ultimately not worth the expenditure . Alternative strategies suggested involve linkage analysis . More recently , the rapidly decreasing price of complete genome sequencing have also provided a realistic alternative to genotyping array @-@ based GWA studies . It can be discussed if the use of this new technique is still referred to as a GWA study , but high @-@ throughput sequencing does have potential to side @-@ step some of the shortcomings of non @-@ sequencing GWA . 
 = = Fine @-@ mapping = = 
 <unk> arrays designed for GWAS rely on linkage disequilibrium to provide coverage of the entire genome by genotyping a subset of variants . Because of this , the reported associated variants are unlikely to be the actual causal variants . Associated regions can contain hundreds of variants spanning large regions and encompassing many different genes , making the biological interpretation of GWAS loci more difficult . Fine @-@ mapping is a process to refine these lists of associated variants to a credible set most likely to include the causal variant . 
 Fine @-@ mapping requires all variants in the associated region to have been <unk> or imputed ( dense coverage ) , very stringent quality control resulting in high @-@ quality genotypes , and large sample sizes sufficient in separating out highly correlated signals . There are several different methods to perform fine @-@ mapping , and all methods produce a posterior probability that a variant in that locus is causal . Because the requirements are often difficult to satisfy , there are still limited examples of these methods being more generally applied . 
 = Tropical Storm Carlos ( 2003 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Carlos was the first of five tropical cyclones to make landfall during the 2003 Pacific hurricane season . It formed on June 26 from a tropical wave to the south of Mexico . It quickly strengthened as it approached the coast , and early on June 27 Carlos moved ashore in Oaxaca with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . The storm rapidly deteriorated to a remnant low , which persisted until dissipating on June 29 . Carlos brought heavy rainfall to portions of southern Mexico , peaking at 337 mm ( 13 @.@ 3 in ) in two locations in Guerrero . Throughout its path , the storm damaged about 30 @,@ 000 houses , with a monetary damage total of 86 @.@ 7 million pesos ( 2003 MXN , $ 8 million 2003 USD ) . At least nine people were killed throughout the country , seven due to mudslides and two from river flooding ; there was also a report of two missing fishermen . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Carlos were from a tropical wave that exited the west coast of Africa on June 14 . The wave moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea , with little evidence of its existence on satellite imagery . By June 20 it crossed Central America into the eastern Pacific Ocean , later spawning an area of convection , or thunderstorms , south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) first mentioned the system in its tropical weather outlook on June 24 , by which time a low pressure center developed . Gradually , the system continued to develop due to light wind shear , with rainbands and convection located near the broad center . By early on June 26 , the disturbance had organized enough for the NHC to initiate advisories on Tropical Depression Three @-@ E , about 130 miles ( 210 km ) south @-@ southwest of Puerto Escondido , Oaxaca . 
 Upon first being classified as a tropical cyclone , the depression had a slightly elongated circulation . An anticyclone to its north was forecast to track westward , which would allow the depression to track west @-@ northwestward and remain offshore ; however , the NHC noted uncertainty in its motion . The cloud pattern gradually organized , with warm water temperatures and lessening wind shear . At 1200 UTC on June 26 , it is estimated the depression attained tropical storm status ; upon doing so , the NHC named the storm Carlos . As it reached tropical storm intensity , Carlos began an erratic northward track toward the Mexican coast , under the influence of a trough . It quickly strengthened , developing a well @-@ defined eye feature in the center of the convection . Based on the eye , it is estimated Carlos made landfall early on June 27 with peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , about 60 miles ( 95 km ) west of Puerto Escondido , Oaxaca , or about 150 miles ( 245 km / h ) east @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Guerrero . 
 As Carlos moved inland , it turned to the northwest in response to the anticyclone over Mexico , and it quickly weakened to tropical depression status . By 12 hours after landfall , there was little evidence of a circulation on satellite imagery . Late on June 27 , Carlos degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low pressure area near Acapulco . The circulation turned to the southwest and emerged into the Pacific Ocean ; by 0000 UTC on June 29 , the system dissipated completely . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the cyclone first formed , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Acapulco , Guerrero to Punta San Telmo , Michoacán , although initially it was forecast to remain offshore . After Carlos attained tropical storm status and when it was correctly anticipated to make landfall , the warning area was adjusted from Salina Cruz , Oaxaca to Zihuatanejo , Guerrero . Although the storm moved ashore in Oaxaca , its rainbands also affected the Mexican states of Chiapas , Tabasco , Veracruz , Puebla , and Guerrero . On the day when Carlos made landfall , it dropped heavy rainfall , with 24 ‑ hour statewide maxima of 254 mm ( 10 in ) in Río Verde , Oaxaca , and 112 mm ( 4 @.@ 42 in ) in <unk> , Guerrero . Throughout the country , rainfall peaked at 337 mm ( 13 @.@ 3 in ) in both Marquelia and <unk> in Guerrero . 
 Tropical Storm Carlos affected 79 municipalities in Oaxaca with flooding or rainfall , and much of the region was declared a disaster area ; as a result , disaster funds were opened . Across the region , the combination of rainfall and strong winds downed power lines , disrupted phone service , and flooded two major highways ; additionally , the storm left widespread damage to other roads and airstrips . In northwestern Oaxaca , seven people were killed when the heavy rainfall triggered a mudslide . Mudslides were reported elsewhere in the state , and about 30 @,@ 000 homes were damaged . In one town , the flooding forced 150 families to evacuate to shelters . In Guerrero , a flooded river killed two people . Four fishermen were reported missing , possibly swept out to sea due to the storm ; the Mexican army searched offshore for several days , rescuing two of the four fishermen by four days after the storm . Overall , the storm affected about 148 @,@ 000 people , and monetary damage totaled 86 @.@ 7 million pesos ( 2003 MXN , $ 8 million 2003 USD ) . 
 = At the Movies ( Rugrats ) = 
 " At the Movies " is the third episode of the animated television series Rugrats . It originally aired on the television network Nickelodeon on August 25 , 1991 , during the series ' first season . In the episode , Didi and Stu take The Rugrats to a movie theatre to see The Dummi Bears and the Land Without Smiles , but Tommy is infatuated with seeing the monster movie Reptar ! . He and the babies sneak out of the theater room to catch a showing of Reptar ! while leaving a wake of accidental mayhem and destruction as they do . 
 " At the Movies " was written by Craig Bartlett and series co @-@ creator Paul Germain and directed by Dan Thompson . The episode introduced the characters of the Dummi Bears and Reptar . The Dummi Bears were inspired by non @-@ violent children 's characters such as the Care Bears and Disney 's Adventures of the Gummi Bears , whereas Reptar was heavily inspired by the Japanese monster Godzilla and satirized the ever growing domination of Japanese culture into children 's society . The character appeared in countless media tie @-@ ins for the series , including a cereal brand , t @-@ shirts , and video games , and would be reused in several other episodes of the series throughout its run . 
 Author Jan Susina gave a generally positive review of " At the Movies " in the book , The <unk> of Children 's Popular Culture : From Godzilla to Miyazaki . In 1997 , it became available on the VHS Rugrats : Return of Reptar , which was nominated for Video Software Dealers Association 's Home Entertainment Award in the " Outstanding Marketing Campaign for a Major Direct @-@ to @-@ Video Release " category in 2000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Didi and Stu decide to take Tommy and co. to go see The Dummi Bears and the Land Without Smiles at West Side <unk> . The kids really want to see their first movie Reptar , which was rated MGR : Minor Guidance Recommended . When they go to the theater and the movie starts , the kids sneak off to try to find the room showing Reptar at the theater . The first room they attempt to get into is showing a romance film , so they move on and end up accidentally creating a huge mess at the concession stand . They look in the popcorn popper , eating candy bars , and playing with the orange and grape soda dispensers , ketchup and mustard pumps , and straws . They also find hot dogs , hot dog buns , popcorn tubs , lids , napkins , and cups . They find their way up to the projection booth and finally find the room where Reptar is playing . As they are watching the film through the booth window , they fall down on some film , and they decide to ride on the projectors for fun . In the process , though , all of the projectors in the room become unraveled , and various films break so they exit the room . They soon run into Grandpa , who is getting popcorn at the concession stand and are led back into the theater . As they arrive , The Dummi Bears and the Land Without Smiles is about to reach its climax ; however , the film burns as a result of the kids ' earlier tomfoolery , and everyone leaves the <unk> disgruntled . 
 = = Production = = 
 " At the Movies " was written by Craig Bartlett and Paul Germain — creator of Rugrats along with Arlene Klasky and Gábor Csupó — and directed by Dan Thompson . Germain additionally served as animation director , a role he played for all early episodes of the series . Recording sessions for the episode , located in Hollywood , California , for each actor individually took one day to complete , taking anywhere from fifteen minutes to four hours depending on the scene or role . 
 The episode marked the first appearance of the character Reptar . Reptar was modeled visually to resemble a Tyrannosaurus rex , but his mannerisms and actions were meant to parody that of the fictional monster , Godzilla , who first appeared in the 1954 film Godzilla , released in Japan as Gojira . Though he is portrayed comically , his name was based on a child 's mispronunciation of Velociraptor , a ferocious dinosaur made iconic for its appearance in the Steven Spielberg film Jurassic Park . As noted by W. J. T. Mitchell in his book The Last Dinosaur Book , children generally begin fascination with dinosaurs between ages four and seven , while at other times during pre @-@ school and elementary school . This demographic was the general age of Rugrats ' viewers , and likely the reason behind Reptar 's species . 
 " At the Movies " became available on the VHS release entitled Rugrats : Return of Reptar in 1997 . The release included several other Reptar themed episodes , including " Reptar 2010 " and " Reptar on Ice . " It was released both as part of a special promotional deal between Paramount Home Entertainment and Oral @-@ B and as a re @-@ promotion of Rugrats videos during the holiday season . 
 = = Cultural impact and references = = 
 " At the Movies " introduced characters such as Reptar and the Dummi Bears — each of whom would become recurring characters throughout the series — and marked the first time in the series that the <unk> had seen a movie . Reptar , in particular , would appear in several episodes throughout the series in different manifestations . During different episodes , he has appeared as a toyline , a focal point in a marketing campaign , cereal brands , and a character in television series . In The Rugrats Movie , released in 1998 , Reptar appears as a mechanical wagon built by Stu , voiced by rapper Busta Rhymes . In its sequel , Rugrats in Paris : The Movie , released in 2000 , the central setting is located at a vast Reptar theme park in France called " <unk> , " similar to Disneyland Paris , which features a stage production with a robotic Reptar created by Stu . 
 Reptar himself become an actual merchandising piece and became the basis of several Rugrats promotional works . Several videos , books , <unk> , and clothing have been marketed by Nickelodeon , serving as both a high @-@ profit margin and a parody of the character 's fictional success in the series . Bed sheets , lamps , and a cereal brand have all become available in stores and feature Reptar . A Rugrats video game entitled Rugrats : Search for Reptar , followed Tommy looking for missing pieces of a Reptar puzzle . The game was widely successful and become a part of PlayStation 's " Greatest Hits " label in 1999 . 
 The Dummi Bears are parodies of the Care Bears franchise , and the film they are featured in , The Land Without Smiles , is a parody of the feature length 1985 film The Care Bears Movie based on the franchise , while the title of the film is a reference to the Care Bears ' first TV special from 1983 , The Care Bears in the Land Without Feelings . The Dummi Bears ' name is a reference to the TV series Disney 's Adventures of the Gummi Bears . One scene in The Land Without Smiles details the Dummi Bears firing valentines from the clouds for all the sad , bullied and lonely , teased children in the world references a similar scene from The Care Bears Movie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " At the Movies " was originally broadcast on the television network Nickelodeon on August 25 , 1991 . It was paired with the episode " Slumber Party . " In 2000 , Rugrats : Return of Reptar , in which the episode featured , was nominated for Video Software Dealers Association 's Home Entertainment Award for " Outstanding Marketing Campaign for a Major Direct @-@ to @-@ Video Release . In 2001 , Nickelodeon allowed viewers to vote for their favorite Rugrats episode on Nick.com as part of the series 10th anniversary . When the poll results were announced , " At the Movies " ranked at number 39 . 
 The episode received a generally positive response . In the book The <unk> of Children 's Popular Culture : From Godzilla to Miyazaki , Jan Susina opted that it was " appropriate " to introduce Reptar in the episode via a television commercial , as " Throughout the series , Reptar 's power and popularity increases , so that by Rugrats in Paris a Euro @-@ <unk> exists . " Susina also noted that his existence in the series was " one of the more unexpected " treatments of Japanese culture in " contemporary American children 's culture . " 
 = Phan Đình Phùng = 
 Phan Đình Phùng ( 1847 – January 21 , 1896 ) was a Vietnamese revolutionary who led rebel armies against French colonial forces in Vietnam . He was the most prominent of the Confucian court scholars involved in anti @-@ French military campaigns in the 19th century and was cited after his death by 20th @-@ century nationalists as a national hero . He was renowned for his uncompromising will and principles — on one occasion , he refused to surrender even after the French had desecrated his ancestral tombs and had arrested and threatened to kill his family . 
 Born into a family of mandarins from Hà Tĩnh Province , Phan continued his ancestors ' traditions by placing first in the metropolitan imperial examinations in 1877 . Phan quickly rose through the ranks under Emperor Tự Đức of the Nguyễn Dynasty , gaining a reputation for his integrity and uncompromising stance against corruption . Phan was appointed as the Imperial Censor , a position that allowed him to criticise his fellow mandarins and even the emperor . As the head of the censorate , Phan 's investigations led to the removal of many incompetent or corrupt mandarins . 
 Upon Tự Đức 's death , Phan almost lost his life during a power struggle in the imperial court . The regent Tôn Thất Thuyết disregarded Tự Đức 's will of succession , and three emperors were deposed and killed in just over a year . Phan protested against Thuyet 's activities , was stripped of his honours and briefly jailed , before being exiled to his home province . At the time , France had just conquered Vietnam and made it a part of French Indochina . Along with Thuyet , Phan organised rebel armies as part of the Cần Vương movement , which sought to expel the French and install the boy Emperor Hàm Nghi at the head of an independent Vietnam . This campaign continued for three years until 1888 , when the French captured Hàm Nghi and exiled him to Algeria . 
 Phan and his military assistant Cao Thắng continued their guerrilla campaign , building a network of spies , bases and small weapons factories . However , Cao Thắng was killed in the process in late 1893 . The decade @-@ long campaign eventually wore Phan down , and he died from dysentery as the French surrounded his forces . 
 = = Court official = = 
 Phan was born in the village of Đông Thái in the northern central coast province of Hà Tĩnh . Đông Thái was famous for producing high @-@ ranking mandarins and had been the home of senior imperial officials since the time of the Lê Dynasty . Twelve consecutive generations of the Phan family had been successful <unk> graduates . All three of Phan 's brothers who lived to adulthood passed the imperial examinations and became mandarins . Early on , Phan indicated his distaste for the classical curriculum required of an aspiring mandarin . He nevertheless persevered with his studies , passing the regional exams in 1876 and then topping the metropolitan exams the following year . In his exam response , Phan cited Japan as an example of how an Asian country could make rapid military progress given sufficient willpower . 
 Phan was never known for his scholarly abilities ; it was his reputation for principled integrity that led to his quick rise through the ranks under the reign of Emperor Tự Đức . He was first appointed as a district mandarin in Ninh Bình Province , where he punished a Vietnamese Roman Catholic priest , who , with the tacit support of French missionaries , had harassed local non @-@ Catholics . Amid the diplomatic controversy that followed , he avoided blaming the unpopular alliance between Vietnamese Catholics and the French on Catholicism itself , stating that the partnership had arisen out of the military and political vulnerabilities of Vietnam 's imperial government . Despite this , the Huế court eventually removed Phan from this post . 
 Phan was transferred to the Huế court as a member of the censorate , a watchdog body that monitored the work of the <unk> . He earned the ire of many of his colleagues , but the trust of the emperor , by revealing that the vast majority of the court mandarins were making a mockery of a royal edict to engage in regular rifle practice . Tự Đức later dispatched Phan on an inspection trip to northern Vietnam . His report led to the ousting of many officials who were deemed corrupt or incompetent , including the viceroy of the northern region . He rose to become the <unk> Su , or Imperial Censor , a position which allowed him to criticise other high officials and even the emperor for misconduct . Phan openly criticised Tôn Thất Thuyết , the foremost mandarin of the court , believing him to be rash and dishonest . Aside from his work in rooting out corruption , Phan also compiled a historical geography of Vietnam , which was published in 1883 . 
 Despite his prominent position in the Nguyễn Dynasty , little is known about Phan 's personal stance on Vietnamese relations with France , which was in the process of colonising Vietnam . France had first invaded in 1858 , beginning the colonisation of southern Vietnam . Three provinces were ceded under the 1862 Treaty of Saigon , and a further three in 1867 to form the colony of Cochinchina . During the period , there was debate in the Huế court on the best strategy to regain the territory . One group advocated military means , while another believed in the use of diplomacy in addition to financial and religious concessions . By the time of Tự Đức 's death in 1883 , the whole of Vietnam was colonised , henceforth incorporated with Laos and Cambodia into French Indochina . 
 Upon his death in 1883 , the childless Tự Đức had named his nephew , <unk> Phúc , as his successor , rather than Dục Đức , his most senior heir . Tự Đức had written in his will that Dục Đức was depraved and unworthy of ruling the country . However , led by Thuyet , the regents enthroned Dục Đức under the pressure of the ladies of the court . Phan protested against the violation of Tự Đức 's will of succession and refused to sanction anyone other than Kien Phuc . Lucky to escape the death penalty , Phan was stripped of his positions . Later , Dục Đức was deposed and executed by Thuyet on the grounds of ignoring court etiquette , ignoring the mourning rites for Tự Đức and having affairs with the late emperor 's consorts . Phan again protested the regents ' actions and was briefly imprisoned by Thuyet , before being exiled to his home province . 
 = = Revolutionary career = = 
 = = = Cần Vương = = = 
 Phan rallied to the cause of the boy Emperor Hàm Nghi — the fourth monarch in little over a year — after an abortive royal uprising at Huế in 1885 . Thuyet and fellow regent Nguyễn Văn Tường had enthroned <unk> Hòa after disposing of Dục Đức . However , the new emperor was wary of the regents ' behaviour and attempted to avoid their influence , leading Thuyet to organise his execution . The teenage <unk> Phúc ascended the throne , but was poisoned by his adoptive mother Học Phi — one of Tự Đức 's wives — whom he caught having intercourse with Tuong . Kien Phuc was thus replaced by his 14 @-@ year @-@ old brother Hàm Nghi . In the meantime , the French concluded that the regents were causing too much trouble and had to be disposed of . 
 Thuyet had already decided to place Hàm Nghi at the head of the Phong <unk> Cần <unk> ( Loyalty to the Emperor Movement ) , which sought to end French rule with a royalist rebellion . Phan helped the cause by setting up bases in Hà Tĩnh and creating his own guerrilla army . Thuyet had hoped to secure support from the Qing Dynasty of China , but Phan thought that Vietnam 's best chance of effective support came from Siam . Gia Long , the founder of the Nguyễn Dynasty and great @-@ grandfather of Tự Đức , had married his sister off to the King of Siam . He had also used Siam as a base @-@ in @-@ exile during his quest for the throne in the 1780s . However , direct appeals to the Siamese government only yielded a few pack trains of firearms and ammunition . In preparation for the revolt , Thuyet had been building up an armed base at Tan So for over a year . 
 In any case , the Cần Vương revolt started on July 5 , 1885 when Thuyet launched a surprise attack against the colonial forces after a diplomatic confrontation with the French . Thuyet took Hàm Nghi northwards to the Tan So mountain base near the border with Laos after the attack failed . The campaign was launched when the emperor issued the Can Vuong edict that had been prepared by the regent . 
 Phan initially rallied support from his native village and set up his headquarters on Mount Vũ Quang , which overlooked the coastal French fortress at Hà Tĩnh . Phan 's organisation became a model for future insurgents . For flexibility , he divided his operational zone into twelve districts . His forces upheld military discipline and wore uniforms . Phan initially used the local scholar @-@ gentry as his military commanders . Their first notable attack targeted two nearby Catholic villages that had collaborated with French forces . Colonial troops arrived a few hours later , quickly overwhelming the rebels and forcing them to retreat to their home village , where the retribution was heavy . Phan managed to escape but his elder brother was captured by the same former viceroy of northern Vietnam who had been removed from office as a result of Phan 's critical report . The disgraced official was now a French collaborator , serving as the governor of Nghệ An Province . 
 The strategy of attempting to pressure Phan into capitulating was a classical strategy of coercion . The French used an old friend and fellow villager to make an emotional and deeply Confucian appeal for Phan to surrender in order to save his brother , his ancestral tombs and his entire village . Phan was reported to have replied : 
 From the time I joined with you in the Can Vuong movement , I determined to forget the question of family and village . Now I have but one tomb , a very large one , that must be defended : the land of Vietnam . I have only one brother , very important , that is in danger : more than twenty million countrymen . If I worry about my own tombs , who will worry about defending the tombs of the rest of the country ? If I save my own brother , who will save all the other brothers of the country ? There is only one way for me to die now . 
 Phan was later reported to have simply retorted , " If anyone carves up my brother , remember to send me some of the soup " . However , he held no illusions about the prospect of successfully driving out the French , stating " It is our destiny . We accept it . " 
 This incident and Phan 's response are often cited as one of the reasons why he was so admired by the populace and among future generations of Vietnamese anti @-@ colonialists : he adhered to the highest personal standards of patriotism . He identified with a countrywide cause , far removed from the questions of family and region . 
 Phan 's men were well @-@ trained and disciplined , and the military inspiration behind his rebellion was derived from Cao Thang , a bandit leader who had been protected from royal forces by Phan 's brother a decade earlier . They operated in the provinces of Thanh Hóa in the north , Hà Tĩnh , Nghệ An in the centre and Quảng Bình in the south , with their strongest areas being the two central provinces . In 1887 , Phan concluded that his tactics were misguided , ordering his subordinates to cease open combat and resort to guerrilla tactics . His men built up a network of base camps , food caches , intelligence agents and peasant supply contacts . Phan traveled to the north in the hope of coordinating strategic and tactical plans with other leaders . In the meantime , Cao Thang led a force of around 1 @,@ 000 men with some 500 firearms between them . Cao Thang produced around 300 rifles by disassembling and copying 1874 @-@ model French weapons that had been captured . For the purpose of creating such replica guns , they captured Vietnamese artisans . According to French officers who later captured some of the Vietnamese copies , the weapons were proficiently reproduced . The only details in which they were regarded as being defective were in the tempering of the springs , which were improvised with umbrella spokes , and the lack of rifling in the barrels , which curtailed range and accuracy . 
 Nevertheless , the weaponry used by Phan 's rebels was far inferior to that of their adversaries , and their inland positions were within firing range of the French Navy . The Vietnamese could not rely on China to give them material support , and other European powers such as Portugal , The Netherlands and the United Kingdom were unwilling to sell them weapons for various reasons . Thus , Phan had to explore overland routes to procure weapons from Siamese sources — using seafaring transport was impossible due to the presence of the French Navy . He instructed his followers to create a secret route from Hà Tĩnh through Laos into northeastern Siam ; one such route from Mount Vu Quang was believed to have been created around 1888 . It is unclear if Phan himself went to Thailand , but a young female supporter named Co Tam was his designated arms buyer in Tha <unk> , which boasted a substantial expatriate Vietnamese community . In 1890 , the Siamese Army transported around 1 @,@ 000 Austrian repeating @-@ rifles from Bangkok to Luang Prabang in Laos . However , it is unclear whether the weapons found their way into Vietnamese hands or whether they were related to Co Tam 's activities . 
 = = = After Cần Vương = = = 
 In 1888 , Hàm Nghi 's Muong bodyguard Truong Quang Ngoc betrayed him , leading to the emperor 's capture and deportation to Algeria . Phan and Cao Thang fought on in the mountainous areas of Hà Tĩnh , Nghệ An and Thanh Hóa . Another 15 bases were built along the mountain to complement the headquarters at Vu Quang . Each base had a subordinate commander leading units numbering between 100 and 500 men . The operations were funded by local villagers , who were levied with a land tax in silver and rice . Local bases were supported by nearby villages and excess funds were sent to Vu Quang . Phan 's men foraged and sold cinnamon bark to raise funds , while lowland peasants donated spare metals for the production of weapons . 
 When Phan returned from the north in 1889 , his first order was to track down Hàm Nghi 's betrayer Ngoc . When he was found , Phan personally executed Ngoc in <unk> Hóa . He then began a series of small @-@ unit attacks on French installations through the summer of 1890 , but these proved indecisive . The French relied mostly on district and provincial colonial units to man their perpetually increasing line of forts , which were usually commanded by a French lieutenant . In late 1890 , a French effort to move into the low @-@ lying villages and isolate the populace from the mountainous rebel bases failed . In the spring of 1892 , a major French sweep of Hà Tĩnh failed , and in August , Cao Thang seized the initiative with a bold counterattack on the provincial capital . The rebels broke into the prison and freed their compatriots , killing a large number of the Vietnamese soldiers who defended the penitentiary as members of the French colonial forces . This caused the French to intensify their efforts against Phan , and a counteroffensive was conducted throughout the remainder of 1892 , forcing the rebels to retreat back into the mountains . Two of their bases fell and steady French pressure began to break their covert resistance links with lowland villages . This compounded the problems of securing food , supplies , intelligence data and recruits . A ring of French forts continued to be erected , increasingly pinning down Phan 's men . The only notable gain for Phan 's forces during this period was the acquisition of gunpowder supplies from Siam . This enabled them to mix foreign and local powder in a 50 : 50 ratio , rather than their previous weaker mixture of 20 : 80 . 
 Late in the year , the burden on Phan increased after the loss of two Can Vuong allies . In September , Tong Duy Tân — who led the royalists in Thanh Hóa — was captured and publicly executed . Nguyen Thien <unk> , who had been active in the northern provinces of Hưng Yên and Hải Dương , fled to Guangxi in China . The supporters of Tan and <unk> moved south and integrated into Phan 's force . 
 In mid @-@ 1893 , Cao Thang proposed a full @-@ scale attack on the provincial seat of Nghệ An and the surrounding posts . The plan proposed to Phan included diversions to the south and the training of almost 2 @,@ 000 men in conventional military tactics . Unconvinced of its viability , Phan reluctantly approved the plan . The troops were eager , but after overpowering several small posts en route , the main force was pinned down while attacking the French fort of No on September 9 , 1893 . Along with his brother , Cao Thang was mortally wounded while leading a risky frontal attack with 150 men , and the forces retreated in disarray . Phan regarded the loss of Cao Thang as a significant one , admitting as much in delivering the eulogy and funeral oration . According to the historian David Marr , there was evidence that Phan clearly realised the advantages and limitations of prolonged resistance . Although Phan had previously stated that he was not expecting ultimate success , the guerrilla leader thought that it was important to keep pressuring the French in order to demonstrate to the populace that there was an alternative to what he felt was a defeatist attitude from the Huế court . 
 = = = Downfall = = = 
 Hoàng Cao Khải , the French @-@ installed viceroy of Tonkin , perceived Phan 's intent to a degree that his French masters did not . Khai was from a scholar @-@ gentry family from the same village as Phan . He became the main backer of a determined effort to crush Phan 's forces , using every means available : political , psychological and economic . By late 1894 , relatives and suspected sympathisers of the insurgents were intimidated and more resistance commanders had been killed . Communications were disrupted , and the rebel hideouts became increasingly insecure . In an attempt to force Phan to surrender , the French arrested his family and desecrated the tombs of his ancestors , publicly displaying the remains in Hà Tĩnh . 
 Khai delivered a message to Phan via a relative . Phan sent a written reply , allowing their exchange to be studied . Khai recalled the common origins of the pair and promised Phan that he would lobby Governor @-@ General Jean Marie Antoine de Lanessan and other French officials for an amnesty in return for Phan 's surrender . Khai credited Phan with righteousness , loyalty and dedication towards the monarchy . 
 The situation has changed and even those without intelligence or education have concluded that nothing remains to be saved . How is it that you , a man of vast understanding , do not realise this ? ... You are determined to do whatever you deem to be righteous ... All that matters indeed is giving of one 's life to one 's country . No one therefore can deter you from your goal . 
 I have always been taught that superior men should consider the care of the people as fundamental ; who has ever heard of men who were loyal to their King but forgot the people 's aspirations ? ... As of now , hundreds of families are subject to grief ; how do you have the heart to fight on ? I venture to predict that , should you pursue your struggle , not only will the population of our village be destroyed but our entire country will be transformed into a sea of blood and a mountain of bones . 
 According to Marr , " Phan Dinh <unk> 's reply was a classic in savage understatement , utilizing standard formalism in the interest of propaganda , with deft denigration of his opponent " . Phan appealed to Vietnamese nationalist sentiment , recalling his country 's stubborn resistance to Chinese aggression . He cited defensive wars against the Han , Tang , Song , Yuan and Ming dynasties , asking why a country " a thousand times more powerful " could not annex Vietnam . Phan concluded that it was " because the destiny of our country has been willed by Heaven itself " . 
 Phan placed the responsibility for the suffering of the people at the feet of the French , who " acted like a storm " . After analysing his own actions , Phan concluded with a thinly veiled attack on Khai and his collaborators . 
 If our region has suffered to such an extent , it was not only from the misfortunes of war . You must realise that wherever the French go , there flock around them groups of petty men who offer plans and tricks to gain the enemy 's confidence . These persons create every kind of enmity ; they incriminate innocent persons , blaming one one day , punishing another the next . They use every expedient to squeeze the people out of their possessions . That is how hundred of misdeeds , thousands of offenses have been perpetrated . 
 Khai 's appeal was rebutted with an appeal to history , nationalist sentiment and a demand that the blame for death and destruction lay with the colonial forces and their Vietnamese assistants . Phan raised the stakes above family and village to the entire nation and its populace . 
 With Phan 's rebuke in his hands , Khai translated both documents into French and presented them to de Lanessan , proposing that it was time for the final " destruction of this scholar gentry rebellion " . In July 1895 , French area commanders called in 3 @,@ 000 troops to tighten the cordon around the three remaining rebel bases . The insurgents were able to execute ambushes at night , but Phan contracted dysentery and had to be carried on a stretcher whenever his unit moved . A collaborator mandarin named Nguyen Than , who had previous experience in pacification in Quảng Ngãi and Quảng Nam , was drafted in to isolate the insurgents from their supporters in the villages . Cut off from their supplies , the insurgents were left to survive by eating roots and occasional handfuls of dried corn . Their shoes were worn through and most were without blankets . Phan died of dysentery on January 21 , 1896 , and his captured followers were executed . A report submitted by the de Lanessan to the Minister of Colonies in Paris stated that " the soul of resistance to the protectorate was gone " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Phan 's remains were disturbed after his death . Ngô Đình Khả , a Catholic mandarin and father of Ngo Dinh Diem — the first President of South Vietnam — was a member of the French colonial administration . <unk> had Phan 's tomb exhumed and used the remains in gunpowder used for executing revolutionaries . 
 Phan is widely regarded by Vietnamese people as a revolutionary hero . Phan Bội Châu , regarded as the leading Vietnamese anti @-@ colonial figure of the early 20th century , strongly praised Phan in his writing , with particular emphasis on his defiance of Khai . During Phan Boi Chau 's career as a teacher , he strongly emphasised Phan 's deeds to his students . In 1941 , after returning to Vietnam after decades in exile , the Marxist revolutionary Ho Chi Minh , then using the name Nguyen Ai Quoc ( Nguyen the Patriot ) , invoked the memory of Phan in appealing to the public for support for his independence movement . Like Phan , Ho was a native of Nghệ An and Hà Tĩnh . In the 1940s , Ho 's Vietminh named their self @-@ produced style of grenades in honour of Phan . Since then , Ho 's communists have portrayed themselves as the modern day incarnations of revered nationalist leaders such as Phan , Trương Định and Emperors Lê Lợi and Quang Trung , who expelled Chinese forces from Vietnam . Both North and South Vietnam had prominent thoroughfares in their capital cities ( Hanoi and Saigon , respectively ) named in Phan 's honour . 
 = French battleship Liberté = 
 Liberté was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy , and the lead ship of her class . She was laid down in November 1902 , launched in April 1905 , and completed in March 1908 , over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought made ships like Liberté obsolete . After her commissioning , Liberté was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet . She served for only three and a half years ; while moored in Toulon in September 1911 , an explosion of badly degraded propellant charges detonated the forward ammunition magazines . Some 250 officers and men were killed , and the ship was totally destroyed . The wreck remained in the harbor until 1925 , when it was raised and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Liberté was laid down at the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire shipyard in November 1902 , launched on 19 April 1905 , and completed in March 1908 . This was over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought , which rendered the pre @-@ dreadnoughts like Liberté outdated before they were completed . The ship was 133 @.@ 81 meters ( 439 ft 0 in ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 24 @.@ 26 m ( 79 ft 7 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 8 @.@ 41 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) . She displaced up to 14 @,@ 860 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 630 long tons ; 16 @,@ 380 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of between 739 and 769 officers and enlisted men . The battleship was powered by three vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines with twenty @-@ two Belleville boilers . They were rated at 18 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 1 @,@ 800 t ( 1 @,@ 800 long tons ; 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) . 
 Liberté 's main battery consisted of four Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 / 96 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of ten Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1902 guns ; six were mounted in single turrets , and four in casemates in the hull . She also carried thirteen 9 @-@ pounder guns and ten 3 @-@ pounders . The ship was also armed with two 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . The ship 's main belt was 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 350 mm ( 13 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower had 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After commissioning , Liberté was assigned to the Active Squadron of the French Mediterranean Fleet . In September 1909 , Liberté , Justice , and Vérité visited the United States for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . The three battleships , commanded by Admiral Jules le Pord , were the first foreign contingent to arrive . 
 On 25 September 1911 , as Liberté was moored in Toulon harbor , an accidental explosion in one of her forward ammunition magazines for the secondary guns destroyed the ship . After the initial explosion of propellant charges , the ship 's commander , Captain Louis Jaurès , tried to organize damage control teams at the stern . He sent a party forward to flood the magazines to prevent an explosion in the main magazines , but the flooding valves were located under the magazines , and the path was blocked by fires and smoke . After two failed attempts to reach the valves , the men returned to the captain , who ordered them to try again ; they were killed when the main magazines exploded shortly thereafter . The explosion hurled a 37 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 36 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 41 @-@ short @-@ ton ) chunk of armor plate from the ship into the battleship République moored some 210 m ( 690 ft ) away , which caused significant damage . 
 The French Navy had earlier suffered a series of fatal accidents in Toulon , beginning with an explosion aboard a torpedo boat in February 1907 , in which nine men were killed . The following month , the battleship Iéna blew up , killing 107 men . An explosion aboard a gunnery training ship killed six in August 1908 , and an explosion on a cruiser killed 13 . Six more men were killed aboard the cruiser Gloire a year later , on 10 September 1911 . The explosion aboard Liberté killed some 250 officers and men . The culprit was unstable Poudre B , a nitrocellulose @-@ based propellant that was also responsible for the destruction of Iéna , and possibly the other explosions as well . The wreck remained in Toulon until 1925 , when she was raised and broken up for scrap . 
 After the accidental explosion , the high number of victims justified state funerals with president Armand Fallières , which occurred on the following 3 October . The tragedy also raised an emotional wave of solidarity throughout France , with even small villages sending their financial support to help the families of the victims . Captain Jaurès was exonerated of responsibility for the disaster by a subsequent naval board of enquiry . He did not however hold a further sea @-@ going command . 
 = Ohio State Route 666 = 
 State Route 666 ( SR 666 ) is a 14 @.@ 17 @-@ mile ( 22 @.@ 80 km ) state route that runs between Zanesville and Dresden in the US state of Ohio . Most of the route is a rural two @-@ lane highway and passes through both woodland and farmland . For much of its path , SR 666 runs generally parallel to the east of the Muskingum River . The highway was first signed in 1937 on the same alignment as today . The whole highway was paved by 1955 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 666 begins at a traffic signal with SR 60 and SR 146 , on the northeast side of Zanesville . The route heads east as a two @-@ lane highway , before curving northeast . While passing through Zanesville the route passes woodland , with some commercial businesses . The highway makes a sharp curve due west , before another sharp curve northeast . After the second curve the route leaves Zanesville , running parallel to the Muskingum River and an Ohio Central Railroad track . The road makes a sharp curve northwest and passes under the Ohio Central Railroad track . After passing under the railroad track the route curves north @-@ northeast and the railroad track curves due east . The roadway passes through the Zanesville State Forest Nursery , followed by a curve northwest , passing through the state forest nursery again . After leaving the state forest nursery , the highway passes through farmland heading due north . The route curves northeast passing through the state forest nursery for the last time and the highway has an intersection with County Road 40 ( CR 40 ) , in rural Jefferson Township . Following this intersection , SR 666 turns due west , before curving towards the north . This section of roadway passes mostly through farmland , with wooded areas when the route is close to the river . SR 666 ends at an intersection with SR 208 near Dresden , on the east bank of the Muskingum River . 
 SR 666 is not part of the National Highway System , a system of routes important to the nation 's economy , mobility and defense . The highway is maintained by the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) . ODOT 's 2010 annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) calculations showed that the lowest traffic levels were present on the section that is at the intersection with Washington Township Road 112 ( Bateman Road ) , where only 510 vehicles used the highway daily ; the peak traffic volume was 5 @,@ 340 vehicles AADT along a section of SR 666 near its southern terminus . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 666 was established in 1937 along the same alignment between Zanesville and near Dresden within Muskingum County that it utilizes today . Between 1953 and 1955 the highway was paved . The highway has not experienced any major changes to its routing since 1955 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Muskingum County . 
 = Aubrey Huff = 
 Aubrey Lewis Huff III ( born December 20 , 1976 ) is an American former professional baseball player . He played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays , Houston Astros , Baltimore Orioles , Detroit Tigers , and San Francisco Giants . Huff is 6 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) tall and weighs 225 pounds ( 102 kg ) . He batted left @-@ handed but threw right @-@ handed . 
 Huff attended Vernon College and the University of Miami , where he finished his career second in school batting average . He was drafted by the Devil Rays in the sixth round in 1998 . After a couple years in the minor leagues , he debuted with the Devil Rays in 2000 . His first full season in the majors came in 2001 . In 2002 , he finished tenth in the American League ( AL ) in batting average . He set a career high in 2003 with 34 home runs and batted .311 with 107 runs batted in ( RBI ) . Next season , he batted .297 with 24 home runs and 104 RBI . In 2005 , he was placed on the disabled list for the first time in his career , but he batted .261 with 22 home runs and 92 RBI . During the 2006 season , he was traded to the Astros . 
 In 2007 , Huff signed a three @-@ year contract with the Orioles . He hit 15 home runs his first season with the Orioles , his lowest total since 2001 . In 2008 , he won the Silver Slugger Award for the designated hitter position after batting .304 with 32 home runs and a career @-@ high 108 RBI . During the 2009 season , he was traded to the Tigers . He became a free agent after the season and signed a one @-@ year deal with the Giants . He batted .290 with 26 home runs in 2010 , reached the playoffs for the first time , and won his first World Series . He signed a two @-@ year deal with the Giants in 2011 and hit 12 home runs , his lowest total since 2001 . In 2012 , he was used mostly as a pinch hitter and appeared in a career @-@ low 52 games but won his second World Series with the Giants . 
 On January 4 , 2014 , Huff officially announced his retirement from baseball and took a position as a baseball color commentator , but in 2015 , he announced coming out of retirement at age 38 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Although he was born in Marion , Ohio , Huff grew up in Mineral Wells , Texas . When he was six years old , his father , Aubrey II , was killed as an innocent bystander in a domestic dispute while working as an electrician . That left Huff 's mother Fonda in charge of raising him and his sister Angela . Growing up , Huff regularly practiced baseball in his yard , which had a batting cage with lights and a pitching machine . He said , " [ My mother bought ] it more to keep me out of trouble . " He grew up rooting for the Texas Rangers and frequently attended their games . One of his favorite players was Nolan Ryan . Huff initially attended Mineral Wells High School but then transferred to Brewer High School when his family moved to Fort Worth . Although he was selected to the All @-@ District baseball team in high school , he was better known as a basketball player . He graduated in 1995 . 
 = = = College career = = = 
 Huff attended Vernon College for two years and was named the Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of its baseball team in 1996 . Huff transferred to the University of Miami for his final two years of college baseball . As a junior , he tied team single @-@ game records for runs in a game ( five against Harvard University on March 28 ) and most doubles in a game ( four on May 16 against Georgia Tech ) . 
 As a senior , Huff hit for a .412 batting average , the fourth highest single @-@ season average in school history . His <unk> slugging percentage is the second highest in school history . He also hit 21 home runs ( fifth in school history ) and a school record of 95 runs batted in ( RBI ) . Baseball America , The Sporting News and the National Collegiate Baseball Writers Association named him a first @-@ team All @-@ American . 
 Huff finished his college career with a .400 batting average ( second in school history ) and a <unk> slugging percentage ( third in school history ) . In 2009 , he was inducted into the University of Miami Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = Minor league career = = 
 Huff was the Tampa Bay Devil Rays ' fifth @-@ round selection in the 1998 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft . He spent 1998 with the Charleston RiverDogs of the single @-@ A South Atlantic League , where he batted .321 with 85 hits , 19 doubles , 13 home runs , and 54 RBI in 69 games . 
 In 1999 , Huff played for the Orlando Rays of the double @-@ A Southern League and was named a Southern League postseason All @-@ Star . In 133 games with the Rays ( tied with three players for fourth in the league behind Brady Clark 's 138 , Brent Abernathy 's 136 , and Kurt <unk> 's 134 ) , Huff batted .301 ( eighth ) with 148 hits ( fourth , behind Abernathy 's 168 , Clark 's 165 , and Tim Giles 's 157 ) , 40 doubles ( third , behind Scott Vieira 's 44 and Abernathy 's 42 ) , 22 home runs ( tied with John Curl for second behind Javier Cardona 's 26 ) , and 78 RBI ( tied with Bry Nelson for ninth in the league ) . 
 Huff began 2000 with the Durham Bulls of the triple @-@ A International League . In 108 games , he batted .316 ( fifth ) with 129 hits , 36 doubles ( fourth , behind Clark 's 41 , Ryan Jackson 's 38 , and José Fernández 's 37 ) , 20 home runs , and 76 RBI . He was named the International League Rookie of the Year and was named to the postseason All @-@ Star team . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Tampa Bay Devil Rays = = = 
 = = = = 2000 = = = = 
 Huff was called up by the Devil Rays at the beginning of August to be the starting third baseman after Vinny Castilla suffered an injury . He had an RBI in his debut on August 2 , a 5 – 3 loss to the Cleveland Indians . Two days later , he got his first career hit against José Mercedes in a 10 – 9 loss to the Baltimore Orioles . On August 10 , he had a season @-@ high three RBI by hitting his first career home run , a game @-@ winning three @-@ run hit against Jason Ryan in a 10 – 4 victory over the Minnesota Twins . In 39 games , Huff hit .287 with 35 hits , seven doubles , four home runs , and 14 RBI . 
 = = = = 2001 = = = = 
 Huff began the 2001 season with Durham but was called up on April 13 when Ariel Prieto was sent to the minors . He became the starting third baseman on May 11 when Castilla was released . On June 29 , he had three RBI in a 7 – 5 loss to the New York Yankees . Huff was moved from third base to first base on August 6 following an injury to Steve Cox . After batting .243 with 6 home runs and 33 RBI in his first 92 games , he was optioned to Durham on August 23 when Cox came off the disabled list ( DL ) . In September , he was called up to replace Greg Vaughn as the Devil Rays ' designated hitter ( DH ) . On September 19 , he had three hits and five RBI , including a game @-@ winning single against David Cone , in a 12 – 2 victory over the Boston Red Sox . He finished the season batting .248 with 102 hits , 25 doubles , eight home runs , and 45 RBI in 111 games . In 17 games at Durham , he batted .288 with 19 hits , six doubles , three home runs , and 10 RBI . 
 = = = = 2002 = = = = 
 Huff missed the first month of 2002 with a broken cheekbone and began the season in the minor leagues before getting called up on May 28 to replace the struggling Jason Tyner on the roster . He started for the rest of the season as a first baseman , a third baseman , or a DH . On June 9 , he hit a three @-@ run home run against Bobby Jones in a 9 – 6 loss to the San Diego Padres . He hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Félix Heredia on June 26 in a 4 – 2 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays . On July 19 , he had four hits , including a home run against Esteban <unk> , and three RBI in an 11 – 8 loss to the Blue Jays . On August 5 , his three @-@ run home run against Jon Garland accounted for all of the Devil Rays ' scoring in a 4 – 3 loss to the Chicago White Sox . On August 18 , he had three hits and three RBI , including a home run against Jeff Suppan , as the Devil Rays defeated the Kansas City Royals 8 – 6 . He had a 17 @-@ game hitting streak from August 23 to September 10 , the second @-@ longest streak in franchise history at the time ( behind Quinton McCracken 's 18 @-@ game streak in 1998 ) and as of 2012 the third @-@ longest ( behind Jason Bartlett 's 19 @-@ game streak in 2009 ) . In 113 games , Huff finished tenth in the American League ( AL ) with a .313 batting average and had 142 hits , 25 doubles , 23 home runs , and 59 RBI . He led the Devil Rays in home runs , marking the first time a player led his team in home runs after starting the season in the minors since 1996 , when Tony Clark led the Detroit Tigers . In 32 games with Durham , he batted .325 with 41 hits , nine doubles , three home runs , and 20 RBI . 
 = = = = 2003 = = = = 
 On April 26 , 2003 , Huff had four hits in a 10 – 7 victory over the Baltimore Orioles . After playing mostly first and third base in April , he took over from George Lombard as the Devil Rays ' right fielder for the remainder of the season on April 29 . On May 3 , he had the first multihomer game of his career by hitting two two @-@ run home runs against Adam <unk> in an 8 – 6 victory over the Tigers . He had four hits on June 4 in a 5 – 2 victory over the Chicago Cubs . In the first game of a doubleheader on June 17 , Huff had four RBI in an 11 – 2 victory over the Yankees . On July 2 , he had all four Devil Rays ' RBI and hit a three @-@ run home run against Pedro Martínez in a 5 – 4 loss to the Red Sox . On September 3 , he hit a three @-@ run home run against Freddy García and had four RBI in a 7 – 0 victory over the Seattle Mariners . On September 6 , he stole home plate in a 7 – 4 victory over the Oakland Athletics . On September 23 , he had four hits and hit a home run against Josh Towers in an 8 – 5 loss to the Blue Jays . In 162 games ( tied for second in the AL with Miguel Tejada behind Hideki Matsui 's 163 ) , he batted .311 ( ninth ) with 47 doubles ( third behind Garret Anderson 's and Vernon Wells 's 49 ) , 34 home runs ( ninth ) , and 107 RBI ( tied for eighth with Jason Giambi ) . Huff 's single @-@ season totals in hits , doubles , home runs , and RBI have been matched by eleven players in major league history as of 2012 . He was tied for 24th in AL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) voting along with Esteban <unk> and Jason Varitek . Defensively , he tied with Tim Salmon for the lead in errors by AL right fielders with six . 
 = = = = 2004 = = = = 
 In 2004 , Huff spent most of the season playing third base . On May 12 , he had five RBI , including a three @-@ run home run against Chan Ho Park , in a 9 – 8 victory over the Texas Rangers . On May 28 , he had four hits , three runs scored , and two RBI including a home run against Javier Vázquez in a 7 – 5 victory over the Yankees . Two days later , he hit two home runs against Jon Lieber and had three hits and RBI in a 7 – 6 victory over the Yankees . Four days later , he hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Johan Santana in a 5 – 2 victory over the Twins . On June 15 , he hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Brian Lawrence in a 5 – 2 victory over the San Diego Padres . On July 2 , he had three RBI and hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Carl Pavano in a 4 – 2 victory over the Florida Marlins . He saw a streak of 398 consecutive games played snapped on August 22 when he was forced to miss a game with a minor back injury . He told reporters afterwards , " You guys care more about the streak than I do . " On August 27 , he had four hits in an 8 – 7 loss to the Athletics . Four days later , he had three hits , two home runs , and four RBI in a 12 @-@ inning , 10 – 6 loss to the Orioles . He had four hits on September 23 in a 7 – 3 loss to the Yankees . Huff finished the season batting .297 with 178 hits , 27 doubles , 29 home runs , and 104 RBI in 157 games . His average , home runs , and RBI were the highest totals among Devil Rays ' players . 
 = = = = 2005 = = = = 
 In 2005 , Huff spent most of the year in right field . On April 18 , Huff had four RBI and hit the 100th home run of his career , a three @-@ run shot against Jaret Wright in a 19 – 8 loss to the Yankees . He had three hits and four RBI , including a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Aaron Sele , on June 3 in a 6 – 1 victory over the Mariners . After hitting 5 home runs in the first three months , Huff hit 17 home runs through the rest of the season . On July 22 , he hit the first grand slam of his career , a game @-@ winning home run against Bruce Chen in a 7 – 5 victory over the Orioles . Three days later , he had a walk @-@ off double against Curt Schilling in a 10 @-@ inning , 4 – 3 victory over the Red Sox . The next day , he hit a grand slam against Chad Bradford in a 10 – 8 loss to the Red Sox . Three days later , he had two hits and four RBI , including a three @-@ run home run against D. J. Carrasco in a 6 – 3 victory over the Royals . He was named the AL Player of the Week from July 25 to 31 after he batted .409 with two home runs and 10 RBI . On August 28 , Huff drove in all the runs for the Devil Rays with a two @-@ run home run against Jarrod Washburn in a 2 – 1 victory over the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . On September 30 , he had two hits and hit a three @-@ run home run against John Maine in a 7 – 6 loss to the Orioles . In 148 games , Huff batted .261 with 150 hits , 26 doubles , 22 home runs , and 92 RBI . 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 For 2006 , Huff was moved back to third base . He was placed on the disabled list for the first time in his career on April 12 with a sprained left knee suffered in a collision with Nick Green the day before . On May 4 , he was activated from the DL . On May 19 , he hit his first career walk @-@ off home run against Yusmeiro Petit in a 10 @-@ inning , 5 – 4 win over the Marlins . He had three hits and three RBI on June 22 , including a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Édgar González in a 4 – 1 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks . On July 9 , he hit a three @-@ run home run against Kris Wilson in a 6 – 5 victory over the Yankees . Through July 9 , Huff batted .283 with 65 hits , 15 doubles , 8 home runs , and 28 RBI in 63 games . 
 = = = Houston Astros = = = 
 On July 12 , 2006 , the Houston Astros acquired Huff from Tampa Bay for minor leaguers Mitch Talbot and Ben Zobrist . Huff was used at third base for the Astros until August 1 , when he was moved to right field following regular third baseman Morgan <unk> 's return from the DL . In his debut with the Astros on July 13 , the first game after the All @-@ Star break , Huff had two hits , including a three @-@ run home run against Randy Messenger in a 5 – 1 victory over the Marlins . On August 9 , he had three hits , two home runs , and six RBI in a 14 – 1 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates . He hit a game @-@ winning home run against José <unk> on September 8 in a 4 – 3 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers . In 68 games with Houston , Huff batted .250 with 56 hits , 10 doubles , 13 home runs , and 38 RBI . He combined to bat .267 with 121 hits , 25 doubles , 21 home runs , and 66 RBI in 131 games in 2006 . On October 31 , he filed for free agency . 
 = = = Baltimore Orioles = = = 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 On January 3 , 2007 , Huff officially signed a 3 @-@ year $ 20 million contract with the Baltimore Orioles . He began the year getting most of the starts at first base , but in mid @-@ May he became the Orioles regular DH as Kevin Millar was moved to first base . On May 9 , he hit a walk @-@ off home run against Brian Stokes to account for the game 's only scoring in a 10 @-@ inning , 1 – 0 win over Tampa Bay . In a 9 – 7 loss to the Angels on June 29 , he hit for the cycle and got his 1000th hit and 200th double ( both against <unk> Escobar ) . He is one of four Orioles to hit for the cycle ( along with Brooks Robinson , Cal Ripken , Jr . , and Félix Pie ) and the first player to do so at Oriole Park at Camden Yards . On August 3 , his three @-@ run home run against James Shields accounted for all the Orioles ' runs in a 3 – 1 victory over Tampa Bay . On August 14 , Huff had two hits and five RBI , including a grand slam against Jeff Karstens in a 12 – 0 victory over the Yankees . He had four hits on September 15 in an 8 – 3 loss to the Blue Jays . In 151 games , Huff batted .280 with 154 hits , 34 doubles , 15 home runs , and 72 RBI . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Before the 2008 season , Huff switched his uniform number from 19 to 17 in honor of his former teammate Joe Kennedy , who died during the offseason . He angered fans in the offseason when he called Baltimore a " <unk> " town when compared to Tampa , but he regained fan support by the end of the year by posting one of his best seasons . He was the Orioles ' designated hitter for most of the season , although he was moved to third base at the end of August following an injury to Melvin Mora . On April 2 , he hit a two @-@ run home run against Matt Garza and a game @-@ winning two @-@ run double against Al Reyes in a 9 – 6 victory over Tampa Bay . On April 8 , he had four hits and four RBI in an 8 – 1 victory over the Rangers . On July 3 , he had three hits , three RBI , and two home runs against Kyle Davies in a 10 – 7 loss to the Royals . He was named AL Player of the Week from June 30 to July 6 after hitting .345 with three home runs and nine RBIs . On August 27 , he had three hits and three RBI , including a two @-@ run home run against Lance Broadway in an 11 – 3 victory over the White Sox . Two days later , he had two hits , including a three @-@ run home run against Andy <unk> in a 10 – 9 loss to Tampa Bay . He was named the Player of the Week again from August 25 – 31 after batting .478 with two home runs and seven RBI . He hit a grand slam against Juan Rincón on September 8 in a 14 – 3 victory over Cleveland . In 154 games , Huff batted .304 with 182 hits ( tied with Nick Markakis for 10th in the league ) , 48 doubles ( tied with Markakis for third in the league behind Dustin Pedroia 's 54 and Brian Roberts 's 51 ) , 33 home runs ( tied for eighth with Jason Giambi and Josh Hamilton ) , and 108 RBI ( sixth ) . He finished 16th in AL MVP voting and was named " Most Valuable Oriole " by Baltimore sportswriters . He won the Silver Slugger Award for DH and the Edgar Martínez Award , becoming the first Oriole to win the award since Tommy Davis in 1974 . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 Huff moved to first base in 2009 following the departure of Millar . On April 13 , he had four hits and three RBI in a 10 – 9 victory over Texas . On April 21 , he hit two home runs and had four RBI in a 10 – 3 victory over the White Sox . He hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run against Phil Hughes on May 9 in a 12 – 5 victory over the Yankees . The next day , he hit a three @-@ run home run against Joba Chamberlain in a 5 – 3 loss to the Yankees . On June 17 , he had three RBI , including a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Pedro Feliciano in a 6 – 4 victory over the New York Mets . Through August 17 , Huff batted .253 with 109 hits , 24 doubles , 13 home runs , and 72 RBI in 110 games . 
 = = = Detroit Tigers = = = 
 On August 17 , 2009 , Huff cleared waivers and was traded to the Detroit Tigers in exchange for pitching prospect Brett Jacobson . He began his time with the Tigers as the team 's DH , but in September he only played against right @-@ handed pitchers as Marcus Thames began playing against left @-@ handed pitchers . He hit his first career pinch @-@ hit home run against Jason <unk> on September 14 , a game @-@ tying three @-@ run hit in a 10 @-@ inning , 6 – 5 victory over Toronto . In 40 games with the Tigers , Huff batted .189 with 20 hits , six doubles , two home runs , and 13 RBI . His season totals were a .241 batting average , 129 hits , 30 doubles , 15 home runs , and 85 RBI in 150 games . Following the season , Huff filed for free agency . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 On January 13 , 2010 , Huff signed a one @-@ year , $ 3 million contract with the San Francisco Giants . He spent most of the season playing first base for the Giants , although he played left field and right field when Buster Posey played first base from May 29 – June 30 and Travis Ishikawa made most of the starts at first base from July 3 – August 14 . On April 14 , Huff hit his first career inside @-@ the @-@ park home run ( his first home run with the Giants ) , a game @-@ winning hit against Charlie Morton in a 6 – 0 victory over the Pirates . On June 4 , he hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Zach Duke in a 6 – 4 victory over Pittsburgh . He hit two two @-@ run home runs on June 13 , including a game @-@ winning home run against Vin <unk> in a 6 – 2 victory over Oakland . On July 8 , he had four RBI and a two @-@ run home run against Manny Parra in a 9 – 3 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers . He hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Blake Hawksworth on August 20 in a 6 – 3 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals . On August 28 , he got his 1,500th career hit against Alex <unk> in a 10 @-@ inning , 10 – 9 victory over the Marlins . In 157 games , Huff batted .290 with 165 hits , 35 doubles , 26 home runs , and 86 RBI while scoring 100 runs ( tied for seventh in the league with Brandon Phillips , Martín Prado , and Dan Uggla ) for the first time in his career . Huff finished seventh in the voting for the NL MVP award . 
 Huff , in the 11th year of his career , reached the playoffs for the first time as the Giants won the NL West . In Game 4 of the NL Division Series ( NLDS ) against the Atlanta Braves , he had a ninth @-@ inning , two @-@ out , game @-@ tying RBI single against Mike Dunn in a 3 – 2 Giants ' victory . He batted .267 with four hits and one RBI in the series as the Giants defeated the Braves in four games . In Game 4 of the NL Championship Series ( NLCS ) against the Philadelphia Phillies , on October 20 , he had three hits , two runs scored , and an RBI in a 6 – 5 Giants ' victory . He batted .250 with six hits and three RBI in the series as the Giants defeated the Phillies in six games . In Game 1 of the World Series against the Texas Rangers , on October 27 , he had three hits and an RBI in an 11 – 7 Giants ' victory . In Game 4 of the series on October 31 , he hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run home run against Tommy Hunter in a 4 – 0 Giants ' victory . He batted .294 with five hits , a home run , and four RBI in the series , winning his first World Series as the Giants defeated the Rangers in five games to win their first World Series in 56 years . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Huff filed for free agency after the 2010 season , but on November 23 , 2010 , he re @-@ signed a $ 22 million contract with the Giants for two years with a club option for 2013 . Coming off the team 's 2010 World Series success and his new contract , Huff arrived at 2011 spring training out of shape . He began 2011 in right field due to an injury to Cody Ross , but he returned to first base when Ross was activated from the disabled list on April 20 . He drew a pinch @-@ hit , game @-@ winning , bases loaded walk on April 30 against John Lannan in a 2 – 1 victory over the Washington Nationals . Three days later , he hit a game @-@ winning home run against Taylor Buchholz in a 10 @-@ inning , 7 – 6 victory over the New York Mets . He had a walk @-@ off RBI single against Brian Fuentes on May 20 in a 10 @-@ inning , 2 – 1 victory over Oakland . On June 2 , his wife 's birthday , Huff hit three home runs and drove in a career @-@ high six runs in the Giants ' 12 – 7 win over the St. Louis Cardinals . He said after the game , " [ My wife ] wanted me to hit her a homer . I hit three . Brownie points . " Those home runs accounted for a quarter of his season total , as his overall production dropped from the previous season . Compared to 2010 , his batting average dropped 44 points , his homers fell from 26 to 12 , and his walks went from 83 to 47 as he grew impatient . His On @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) dropped 215 points to <unk> , last among Major League first baseman in 2011 . Giants ' manager Bruce Bochy said , " [ Huff 's ] struggles helped cause our struggles " ; the Giants failed to return to the playoffs in 2011 . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 In 2012 spring training , Huff competed with Brandon Belt and Brett Pill for the Giants ' first base job . Belt won the job , and Huff opened the season as the Giants ' left fielder . He had two hits and three RBI on April 13 , including a two @-@ run home run against Joel Hanrahan in a 5 – 0 victory over Pittsburgh . On April 21 , because the Giants did not have any infielders available , Huff was positioned at second base for the first time in his career in the ninth inning of a tied game against the Mets . He failed to cover second base in a potential double play situation , and the Mets went on to win the first game of the doubleheader 5 – 4 . After the game , on April 25 , Huff was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list with anxiety issues . 
 He returned from the DL on May 7 but was used mainly as a pinch hitter for the rest of the season . On June 15 , he was placed on the DL with a sprained right knee which he suffered jumping over a dugout railing to celebrate Matt Cain 's perfect game . He returned from the DL on July 28 but was placed on it four days later with right knee tendinitis which kept him out until August 31 . In 52 games , Huff batted .192 with 15 hits , four doubles , one home run , and seven RBI . In the playoffs , Huff was used exclusively as a pinch hitter . In 10 games , he had one hit in nine at @-@ bats but won his second career World Series as the Giants swept the Tigers in four games . On November 1 , Huff 's $ 10 million club option was declined , making him a free agent . He instead earned a $ 2 million buyout . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Huff ranks among the top ten in several career and single @-@ season records in the history of the Tampa Bay Rays ( Devil Rays from 1998 – 2007 ) as of 2012 . Through 2012 , he ranks third behind Carl Crawford and B. J. Upton in games played ( 799 ) , at bats ( 3 @,@ 028 ) , plate appearances ( 3 @,@ 322 ) , hits ( 870 ) , and doubles ( 172 ) . His .287 batting average ranks fourth ( behind Crawford 's .296 , Fred McGriff 's .291 , and Jason Bartlett 's .288 ) , his 128 home runs rank second ( behind Carlos Peña 's 161 ) , his 449 RBI rank third ( behind Crawford 's 592 and Peña 's 458 ) , and his 400 runs scored rank fifth . He and Delmon Young are the only Devil Rays to appear in 162 games in a season . He holds Devil Rays ' record for hits in a season and doubles in a season , both set in 2003 . His batting averages in 2002 and 2003 rank sixth and seventh , respectively ; his home run totals in 2003 and 2004 are tied for third ( with Jose Canseco 's 1999 total behind two of Peña 's totals ) and ninth , respectively ; and his RBI totals in 2003 and 2004 are fourth and tied for sixth ( with Evan Longoria 's 2010 total and McGriff 's 1999 total ) , respectively . 
 Through the 2012 season , Huff had hit 242 career home runs , tying him for 217th all @-@ time with Dusty Baker , Sal Bando , Wally Berger , Roy Campanella , and J. D. Drew . In addition to being used as a designated hitter , he has played at five different positions in his career : first base , third base , left field , right field , and second base . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On January 27 , 2007 , Huff married Barbara " <unk> " Heaton . The couple has two sons : <unk> ( born September 4 , 2008 ) and Jagger ( born September 15 , 2010 ) . During Huff 's playing days , they resided in Tampa , Florida , in the off @-@ season . <unk> Huff filed for divorce on January 31 , 2012 . Huff 's mother lives in Largo , Florida , where she teaches math . His sister , Angela , is a store manager there . As of 2015 , Huff and his family reside in Carmel Valley , San Diego . 
 Huff has several tattoos . A noted Transformers fan , he has the logos of the Autobots and Decepticons tattooed on his shoulder blades . On his left shoulder , he also has a tattoo of a guitar with his father 's name under it in memory of his father . 
 During the Giants ' 2010 playoff race and postseason , Huff became known for wearing a red " rally thong " , which he joked would help the team win . When he was slumping in 2011 , fans sent him thongs throughout the season in hopes of improving his performance . 
 = = = Post @-@ playing career = = = 
 On January 4 , 2014 , Huff officially announced his retirement from baseball and took a position as a baseball color commentator for the Pac @-@ 12 Network . On March 31 , 2014 , Huff started co @-@ hosting a morning radio show on Bay Area sports radio station 95 @.@ 7 The Game with Chris Townsend and Ric Bucher titled Bucher , <unk> and Huff . Huff left the show in August 2014 . Currently , Huff is working on a comeback to baseball and hopes to join a club for MLB Spring training . 
 Huff is an assistant baseball coach at Canyon Crest Academy in San Diego , California . 
 = Azteca horse = 
 The Azteca is a horse breed from Mexico , with a subtype , called the " American Azteca " , found in the United States . They are well @-@ muscled horses that may be of any solid color , and the American Azteca may also have pinto coloration . Aztecas are known to compete in many western riding and some English riding disciplines . The Mexican registry for the original Azteca and the United States registries for the American Azteca have registration rules that vary in several key aspects , including ancestral bloodlines and requirements for physical inspections . The Azteca was first developed in Mexico in 1972 , from a blend of Andalusian , American Quarter Horse and Mexican Criollo bloodlines . From there , they spread to the United States , where American Paint Horse blood was added . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The three foundation breeds of the Azteca are the Andalusian ( defined by the Mexican registry as either Pura Raza Española or Lusitano ) , American Quarter Horse , and Mexican Criollo or Criollo <unk> . They were chosen to produce a breed that combined athletic ability with a good temperament and certain physical characteristics . Azteca stallions and geldings measure between 15 and 16 @.@ 1 hands ( 60 and 65 inches , 152 and 165 cm ) at the withers , while mares stand between 14 @.@ 3 and 16 hands ( 59 and 64 inches , 150 and 163 cm ) . The ideal height is 14 @.@ 3 – 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 59 – 61 inches , 150 – 155 cm ) . Both sexes usually weigh from 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 200 pounds ( 450 to 540 kg ) . The facial profile of the breed is straight or convex and the neck slightly arched . Overall , they are well @-@ muscled horses , with broad croup and chest , as well as long , sloping shoulders . Gaits are free and mobile , with natural collection derived from the Andalusian ancestry of the breed . The breed is found in all solid colors , although gray is most often seen . White markings are allowed on the face and lower legs by breed associations . The American Azteca registry also allows non @-@ solid pinto coloration . 
 = = = Registration = = = 
 According to the breed standard of the Mexican registry , Azteca horses cannot have more than 75 percent of their parentage from any one of the foundation breeds ( Andalusian , Quarter Horse and Mexican Criollo ) ; Criollo blood may be no more than 50 % , and only from unregistered mares within Mexico . Horses are classified in one of six registration categories , designated with letters A through F , depending on their parentage . Only certain crosses between the different classes are permitted . In Mexico , Azteca horses must conform to a strict phenotype standard established by the Secretaría de Agricultura , <unk> , Desarrollo Rural , Pesca y <unk> ( <unk> ) , the Mexican agriculture ministry , which requires inspection of foals at seven months for the issue of a " birth certificate " ; a foal that does not meet the breed standards may be denied registration even if both parents are registered Aztecas approved for breeding . Full registration and approval for breeding are subject to a second and more detailed inspection at age three or more , and granted only to those horses that fully satisfy the requirements of the standard . 
 In the American Azteca registry , horses with American Paint Horse ( APHA ) breeding are also allowed . However , horses with more than 25 percent Thoroughbred blood in their pedigrees ( common in many Paints and Quarter Horses ) within four generations cannot be registered . American Aztecas have four categories of registration based on the relative degree of blood from each foundation breed , seeking an ideal blend of 3 / 8 Quarter Horse and 5 / 8 Andalusian . Unlike their Mexican counterparts , they do not have to go through physical inspections before being registered . 
 = = History = = 
 The Azteca was first bred in 1972 as a horse for <unk> , the traditional horsemen of Mexico . Antonio Ariza <unk> , along with others , was instrumental in the creation of the Azteca horse as the national horse of Mexico and with its official recognition by the Mexican Department of Agriculture on November 4 , 1982 . Ariza used imported Andalusians , crossed with Quarter Horses and Criollos and began to breed the foundation horses of the Azteca breed at Rancho San Antonio near Texcoco , Mexico . Early in the Azteca 's history , breeders realized the need for a unified breeding program in order to produce horses that met the required characteristics . The Azteca Horse Research Center was created at Lake Texcoco , and in partnership with breeders developed the phenotype of the breed today . The first official Azteca was a stallion named <unk> , who was a cross between an Andalusian stallion named <unk> and a Quarter Horse mare named Americana . He was foaled at the Centro de <unk> Caballar <unk> in 1972 . 
 The <unk> Mexicana de Criadores de Caballos de Raza Azteca , or Mexican Breeders Association for the Azteca Horse , is the original breed registry and still maintains the international registry . The International Azteca Horse Association and its regional affiliates was formed in 1992 . The majority of Aztecas are found in Mexico , and the Mexican association had registered between 10 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 horses as of 2005 , according to the Texas Department of Agriculture . The Mexican registry adds approximately 1 @,@ 000 horses per year . 
 The Azteca Horse Registry of America was formed in 1989 for registering the US portion of the breed , followed by the Azteca Horse Owners Association in 1996 as an owners association . This registry has slightly different registration and breeding rules , and is not approved by the Mexican government to register Azteca horses . The American registry , now called the American Azteca Horse International Association , allows the use of American Paint horses , which are essentially Quarter Horses with pinto coloration , if they have less than 25 percent Thoroughbred breeding . However , the US registry does not incorporate Criollo bloodlines . The Mexican registry allows only the blood of Quarter Horses , Andalusians and Criollos in its registered Aztecas . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Because of the breeds that make up the Azteca , they are known for their athleticism . They have been seen in competition in western riding events such as reining , cutting , team penning and roping , as well as English riding events such as dressage and other events such as polo and bullfighting . They are also used for pleasure riding . 
 = Gunslinger ( film ) = 
 Gunslinger is a 1956 American western film starring Beverly Garland as Rose Hood , the widow of a slain town marshal who inherits his job . Directed by Roger Corman from a screenplay by Mark Hanna and Charles B. Griffith , the film , shot in colour , also features Allison Hayes as Erica Page , the owner of a saloon , who hires a gunslinger assassin ( John Ireland ) to kill Rose . 
 The film began production in February 1956 , as director Corman wanted to shoot one final film in six days before a change in union contracts meant that actors were limited to working only five days a week . Filming of Gunslinger was marred by several inconveniences ; rain caused the filming location to become muddy , and the two lead actresses were both injured on set . Eventually , Gunslinger was released to mixed reviews , and , in 1993 , was featured in a fifth season episode of the movie @-@ mocking comedy television series Mystery Science Theater 3000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After her husband Scott ( William Schallert ) , the marshal of Oracle , Texas , is killed by two assailants , his widow Rose ( Beverly Garland ) is named temporary marshal . That night , Rose asks Erica Page ( Allison Hayes ) to close her saloon at 3 AM in accordance with town regulations , but Erica insists her saloon is open for business 24 hours . The women fight , but eventually Erica , who loses the fight , closes for the night . After Rose exits , Erica tells lackey Jake ( Jonathan Haze ) to hire a killer , which he does , finding a man named Cane Miro ( John Ireland ) . As Cane enters town , Rose shoots at him , mistaking him for a man she has been searching out . She apologizes . Cane tells Rose that he has come to Oracle to see town mayor Gideon Polk ( Martin Kingsley ) . 
 Cane enters Erica 's saloon , where Polk has been telling her that she has overextended herself by buying property along a proposed railroad track . Cane confronts Polk until Erica requests he stop . Erica reveals that Rose is the woman whom she paid Cane to kill ; however , if the proposed railroad track is a success , she admits that Rose may not have to die . 
 Rose follows Cane as he exits town . When he stops to let her catch up , they talk and eventually kiss . Jake watches and reports to Erica , who becomes irate . She demands he kill Rose immediately . Cane reminds her that they cannot change the deal they made . 
 Cane later explains to Rose that Polk had been his commander of an artillery battery at a battle which could have been a victory but that Polk panicked and ran , depressing his men , with those who didn 't desert their positions being decimated , including Cane 's brothers , or captured like Cane himself . Rose makes Cane promise not to harm Polk , but still has Polk placed in protective custody . 
 Cane becomes intoxicated . Erica enters his room , and Jake , who has been spying , sees the two kiss , but leaves before he sees Cane reject Erica . An embarrassed Erica orders Cane to kill Rose no matter what . When she returns to her saloon , Jake slaps her . Jake goes to Rose 's office and tells her everything he knows . Back at the saloon , Jake draws a gun on Cane , who kills him . Rose does not arrest him as Erica claims it was self @-@ defense . 
 After receiving a letter from the Pony Express , informing her that the railroad will not be built , Erica rides into town , intending to have Cane kill Rose . Deputy Joshua Tate ( Chris <unk> ) is killed when he confronts them . Cane goes after Polk , killing his wife when she shields him . Cane then shoots and kills Polk . Rose enters town and Erica aims at her , but Erica is shot by Cane before she can pull the trigger . Rose and Cane exchange fire . After he is shot , Cane asks if Rose loved him , and she replies that she did . Cane 's wound is fatal , and Rose rides out of Oracle , declaring she will never come back . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Beverly Garland ... Marshal Rose Hood 
 John Ireland ... Cane Miro 
 Allison Hayes ... Erica Page 
 Martin Kingsley ... Mayor Gideon Polk 
 Jonathan Haze ... Jake Hayes 
 Margaret Campbell ... Felicity Polk 
 Bruno <unk> ... <unk> Tabb 
 Chris <unk> ... Deputy Joshua Tate 
 Dick Miller ... Jimmy Tonto 
 William Schallert ... Marshal Scott Hood 
 Kermit Maynard ... <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Gunslinger 's screenplay was written by Mark Hanna and Charles B. Griffith , from an idea by Corman , who proposed a Western film where a sheriff is murdered while on duty , and the sheriff 's widow inherits the job . Griffith was hired when Jonathan Haze showed several of Griffith 's screenplays to Corman , with Corman being impressed enough to hire him . 
 Griffith had written two Westerns for Corman which had not been made . " He took me out to see Three Hours to Kill [ Alfred L. <unk> , 1954 ] with Dana Andrews and said to me , ' I want you to do the same picture but with a woman as the sheriff ' , " said Griffith . 
 It was originally known as The Yellow Rose of Texas . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Gunslinger began production in February 1956 , as the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and the film studios renegotiated for a five @-@ day work week instead of six . Director Roger Corman decided to film a low @-@ budget Western in six days before the new contract took effect , with Gene Corman providing half of the financing . Shot at the Jack Ingram Western Movie Ranch in Topanga , California , it rained for five days during the shoot . Corman had to go over schedule , taking seven days instead of six , which he recounted as the only time he had ever done so . The rain made the area muddy , causing trucks , cameras , and lighting equipment to sink . When the crew left the set , Corman did not hire a guard , telling the film 's assistant director that " anyone who 'd come out here , steal the equipment , and carry it through this mud is welcome to get it . " 
 Due to the quick shooting schedule , the rain forced several exterior scenes to be re @-@ written to be shot inside . Other scenes were shot with a large tarp draped over the actors . Due to the fact that the rainfall was audible in the background , Corman used the film 's score and an assortment of sound effects to drown out the noise . The first scene shot was Beverly Garland and John Ireland 's love scene in a tree . The tree was home to a colony of red ants , who crawled all over the actors and repeatedly bit them . 
 Actors were injured several times on set . One day , Allison Hayes ' horse slipped in the mud , causing her to fall off . Hayes broke her arm . While the crew waited for an ambulance to arrive , Corman shot a reel of close @-@ ups of Hayes looking left and right , with the intent of splicing them in to the final cut while using a double to shoot other scenes . When shooting wrapped , the crew all signed Hayes ' orthopedic cast . 
 In another instance , a scene called for Garland to exit the saloon , jump on a horse , and ride out of town . When the scene was shot , Garland jumped over the horse instead of on it , so the scene had to be shot again . During the second take , she twisted her ankle running down the stairs in the saloon , but continued the scene . When Garland returned home , she thought it would feel good to put her ankle in a warm bath and did . She left it there for about an hour , but when she took it out , she found that it had swollen to twice its normal size . When she returned to the set , Corman said , " Well , we have to start shooting . " In order to fit her ankle into her boot , the crew cut the back of it and taped it to her foot . Garland was unable to walk for nearly a week after Gunslinger finished shooting , writing that " I had screwed up my ankle so bad ! " 
 While Corman described the production of Gunslinger as " one of the worst experiences of my life " and Hayes wanted to leave the film during shooting , Garland considered Rose Hood one of her favorite roles , noting that : 
 I think I was the first woman to play a marshal in a movie western . Roger would often cast against type in those days . I could never resist a plum role like a lady marshal in a genre that would never have considered such a gender reversal like that before . However , working with Roger was always an adventure and this film was no exception . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Released in October 1956 , Gunslinger has received mixed reviews from critics . The Hollywood Reporter called it " quite a startling Western " and praised the two lead actresses , saying " Miss Garland and Hayes are good as the feuding ladies from different sides of the tracks . " Variety wrote that " with such a twist to the conventional western plot , this Roger Corman production should get its share of playing time attention in the program market . " VideoHound 's Golden Movie Retriever praised Gunslinger for being a " unique western with a surprise ending . " In The Encyclopedia of Western Movies , Gunslinger was praised for exploring the potential of a woman gunfighter , and that it was " the most assured of Corman 's quartet of Westerns . " In his book Western Movies : A Guide to 5 @,@ 105 Feature Films , Michael R. Pitts said that it was an " early six day Roger Corman <unk> that is rather appealing . " 
 Adversely , Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Verdict , gave Gunslinger a negative review , writing , " Roger Corman was responsible for a lot of smoldering cinematic <unk> over the course of his economically sound career , but Gunslinger has got to be one of the most overripe and ridiculous . " While he stated that " Beverly Garland , who plays our dispassionate Rose , and John Ireland , as the cool and callous Cane <unk> , are decent enough , " he wrote that " there isn 't much to recommend in this movie , " saying that " there 's too much unresolved intrigue , too many easy answers to rotten questions , to make heads or tails of what is supposed to matter . " TV Guide gave Gunslinger two stars , and said that " it 's a strange little Corman film , made before he went wholeheartedly for horror films , and this too has a semi @-@ sense of the strange . " Film reviewer Leonard Maltin gave Gunslinger one star and a half . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Gunslinger was released on DVD by Optimum Home Entertainment on September 15 , 2008 , as part of Roger Corman : The Collection , which included five other Corman @-@ directed films : Five Guns West , The Haunted Palace , The Premature Burial , The Masque of Red Death and Wild Angels . The Mystery Science Theater 3000 episode featuring Gunslinger has been released twice : once as part of Rhino Home Video 's Mystery Science Theater 3000 Collection , Volume 6 which included three other episodes from the series , and once by Shout ! Factory as a standalone disc . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Gunslinger was featured in a fifth season episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 , a comedy television series . The show features a human and his robot creations watching bad films while providing a running commentary which mocks it . Gunslinger was the eleventh episode of the fifth season , which was broadcast on Comedy Central on October 9 , 1993 . Gunslinger was the penultimate episode for series creator and host Joel Hodgson , who left the show at the end of the next episode , Mitchell . 
 Actor and writer Kevin Murphy , who provides the voice and puppetry of Tom Servo in the series , spoke disparagingly about the film in the book Mystery Science Theater 3000 : The Amazing Colossal Episode Guide , writing , " One of my darkest fears is that I 'll one day make my own film , my story , my direction , my own crystalline vision of something so universal , it must needs be shared with the world on the silver screen . And I make the movie , and it turns out like Gunslinger , or any other Corman film — turgid , insipid , clichéd , confusing , every opportunity for artistic expression intentionally ignored . " 
 = White Night riots = 
 The White Night riots were a series of violent events sparked by an announcement of the lenient sentencing of Dan White for the assassinations of San Francisco Mayor George Moscone and of Harvey Milk , a member of the city 's Board of Supervisors who was among the first openly gay elected officials in the United States . The events took place on the night of May 21 , 1979 ( the night before what would have been Milk 's 49th birthday ) in San Francisco . Earlier that day , White had been convicted of voluntary manslaughter , the lightest possible conviction for his actions . That White was not convicted of first @-@ degree murder ( of which he was originally charged ) had so outraged the city 's gay community that it set off the most violent reaction by gay Americans since the 1969 Stonewall Riots in New York City ( which is credited as the beginning of the modern gay rights movement in the United States ) . 
 The gay community of San Francisco had a longstanding conflict with the San Francisco Police Department . White 's status as a former police officer intensified the community 's anger at the SFPD . Initial demonstrations took place as a peaceful march through the Castro district of San Francisco . After the crowd arrived at the San Francisco City Hall , violence began . The events caused hundreds of thousands of dollars ' worth of property damage to City Hall and the surrounding area , as well as injuries to police officers and rioters . 
 Several hours after the riot had been broken up , police made a retaliatory raid on a gay bar in San Francisco 's Castro District . Many patrons were beaten by police in riot gear . Two dozen arrests were made during the course of the raid , and several people later sued the SFPD . 
 In the following days , gay leaders refused to apologize for the events of that night . This led to increased political power in the gay community , which culminated in the election of Mayor Dianne Feinstein to a full term , the following November . In response to a campaign promise , Feinstein appointed a pro @-@ gay Chief of Police , which increased recruitment of gay people in the police force and eased tensions . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Gay history of San Francisco = = = 
 The American settlers who moved west toward California in the 18th and 19th centuries were largely male prospectors and miners . Events such as the California Gold Rush created a broadly male society in that region . Romantic friendships were common , and often tolerated . As San Francisco was settled the ratio of men to women remained disproportionately high , resulting in the growth of a culture that was more open @-@ minded towards homosexuality . The city 's notorious brothel district – named the Barbary Coast – earned the city a reputation as a lawless and amoral society leading to San Francisco becoming known as " Sodom by the Sea . " 
 The end of Prohibition prompted the opening of several gay bars along North Beach . The most notable of these were the Black Cat where female impersonation shows became the main draw , and a lesbian bar known as Mona 's . 
 During World War II , San Francisco became a major debarkation point for servicemen stationed in the Pacific Theater . The U.S. military , which was concerned about male homosexuality , had a policy of dismissing servicemen caught in known gay establishments with blue discharges . As many of these men faced ostracism from their communities and families , they chose to remain in the city . The number of men that remained was a significant factor in the creation of a homosexual community in San Francisco . 
 = = = Gay activism in San Francisco = = = 
 In 1951 , the California Supreme Court affirmed in Stoumen v. Reilly the right of homosexuals to assemble peacefully . To assist homosexuals with legal problems , in 1951 labor activist Harry Hay started the Mattachine Society , from his living room in Los Angeles . A few years later , Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin started the Daughters of Bilitis with six other women in San Francisco , initially to have a place to socialize without fear of harassment or arrest . Within a few years , both organizations learned of each other and grew to have similar goals : helping assimilate homosexuals into general society , working for legal reform to repeal sodomy laws , and assisting those who were arrested . Both groups were headquartered in San Francisco by 1957 . 
 Police continued to arrest homosexuals in large numbers , routinely bringing paddy wagons to gay bars and arresting their patrons . Charges were usually dismissed but those arrested often lost their anonymity when newspapers printed their names , addresses and places of employment . Officers also notified the employer and family of the accused , causing serious damage to their reputations . 
 In 1964 , a New Year 's Eve benefit event was held for the Council on Religion and the Homosexual . Police stood outside with large floodlights , and in an effort to intimidate took photographs of anyone entering the building . Later , several officers demanded that they be allowed inside . Three lawyers explained to them that under California law , the event was a private party and they could not enter unless they bought tickets . The lawyers were then arrested . Several ministers who were in attendance held a press conference the next morning , likening the SFPD to the Gestapo . Even the Catholic archbishop strongly condemned the actions of the police . In an attempt to reduce such harassment two officers were tasked with improving the police department 's relationship with the gay community . 
 The Mattachine Society and Daughters of Bilitis promoted non @-@ confrontational education for homosexuals and heterosexuals , hoping to prove that homosexuals were respectable and normal . Living beyond the mostly white , middle class scope of these groups was an active community of cross @-@ dressers , hustlers , and " street queens " who worked primarily in the Tenderloin district of the city . After being denied service at Gene Compton 's Cafeteria , a few activists picketed the restaurant in 1966 . A few days later , early in the morning , the police arrived to arrest patrons in drag . A riot ensued when a drag queen threw the contents of a cup of coffee in the face of a police officer in response to the officer 's grabbing of her arm . The cafe 's plate glass windows were shattered in the melée , and then again a few days later after they had been replaced . Although three years later the Stonewall Riots would have a more significant impact , the Compton 's Cafeteria riots were among the first in American history where homosexuals and the newly forming transgender community fought against the authorities . 
 = = = Political clout = = = 
 San Francisco continued to grow as a haven for homosexuals . North Beach and Polk Street had been quiet neighborhoods each with a large homosexual population , but in the 1960s the growth of the Castro District outpaced either of them . Thousands of gay men migrated to San Francisco , turning the quiet Irish working @-@ class neighborhood around Castro Street into a bustling center of activity . New Yorker Harvey Milk resettled on Castro Street in 1972 , and opened Castro Camera the following year . Dissatisfied with the level of bureaucratic apathy and indifference toward the gay community , Milk decided to run for city supervisor . Through his multiple campaigns , culminating in his 1977 election , he became the political voice for the gay community , promoting himself as the " Mayor of Castro Street . " By 1977 , 25 percent of the population of San Francisco was reported to be gay . 
 On Labor Day of 1974 , tensions between the gay community and the SFPD came to a head when a man was beaten and arrested while walking down Castro Street . Police reinforcements suddenly appeared on the street , their badge numbers hidden , and beat dozens of gay men . Of these , 14 were arrested and charged with obstructing a sidewalk . Harvey Milk dubbed them the " Castro 14 " , and a $ 1 @.@ 375 million lawsuit was filed against the police . 
 In 1975 , after George Moscone had been elected Mayor , he appointed Charles Gain as his Chief of Police . Gain , whose conciliatory position towards African Americans had branded him as one of the most liberal law enforcement officers in the country , soon earned the ire of the police force . Gain implemented policies that proved unpopular with his staff , such as painting police cars powder blue , and barring officers from drinking on the job . His lenient policies towards gays also angered the police force . When asked what he would do if a gay police officer came out , Gain replied " I certainly think that a gay policeman could be up front about it under me . If I had a gay policeman who came out , I would support him 100 percent . " This statement sent shockwaves through the police department , and made national headlines . Made during the first week of Gain 's tenure , the remark also made Mayor Moscone extremely unpopular with the police . The two were so intensely disliked by the police that in 1977 rumors circulated about a plan by right @-@ wing police officers to assassinate Gain , and a year later similar plans formed targeting Mayor Moscone . Upon being informed of this threat , Moscone hired a bodyguard . 
 = = = Assassinations = = = 
 Dissatisfied with city politics , and in financial difficulty due to his failing restaurant business and low annual salary of $ 9 @,@ 600 , former police officer and Supervisor Dan White resigned from the San Francisco Board of Supervisors on November 10 , 1978 . However , after a meeting with the Police Officers ' association and the Board of Realtors , White announced that he wanted his seat back . Liberal Supervisors saw this as an opportunity to end the 6 @-@ 5 split on the Board that blocked progressive initiatives they wanted to introduce . After intense lobbying by Supervisors Milk and Silver , as well as State Assemblyman Willie Brown , Moscone announced on November 26 , 1978 , that he would not be <unk> Dan White to the seat he had vacated . 
 The next morning White went to City Hall armed with his police .38 Smith & Wesson revolver and 10 extra cartridges in his coat pocket . To avoid the metal detector he entered the building through a basement window , and proceeded to the office of Mayor George Moscone . Following a brief argument , White shot the Mayor in the shoulder and chest , and then twice in the head . White then walked to his former office , reloading his gun , and asked Milk to join him . White then shot Milk in the wrist , shoulder and chest , and then twice in the head , execution style . Supervisor Dianne Feinstein heard the gunshots and called the police , who found Milk on his stomach , blood pouring out of his head wounds . 
 = = Riots = = 
 = = = Dan White verdict = = = 
 On May 21 , 1979 , White was found guilty of the voluntary manslaughter of Mayor Moscone and Supervisor Milk . The prosecutor asked for a finding of first @-@ degree murder with " special circumstances " , which would have permitted the death penalty under the terms of a recently adopted capital punishment law in California , Proposition 7 . The " special circumstances " alleged in this case were that Mayor Moscone had been killed in order to block the appointment of someone to fill the City Supervisor seat from which Dan White had resigned , and also that multiple people were killed . 
 White 's sentence was reduced due in part to the so @-@ called Twinkie defense , a judgment that provoked outrage in the community . The " Twinkie " defense was presented by a psychiatrist to the jury , stating that White had a diminished capacity due to depression . The copious amounts of junk food White consumed are cited as a symptom of his mental state . It has also been stated that the refined sugars present in White 's diet preceding the killings may have fueled the depression . The jury was also composed of persons whom were predominantly Roman Catholic , working @-@ class , heterosexual , and white — essentially , the same demographic in the city who felt sympathy for White . The jury heard a tape recording of White 's confession , which consisted of highly emotional ranting about the pressure he was under , and members of the jury wept in sympathy for the defendant . White represented the " old guard " of San Francisco , who were wary of the influx of minority groups into the city and represented a more conservative , traditional view that the more liberal forces in the city , like Moscone and Milk , were perceived to be eroding . The San Francisco Police Department had , in conjunction with the fire department , raised more than $ 100 @,@ 000 to defend White , which earned the anger of the gay community . He received a conviction for the least serious offense , voluntary manslaughter , and sentenced to seven years and eight months in Soledad prison . With good behavior he had the chance to be released after serving two @-@ thirds of his sentence , about five years . Upon hearing the verdict , District Attorney Joseph Freitas , Jr . , said " It was a wrong decision . The jury was overwhelmed by emotions and did not sufficiently analyze the evidence that this was deliberate , calculated murder . " In defense of his client , White 's attorney Douglas Schmidt stated that White " is filled with remorse and I think he 's in a very bad condition . " 
 White would later confirm that the killings were premeditated . In 1984 , he told former police Inspector Frank Falzon that not only had he planned to kill Moscone and Milk , but also had plans to kill Assemblyman Willie Brown and Supervisor Carol Ruth Silver . He believed that the four politicians were attempting to block his reinstatement as Supervisor . Falzon quoted White as having said , " I was on a mission . I wanted four of them . Carol Ruth Silver , she was the biggest snake ... and Willie Brown , he was masterminding the whole thing . " 
 = = = March through the Castro = = = 
 When told of the verdict , Milk 's friend and activist Cleve Jones addressed an audience of about 500 people that had gathered on Castro Street , telling them of the verdict . With shouts of " Out of the bars and into the streets " Jones led a crowd down Castro street , its numbers bolstered by people emerging from each bar . The crowd circled around and marched through the Castro again , by now numbering about 1 @,@ 500 people . 
 In a 1984 interview , Jones gave a voice to the feeling in the crowd as they began to group together on Castro Street after news of the verdict spread , stating , " The rage in people ’ s face — I saw people I ’ d known for years , and they were so furious . That to me was the scariest thing . All these people I ’ d know from the neighborhood , boys from the corner , these people I ’ d ridden the bus with , just out there , screaming for blood . " 
 = = = Violence at City Hall = = = 
 By the time the crowd reached City Hall its numbers had increased to over 5 @,@ 000 . Protesters shouted slogans such as " Kill Dan White ! " and " Dump Dianne ! " , a reference to Mayor Dianne Feinstein . The handful of police officers on duty at the scene were uncertain about how to deal with the situation , and the Police Department , which was unaccustomed to an angry gay crowd , was similarly uncertain of how to proceed . The protesters were convinced that the police and prosecution had conspired to avoid a severe sentence for White , although Prosecutor Thomas Norman denied this repeatedly until his death . 
 Members of the crowd tore gilded ornamental work from the building 's wrought iron doors and then used it to break first floor windows . Several of Harvey Milk 's friends monitored and attempted to hold back the crowd , including former lover Scott Smith . A formation of police appeared on the north side of the Civic Center Plaza , and those attempting to hold back the mob sat down , grateful for the reinforcements . The officers however did not restrain themselves to holding back the crowd , and instead attacked them with night sticks . 
 One young man kicked and smashed the window of a police car , lit a pack of matches , and set the upholstery on fire . After burning for a short time , the fuel tank exploded ; a dozen more police cars and eight other automobiles would be destroyed in a similar fashion . The photo on the front cover of the Dead Kennedys 1980 album Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables , which shows several police cars on fire , was taken that night . Several crowd members threw tear gas , which they had stolen from police vehicles . Riots began to break out , with one mob disrupting traffic . Electric trollies were disabled when their overhead wires were pulled down , and violence broke out against the police officers , who were outnumbered . Police Chief Charles Gain , standing inside City Hall , ordered officers not to attack and to simply stand their ground . 
 Mayor Feinstein and Supervisor Carol Ruth Silver addressed the demonstrators in an attempt to defuse the situation . Mayor Feinstein said that she had received news of the verdict " with disbelief " , and Supervisor Silver stated , " Dan White has gotten away with murder . It 's as simple as that . " Silver was injured when struck by a flying object . More than 140 protesters were also injured . 
 = = = Police retaliation = = = 
 After nearly three hours of shouts from the angry crowd , officers moved in to quell the riot . Police reportedly covered their badges with black tape — preventing any identification — and attacked rioters . Dozens of police officers swept into the crowd , using tear gas to force protesters away from the building . Police were surprised at the resistance they faced from the protesters , who attempted to push them back using tree branches , chrome torn off city buses , and asphalt ripped from the street , as weapons . As one man ignited the last police car he shouted to a reporter " Make sure you put in the paper that I ate too many Twinkies . " Sixty officers were injured , and about two dozen arrests were made . 
 The second stage of the violence was a police raid / riot hours later in the predominantly gay Castro neighborhood , which vandalized the Elephant Walk bar and injured many of its occupants . After order was restored at City Hall , SFPD cars carrying dozens of officers headed into the Castro District . Officers entered a gay bar called the Elephant Walk , despite their orders not to do so . They shouted " dirty cocksuckers " and " sick faggots " , shattered the large plate glass windows of the bar , and attacked patrons . After 15 minutes police withdrew from the bar and joined other officers who were indiscriminately attacking gays on the street . The incident lasted nearly two hours . 
 When Police Chief Charles Gain heard about the unauthorized Elephant Walk raid , he immediately went to the location and ordered his men to leave . Later that night , freelance reporter Michael Weiss saw a group of police officers celebrating at a downtown bar . " We were at City Hall the day [ the killings ] happened and we were smiling then , " one officer explained . " We were there tonight and we 're still smiling . " 
 At least 61 police officers and an estimated 100 members of the public were hospitalized in the course of the riot . A civil grand jury convened to find out who ordered the attack , but it ended inconclusively with a settlement covering personal injury claims and damages . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The next morning gay leaders convened in a committee room in the Civic Center . Supervisor Harry Britt , who had replaced Milk , along with the more militant gays of the Harvey Milk Democratic Club , made it clear that nobody was to apologize for the riots . Britt informed a press conference , " Harvey Milk 's people do not have anything to apologize for . Now the society is going to have to deal with us not as nice little fairies who have hairdressing salons , but as people capable of violence . We 're not going to put up with Dan Whites anymore . " Reporters were surprised that a public official would condone the violent acts of the previous night , expecting an apology from Britt . Subsequent attempts to find a gay leader who would give an apologetic statement proved unsuccessful . 
 That evening , May 22 , would have been the 49th birthday of Harvey Milk . City officials had considered revoking the permit for a rally planned for that night , but decided against it for fear of sparking more violence . Officials stated that the rally could channel the community 's anger into something positive . Police from San Francisco and its neighboring towns were placed on alert by Mayor Feinstein , and Cleve Jones coordinated contingency plans with the police , and trained 300 monitors to keep an eye on the crowd . Approximately 20 @,@ 000 people gathered on Castro and Market streets , where the mood was " angry , but subdued . " Officers monitored the crowd from a distance , however the crowd engaged in a peaceful celebration of Milk 's life . Attendees danced to popular disco songs , drank beer , and sang a tribute to Milk . 
 On the same night , for over three hours about a hundred people held a demonstration at Sheridan Square in Manhattan , to protest the verdict . About 20 officers observed the protest , which began at 8 pm , but no arrests were made . A candlelight vigil was planned for two days ahead , sponsored by the Coalition for Lesbian and Gay Rights and the National Gay Task Force . 
 On October 14 , 1979 , between 75 @,@ 000 and 125 @,@ 000 people marched on Washington for gay rights . Many carried portraits of Milk , and placards honoring his legacy . The rally , something that Milk had intended to organize , was instead a tribute to his life . 
 Dan White was released from prison on January 14 , 1984 after serving five years of a seven @-@ year , eight @-@ month sentence . On the evening following his release , 9 @,@ 000 people marched down Castro street and burned his effigy . State authorities reportedly feared an assassination attempt , and in response Scott Smith urged people not to retaliate with violence . He stated , " Harvey was against the death penalty . He was a nonviolent person . " 
 White committed suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning on October 21 , 1985 . He connected a rubber hose to his car 's exhaust system and routed it to the interior of the vehicle , which he let fill with carbon monoxide . Mayor Feinstein said , " This latest tragedy should close a very sad chapter in this city 's history . " According to Orange County lawyer Jeff Walsworth , White had expressed remorse for the killings in February 1984 . White reportedly stated that it would always cause him inner turmoil . Inspector Falzone said the contrary , however , commenting that at no time did White express remorse in any form at the deaths of Moscone and Milk . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Causes = = = 
 The community had a long history of conflict with the San Francisco Police Department . Following World War II , gay bars were subject to frequent raids and attempts by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to revoke their alcohol licenses . They were accused of serving alcohol to homosexuals , a criminal act at the time . 
 The growing political and economic power of the city 's gay community conflicted with the established but dwindling numbers of the conservative institutions , such as the police and fire departments . By 1971 , police were arresting an average of 2 @,@ 800 men per year on public sex charges ; by contrast , 63 such arrests were made in New York City , although up to a quarter of San Francisco was reported to be gay at the time . Many charges were dismissed due to entrapment , but several men were given harsh sentences . 
 When Dan White was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter , his successful diminished capacity defense enraged the gay community . That the police and fire departments had raised money for his defense gave their anger a focus , turning it against the city government and especially the SFPD . 
 = = = Effects on San Francisco politics = = = 
 With the 1979 municipal elections occurring only months after the riot , prominent gay leaders feared a backlash at the polls . The elections continued without incident , and the gay community fared better than expected , wielding unprecedented influence . Although the virtually unknown gay Mayoral candidate David Scott finished third in the election , his showing was strong enough to force Mayor Feinstein into a runoff election against conservative City Supervisor Quentin Kopp . Feinstein 's promises to appoint more gay people to public office , and her heavy campaigning in the Castro , ensured that she won enough support from the gay community to give her a full term as Mayor . 
 One of Mayor Feinstein 's first actions upon being elected was to announce the appointment of Cornelius Murphy as the new Chief of Police . Murphy declared that police cars would no longer be colored powder blue , but instead would be repainted as " macho black @-@ and @-@ whites . " This pleased the rank and file , and restored confidence in police leadership . Murphy also vowed to maintain the progressive policy towards gays that his predecessor had implemented . By 1980 , one in seven new police recruits was either gay or lesbian . In one of his last public appearances , outgoing Police Chief Charles Gain stated that he fully expected to see the day when San Francisco would have both a gay mayor and Chief of Police . By October 1985 , an organization for gay law enforcement personnel in California , the Golden State Peace Officers Association , had incorporated as a non @-@ profit organization . It was founded by Art Roth , an Oakland police officer who was present on the night of the riots . 
 Thirty years after the announcement of Dan White 's guilty verdict , the Supreme Court of California prepared their decision on Strauss v. Horton . The case was an attempt to overturn Proposition 8 , which had added the statement " Only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California " to Article I , section 7 @.@ 5 of the California State Constitution . This ballot initiative , which was approved in 2008 , eliminated the right of same @-@ sex couples to marry in the state . 
 In late May 2009 , while the Court was preparing its announcement , rumors surfaced on the Internet that San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom had asked the court not to announce the decision on May 21 . They suggested that he made this request so that the announcement would not coincide with the 30th anniversary of the White Night riots . On May 26 , the court upheld the validity of Proposition 8 , but ruled that the 18 @,@ 000 marriages that had already been performed would remain valid . 
 = = = Effects on the AIDS movement = = = 
 Cleve Jones played a major role in the investigation of the riots , and had since become a prominent activist . He dropped out of school to work as a legislative consultant to California State Assembly Speakers Leo McCarthy and Willie Brown . He also spent time organizing political campaigns . In 1981 , while working as a consultant to the California State Assembly Health Committee , he became aware of gay men in San Francisco contracting unusual diseases , such as Kaposi 's sarcoma . The gay community was eventually seriously affected by the AIDS epidemic , and Jones became a key AIDS activist . Jones co @-@ founded the Kaposi 's Sarcoma Research & Education Foundation , which in 1982 became the San Francisco AIDS Foundation . On November 27 , 1985 , at a candlelight vigil on the anniversary of the Moscone @-@ Milk assassinations , Jones learned that 1 @,@ 000 people had died of AIDS . He proposed the creation of a quilt , in remembrance of those who had died . In 1987 , Jones , by then HIV @-@ positive himself , launched the <unk> Project AIDS Memorial Quilt . As of 2009 , the quilt consists of over 44 @,@ 000 individual panels . In a 2004 interview , Jones said " I thought , what a perfect symbol ; what a warm , comforting , middle @-@ class , middle @-@ American , traditional @-@ family @-@ values symbol to attach to this disease that 's killing homosexuals and IV drug users and Haitian immigrants , and maybe , just maybe , we could apply those traditional family values to my family . " 
 = Ashita , Haru ga Kitara = 
 " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " ( <unk> 、 <unk> , " Tomorrow , If Spring Comes " ) is a song by Japanese entertainer Takako Matsu from her debut album , Sora no Kagami ( 1997 ) . It was released on March 21 , 1997 , through BMG Japan as her debut single . The song was written by Yūji Sakamoto and Daisuke Hinata , while Hinata produced the song . Following the wrap @-@ up of the drama Long Vacation , she decided to give singing a try upon the suggestion of one of its directors . 
 The track was recorded in Santa Monica , California , and is a mid @-@ tempo J @-@ pop song composed in the key of B minor . Its lyrics recite a young girl 's memories of her love for a boy in her high school days . It has been praised by critics and associated with the onset of spring in Japan , having re @-@ entered the airplay charts in Japan around that time , even years after its initial release . It has also been covered by many other artists like Namie Amuro , Masaharu Fukuyama , and Ayumi Shibata . The single peaked at number 8 on the Oricon singles chart and spent 20 weeks in the top 20 of the chart . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments exceeding 400 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Ten years after its initial release , Matsu released a new version of the song titled " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara 97 – 07 " in March 2007 . The re @-@ release contains updated lyrics reflecting changes in the artist 's mind . By intermixing her vocals with her vocals from 10 years before , new version contrasts the two . The new version was featured on her album Cherish You ( 2007 ) and also on her compilation album Footsteps : 10th Anniversary Complete Best ( 2008 ) . As of 2014 , Matsu has performed the song on all of her concert tours as well as other events , including NHK 's Kōhaku Uta Gassen in 1997 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Growing up , Takako Matsu practiced piano and took vocal training as a child . Prior to releasing music , she acted in various television drama and plays . In 1996 , she acted in the drama Long Vacation , which became very popular in Japan . At the wrap up party of the drama , the director of the series at that time heard her perform karaoke and suggested that she try singing . Although taken aback and hesitant at first , she later agreed , as she felt it was not a chance that everyone received and because she liked singing ; she felt it might work out somehow . 
 " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " was written by Yūji Sakamoto and Daisuke Hinata , both of whom had worked with Matsu . Sakamoto had been Tokyo Love Story 's screenwriter and Hinata had been in charge of the music of Long Vacation . Hinata provided the music and arrangement to " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " . The track was recorded at the Hyper Image Studio in Santa Monica , California , in January 1997 . Hinata himself mixed the audio while Steve Hall mastered it . <unk> provided instrumentation to the song . The record was produced by <unk> Nagayama , who had also produced Long Vacation . Initially , another song was selected to be released as Matsu 's debut single . However , it was scrapped for unknown reasons and " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " was selected instead . Matsu debuted the song on radio on February 14 , 1997 , and the single was physically released on March 21 , 1997 through BMG Japan as an 8 cm CD single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " is a mid @-@ tempo J @-@ pop track with a " gentle melody " , that lasts for 4 minutes and 13 seconds . According to the original score published by <unk> Music Publishing , it is composed in the key of B minor and in the common verse @-@ chorus song structure with a tempo of 110 beats per minute . The track opens with an instrumental introduction with a chord progression of Gmaj7 – F ♯ m7 – Bm . As it reaches the chorus , the progression shifts to G – A – F ♯ m – Bm7 . The same pattern is repeated throughout the song . 
 The lyrics of the song , written from the perspective of a girl , sees her recollect the memories of her love with a member of her high school baseball team and how she hopes to meet him again " tomorrow , if spring comes " . Upon the album 's release , Yoshitake Maeda , writing for BMG Japan , commented that Sakamoto probably reminisced on his teenage years through the song . 
 The b @-@ side of the single " Zutto ... <unk> yo " was written by Matsu and produced by Hinata . Matsu decided to give it the theme of three girls going out for a drive . However , she commented that no matter how others looked at it , it seemed as if the song is about two girls . The song opens with an " electro " introduction and utilizes a warped guitar throughout . In addition to the two songs , the single also featured the original karaoke track to " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " . An LP titled Remix Hyper Bug containing remixes of " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " by DJ Craig William — " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " ( Hyper Bug Mix ) and " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " ( Techno Dub Mix ) was released on August 21 , 1997 through BMG Victor . It also features a remix of the album track " Love Sick " , titled " Love Sick ( Deep Sick Mix ) " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A reviewer for CD Journal commended " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " for being " pure " and noted that Matsu 's " unobtrusive [ and ] naked voice " is like " sitting in a sunny spot on early spring day " . Similarly , Rolling Stone Japan wrote that the song has a " heartwarming " production , which they noted has become synonymous with Takako Matsu . Another reviewer for CD Journal said that the b @-@ side , " Zutto ... <unk> yo " ' s arrangement makes it an " impressive pop song " . Since its release , " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " has often been associated with the onset of spring in Japan . The song also entered the top requests list of many FM radio stations around the same time . Since the introduction of Billboard Japan in 2010 , the song has spiked on its airplay charts during the time of spring . It was also included on the compilation True Love : Spring Memorial Songs in 2003 . In a web poll conducted in 2013 by <unk> news asking people about their favorite spring song , " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara " was ranked at number 10 . 
 The single debuted at number 15 on the Oricon singles chart during the week following its release in March 1997 , selling 35 @,@ 640 copies . A few weeks later , it moved to number 8 , moving 46 @,@ 400 copies , which became its peak position . The single spent nine weeks in the top 20 , including two in the top 10 , and finished at number 75 on the yearly chart , due to sales of 428 @,@ 170 copies . As of May 2014 , it has sold 431 @,@ 540 copies in Japan and has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan for shipments of over 400 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 In 1997 , Matsu performed the song at the 48th Kōhaku Uta Gassen in 1997 , representing the " Red " team in the event . The previous year , before her debut as a singer , she had hosted the " Red " team . This made Matsu , who was 19 at that time , the youngest person to reach that position in the event . In June of the same year , she appeared on the show Love Love <unk> , her first music talk show appearance , and performed the song along with a cover of Seiko Matsuda 's " Hitomi wa Diamond " ( 1983 ) . She has performed the song on all of her concert tours — from the Piece of Life ( 2001 ) through Time for Music ( 2010 ) . On the Cherish You ( 2007 ) and Time for Music concert tours , she performed the 97 – 07 version of the song . A footage of performance from the Piece of Life tour was used to promote the DVD release of the concert . 
 Apart from the tours , she has also performed the song on various televised appearances . In 2003 , she appeared on the talk show hosted by Japanese singer Ayumi Hamasaki and performed the song and " Ashita ni <unk> o " ( 2003 ) alongside Hamasaki . Three years later , Matsu sang the song on Music Fair , alongside <unk> Switch . In 2009 , Matsu performed the song on the <unk> sponsored event Radio Magic , with Yoshiyuki Sahashi directing the backing band to a crowd of about 12 @,@ 000 people . A writer for Barks wrote that Matsu 's vocals sounded " transparent " and the whole performance had a " refreshing feeling " . Oricon magazine commented that Matsu sang " cheerfully " while " running around the stage " . The same year , she performed it on the Christmas no Yakusoku 2009 ( <unk> ) show organized by TBS . In 2014 , she performed the song again for NHK , at the J @-@ Pop Heisei Music Graffiti ( J @-@ POP <unk> ・ <unk> ) event . 
 The song was covered by Hiromi Hirata as Makoto Kikuchi of The Idolmaster series as a " Special Request " song . It was later included in the album , The Idolmaster Special Spring ( 2010 ) , released through Nippon Columbia . The album peaked at number 18 on the Oricon Albums Chart . It was also covered for the spring compilation Cafe de <unk> Sweet Jazz 20 the Best Sakura Songs , which peaked at number 39 on the Oricon albums chart . The song has also been covered by many mainstream pop artists like Namie Amuro in 1997 , for the show The Yoru mo <unk> ( <unk> , " The Night of Hit Parade " ) , in 1998 by Masaharu Fukuyama for All Night Nippon , and in 2008 by Ayumi Shibata for Uta Doki ! Pop Classics ( <unk> ! 〜 <unk> 〜 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from Sora no Kagami liner notes . 
 Takako Matsu – vocals 
 Daisuke Hinata – keyboards , programming , mixing 
 Bud Rizzo – guitars , bass , programming 
 Shinnosuke <unk> – acoustic guitar 
 Steve Hall – mastering 
 = = Re @-@ release = = 
 A re @-@ recorded version of the song was released as a single to commemorate Matsu 's tenth anniversary in music industry , to digital outlets like iTunes , mora , and also in Chaku @-@ Uta format , both as ringtone and the full song on March 21 , 2007 . The new version titled , " Ashita , Haru ga Kitara 97 – 07 " ( <unk> 、 <unk> 97 – 07 ) was recorded at the Mouri Art Works Studio in Tokyo . Its modified lyrics penned by Yūji Sakamoto , the writer of the original song , are meant to convey the emotions of the singer ten years into her debut . In addition , Matsu 's vocals from the original version are intermixed with the new vocals to contrast the difference between the current Matsu and the Matsu of ten years ago . While talking to NHK at the time of the single 's release , Matsu commented that the new lyrics not only reflect the changes she had made over the past 10 years , but also of Yūji Sakamoto . 
 The new version , running 4 minutes and 54 seconds , was arranged by musician and future husband Yoshiyuki Sahashi . The song was included in her eighth studio album , Cherish You ( 2007 ) . and also on Matsu 's compilation album , Footsteps : 10th Anniversary Complete Best ( 2008 ) . A TV commercial for the new track was also directed by Hiroyuki <unk> . The song was used as the ending theme to the Fuji TV drama , Matsumoto <unk> <unk> Monogatari : Ojisan no <unk> ( <unk> 〜 <unk> 〜 , " The Story of Matsumoto <unk> 's Family : Grandfather 's Kitchen " ) . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 While reviewing Cherish You , Takayuki Saito of <unk> magazine noted that the track has a " novel " arrangement and Matsu 's current voice " calls out " to her " innocent " self of ten years ago . He further commented that Matsu 's voice , " full of strength " , helps the listeners realize how much she has grown over the years . CD Journal 's reviewer wrote that the lyrics of the new version are more " positive " than the original version . They further noted that the song " overflows with adventurous spirit " woven with " nostalgia and freshness " . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Italian ironclad Enrico Dandolo = 
 Enrico Dandolo was the second of two Caio Duilio @-@ class ironclad turret ships built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1870s . They were fitted with the largest guns available , 17 @.@ 72 in ( 450 mm ) rifled , muzzle @-@ loading guns , and were the largest , fastest and most powerful ships of their day . Enrico Dandolo was built in La Spezia , with her keel laid in January 1873 and her hull launched in July 1878 . Construction was finally completed in April 1882 when the ship , named for the 42nd Doge of Venice , was commissioned into the Italian fleet . 
 Enrico Dandolo spent much of her career in the Active Squadron of the Italian fleet , primarily occupied with training exercises . She was heavily modernized in 1895 – 98 , receiving a new battery of fast @-@ firing 10 in ( 254 mm ) guns in place of the old 17 @.@ 72 in guns . The ship served in the Reserve Squadron after 1905 , and then became a gunnery training ship . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Enrico Dandolo was among the few ships of the Italian fleet to see no action . She was employed as a harbor defense ship , first in Tobruk , Libya in 1913 and then in Brindisi and Venice during World War I. The ship was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Enrico Dandolo was 109 @.@ 16 meters ( 358 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 65 m ( 64 @.@ 5 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 36 m ( 27 @.@ 4 ft ) . She displaced 11 @,@ 025 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 851 long tons ; 12 @,@ 153 short tons ) normally and up to 12 @,@ 037 t ( 11 @,@ 847 long tons ; 13 @,@ 269 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 15 @.@ 6 knots ( 28 @.@ 9 km / h ; 18 @.@ 0 mph ) at 8 @,@ 045 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 999 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 875 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 324 km ; 3 @,@ 308 mi ) at a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . She had a crew of 420 officers and men , which later increased to 515 . 
 Enrico Dandolo was armed with a main battery of four 17 @.@ 72 in ( 450 mm ) 20 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two turrets placed en echelon amidships . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried three 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . Enrico Dandolo was protected by belt armor that was 21 @.@ 5 in ( 546 mm ) thick at its strongest section , which protected the ship 's magazines and machinery spaces . Both ends of the belt were connected by transverse bulkheads that were 15 @.@ 75 in ( 400 mm ) thick . She had an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 1 to 2 in ( 28 to 51 mm ) thick . Her gun turrets were armored with 17 in ( 432 mm ) of steel plate . The ship 's bow and stern were not armored , but they were extensively subdivided into a cellular " raft " that was intended to reduce the risk of flooding . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Enrico Dandolo , named after Enrico Dandolo , the 42nd Doge of Venice , was laid down at La Spezia on 6 January 1873 and was launched on 10 July 1878 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed on 11 April 1882 . During the annual fleet maneuvers held in 1885 , Enrico Dandolo served as the flagship of the 1st Division of the " Western Squadron " , with Vice Admiral Martini commanding . She was joined by her sister Caio Duilio , the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan , and a sloop . The " Western Squadron " attacked the defending " Eastern Squadron " , simulating a Franco @-@ Italian conflict , with operations conducted off Sardinia . During the following year 's fleet maneuvers , which began on 10 June , Enrico Dandolo was assigned to the " defending squadron " , along with the ironclads Palestro , Castelfidardo , and Affondatore , the protected cruiser Dogali , the torpedo cruiser Folgore , and several smaller vessels . The first half of the maneuvers tested the ability to attack and defend the Strait of Messina , and concluded in time for a fleet review by King Umberto I on the 21st . The second phase consisted of joint maneuvers with the Italian Army ; the fleet was tasked with attempting to force an amphibious landing , which it effected at San Vicenzo on 30 July , the last day of the exercises . 
 Enrico Dandolo took part in the annual 1888 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Lepanto , Italia , Caio Duilio , and San Martino , one protected cruiser , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . The ship served as the flagship of the 3rd Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Affondatore , the torpedo cruiser Goito , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . For the rest of the year , Enrico Dandolo was assigned to the 2nd Division of the Italian fleet , along with the protected cruiser Vesuvio and the torpedo cruiser Partenope . 
 She was thoroughly reconstructed between 1895 and 1898 to a design created by Inspector Engineer Giacinto <unk> . The ship 's old , slow @-@ firing 17 @.@ 7 in guns were replaced with new quick @-@ firing 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns , and she received a new secondary battery to defend the ship against torpedo boats . The battery consisted of five 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , sixteen 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 43 @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing guns , eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ caliber revolver cannon , and four machine guns . The main battery guns were placed in significantly smaller turrets that had 8 @.@ 8 in ( 220 mm ) of armor plating ; the lighter guns and turrets reduced the ship 's displacement to 10 @,@ 679 t ( 10 @,@ 510 long tons ; 11 @,@ 772 short tons ) normally and 11 @,@ 264 t ( 11 @,@ 086 long tons ; 12 @,@ 416 short tons ) at full load . Enrico Dandolo also received a new engine , though her performance remained the same . The ship 's crew increased to 495 . 
 In 1901 , Enrico Dandolo was joined in the 2nd Division by the ironclads Andrea Doria and Francesco Morosini , the armored cruiser Carlo Alberto , Partenope , and three torpedo boats . She remained in service in the Active Squadron the following year , with Andrea Doria , Francesco Morosini , the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads , and the new pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Ammiraglio di Saint Bon . In 1905 , Enrico Dandolo was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with the three Ruggiero di Laurias and the three Re Umbertos , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . She thereafter served in the Gunnery School as a training ship , along with the torpedo cruiser Saetta . 
 At the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Italia was assigned to the 5th Division of the Italian fleet , the ironclads Italia and Lepanto , but she saw no action during the conflict . She became the guardship at Tobruk , Libya in 1913 and was transferred to Brindisi and Venice during World War I. While stationed at Brindisi , six of her 37 mm guns were removed . She was stricken on 23 January 1920 and later broken up for scrap . 
 = Deusdedit of Canterbury = 
 Deusdedit ( died c . 664 ) , perhaps originally named <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury , the first native @-@ born holder of the see of Canterbury . By birth an Anglo @-@ Saxon , he became archbishop in 655 and held the office for more than nine years until his death , probably from plague . Deusdedit 's successor as archbishop was one of his priests at Canterbury . There is some controversy over the exact date of Deusdedit 's death , owing to discrepancies in the medieval written work that records his life . Little is known about his episcopate , but he was considered to be a saint after his demise . A saint 's life was written after his relics were moved from their original burial place in 1091 . 
 = = Life = = 
 A post @-@ Norman Conquest tradition , originating with Goscelin , gives Deusdedit 's original name as <unk> , possibly a corruption of <unk> . He was consecrated by Ithamar , Bishop of Rochester , on 26 March or perhaps 12 March 655 . He was the sixth archbishop after the arrival of the Gregorian missionaries , and the first to be a native of the island of Great Britain rather than an Italian , having been born a West Saxon . One reason for the long period between the Christianization of the Kentish kingdom from Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism in about 600 and the appointment of the first native archbishop may have been the need for the schools established by the Gregorian missionaries to educate the natives to a sufficiently high standard for them to take ecclesiastical office . Deusdedit probably owed his appointment to the see of Canterbury to a collaboration between Eorcenberht of Kent and Cenwalh of Wessex . The name Deusdedit means " God has given " in Latin , and had been the name of a recent pope , Deusdedit , in office from 615 to 618 ; it was the practice of many of the early medieval Saxon bishops to take an adopted name , often from recent papal names . It is unclear when Deusdedit adopted his new name , although the historian Richard Sharpe considers it likely to have been when he was consecrated as an archbishop , rather than when he entered religious life . 
 The see of Canterbury seems at this time to have been passing through a period of comparative obscurity . During Deusdedit 's nine years as archbishop , all the new bishops in England were consecrated by Celtic or foreign bishops , with one exception : Deusdedit consecrated <unk> , Ithamar 's successor as Bishop of Rochester . Deusdedit did , however , found a nunnery in the Isle of Thanet and helped with the foundation of Medeshamstede Abbey , later Peterborough Abbey , in 657 . He was long overshadowed by Agilbert , bishop to the West Saxons , and his authority as archbishop probably did not extend past his own diocese and that of Rochester , which had traditionally been dependent on Canterbury . 
 The Synod of Whitby , which debated whether the Northumbrian church should follow the Roman or the Celtic method of dating Easter , was held in 664 . Deusdedit does not appear to have been present , perhaps because of an outbreak of the plague prevalent in England at the time . 
 = = Death = = 
 Deusdedit died at some time around the Synod of Whitby , although the exact date is disputed . Bede , in the Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , states that " On the fourteenth of July in the above mentioned year , when an eclipse was quickly followed by plague and during which Bishop Colman was refuted by the unanimous decision of the Catholics and returned to his own country , Deusdedit the sixth Archbishop of Canterbury died . " A solar eclipse occurred on 1 May 664 , which would appear to make the date of Deusdedit 's death 14 July 664 . But that conflicts with Bede 's own information earlier in the Historia , where he claims that Deusdedit 's predecessor , Honorius , " died on the 30th of September 653 , and after a vacancy of 18 months , Deusdedit , a West Saxon was elected to the archiepiscopal see and became the 6th Archbishop . He was consecrated by Ithamar , Bishop of Rochester , on the 26th of May , and ruled the see until his death nine years , four months , and two days later . " If this information is accurate , then Deusdedit must have died on 28 July 664 . Various methods of reconciling these discrepancies have been proposed . Frank Stenton argues that Bede began his years on 1 September ; thus the date of Honorius ' death should be considered 30 September 652 in modern reckoning . Further , Stenton argued that medieval copyists had introduced an error into the manuscripts of the Historia , and that Bede meant that the length of Deusdedit 's reign was 9 years and 7 months , rather than 9 years and 4 months as stated in the manuscripts . From this , he concludes that Deusdedit 's death occurred in the year September 663 to September 664 . This would make the year of death correct according to the eclipse , but still leave a discrepancy on the specific day of death , for which Stenton asserted the length calculations given by Bede were more correct than the actual death date given . Thus Stenton concluded that Deusdedit died on 28 October 663 . 
 Other historians , including Richard Abels , P. Grosjean , and Alan Thacker , state that Deusdedit died on 14 July 664 . The main argument was put forward by Grosjean , who claimed that Bede had the consecration date wrong , as 26 May was Maundy Thursday in 655 , not a date that would normally have been chosen for a consecration . Grosjean argues that the best method for resolving the conflicts is to just take 14 July 664 as the date of death , and figure backwards with the length of reign given by Bede , which gives a consecration date of 12 March 655 . Thacker and Abels agree generally , although Thacker does not give a specific consecration date beyond March . Abels adds to Grosjean 's arguments Bede 's association of Deusdedit 's death with that of King Eorcenberht , which Bede gives as occurring on the same day . Bede states that the plague of 664 began soon after the eclipse on 1 May . Nothing in Bede contradicts the date of 14 July 664 for Eorcenberht ; therefore , Abels considers that date to be the best fit for the available data . The historian D. P. Kirby agrees that Deusdedit died in 664 , although he does not give a precise date within that year . 
 Most historians state that Deusdedit died of the plague that was prevalent in England at the time . Because Bede records the death of Deusdedit shortly after he mentions the outbreak of the plague , the historian J. R. Maddicott asserts that both Deusdedit and Eorcenberht were struck suddenly with the disease and died quickly . Bede is not specific on the type of plague , but Maddicott argues that because of the time of its eruption and the way it arrived in England it was probably bubonic plague . Although Bede does not describe either Eorcenberht or Deusdedit 's symptoms he does discuss another victim of the 664 disease , who suffered from a tumour on his thigh , resembling the characteristic groin swellings of bubonic plague . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Except for the bare facts of his life , little is known about Deusdedit . Deusdedit 's successor as Archbishop of Canterbury , Wighard , had been one of his clergy . Deusdedit was regarded as a saint after his death , with a feast day of 14 July , although the Bosworth Psalter , a late 10th or early 11th @-@ century psalter produced at St Augustine 's Abbey , gives a date of 15 July . His feast day is designated as a major feast day , and is included along with those of a number of other early Canterbury archbishops in the Bosworth Psalter . Deusdedit was buried in the church of St Augustine 's in Canterbury , but was translated to the new abbey church in 1091 . A hagiography , or saint 's biography , on Deusdedit was written by Goscelin after the translation of his relics , but the work was based mainly on Bede 's account ; the manuscript of the De Sancto Deusdedit <unk> survives as part of British Library manuscript ( ms ) Cotton Vespasian <unk> Because of the late date of the Sancto , Bede 's Historia is the main source for what little is known about Deusdedit . Other than the hagiography , there is scant evidence of a cult surrounding him . His shrine survived until the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s . 
 = = Note = = 
 = Dresden @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Dresden class was a pair of light cruisers built for the Imperial German Navy in the early part of the 20th century . The class comprised SMS Dresden , the lead ship , and SMS Emden . Both ships were laid down in 1906 ; Dresden was launched in 1907 , and Emden followed in 1908 . They entered service in 1908 and 1909 , respectively . The design for the ships was an incremental improvement over the preceding Königsberg class , being slightly larger and slightly faster , but with the same primary armament of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns . Dresden and Emden were powered by steam turbines and triple expansion engines , respectively , as part of continued experiments with the new turbine technology . 
 Both ships served extensively on foreign stations ; Emden was assigned to the East Asia Squadron from her commissioning , and Dresden was sent to Caribbean waters in 1913 . Dresden was due to return to Germany for periodic maintenance shortly before the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but this became impossible with the onset of hostilities . She therefore operated as a commerce raider , before linking up with Vizeadmiral Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron . Dresden thereafter participated in the Battle of Coronel in November 1914 and the Battle of the Falkland Islands the following December . She was the only German vessel to escape destruction at the latter engagement , and she remained at large for several more months . Dresden finally put into the Chilean island of Más a Tierra in March 1915 owing to worn @-@ out engines . A pair of British cruisers violated Chilean neutrality and attacked Dresden while she lay at anchor ; the Germans scuttled their ship to prevent her capture . 
 Emden , meanwhile , had been detached from the East Asia Squadron to pursue an independent commerce raiding campaign in the Indian Ocean . She captured or sank numerous Entente vessels , including the steamer Ryazan , which was converted into the auxiliary cruiser Cormoran . In September 1914 , Emden raided Penang and caught the Russian protected cruiser Zhemchug and the French destroyer Mousquet and quickly destroyed both ships . Shortly thereafter , Emden was caught by the Australian cruiser HMAS Sydney off the Cocos Islands and forced to beach after a ferocious engagement . 
 = = Design = = 
 The two ships of the Dresden class were ordered in the 1905 – 1906 construction program . Their design represents an incremental improvement over the earlier Königsberg class . They carried the same main battery of 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns on a slightly greater displacement . Like the <unk> , one ship — Dresden — was fitted with a steam turbine engine to compare its performance with the traditional triple @-@ expansion engine in an otherwise @-@ identical sister ship . All subsequent designs of German cruisers utilized turbine propulsion systems . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The two Dresden @-@ class cruisers were 117 @.@ 90 meters ( 386 ft 10 in ) long at the waterline and 118 @.@ 30 m ( 388 ft 1 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 13 @.@ 50 m ( 44 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 53 m ( 18 ft 2 in ) forward . They displaced 3 @,@ 664 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 606 long tons ) as designed and up to 4 @,@ 268 t ( 4 @,@ 201 long tons ) at full combat load . Their hulls were constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames . The hulls contained thirteen watertight compartments and had a double bottom that extended for 47 percent of the length of the keel . 
 The ships were good sea boats , but they were crank and rolled up to twenty degrees . They were also very wet at high speeds and suffered from a slight weather helm . Nevertheless , the ships turned tightly and were very maneuverable . In a hard turn , their speed fell up to 35 percent . They had a transverse metacentric height of <unk> m ( 1 ft 11 in ) . Dresden and Emden had a crew of 18 officers and 343 enlisted men . They carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , one barge , one cutter , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Dresden 's propulsion system consisted of two Parsons steam turbines , designed to give 15 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 11 @,@ 185 kW ) . Emden , instead , was equipped with two triple expansion engines rated at 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 067 kW ) . Both ships had a top speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . In both vessels , the engines were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Both ships carried up to 860 metric tons ( 850 long tons ) of coal , though their ranges were slightly different , owing to their different propulsion systems . Dresden could steam for 3 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 700 km ; 4 @,@ 100 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , while Emden had a range of 3 @,@ 760 nmi ( 6 @,@ 960 km ; 4 @,@ 330 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied by three turbo @-@ generators that provided a total of 125 kilowatts at 110 volts . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships were armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 13 @,@ 900 yd ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . The ships were also equipped with eight 5 @.@ 2 cm SK L / 55 guns with 4 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . Both ships were also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . 
 The ships were protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick amidships with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick sloping armor on the sides . The deck was reduced to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) further aft and then again to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) toward the stern . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm thick shields . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Dresden = = = 
 Dresden spent most of her career on foreign stations . After her commissioning , she visited the United States in 1909 as part of Germany 's delegation to the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . She returned to North American waters in late 1913 , when she was stationed off the Mexican coast to protect German nationals during the Mexican Revolution . Following the rebels ' victory the following year , Dresden evacuated the former dictator Victoriano Huerta to Jamaica , where the British had granted him asylum . In need of repairs , the cruiser was scheduled to return to Germany in July 1914 , but the outbreak of World War I prevented this from taking place . Instead , Dresden operated as a commerce raider in South American waters in the Atlantic in the first months of the war before moving to the Pacific Ocean in September and thereafter joining Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron . 
 Dresden participated in two major battles with the East Asia Squadron . The first , the Battle of Coronel , took place in November , and Dresden engaged the British cruiser HMS Glasgow . The second , the Battle of the Falkland Islands , followed in December , where British battlecruisers annihilated the German squadron ; Dresden was the only vessel to escape . She eluded her British pursuers for several more months , until she put into Más a Tierra in March 1915 . Her engines were worn out and she had almost no coal left for her boilers ; the ship 's captain contacted the local Chilean authorities to have his vessel interned for the duration of the conflict . There , she was trapped by British cruisers , including her old opponent Glasgow ; the British violated Chilean neutrality and opened fire on the ship . The Germans scuttled Dresden and the majority of the crew escaped to be interned in Chile for the duration of the war . The wreck remains in the harbor and was first surveyed in 2002 . 
 = = = Emden = = = 
 Following her commissioning into the fleet , Emden was assigned to the East Asia Squadron . In 1913 , Korvettenkapitän ( Corvette Captain ) Karl von Müller became the ship 's commander . At the outbreak of war , Emden was the only major German warship in Tsingtao , the main German naval base in Asia . Müller immediately began to operate as a commerce raider , and captured one ship , the Russian steamer Ryazan . Emden was thereafter ordered to rendezvous with the rest of Spee 's cruisers . She remained with the East Asia Squadron for only a few days , as Müller convinced Spee to detach Emden as an independent raider in the Indian Ocean . 
 After arriving in the Indian Ocean in September , Emden captured several British merchantmen along the sea lanes from India to Aden . On 22 September , the ship bombarded Madras , before resuming the hunt for merchant ships . She captured several more vessels , and then raided the port of Penang . There , Emden caught the Russian protected cruiser Zhemchug in the harbor and quickly destroyed her . As Emden was departing , she encountered and sank the French destroyer Mousquet . Emden thereafter proceeded to the Cocos Islands , where Müller intended to destroy a wireless station . The Australian cruiser HMAS Sydney reacted to British wireless signals warning of the Germans ' presence . After a fierce gunnery duel , Sydney caused serious damage to Emden and forced her to beach on North Keeling island . Most of her surviving crew , including Müller , were thereafter taken into captivity . The wreck was eventually broken up in situ in the early 1950s by a Japanese salvage company , though parts of the ship remain scattered around the area . 
 = Green Lake ( Texas ) = 
 Green Lake is a natural tidal lake in Calhoun County , Texas , on the Guadalupe River flood basin . Known for its greenish waters , from which its name derives , the lake is located 12 miles ( 19 km ) west of Port Lavaca and 22 miles ( 35 km ) south of Victoria on the Gulf Coastal Plain . Despite being less than 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from the coast of San Antonio Bay , its waters are fresh . It is the largest natural freshwater lake entirely in Texas , covering an area of approximately 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 km ² ) . 
 Separated from San Antonio Bay by the Guadalupe River delta around 2 @,@ 200 years ago , a wetland ecosystem supporting a wide variety of waterfowl developed along the lake shore and the Guadalupe River delta . Archaeological evidence supports claims of Karankawa settlement . 
 An affluent 19th @-@ century agricultural community of the same name established near the lakeside in the mid @-@ 19th century , but dwindled in status , becoming virtually abandoned in the aftermath of the American Civil War . It was strategically important during the early stages of the war , due to its proximity to fresh water and the Gulf of Mexico . After reaching its low point during the Great Depression , the lakeside community modestly rebounded in 1947 following the nearby discovery of oil . A fictional lake of the same name and with a similar history is featured in the 1998 novel Holes . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Green Lake is about 13 miles ( 21 km ) in circumference and about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide . The water level is shallower near the shoreline , but is deepest towards the center of the lake several hundred feet from the shore . The bottom is generally flat and averages about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in depth . The nearby Guadalupe River frequently floods the plain , and is the main source of fresh water renewal . The shoreline is naturally grassy and poorly drained with coastal marshes between the lake and San Antonio Bay . 
 To improve drainage , a levee was constructed in 1967 , separating the lake from the Victoria Barge Canal , which runs along the bay 's northern and eastern shores ; cutting off several bayous from the lake . The canal begins north at an industrial plant outside Victoria and empties in San Antonio Bay in Seadrift . Hog Bayou runs along the western shore of Green Lake , through the Guadalupe Delta Wildlife Management Area to the south , before its confluence with Mission Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Green Lake formed initially as a northern inlet of San Antonio Bay . As the Guadalupe River shifted westward about 2 @,@ 500 years ago , it deposited silt , developing a delta that <unk> into San Antonio Bay . Around 2 @,@ 200 years ago the delta discharge extended completely across the bay , severing the northern extension from the system , which formed present @-@ day Green Lake . Pottery and burial grounds found in the area suggest a presence of Karankawa Indians at the time of formation . Middens uncovered north of the lake contained shells from the brackish water @-@ species of <unk> clams ( <unk> cuneata ) . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 Wealthy cotton farmers from Kentucky established plantations and settled the fertile lands near the lake during the 1850s , establishing the town of Green Lake , Texas . First @-@ hand accounts described it as " the locality of a neighborhood characterized by [ the ] wealth and social standing of the residents . " 
 After the American Civil War , returning residents found that their slaves , livestock and farm equipment had been taken . Most residents relocated . However , in the early 20th century , farmers returned and the town of Green Lake modestly grew to an approximate population of 300 in 1914 . At the time , much of the land in the vicinity was used for livestock grazing . The only profitable commercial uses for the lake itself included transportation of lumber and fishing . Approximately US $ 100 @,@ 000 worth of fish were caught in the lake from 1900 to 1915 . Nevertheless , the lake bed remained dry for extended periods and vegetation covered certain areas . Local residents soon began to use the bed to grow cotton . 
 In 1917 , Texas filed a trespass to try title suit to reclaim the lake bed for the state . In <unk> v. State , the Texas Court of Civil Appeals in Austin declared the lake permanent and navigable @-@ in @-@ fact , granting the bed to the state under the purview of the Texas Game , Fish and Oyster Commission ( later Texas Parks and Wildlife Department ) . Without permission from the Texas Attorney General , the Texas Land Commissioner then sold the bed to a private buyer for agricultural use in 1918 . In the 1948 case of State v. Bryan , the Texas Court of Civil Appeals in Austin upheld the sale as valid under color of law , and immune from a trespass to try title suit due to the one @-@ year statute of limitations on land sales . However , under the Texas Water Rights <unk> Act of 1967 , Green Lake was classified as a public body of water . The Supreme Court of Texas affirmed this classification in 1988 , rejecting the argument of the bed 's then @-@ owner that it was not a lake by definition , but a natural depression flooded with surface runoff . 
 During the Great Depression , the population of the Green Lake settlement dwindled to 25 . It remained low until the discovery of oil in 1947 . Twenty wells were constructed at the Green Lake oilfield , although as of 1984 , only one still operated . By 2000 , the population of Green Lake was 51 , the same number reported in 1970 and 1990 . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 The lake played a role in the evacuation of federal troops from Texas at the onset of the American Civil War . As Texas considered whether to secede from the United States , General David E. Twiggs , commander of federal troops in Texas negotiated with state leaders concerning the transfer of federal property . After learning of such negotiations , the United States military moved to decommission Twiggs , and replace him with Colonel Carlos Waite . Texas viewed this move as a rejection of the negotiations and proceeded to forcefully claim the federal property . Twiggs , while awaiting relief from Waite , surrendered the property on the condition that federal troops could peacefully evacuate . They were allowed to depart , but only from the Texas coast . Waite arrived and relocated troops near Green Lake , where they could await coastal departure near an adequate source of freshwater . During the stay , Fort Sumter fell under siege , and Texas grew concerned about the concentration of armed federal troops in the area . With their respective nations now at war , Texas considered the deal with Twiggs void , and began to capture federal troops to force them to either join the Confederacy or be Prisoners of War . Some of the remaining uncaptured companies elsewhere in the state attempted to flee to Green Lake . Several regiments camped by the lake later in the war , and complained about mosquitos . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 In the area around Green Lake there are forests of pecan , black willow , cedar , American elm , <unk> and green ash . To the south , the Guadalupe Delta Wildlife Management Area serves as a wetland habitat for thousands of permanent egrets , and other birds , including the brown pelican , reddish egret , white @-@ faced ibis , wood stork , bald eagle , white @-@ tailed hawk , peregrine falcon , and the whooping crane . American alligators reside in the area as well . 
 Redfish and trout were once the main species of fish living in the lake , until the construction of an embankment reduced their populations . A large quantity of silt is now deposited in the lake from the Guadalupe River , after the dredging of a freshwater channel that supplies farmers and the Union Carbide plant in Seadrift . The channel has negatively affected the delta ecosystem by diminishing the river 's nutritional input . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Green Lake , Texas is the setting for Louis Sachar 's 1998 novel Holes , and the 2003 film adaptation . It is described as a dry lake that had once been the largest in the state , surrounded by an affluent community . After a long drought , the lake dried up and the area became a ghost town . Juvenile delinquents were sent to Camp Green Lake to dig holes in the lakebed as punishment . 
 = X @-@ Men ( film series ) = 
 The X @-@ Men film series is an American series of superhero films based on the fictional superhero team of the same name , who originally appeared in a series of comic books created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and published by Marvel Comics . 20th Century Fox obtained the film rights to the characters in 1994 , and after numerous drafts , Bryan Singer was hired to direct X @-@ Men ( 2000 ) and its sequel , X2 ( 2003 ) , while Brett Ratner directed X @-@ Men : The Last Stand ( 2006 ) . 
 After each film earned higher box @-@ office grosses than its predecessor , several spin @-@ off films were released , X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine ( 2009 ) , X @-@ Men : First Class ( 2011 ) and The Wolverine ( 2013 ) . X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , a sequel to both X @-@ Men : The Last Stand and X @-@ Men : First Class , was released in 2014 . Deadpool and X @-@ Men : Apocalypse followed in 2016 . 
 X @-@ Men , X2 , X @-@ Men : First Class , X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past and the spin @-@ offs The Wolverine and Deadpool were all met with positive reviews , with X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past as the best @-@ received film in the series . In the cases of X @-@ Men and X2 , critics especially highlighted their dark , realistic tones and subtexts dealing with discrimination and intolerance , while Deadpool was highlighted for its " faithful " interpretation of the source material and for its R rating . X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine and X @-@ Men : Apocalypse were met with mixed reviews from critics . 
 With nine films released , the X @-@ Men film series is the seventh highest @-@ grossing film franchise of all @-@ time , having grossed over US $ 4 @.@ 3 billion worldwide . It is set to continue with the release of a third Wolverine film in 2017 . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = X @-@ Men ( 2000 ) = = = 
 The film introduces Wolverine and Rogue into the conflict between Professor Xavier 's X @-@ Men , and the Brotherhood of Mutants , led by Magneto . Magneto intends to mutate world leaders at a United Nations summit with a machine he has built , to bring about acceptance of mutantkind , but Xavier realizes this forced mutation will only result in their deaths . 
 In 1994 , 20th Century Fox and producer Lauren Shuler Donner bought the film rights to the X @-@ Men . Andrew Kevin Walker was hired to write and James Cameron expressed interest in directing . Eventually , Bryan Singer signed on to direct in July 1996 . Although he was not a comic book fan , Singer was fascinated by the analogies of prejudice and discrimination that X @-@ Men offered . John Logan , Joss Whedon , Ed Solomon , Christopher McQuarrie and David Hayter wrote the script , with Hayter receiving sole credit . Principal photography began in September 1999 in Toronto , Canada and ended in March 2000 . The film was released on July 14 , 2000 . 
 = = = X2 ( 2003 ) = = = 
 In the film , Colonel William Stryker brainwashes and questions the imprisoned Magneto about Professor Xavier 's mutant @-@ locating machine , Cerebro . Stryker attacks the X @-@ Mansion , and brainwashes Xavier into locating every mutant on the planet to kill them . The X @-@ Men must team up with the Brotherhood to prevent Stryker 's worldwide genocide . 
 Hayter and Zak Penn were hired to write their own scripts for the sequel which Singer would pick , with an aim to release the film in December 2002 . Michael Dougherty and Dan Harris were hired to re @-@ write the script in February 2002 , writing around 26 drafts and 150 on set . Principal photography began in June 2002 in Vancouver , Canada and ended in November 2002 . The film was released on May 2 , 2003 . 
 = = = X @-@ Men : The Last Stand ( 2006 ) = = = 
 In the film , a pharmaceutical company has developed a suppressor of the mutant gene , provoking controversy in the mutant community . Magneto declares war on the humans and retrieves his own weapon : Phoenix , who is the resurrected former X @-@ Man , Jean Grey . A final battle between the X @-@ Men ( now led by Storm ) and the Brotherhood ensues , and Wolverine must accept that in order to stop Grey , he will have to kill her . 
 Singer initially intended to shoot the film back @-@ to @-@ back with a fourth film , though he left in 2004 to direct Superman Returns . Penn and Simon Kinberg were hired the following month . Whedon 's Astonishing X @-@ Men story " Gifted " , featuring a mutant cure was suggested for the primary story . Matthew Vaughn came on board as director in February 2005 , but left due to the rushed production schedule . Brett Ratner was later hired as director in June . Principal photography began in August 2005 in Vancouver , Canada and ended in January 2006 . The film was released on May 26 , 2006 . 
 = = = X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine ( 2009 ) = = = 
 The film is a prequel and a spin @-@ off focusing on the character Wolverine and his relationship with his half @-@ brother Victor Creed , as well his time with Stryker 's Team X , before and shortly after his skeleton was bonded with the indestructible metal adamantium . 
 David Benioff was hired to write the screenplay for the spin @-@ off film Wolverine in October 2004 . Hugh Jackman became producer as well as star , and worked with Benioff on the script . Ratner was negotiated by the studio to take the helm of Wolverine after directing X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , but no agreement was made . In July 2007 , Gavin Hood was hired as director . Principal photography began in January 2008 in Queenstown , New Zealand and ended in May . The film was released on May 1 , 2009 . 
 = = = X @-@ Men : First Class ( 2011 ) = = = 
 The film is a prequel set primarily in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis , and focuses on the relationship between Charles Xavier and Erik Lehnsherr , and the origin of their groups — the X @-@ Men and the Brotherhood , respectively . 
 Producer Lauren Shuler Donner first thought of a prequel based on the young X @-@ Men during the production of X2 , and later producer Kinberg suggested to 20th Century Fox an adaptation of the comic @-@ book series X @-@ Men : First Class . Singer signed on to direct the film in December 2009 , however , in March 2010 it was announced that Singer would be producing instead of directing . Vaughn , who was previously attached to direct X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , became the director , and co @-@ wrote the final script with his writing partner Jane Goldman . The film superseded a planned X @-@ Men Origins : Magneto , and the Writer 's Guild of America arbitration still credited Magneto writer Sheldon Turner for the film 's story . Principal photography began in August 2010 in London , England and ended in December . The film was released on June 3 , 2011 . 
 = = = The Wolverine ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Set after the events of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , the film features Wolverine heading to Japan for a reunion with a soldier named Ichirō Yashida whose life he saved years before . Wolverine must defend the man 's granddaughter Mariko Yashida from all manner of ninja and Yakuza assassins . 
 Christopher McQuarrie , who went uncredited for his work on X @-@ Men , was hired to write the screenplay for the second Wolverine film in August 2009 . Darren Aronofsky was chosen to direct the film , though bowed out , stating the project would keep him out of the country for too long . James Mangold was later chosen to direct the film . Mark Bomback was then hired to rewrite McQuarrie 's script . Principal photography began in August 2012 in Sydney , Australia and ended in November . The film was released on July 26 , 2013 . 
 = = = X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past ( 2014 ) = = = 
 Set years after the events of The Wolverine , the film features the cast of the original X @-@ Men trilogy and X @-@ Men : First Class . The story , inspired by Chris Claremont and John Byrne 's X @-@ Men comic book storyline " Days of Future Past " , features Wolverine going back in time to 1973 to prevent an assassination that , if carried out , will lead to the creation of a new weapons system called the Sentinels that threatens the existence of mutants — and potentially , all of humanity . 
 Matthew Vaughn was attached to direct the film , but left in October 2012 to focus on the film Kingsman : The Secret Service . Singer , who directed the first two X @-@ Men films and produced X @-@ Men : First Class , replaced Vaughn as the director of the film . The screenplay was written by Kinberg . Principal photography began in April 2013 in Montreal , Canada and ended in August . The film was released on May 23 , 2014 . 
 = = = Deadpool ( 2016 ) = = = 
 In the film , former Special Forces operative Wade Wilson is subjected to an experiment that leaves him with new abilities . He adopts the alter ego Deadpool to hunt down the man who nearly destroyed his life . 
 In May 2000 , Marvel Studios attempted to produce a Deadpool film as part of a distribution deal with Artisan Entertainment . However , by 2004 , Marvel was developing the film with New Line Cinema . David S. Goyer was set to write and direct and courted actor Ryan Reynolds for the lead role , but lost interest within months in favor of other projects . 20th Century Fox acquired Deadpool the following year after New Line placed it in turnaround , and was considering the spin @-@ off in the development of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine , with Reynolds being cast for the role . After the opening weekend success of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine in May 2009 , Fox lent Deadpool out to writers with Donner acting as a producer . Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick were hired to write the script in January 2010 . Robert Rodriguez was sent a draft of the screenplay the following June , but did not pursue it , and Adam Berg emerged as a top contender to direct . In April 2011 , visual effects specialist Tim Miller was hired to direct . Principal photography began in March 2015 in Vancouver , Canada and ended in May . The film was released on February 12 , 2016 . 
 = = = X @-@ Men : Apocalypse ( 2016 ) = = = 
 In the film , En Sabah Nur , the first and most powerful mutant awakens after thousands of years . He is disillusioned with the world as he finds it and recruits a team of powerful mutants to cleanse mankind and create a new world order , over which he will reign . As the fate of the Earth hangs in the balance , Raven , with the help of Professor X , must lead the X @-@ Men to stop their nemesis and save mankind from destruction . 
 In December 2013 , Singer announced the upcoming X @-@ Men film , titled X @-@ Men : Apocalypse , a sequel to X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past . Directed by Singer from a script by Simon Kinberg , Dan Harris , and Michael Dougherty , the film is said to focus on the origin of the mutants . Kinberg said that it will take place in 1983 and will complete a trilogy that began with X @-@ Men : First Class . Principal photography began in April 2015 in Montreal , Canada and ended in August . The film was released on May 27 , 2016 in North America . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 = = = = Untitled Wolverine film ( 2017 ) = = = = 
 By November 2013 , 20th Century Fox had begun negotiations for the treatment for another solo film starring Wolverine with director James Mangold while Donner is attached to produce . Mangold has said that it will be inspired by other Wolverine stories from the comic books and it will be made after X @-@ Men : Apocalypse . In March 2014 , David James Kelly was hired to write the script . In April 2015 , Michael Green was hired to work on the film 's script . The film will star Hugh Jackman in his final performance as Wolverine along with Patrick Stewart as Charles Xavier / Professor X , Boyd Holbrook , Stephen Merchant , Richard E. Grant , Eriq La Salle and Elise Neal . Jackman hinted at the film being an adaptation of the Old Man Logan storyline , a status confirmed by said comic 's writer , Mark Millar . In February 2016 , Liev Schreiber was in talks to return as Victor Creed / Sabretooth , whom he played in X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . Principal photography commenced in May 2016 for a March 3 , 2017 release . 
 = = = = In development = = = = 
 In October 2014 , Josh Zetumer was hired to write the screenplay for a film about the character Remy LeBeau / Gambit based on the treatment by comic @-@ book writer Chris Claremont . In June 2015 , Rupert Wyatt was hired to direct but left in September due to schedule conflicts . In November , Doug Liman was in final negotiations to direct the film . The film will star Channing Tatum in the lead role . Donner , Kinberg , Tatum and Reid Carolin are attached as producers . Kinberg said that he hopes to start filming in spring 2016 . Principal photography is scheduled to commence in late 2016 , while filming is reported to start at the beginning of Spring 2017 . 
 In September 2015 , Kinberg said that a sequel for Deadpool was in development . By the release of Deadpool , 20th Century Fox had already greenlit the sequel , with <unk> and Wernick returning to write , and Miller being looked at to return as director . According to an Easter Egg at the end of the largely tongue in cheek first film , the character Nathan Summers / Cable will appear in the film . 
 In May 2015 , Josh Boone was hired to direct and write a film adaptation of The New Mutants comic @-@ book series . Acting as a spin @-@ off to the X @-@ Men films , the film will be written by Boone and <unk> Gwaltney , while Donner and Kinberg are attached to produce . In May 2016 , Boone confirmed the characters that will appear in the film such as <unk> Rasputin / Magik , <unk> Sinclair / Wolfsbane , Danielle " Dani " Moonstar / Mirage , Samuel " Sam " Guthrie / Cannonball , Roberto da Costa / Sunspot , and Warlock . Kinberg has stated that the film will be very loyal to the comics . Professor X is confirmed to make an appearance in the film , while filming potentially begins in early 2017 . 
 In May 2016 , Kinberg said the next X @-@ Men film will be set in the 1990s . In May 2016 , screenwriter Simon Kinberg acknowledged the possibility of re @-@ adapting " The Dark Phoenix Saga " , which had been adapted in the original X @-@ Men trilogy films . 
 In July 2013 , 20th Century Fox hired Jeff <unk> to write a film adaptation of the X @-@ Men spin @-@ off comic @-@ book series X @-@ Force , with Donner attached to produce . Mark Millar , the creative consultant for 20th Century Fox 's Marvel Comics based films , stated that the film will feature five characters as protagonists . After the release of Deadpool , Reynolds felt that Deadpool would soon be in an X @-@ Force film , while Kinberg stated that there was potential for X @-@ Force to be R @-@ rated like Deadpool . Kinberg has since reportedly been working on another draft of the script . 
 = = Recurring characters = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 This table only shows characters that have appeared in three or more films in the series . 
 A dark grey cell indicates that the character was not in the film or that the character 's presence in the film has yet to be announced . 
 A Y indicates a role as a younger version of the character . 
 An O indicates a role as an older version of the character . 
 A U indicates an uncredited role . 
 A C indicates a cameo role . 
 A V indicates a voice @-@ only role . 
 An A indicates an appearance through archival footage or stills . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = Home media release = = 
 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the first seven films on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and digital download . The first two films were also released on VHS . The films were also released on VHS , DVD and Blu @-@ ray box sets : 
 As of May 2014 , the DVD and Blu @-@ ray sales of the first six films in the United States earned more than $ 620 million . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 The first three X @-@ Men films and Deadpool set opening records in North America : X @-@ Men had the highest July opening yet , while X2 and X @-@ Men : The Last Stand earned the fourth highest opening weekends yet and Deadpool got the largest opening weekend in February . The records for the first three films have since been surpassed . The next three X @-@ Men films after X @-@ Men : The Last Stand opened lower than their predecessor and didn 't set opening records . In North America , Deadpool is the highest @-@ grossing film in the series , and it also has the highest opening weekend . Outside North America , X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past has the highest opening weekend and is the highest @-@ grossing film in the series . Worldwide , Deadpool is the highest grossing film in the series . 
 The X @-@ Men film series is the second highest @-@ grossing film series based on Marvel Comics characters after Marvel Cinematic Universe . In North America , it is the seventh highest @-@ grossing film franchise , having earned over $ 1 @.@ 8 billion . Worldwide , it is the seventh highest @-@ grossing film franchise of all time , having grossed over $ 4 @.@ 3 billion . 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe praised the first three X @-@ Men films as " more than a cash @-@ guzzling wham @-@ bang Hollywood franchise ... these three movies sport philosophy , ideas , a telethon @-@ load of causes , and a highly elastic us @-@ versus @-@ them allegory . " Morris praised X @-@ Men : The Last Stand for " put [ ting ] the heroes of a mighty summer blockbuster in a rare mortal position . Realism at this time of year ? How unorthodox ! " Roger Ebert gave the films mostly positive reviews , but criticized them for the amount of mutants , stating " their powers are so various and ill @-@ matched that it 's hard to keep them all on the same canvas . " 
 The first two films were highly praised due to their cerebral tone . However , when director Bryan Singer left the series , many criticized his successor , Brett Ratner . Colin <unk> of the Star Tribune felt " Singer 's sensitivity to [ the discrimination themes ] made the first two X @-@ Men films surprisingly resonant and soulful for comic @-@ based summer extravaganzas ... Singer is adept at juggling large casts of three @-@ dimensional characters , Ratner makes shallow , unimaginative bang @-@ ups . " James Berardinelli felt , " X @-@ Men : The Last Stand isn 't as taut or satisfying as X @-@ Men 2 , but it 's better constructed and better paced than the original X @-@ Men . The differences in quality between the three are minor , however ; despite the change in directors , there seems to be a single vision . " David Denby of The New Yorker praised " the liquid beauty and the poetic fantasy of Singer 's work " , but called Ratner 's film " a crude synthesizer of comedy and action tropes . " Singer 's third film in the series , X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past was also highly praised . Alonso Duralde of The Wrap felt that " Singer keeps things moving along briskly enough that you can just go along with the ride of Superhero Stuff without getting bogged down " . 
 The X @-@ Men films were well @-@ received by fans of the comic books , but there was criticism of the large cast , and the limited screentime for all of them . Richard George of IGN praised the depictions of Wolverine , Professor X , Magneto , Jean Grey , Storm , William Stryker , Mystique , Beast and Nightcrawler ; however , George thought many of the younger X @-@ Men characters , such as Rogue , Iceman , Pyro and Kitty Pryde were " <unk> teenager [ s ] " , and was disappointed by Cyclops ' characterization . He observed the filmmakers were " big fans of silent henchmen " , due to the small roles of the various villainous mutants ; such as Lady Deathstrike . Spider @-@ Man director Sam Raimi said he was a fan of the series , particularly Singer 's films . Film historian Kim Newman also tonally compared Batman Begins to Singer 's films . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Richard George of IGN stated that the success of the first X @-@ Men film paved the way for comic @-@ book film adaptations such as the Spider @-@ Man series , Fantastic Four , V for Vendetta and Singer 's Superman Returns . Chris Hewitt of Empire magazine called the first X @-@ Men film as the " catalyst " for films based on Marvel Comics characters stating " Singer ’ s 2000 movie is the catalyst for everything that ’ s come since , good and bad . Without it , there ’ s no Marvel Studios . " Comic @-@ book writer Mark Millar said that Singer 's X @-@ Men " revolutionized " superhero films . 
 = = Tie @-@ in material = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In June 2000 , Marvel Comics published a comic book prequel to the first film , titled X @-@ Men : Beginnings , featuring the back @-@ stories of Magneto , Rogue and Wolverine . A novel adaptation for the film was also released . In 2003 , Marvel released a comic @-@ book for X2 , which contained prequels detailing Nightcrawler 's backstory and Wolverine 's time searching for Alkali Lake . Del Rey Books also published novelizations for the first three films ; the latter two were written by Chris Claremont . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 In July 2000 , X @-@ Men : Mutant Academy was released for PlayStation and Game Boy Color . It shared the title fonts and costumes from the first film . The game also contains behind @-@ the @-@ scenes material from the first film . In April 2003 , X2 : Wolverine 's Revenge which served as a tie @-@ in to X2 was released for GameCube , Game Boy Advance , Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 2 and Xbox . Patrick Stewart served as the voice actor for Professor X. In May 2006 , X @-@ Men : The Official Game was released for GameCube , Game Boy Advance , Microsoft Windows , Nintendo DS , PlayStation 2 , Xbox and Xbox 360 . The story was set between X2 and X @-@ Men : The Last Stand and also explained Nightcrawler 's departure from the X @-@ Men . In May 2009 , the video game X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine based on the film of the same name was released for Microsoft Windows , Nintendo DS , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation Portable , Wii and Xbox 360 . In September 2011 X @-@ Men : Destiny was released for consoles to coincide with the X @-@ Men : First Class 's home @-@ media release , containing costumes from the latter as unlockable content . All video games were released by Activision . 
 = = = Television series = = = 
 In October 2015 , Marvel Television announced that two television series based on X @-@ Men characters , Legion and Hellfire are in development . 
 Legion , based on the character David Haller , was ordered by FX for a pilot . Noah Hawley was attached to write the pilot . Produced by FX Productions and Marvel Television . Hawley will also serve as an executive producer along with Lauren Shuler Donner , Bryan Singer , Simon Kinberg , Jeph Loeb , Jim Chory and John Cameron . It is set to air in 2017 for an eight @-@ episode season . 
 Hellfire meanwhile was in development with Fox Broadcasting Company and was to be produced by 20th Century Fox Television and Marvel Television . Set in the late 1960s , the show was supposed to follow an agent who learns that a power @-@ hungry woman with " extraordinary " abilities is working with a clandestine society of millionaires , known as the Hellfire Club to take over the world . Evan Katz , Manny Coto , Patrick McKay and JD Payne were to be credited as the co @-@ creators of the show while McKay and Payne were hired to write the pilot , based on a story by Katz , Coto , McKay and Payne . Katz and Coto were also hired to act as showrunners but left along with McKay and Payne in January 2016 to focus on 24 : Legacy . Singer , Donner , Kinberg , Loeb and Chory were also attached as executive producers for the show . It was scrapped in July 2016 . 
 = Ding Dong , Ding Dong = 
 " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " is a song by English musician George Harrison , written as a New Year 's Eve singalong and released in December 1974 on his album Dark Horse . It was the album 's lead single in Britain and some other European countries , and the second single , after " Dark Horse " , in North America . A large @-@ scale production , the song incorporates aspects of Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound technique , particularly his Christmas recordings from 1963 . In addition , some Harrison biographers view " Ding Dong " as an attempt to emulate the success of two glam rock anthems from the 1973 – 74 holiday season : " Merry Xmas Everybody " by Slade , and Wizzard 's " I Wish It Could Be Christmas Everyday " . The song became only a minor hit in Britain and the United States , although it was a top @-@ twenty hit elsewhere in the world . 
 Harrison took the lyrics to " Ding Dong " from engravings he found at his nineteenth @-@ century home , Friar Park , in Oxfordshire – a legacy of its eccentric founder , Sir Frank Crisp . The song 's " Ring out the old , ring in the new " refrain has invited interpretation as Harrison distancing himself from his past as a member of the Beatles , and as the singer farewelling his first marriage , to Pattie Boyd . As on much of the Dark Horse album , Harrison 's vocals on the recording were hampered by a throat condition , due partly to his having overextended himself on business projects such as his recently launched record label , Dark Horse Records . Recorded at his Friar Park studio , the track includes musical contributions from Tom Scott , Ringo Starr , Alvin Lee , Ron Wood and Jim Keltner . 
 On release , the song met with an unfavourable response from many music critics , while others considered its musical and lyrical simplicity to be a positive factor for a contemporary pop hit . For the first time with one of his singles , Harrison made a promotional video for " Ding Dong " , which features scenes of him miming to the track at Friar Park while dressed in a variety of Beatle @-@ themed costumes . The song still receives occasional airplay over the holiday season . The video appears on the DVD in Harrison 's eight @-@ disc Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set , released in September 2014 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 George Harrison purchased the 33 @-@ acre Friar Park estate , in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames , Oxfordshire , in January 1970 , and soon afterwards composed " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " as a tribute to the property 's original owner , an eccentric Victorian lawyer and horticulturalist named Frank Crisp . Harrison included the song on his All Things Must Pass triple album , released in November 1970 , by which time he had begun incorporating into his new compositions some of the homilies and aphorisms that Crisp had inscribed around the property , 70 or more years before . A four @-@ line verse beginning " Scan not a friend with a microscopic glass " particularly resonated with Harrison , who eventually used it in his 1975 song " The Answer 's at the End " . It similarly took Harrison several years to turn two inspirational lines of verse from carvings in the house 's drawing room into song lyrics . These lines provided the repeated verse in " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " : " Ring out the old , ring in the new " – which he took from the carving to the left of the fireplace – and " Ring out the false , ring in the true " – from the one to the right . In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison credits English poet Lord Tennyson as the original source for these lines . 
 Authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter describe " Ding Dong " as the " quickest song " that Harrison ever wrote , in terms of time spent on the composition . The words for the song 's middle eight – " Yesterday , today was tomorrow / And tomorrow , today will be yesterday " – came from another pair of inscriptions from Crisp 's time at Friar Park . Harrison found these lines in what he called " the garden building " , carved in stone around two matching windows . The only other lyrics in " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " are the song title , repeated four times to serve as its chorus . Sung in imitation of a clock chiming , the chorus lyrics , combined with the message of those of the verse , lend the composition an obvious New Year 's theme . Harrison later described the song as " very optimistic " , and suggested : " Instead of getting stuck in a rut , everybody should try ringing out the old and ringing in the new … [ People ] sing about it , but they never apply it to their lives . " 
 Harrison 's other singles from the early 1970s – " My Sweet Lord " , " What Is Life " , " Bangla Desh " and " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " – were similarly written very quickly . In the case of " Ding Dong " and other tracks from the Dark Horse album , however , author Simon Leng recognises this haste as an example of Harrison abandoning his careful approach to his own music over the 1973 – 74 period , while remaining a " painstaking craftsman " on his concurrent projects with Ravi Shankar and the vocal duo Splinter . Preceding this change , elements of the British media had ridiculed Harrison 's continued association with the Hare Krishna movement , and some music critics had objected to the overtly spiritual content of his 1973 album Living in the Material World . With his marriage to Pattie Boyd all but over by the summer of 1973 , Harrison now wanted to be " one of the boys , not a spotlight @-@ grabbing philosopher " , according to Leng . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Initial recording = = = 
 Harrison recorded the rhythm track for " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " at his home studio , FPSHOT , in late November 1973 , during the first sessions for Dark Horse . Aside from himself , on acoustic guitar , the other musicians on the track were Gary Wright ( piano ) , Klaus Voormann ( bass ) , Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner ( both on drums ) – all of whom had appeared on Living in the Material World earlier in the year . The recording engineer was Phil McDonald . 
 The sessions coincided with a period of domestic turbulence at Friar Park , with Harrison and Boyd both involved in extramarital affairs . They saw in the 1973 – 74 New Year with a party at Starr 's Tittenhurst Park mansion – which was an " absolute dud " of a night , according to their friend Chris O 'Dell , due to Harrison having openly declared his love for Starr 's wife , Maureen Starkey , a few days before . Boyd recalls that Harrison told her at the party : " Let 's have a divorce this year . " 
 = = = Overdubbing = = = 
 Harrison included a rough mix of " Ding Dong " on a tape he sent to Asylum Records boss David Geffen in January 1974 , shortly before travelling to India to visit Shankar and escape his unhappy domestic situation with Boyd . The purpose of the tape was to find a distributor for albums by Harrison 's future Dark Horse Records acts – Shankar Family & Friends by Shankar , and Splinter 's The Place I Love – both of which had started off as Harrison productions for the Beatles ' Apple record label . He added two songs of his own on the tape , with introductory comments about " Ding Dong " . 
 As outlined to Geffen , Harrison went on to adopt the Wall of Sound production technique of his former collaborator , American producer Phil Spector , in his subsequent work on the track . Harrison 's musical arrangement reflects the influence of the 1963 album A Christmas Gift for You , which contained Spector @-@ produced songs by the Ronettes , the Crystals and Darlene Love , while more recently Spector had co @-@ produced the Apple Records single " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " single , by John Lennon and Yoko Ono . Some authors claim that with " Ding Dong " , Harrison set out to create a seasonal " classic " , in an attempt to match the British chart success of " Happy Xmas " and particularly of Slade 's " Merry Xmas Everybody " and Wizzard 's " I Wish It Could Be Christmas Everyday " – two glam rock singles that were major UK hits over the winter of 1973 – 74 . Leng cites the inclusion on the finished version of " Ding Dong " of harmonium and distorted electric guitars , similar to the Slade hit , while Harrison 's use of baritone saxophones , two drummers and tubular bells , together with a female choir , matched the arrangement on " I Wish It Could Be Christmas Everyday " , which was heavily influenced by Spector 's sound . Having incorporated aspects of Spector 's technique on Material World , Harrison 's aim with " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , according to Leng , was an update of the Wall of Sound that reflected " the glam rock mood of the day " . 
 Harrison overdubbed call @-@ and @-@ response guitar riffs by Alvin Lee and Ron Wood onto the 1973 rhythm track , as well as his own slide guitars . Further overdubs included baritone and tenor saxophone parts by Tom Scott , and a second acoustic guitar , played by Mick Jones . Harrison also contributed on organ , clavinet and percussion , the last of which included tubular bells ( or chimes ) , sleigh bells and zither . 
 Harrison 's workload ensured that he was rushing to finish Dark Horse in October 1974 before beginning his North American tour with Shankar on 2 November . Described by Leng as " growled " , Harrison 's rough @-@ sounding singing on " Ding Dong " shows the effects of a long @-@ standing throat problem . Due to a combination of overexertion and abuse , this condition worsened , leading to him contracting laryngitis as he simultaneously completed his vocals for the album in Los Angeles and rehearsed for the tour . The female backing singers on the track remain uncredited . 
 = = Release = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " was released as the lead single from Dark Horse on 6 December 1974 ( as Apple R <unk> ) . The B @-@ side was " I Don 't Care Anymore " , a non @-@ album track that Harrison recorded in a single take , specifically for the single . 
 In the United States , where " Dark Horse " had already been issued in advance of the album , " Ding Dong " was coupled with the instrumental " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " and released two days before Christmas ( as Apple 1879 ) . Apple issued white label promotional discs to US radio stations , containing a 3 : 12 edit of the song . The single was available in a picture sleeve consisting of the song lyrics printed on an off @-@ white background , with stamped Om symbols and the FPSHOT logo . The record 's A @-@ side face label included a photo of Harrison 's new girlfriend , Olivia Arias , above the song information , whereas the UK single had Harrison 's face on both sides . 
 On the Dark Horse LP , the two face labels similarly alternated between a picture of Harrison and one of Arias . Combined with the positioning of " Ding Dong " as the opening track on side two , this detail gave the impression that the song represented Harrison 's ushering @-@ in of his future wife and a farewell to Boyd . In the album 's inner @-@ sleeve credits , Harrison listed one of the guitarists on the track as " Ron Would if you let him " , a reference to Wood 's brief affair with Boyd before she took up with Eric Clapton . He also acknowledged Frank Crisp for having provided " spirit " on the recording . In another farewell to the past , Harrison signed the so @-@ called " Beatles Agreement " papers in New York on 19 December , further severing the four former bandmates from the group 's legal identity . 
 Rather than the smash hit that Harrison had hoped for , " Ding Dong " was only moderately successful . The single peaked at number 38 in Britain and number 36 on America 's Billboard Hot 100 . Madinger and Easter write that the single did " remarkably well " , however , given that it was issued too late to take advantage of holiday @-@ season programming . Harrison 's single enjoyed more success internationally , climbing to number 10 in the Netherlands and number 12 in Belgium . 
 Despite " Ding Dong " having had what author Bruce Spizer terms a " respectable " chart run in America , Apple distributor Capitol Records omitted the song from its 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , which the company issued after Harrison had moved on to Dark Horse Records . Following Dark Horse 's CD release in 1992 , the song was unavailable in newly remastered form until the Apple Years Harrison reissues , released in September 2014 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 The majority of music critics were unimpressed with " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , and its release came in the wake of unfavourable reviews for the North American tour . In keeping with the song 's message , Harrison refused to celebrate the past in his concerts by pandering to nostalgia for the Beatles , and many in the mainstream music press criticised the poor state of his voice and his decision to feature Ravi Shankar so heavily in the program . 
 In the UK , BBC DJ John Peel called " Ding Dong " " repetitive and dull " and accused Harrison of complacency , while the NME 's Bob Woffinden derided Dark Horse as " Just stuff and nonsense " , adding : " You keep looking for saving graces , for words of enthusiasm to pass on – ' Ding Dong ' , you begin to think , for all its inane lyrics , has some spirit , but it really is very slight . " Harrison 's standing there was not helped by the presence of " I Don 't Care Anymore " on the B @-@ side , due to its casual delivery and the literal message in the song title . In a more favourable review , for Melody Maker , Chris Irwin wrote of the single : " We ’ ve come to expect something with more substance than this glorified nursery rhyme from one of the most important musicians of the decade . True , it ’ s catchy with a full chunky sound to bounce it along , but with an undeniable infectiousness of the sort normally associated with chicken pox or measles ... Curiously , records of such banality have a habit of selling in their <unk> and this is bound to be a <unk> . Hit . " 
 Jim Miller of Rolling Stone condemned Harrison for releasing an album with his voice blown and for his apparent disdain towards the Beatles ' legacy , and he dismissed the song as " a raspy stab at ' Auld Lang Syne ' " . Amid the scathing critique he gave Harrison 's tour and album , Jack Sheridan of Baltimore radio station <unk> cited " Ding Dong " as an example of how the former Beatle 's music had altered " so radically " . Writing in Circus Raves magazine , Michael Gross defended Harrison 's move away from the past , saying that Dark Horse matched the critically acclaimed All Things Must Pass , " surpassing it , at times , with its clarity of production and lovely songs " , and he praised " Ding Dong " , the title track and the Harrison – Ron Wood collaboration " Far East Man " as " all , simply , good songs " . While remarking on the surprisingly late release for a holiday @-@ season single , Billboard 's reviewer deemed the track to be an " Extremely listenable performance " and added : " George has a genuine hit sound to offer here that 's just right for those early January time @-@ to @-@ change resolutions . <unk> , heavily percussive production in Harrison 's uptempo guru vein … Get on it , jocks . " 
 In the 1978 edition of The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Roy Carr and Tony Tyler dismissed the song as " meticulously @-@ played emptiness , a charmless reworking of the traditional peal o ' bells " before concluding : " A pox on it . " Writing in his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner rued that " the exquisite , painstaking arrangements " of Harrison 's earlier albums were absent from Dark Horse , and labelled " Ding Dong " " a string of greeting @-@ card clichés with trite music to match " . 
 = = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = = 
 In his song review for AllMusic , Lindsay Planer writes of " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " : " While arguably simplistic , both lyrics and tune boast Harrison 's trademark optimism , especially during the affable and repeated chorus of ' Ring out the old / Ring in the new / Ring out the false / Ring in the true . ' " Harrison biographer Alan Clayson acknowledges the traditional pop merits of the song while explaining its underachievement : " With a chirpy @-@ chirpy cheapness worthy of Red Rose Speedway , ' Ding Dong , Ding Dong ' had all the credentials of a Yuletide smash but none that actually grabbed the public . " Writing for Goldmine magazine in January 2002 , Dave Thompson described it as " sweetly simplistic " and " a sterling stab at a Christmas anthem … that deserved far better than its low Top 40 chart placings in the U.S. and Britain " . 
 In his 2010 book on Harrison for the Praeger Singer @-@ Songwriter series , Ian Inglis comments that the song had neither the " overt political message " of Lennon 's Christmas single nor the " unashamed commercialism " of Paul McCartney 's " Wonderful Christmastime " , and writes that " Ding Dong " ' s " somewhat halfhearted festive appeal " seems out of place on Dark Horse . Simon Leng views the song as an " intermittently amusing rocker " , but with the perilous state of Harrison 's voice on the recording , " Ding Dong " would have benefited from " hibernating another winter " . Author Robert Rodriguez opines that whereas Harrison 's " rough @-@ hewn " vocals on " Dark Horse " had enhanced that song , his " Father Time impression " did nothing for " Ding Dong " . 
 Among reviews of the 2014 Apple Years reissue of Dark Horse , Paste magazine 's Robert Ham refers to the song as " a Christmas anthem … that is as infectious as McCartney 's ' Wonderful Christmastime ' and as globally minded as Lennon 's ' Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) ' " . Conversely , Paul Trynka of Classic Rock magazine singles out " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " as the one song that " embarrasses " on an album that is otherwise " packed with beautiful , small @-@ scale moments " . Trynka labels it " George 's own Frog Chorus " , with reference to McCartney 's 1984 children 's song , " We All Stand Together " , and adds : " its clunking glam evokes those horrible 70s TV shows where DJs drool over <unk> in hotpants . " 
 In December 1999 , while promoting his album I Wanna Be Santa Claus , Starr hosted a Christmas @-@ themed radio show for New York 's <unk> Broadcasting , during which he featured " Ding Dong " along with the singles by Lennon and McCartney , as well as seasonal recordings by Spector and by a selection of Motown artists . Japanese act Hi Limits & Kenichi <unk> covered the song on East West Records ' Gentle Guitar Dreams Harrison tribute album , released in May 2002 . Harrison 's original still receives some airplay over the Christmas – New Year period . Unlike " Happy Xmas " , however , and , to a lesser extent , " Wonderful Christmastime " , " Ding Dong " never achieved the status of a perennial holiday classic . 
 = = Promo clip = = 
 Harrison compiled a 16mm colour film for " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , the first time he made a promotional clip for one of his singles . The film was little seen at the time of release ; it was first broadcast in January 1975 , on UK television , and then on the French network TF1 's show Midi Premiere in May that year . The video was issued officially on disc eight of Harrison 's Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set in September 2014 . Described as " a hoot " by Robert Rodriguez , it conveys what Harrison deemed the " comical " aspect of the song . Leng describes the clip as " sporadically amusing " and says of its content : " As the audiences at the Dark Horse Tour concerts were about to discover , the only ' old ' that he wanted to ' ring out ' was the Beatles . " 
 Harrison appears in a range of Beatles @-@ related costumes while miming to the track . His attire in these scenes represents a chronology of periods in the band 's career – starting with the Hamburg @-@ era black leathers , followed by 1963 mop @-@ top wig and grey collarless suit , and then the iconic Sgt. Pepper uniform from 1967 . During these scenes , he plays a mix of guitars , including his famous Rickenbacker 12 @-@ string , as used in the Beatles ' 1964 film A Hard Day 's Night , and the Gibson Les Paul ( christened " Lucy " ) that Clapton had used on the recording of " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " in September 1968 . The Sgt. Pepper portion shows Harrison playing a tuba while , behind him , an Indian man plays a sitar . Harrison also re @-@ creates Lennon and Ono 's Two Virgins album cover , by appearing naked save for an acoustic guitar and a pair of furry boots . Another change of costume and instrument , to denims and dobro , supports his stated rejection during the tour of early- ' 70s era , " Bangla Desh George " . 
 Harrison is also seen walking around the grounds of Friar Park . In these scenes , he wears scruffy , present @-@ day attire that represents " his own , new identity " , according to Leng , who likens Harrison 's appearance to the character on the cover of Jethro Tull 's Aqualung album . Harrison mimes the final choruses inside the house , filmed in close @-@ up and surrounded by a cast of " dwarfs , gnomes and other Pythonesque characters " . At the end of the clip , he is seen at the flagpole on the roof of the house , replacing a pirate standard with his yellow @-@ and @-@ red Om flag – a gesture that was the opposite of Boyd 's when she learned of Harrison 's affair with Maureen Starkey . The video was directed by Harrison and filmed by Nick Knowland . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from Harrison 's original handwritten credits , as reproduced in the 2014 Dark Horse CD booklet : 
 George Harrison – vocals , 12 @-@ string acoustic guitar , slide guitars , organ , clavinet , percussion , backing vocals 
 Tom Scott – saxophones , horn arrangement 
 Gary Wright – piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 Ron Wood – electric guitar 
 Alvin Lee – electric guitar 
 Mick Jones – acoustic guitar 
 uncredited – female choir 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Did It Again ( Kylie Minogue song ) = 
 " Did It Again " is a song by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue , originally featured on her sixth studio album Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) . The song was released as the album 's second single on 24 November 1997 through BMG , Deconstruction and Mushroom . Minogue had written the track with Steve Anderson and Dave Seaman , and it was produced by Minogue in collaboration with Brothers in Rhythm . Backed by guitars and drum , " Did It Again " is a pop rock track in which Minogue sings about her self @-@ consciousness and self @-@ hatred . 
 Critical response to " Did It Again " was mostly positive ; some critics praised the song 's composition and highlighted it as a career stand out track . In Australia , " Did It Again " peaked at number fifteen on the Australian Singles Chart and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In the United Kingdom , it peaked at fourteen on the UK Singles Chart . Petro Romanhi directed the song 's music video , which features four clones of Minogue in different outfits , and fighting with each other . 
 To promote " Did It Again " , Minogue performed the track on The National Lottery Live and MTV UK . It was later included on her 1998 concert tour Intimate and Live Tour . The song was subsequently included on Minogue 's compilation albums Confide in Me ( 2002 ) , Ultimate Kylie ( 2004 ) , and Confide in Me : The Irresistible Kylie ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1997 , the British media reported that she was anorexic , labelling her " Kylie <unk> " . Minogue had been told about the rumours and , as a response , wrote the track " Did It Again " . Interviewed by Company magazine that year , she was questioned on her weight and the song , and she explained " It 's a bit of a girl 's song , with me telling myself off and never learning my lesson , particularly with men . It 's me looking myself in the eye and saying ' You fool , stop being too clever and over @-@ neurotic . ' " She had begun writing the song whilst British tabloids published rumors about her private life , and the poor reception that Impossible Princess ' lead single " Some Kind of Bliss " received . However , she re @-@ wrote the original lyrics with Anderson and Seaman and Minogue said it told a " different meaning " . The song discusses telling herself off when she does not learn from her past mistakes . She commented that " Some of the songs from Impossible Princess are close to the heart , but this song was a little voice on my shoulder . " The song was originally titled " Clever Girl ( Did It Again ) " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Did It Again " was recorded at Real World , Sarm West and DMC Studios in England , and was mixed by Alan <unk> at Real World . Greg Bone and Anderson played the guitars , while Anderson played the drums and keyboards . Produced by Brothers in Rhythm and Minogue , " Did It Again " is a pop rock song . Michael Dwyer from Western Australia magazine commented on Minogue 's departure from dance music and bubblegum pop and her maturity since her work with Stock , Aitken and Waterman , stating " Some Kind Of Bliss and Did It Again have already proved our Kylie has more tricks up her sleeve this time than Stock , Aitken and Waterman ever dreamed of and her sixth album harbours more strings to her carefully @-@ cultivated bow . " British writer Sean Smith , author of Kylie ( 2014 ) , commented that " Did It Again " was another track , along with " I Don 't Need Anyone " , from Impossible Princess that " didn 't really sound like Kylie " . He further commented that " Did It Again " was " a blend of drums and electric guitar that might have found its way onto The Beatles ' famous Revolver album . " Reviewing her compilation album Greatest Hits 87 – 97 ( 2003 ) , Michael Paoletta from Billboard magazine viewed the composition as progressive rock . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Did It Again " received positive reviews from most music critics . Allmusic 's Chris True , who also reviewed the parent album , highlighted it as a stand out track from her career . MacKenzie Wilson from Allmusic selected " Did It Again " as a stand out from her compilation Hits + . Jack Foley from <unk> called " Did it Again " one of Minogue 's " chart @-@ busters " that " continue to fill the dancefloors despite being relentlessly over @-@ played in their heyday . " Darrin Farrant from The Age said " Best of the Impossible Princess bunch was clearly Did It Again , Minogue smiling and strutting , the crowd joining her to sing every word . " Gary James from Entertainment Focus praised all her co @-@ written and self @-@ penned tracks . Avoledo from <unk> described the song as blunt , but said it is a " cunning and self @-@ aware look at celebrity without even mentioning fame . " 
 A reviewer from Music Week magazine awarded " Did It Again " three stars out of five , stating that Minogue 's vocals " takes a stroppy edge " , but " it 's not strong enough to do much better than the modest performance of Some Kind Of Bliss . " Natasha <unk> from musicOMH said : " ' Did It Again ' reminds you of her valiant but wildly misjudged attempt to morph into Indie Kylie circa 1997 , only really serving to highlight the limitations of her voice in the process . " Michael R. Smith from Daily Vault felt the song represented the album " perfectly " and had labelled the songs as " undiscovered gems " . Smith felt the song was " another underrated song " from the Impossible Princess album and labelled it an " indie classic " . In the annual 1997 Triple J Hottest 100 list , " Did It Again " was eighty @-@ one . At the 1998 ARIA Music Awards , " Did It Again " was nominated for Single of the Year but lost to Natalie Imbruglia 's single " Torn " respectively . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Did It Again " entered at number twenty @-@ one on the Australian Singles Chart . The song peaked at fifteen , her highest charting and first top twenty single from Impossible Princess . The song lasted seventeen weeks in the top fifty , one of her longest spanning singles in the chart . The song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) with shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . In the United Kingdom , " Did It Again " entered and peaked at fourteen on the UK Singles Chart . It stayed in the top 100 for eight weeks and became highest charting single from the album alongside " Breathe " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 An accompanying music video was directed by Petro Romanhi in London , England . It was filmed over a two @-@ day period and was required to shoot each character individually . Minogue and long @-@ term collaborator and friend , William Baker , designed the clothing for each character : Sex Kylie , Cute Kylie , Indie Kylie , and Dance Kylie . Each character represented a difference appearance and persona ; Baker labelled Sex Kylie as a " drag queen " with a " bitchy " attitude and " slutty " appearance . Dance Kylie had , according to Baker , an " irritating <unk> " , while Cute Kylie had violet @-@ coloured hot pants and a bra . The original costume was blue , but quickly changed due to blue screen issues . The outfit for Indie Kylie , which was red three @-@ quarter pants with a high @-@ collar shirt , was inspired by Star Trek films that was assisted by British fashion design , Pellicano . 
 Frances Whiting from Sunday Mail discussed the music video with Minogue , where she mentioned that the video was a " fun " way to portray her media images throughout her career . Regarding her " Indie Kylie " phase , Minogue commented " I don 't mind being labelled Indie Kylie , I 've had so many labels , but labels are a bit silly because I 'm so many things , we all are . " The concept for the video was created by Romanhi after discovering several articles and <unk> in the 1980s and early @-@ mid 1990s of Minogue , along with his influence of the American film Usual Suspects , but Minogue was sceptical on the final result . In an interview with MTV Australia , Minogue revealed the video was based on her life as a celebrity , stating ; 
 Basically we were having a laugh at a lot of the different articles that were appearing at that time in different magazines and papers , and they were talking about ' Pop Kylie , Dance Kylie , Sex Kylie ' and , you know , with every different release of a single they 'd say ' What Kylie is it now ? ' and it was just becoming a joke . So he , Pedro , cunningly picked up on that and said we should make a video with all the different Kylies , which I was more then [ sic ] happy about , because it was stating the obvious and having a laugh at the same time . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The characters were Sex Kylie , Cute Kylie , Indie Kylie and Dance Kylie , characters which had contributed to Minogue 's image throughout her career . Minogue commented that it took " longer than expected " because Romanhi wanted the outcome to be " precise " . Although Minogue said that " Indie Kylie " was the winner of fight , she felt " Cute Kylie " represented herself than the other three characters . The video opens with Sex Kylie singing and Cute Kylie pushes her . Indie Kylie appears and Dance <unk> bumps her out of the way . Throughout the video , all four characters fight and cuss towards each other . The end finishes with Cute Kylie holding a baseball bat , declaring that she was the winner of all four of them . Despite the ending and Minogue commenting that Cute Kylie amused her the most in the video , Minogue said that Indie Kylie was the winner . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received positive reviews , and won the Australian Video entry at the MTV Video Music Awards in 1998 . Erika Brooks Adickman from Idolator said that " the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek video had the pop icon acknowledging all the ways she had reinvented herself over the years " . American website BuzzFeed hosted a poll for online viewers to vote their best Kylie in the " Did It Again " video . As a result , Indie Kylie won with 36 % ( 2 @,@ 926 votes ) , Cute Kylie came second with 26 % ( 2 @,@ 083 votes ) , Dance Kylie came third with 20 % ( 1 @,@ 628 votes ) , and Sex Kylie came fourth with 18 % ( 1 @,@ 510 votes ) . During an interview Minogue gave to Jetstar Airways magazine , journalist Simon Price stated that the four different Kylies were " brilliantly " satirised in the video . 
 Costumes from the video , along with accessories spanning Minogue 's career , became part of an exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery in Australia , during May 2005 . They were also displayed in another exhibition with the same theme in February 2007 . A still with the four Kylie 's , standing together , was drawn by Jill <unk> and added into the comic book Female Force : Kylie Minogue , published by Bluewater Comics . Media theorist Lee Barron , author of Social Theory in Popular Culture , discussed the Impossible Princess period and further stated " The Impossible Princess phase represented a period of diminished commercial success , marking the moment in which Minogue consciously began to engage in a playful awareness of image construction and referentiality ... This was unmistakably manifest in the promotional video ' Did it Again ' , which featured four Kylies , each defined by the labels that the media created for her " . Barron felt neither of the characters in the video won , but rather " the construction of an entirely new one " and concluded " Because , although Minogue was now reflexively alluding to her identity @-@ shredded progression , ' Indie Kylie ' did not gel with the wider recording @-@ buying public , and consequently ' Indie Kylie ' was discarded for ' Camp Kylie ' " ; Camp Kylie was a media label for her efforts around the Light Years ( 2000 ) era . 
 = = Live performances and other usage = = 
 Minogue performed " Did It Again " on the The National Lottery Live , and performed the song alongside " Some Kind of Bliss " and " I Don 't Need Anyone " on her performance with MTV on 4 October 1997 . Minogue included the song on the set list for her 1998 concert tour Intimate and Live . The performance was recorded on 30 June and 1 July at Capitol Theatre in Sydney , and appeared on the related CD and DVD . 
 " Did It Again " has been featured on many of Minogue 's compilation albums . Its first appearance was on her 2000 Deconstruction compilation Hits + and on her 2001 BMG greatest hits compilation album Confide in Me , a compilation consisting majority off her singles and tracks from her Deconstruction period ; Heather Phares from Allmusic praised the Impossible Princess tracks including " Did It Again " . It then appeared on her 2004 compilation albums Artist Collection and , which included most of her Impossible Princess era , and Ultimate Kylie through Parlophone . The song 's last appearance was on the first disc of Confide in Me : The Irresistible Kylie released in July 2007 by UK independent label Music Club . The Trouser Enthusiasts ' Goddess of <unk> remix and Razor n Go remix appeared on her 1998 remix compilations Mixes and Impossible Remixes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from both maxi @-@ single liner notes . 
 Kylie Minogue – vocals , songwriting , vocal production 
 Steve Anderson – songwriting , guitar , Hammond organ 
 David Seaman – songwriting , guitar 
 Greg Bones – guitar 
 Alan Bremner – engineer , mixing production 
 Paul Wright – engineer 
 Stephane Sednaoui – photographer , designer 
 Farrow Design – cover sleeve designer 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Margaret Bondfield = 
 Margaret Grace Bondfield CH PC ( 17 March 1873 – 16 June 1953 ) was a British Labour politician , trades unionist and women 's rights activist . She became the first female cabinet minister , and the first woman to be a privy counsellor , when she was appointed Minister of Labour in the Labour government of 1929 – 31 . She had earlier become the first woman to chair the General Council of the Trades Union Congress ( TUC ) . 
 Bondfield was born in humble circumstances and received limited formal education . After serving an apprenticeship to an <unk> she worked as a shop assistant in Brighton and London . She was shocked by the working conditions of shop staff , particularly within the " living @-@ in " system , and became an active member of the shopworkers ' union . She began to move in socialist circles , and in 1898 was appointed assistant secretary of the National Union of Shop Assistants , <unk> , and Clerks ( NAUSAWC ) . She was later prominent in several women 's socialist movements : she helped to found the Women 's Labour League ( WLL ) in 1906 , and was chair of the Adult Suffrage Society . Her standpoint on women 's suffrage — she favoured extending the vote to all adults regardless of gender or property , rather than the limited " on the same terms as men " agenda pursued by the militant suffragists — divided her from the militant leadership . 
 After leaving her union post in 1908 Bondfield worked as organising secretary for the WLL and later as women 's officer for the National Union of General and Municipal Workers ( NUGMW ) . She was elected to the TUC Council in 1918 , and became its chairman in 1923 , the year she was first elected to parliament . In the short @-@ lived minority Labour government of 1924 she served as parliamentary secretary in the Ministry of Labour . Her term of cabinet office in 1929 – 31 was marked by the economic crises that beset the second Labour government . Her willingness to contemplate cuts in unemployment benefits alienated her from much of the Labour movement , although she did not follow Ramsay MacDonald into the National Government that assumed office when the Labour government fell in August 1931 . 
 Bondfield remained active in NUGMW affairs until 1938 , and during the Second World War carried out investigations for the Women 's Group on Public Welfare . She died in 1953 ; despite her years of service to party and union , and her successes in breaking through gender boundaries , she has not been greatly honoured within the Labour movement . According to a later female cabinet minister , Barbara Castle , Bondfield 's actions in office had brought her close to betrayal of the movement . 
 = = Childhood and family = = 
 Margaret Bondfield , known in private life as " Maggie " , was born on 17 March 1873 in the Somerset town of Chard . She was the tenth of eleven children , and third of four daughters born to William Bondfield and his wife Ann , née Taylor , the daughter of a Congregational minister . William Bondfield worked as a <unk> , and had a history of political activism . As a young man he had been secretary of the Chard Political Union , a centre of local radicalism that the authorities had on occasion suppressed by military force . He had also been active in the Anti @-@ Corn Law League of the 1840s . Entirely self @-@ educated , he was fascinated by science and engineering , and was the co @-@ designer of a flying machine , a prototype of the modern aircraft , that was exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 . 
 While Margaret was still an infant , William lost his job and was unable to find regular work . The family suffered hardship , with the threat of the workhouse a constant fear . Nevertheless , William and Ann did their best to ensure that their children were educated and prepared for life . Margaret was a clever child , whose skills at reciting poetry or playing piano pieces were often displayed at town events and Sunday School outings . Until the age of 13 she attended the local elementary school ; she then worked for a year as a pupil @-@ teacher ( she was paid three shillings a week ) in the school 's boys ' department . Local employment opportunities being scarce , she left Chard in 1887 , at the age of 14 , to begin an apprenticeship at a draper 's shop in Hove , near Brighton . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = Shop worker = = = 
 Bondfield joined a drapery and embroidery business in Church Road , Hove , where the young apprentices were treated as family members . Relations between customers and assistants were cordial , and Bondfield 's later recollections of this period were uniformly happy . Her apprenticeship complete , she worked as a living @-@ in assistant in a succession of Brighton drapery stores , where she quickly encountered the realities of shop staff life : unsympathetic employers , very long hours , appalling living conditions and no privacy . Bondfield reported on her experiences of living @-@ in : " <unk> , insanitary conditions , poor and insufficient food were the main characteristics of this system , with an undertone of danger ... In some houses both natural and unnatural vices found a breeding ground " . She found some relief from this environment when she was befriended by a wealthy customer , Louisa Martindale , and her daughter Hilda . The <unk> , socially conscious liberals and advocates for women 's rights , found Bondfield a willing learner , and lent her books that began her lifelong interest in labour and social questions . Bondfield described Mrs Martindale as " a most vivid influence on my life ... she put me in the way of knowledge that has been of help to many score of my shop mates " . 
 Bondfield 's brother Frank had established himself in London some years earlier as a printer and trades unionist , and in 1894 , having saved £ 5 , she decided to join him . She found London <unk> conditions no better than in Brighton , but through Frank her social and political circles widened . She became an active member of the National Amalgamated Union of Shop Assistants , <unk> , and Clerks ( <unk> ) , sometimes missing church on Sundays to attend union meetings . Her political and literary education was centred on the Ideal Club , where she met Bernard Shaw , and Sidney and Beatrice Webb . Under the influence of these socialist luminaries , she joined the Fabian Society and later the Independent Labour Party ( ILP ) . 
 As a <unk> , Bondfield was expected to work between 80 and 100 hours a week for 51 weeks in the year , and might be sent out late at night to check that rival shops had closed before her employer would do so . She began to record her experiences , in a series of articles and stories that she wrote under the pseudonym " Grace Dare " , for the shopworkers ' monthly magazine The Shop Assistant . She wrote surreptitiously , at night : " I would light my half @-@ penny dip [ candle ] , hiding its glare by means of a towel and set to work on my monthly article " . In 1896 she was recruited by the Women 's Industrial Council ( WIC ) as an undercover agent , working in various shops while secretly recording every aspect of shop life . Her accounts of squalor and exploitation were published in articles under the " Grace Dare " name , in both The Shop Assistant and the Daily Chronicle newspaper , and provided the basis for a WIC report on shopworkers ' conditions published in 1898 . 
 = = = Union official = = = 
 In 1898 Bondfield accepted the job of assistant secretary of <unk> , which that year became " NAUSAWC " after amalgamating with the United Shop Assistants ' Union . From this time onward she subordinated her life to her union work and to the wider cause of socialism . She " had no vocation for <unk> or motherhood , but an urge to serve the Union ... I had ' the dear love of comrades ' " . At the time the union 's membership , at under 3 @,@ 000 , represented only a small fraction of shopworkers , and Bondfield gave priority to increasing this proportion . For months she travelled the country , distributing literature and arranging meetings when she could , with mixed outcomes in the face of apathy from shop staff , and outright opposition from shopowners . In Reading and Bristol she reported no success , although in Gloucester , she thought , " it should not be difficult to organise every shop worker " . In 1899 Bondfield was the first woman delegate to the Trades Union Annual Congress , that year held in Plymouth , where she participated in the vote that led to the formation in 1900 of the Labour Representation Committee ( <unk> ) , forerunner of the Labour Party . NAUSAWC , its membership by then around 7 @,@ 000 , was one of the first unions to affiliate to the committee . 
 In 1902 Bondfield met Mary Macarthur , some eight years her junior , who chaired the Ayr branch of NAUSAWC . Macarthur , the daughter of a wealthy Scottish draper , had held staunchly Conservative views until a works meeting in 1901 to discuss the formation of a NAUSAWC branch transformed her into an ardent trades unionist . In 1903 Macarthur moved to London where , with Bondfield 's recommendation , she became secretary of the Women 's Trade Union League . The two became close comrades @-@ in @-@ arms during the next two decades , in a range of causes affecting women . The historian Lise Sanders suggests that Bondfield 's more intimate friendships tended to be with women rather than men ; Bondfield 's biographer Mary Agnes Hamilton described Macarthur as the romance of Bondfield 's life . 
 The year 1904 saw the passage of the Shop Hours Act , which made some provision for limiting shop opening hours . In 1907 the first steps were taken to end the Victorian " living @-@ in " practice , which at the time still affected two @-@ thirds of Britain 's 750 @,@ 000 shopworkers . Initially , living @-@ out privileges were only given to male employees ; Bondfield campaigned for equivalent rights for women shop workers , arguing that if they were to become " useful , healthy ... wives and mothers " , they needed to live " rational lives " . As part of her campaign , Bondfield advised the playwright Cicely Hamilton , whose shop @-@ based drama Diana of <unk> appeared that year . Bondfield described the opening scene , set in a dreary , comfortless women 's dormitory over a shop , as very like the real thing . 
 From 1904 onwards , Bondfield was increasingly occupied with the issue of women 's suffrage . In that year she travelled with Dora Montefiore of the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) to the International Congress of Women in Berlin , but she was not in sympathy with the main WSPU policy , which was to secure the vote for women on the same highly restricted basis that it was then given to men . This involved a property qualification , and thus largely excluded the working class . Bondfield saw no benefit in this policy to the women that she represented , and aligned herself with the Adult Suffrage Society ( <unk> ) , which campaigned for universal adult suffrage , men and women alike , regardless of property . In 1906 she became chairman of the society and supported the Franchise and Removal of Women 's Disabilities bill , introduced to parliament by Sir Charles Dilke . This proposed full adult suffrage , and the right of women to become MPs . The bill was " talked out " in the House of Commons , but Bondfield 's support antagonised many militants in the WSPU , who considered the bill a distraction from their more limited aims . In 1907 , in the course of a public debate with Teresa Billington @-@ Greig of the Women 's Freedom League ( a breakaway group from the WSPU ) , Bondfield argued that the only way forward was a bill that enfranchised all men and all women , without qualification . She wished good luck to those fighting for a " same terms as men " suffrage bill , but " don 't let them come and tell me that they are working for my class " . The strains of her duties and constant campaigning began to undermine her health , and in 1908 she resigned her union post after ten years ' service , during which NAUSAWC membership had risen to over 20 @,@ 000 . Her departure , she said , was " alike a grief and a deliverance " . 
 = = Women 's Labour League = = 
 After leaving NAUSAWC , Bondfield transferred the main focus of her energies to the Women 's Labour League ( WLL ) , which she had helped to found in 1906 . The League 's principal aims were " to work for independent labour representation in connection with the Labour Party , and to obtain direct labour representation of women in Parliament and on all local bodies . " The president of the League was Margaret MacDonald , wife of the future Labour Party leader Ramsay MacDonald ; Bondfield had known the MacDonalds since the 1890s , through their joint work for the WIC . 
 With a government suffrage reform bill pending in parliament , the WLL introduced a motion to the 1909 Labour Party conference committing the party to oppose any suffrage extension bill that did not specifically include women . However , while the party was largely sympathetic to the principle of women 's suffrage , it was unwilling to risk losing the limited reforms to male suffrage promised by the government 's bill . When Bondfield tabled the WLL motion at the Labour conference , she was persuaded by Arthur Henderson to water it down . Many suffragists reacted angrily ; the WSPU accused the WLL , and Bondfield in particular , of treachery . Fran Abrams , in a biographical essay , writes that although Bondfield " was prepared to argue loud and long for adult suffrage , ... she was not prepared to damage her relationship with the Labour Party for it " . 
 Since the passing of the Qualification of Women Act in 1907 , women had been eligible to vote in and stand as candidates in municipal elections . Several WLL members contested the London County Council elections in 1910 ; Bondfield stood in Woolwich , unsuccessfully ( she contested the same seat in 1913 , with a similar result ) . The League was active in all types of elections , supporting and canvassing for candidates of either sex who spoke out for women 's rights . Through these activities Bondfield experienced the lives of the poorest of families , writing : " Oh ! the lonely lives of these women , hidden away at the back of a network of small , mean streets ! " 
 Alongside her WLL duties , Bondfield maintained a range of other involvements . She spent part of 1910 in the United States , lecturing on suffrage issues with Maud Ward of the People 's Suffrage Federation ( PSF ) , and studying labour problems . At home , she worked with the Women 's Co @-@ operative Guild ( WCG ) on maternity and child welfare , and was co @-@ opted to the Parliamentary Standing Committee that piloted the introduction of state maternity benefits and other assistance to mothers . Her investigation on behalf of the WIC into the working conditions in the textile industries led her to join most of the Labour leadership in a " War against Poverty " campaign . In 1910 Bondfield accepted the chairmanship of the British section of the Women 's International Council of Socialist and Labour Organisations . 
 Between 1908 and 1910 the WLL and the WIC co @-@ operated in a nationwide investigation of married women 's working conditions . Bondfield carried out the fieldwork in Yorkshire . The relationship between the two bodies was sometimes fractious , and when the report was due to be published , there were disagreements over how it should be handled . As a result of these and other clashes , Bondfield , MacDonald and the other League women resigned from the Council . In 1911 Bondfield assumed the role of the WLL 's Organising Secretary , and spent much of the year travelling : she formed a WLL branch in Ogmore Vale , Glamorgan , reformed the Manchester branch , and found time to advise <unk> engaged in a dispute in South Wales . The sudden death of Mary MacDonald in September 1911 added considerably to Bondfield 's workload ; the strain , together with internal animosities within the WLL , led her to resign her position in January 1912 . The League made strenuous efforts to retain her , and only in September did its committee reluctantly accept her departure . An attempt to re @-@ engage her in 1913 was unsuccessful , and Marion Phillips was appointed to succeed her . 
 = = Campaigns and war = = 
 From 1912 Bondfield was a member of the WCG 's Citizenship Subcommittee , where she worked with Margaret Llewelyn Davies investigating minimum wage rates , infant mortality and child welfare . She also assisted the Guild 's education and training programme , lecturing on " Local Government in Relation to Maternity " . Freedom from her WLL responsibilities gave her more time for political work , and in 1913 she joined the ILP 's National Administration Council . Bondfield spoke at the ILP 's mass anti @-@ war rally in Trafalgar Square rally on 2 August 1914 , organised by George Lansbury ; other speakers included Keir Hardie , Henderson , and the dockers ' leader Ben Tillett . On the outbreak of war a few days later , Bondfield joined the Union of Democratic Control that , while not pacifist , opposed the use of war as an instrument of national policy . She was also a member of the Women 's Peace Council . In March 1915 she attended a conference in Bern , Switzerland , organised by the Women 's International of Socialist and Labour Organizations , which called for a negotiated peace . Later in the war the government , concerned by Bondfield 's association with peace organisations , prevented her from travelling to similar gatherings in Sweden and the United States . 
 Bondfield had helped Mary Macarthur to found the National Federation of Women Workers ( NFWW ) in 1906 . This organisation was dedicated to the unionisation of women , and by 1914 had more than 20 @,@ 000 members . In 1915 Bondfield became NFWW 's organising secretary . Together with Macarthur , Phillips and Susan Lawrence , she established the Central Committee for Women 's Employment , which organised relief work for the female unemployed . Bondfield 's investigations into workers ' pay revealed considerable differences between the rates paid to men and to women , even for identical work . Through the NFWW she campaigned for a £ 1 a week starting minimum wage for women , whatever the nature of the work , and for equal pay with men for equal work . 
 Suffragist militancy having largely lapsed after the outbreak of World War I , in October 1916 a Speaker 's Conference was convened to consider the issue of women 's franchise and make proposals for postwar legislation . While Bondfield , Lansbury and other prewar campaigners pressed for universal adult suffrage , the conference recommended only a limited extension of the franchise . The subsequent Representation of the People Act , 1918 , gave the vote to women over 30 who were property owners or the wives of property owners , or were university graduates . Bondfield described the Act , which excluded almost all working @-@ class women , as " mean and inadequate ... creating fresh anomalies " . 
 = = National prominence = = 
 The end of the war in November 1918 saw Bondfield 's election to the General Council of the TUC , the first woman to be thus elevated . In the following months she travelled as a TUC delegate to international conferences , in Bern and later in Washington DC , where she expressed the view that the peace terms being imposed on Germany were unjust . In April 1920 she was a member of a joint TUC @-@ Labour Party mission to the Soviet Union . A few months earlier , Lansbury had visited the incipient Soviet state and had been most impressed after meeting Lenin , whom he judged to be " symbolic of a new spirit " , " the father of his people " and " their champion in the cause of social and economic freedom " . Bondfield , who also met Lenin , was more cautious . She told an NFWW conference on her return that if she were a Russian citizen she would support the Bolshevist government as currently " the only possible form of administration " . Later , she came to see communism as anti @-@ democratic and dictatorial , and voted against the application of the British Communist Party for affiliation to the Labour Party . 
 Among various public activities , Bondfield joined the governing body of Ruskin College , the Oxford @-@ based institution founded in 1899 to provide higher education opportunities to working @-@ class men . She also became a Justice of the Peace . She first sought election to parliament in 1920 , as the Labour candidate in a by @-@ election in Northampton . She increased the Labour vote significantly , but lost by 3 @,@ 371 votes , to the Coalition Liberal candidate . At the general election of 1922 she was again adopted by Labour at Northampton and , as she had at Woolwich in 1913 , turned to Shaw for help in the campaign . He was contemptuous of the Labour leadership for not arranging a more promising seat ; nevertheless , he came and spoke for her , but her margin of defeat widened to 5 @,@ 476 . 
 Following two years of negotiation , in 1920 the NFWW voted to merge with the National Union of General Workers and become that union 's Women 's Section . Bondfield , who supported the merger , believed that provided women could maintain their separate group identity , it was better for men and women to work together . The secretary of the new section was to have been Mary Macarthur , but she died of cancer on 1 January 1921 , the date that the merger came into effect . Bondfield was appointed in her place , and remained in the post ( with leave of absence while holding ministerial office ) until 1938 . To honour her friend , Bondfield helped to organise the Mary Macarthur Memorial Fund . She added other responsibilities to her heavy schedule : chairing the Standing Joint Committee of Industrial Women 's Organisations ( <unk> ) , membership of the Labour Party 's Emergency Committee on Unemployment , and chairman of the 1922 Conference of Unemployed Women . In September 1923 she became the first women to assume the chair of the TUC 's General Council . 
 In November 1923 Stanley Baldwin 's Conservative Government fell . In the following month 's general election Bondfield was elected in Northampton with a majority of 4 @,@ 306 over her Conservative opponent . She was one of the first three women — Susan Lawrence and Dorothy <unk> were the others — to be elected as Labour MPs . In an outburst of local celebration her supporters , whom she described as " nearly crazy with joy " , paraded her around the town in a charabanc . The Labour Party had won 191 seats to the Conservatives ' 258 and the Liberals ' 158 ; with no party in possession of a parliamentary majority , the make @-@ up of the next government was in doubt for several weeks . 
 = = Parliament and office = = 
 = = = First Labour Government = = = 
 The Liberal Party 's decision not to enter a coalition with the Conservatives , and Baldwin 's unwillingness to govern without a majority , led to Ramsay MacDonald 's first minority Labour government which took office in January 1924 . According to Lansbury 's biographer , Bondfield turned down the offer of a cabinet post ; instead , she became parliamentary secretary to the Minister of Labour , Tom Shaw . This appointment meant that she had to give up the TUC Council chair ; her decision to do so , immediately after becoming the first woman to achieve this honour , generated some criticism from other trade unionists . 
 Bondfield later described her first months in government as " a strange adventure " . The difficulties of the economic situation would have created problems for the most experienced of governments , and the fledgling Labour administration was quickly in difficulties . Bondfield spent much of her time abroad ; in the autumn she travelled to Canada as the head of a delegation examining the problems of British immigrants , especially as related to the welfare of young children . When she returned to Britain in early October she found the government in its final throes . On 8 October MacDonald resigned after losing a confidence vote in the House of Commons . Labour 's chances of victory in the ensuing general election were fatally compromised by the controversy surrounding the so @-@ called Zinoviev letter , a missive purportedly sent by Grigory Zinoviev , president of the Communist International , which called on Britain 's socialists to prepare for violent revolution . The letter , published four days before polling day , generated a " Red Scare " that led to a significant swing of voters to the right , and ensured a massive Conservative victory . Bondfield lost her seat in Northampton by 971 votes . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 After her defeat , Bondfield resumed her work for NUGMW and was re @-@ elected to the TUC Council . In 1926 she supported the TUC 's decision to hold a General Strike , and also the decision to call it off after nine days . Following the resignation of Sir Patrick Hastings in June 1926 , Bondfield was adopted as the Labour candidate at Wallsend , and won the subsequent by @-@ election with a majority of over 9 @,@ 000 . Meanwhile , she had accepted appointment to the <unk> Committee , which the Conservative government had set up to consider reforms to the system of unemployment benefit . Her private view , that entitlement to benefits should be related to contributions , was not widely shared in the Labour Party or the TUC . When the committee made recommendations along these lines she signed the report , which became the basis of the Unemployment Insurance Act 1927 . Bondfield 's association with this legislation permanently shadowed her relationship with the Labour movement . 
 On 29 March 1928 , when a bill came before parliament giving the vote in parliamentary elections to all men and women over 21 , she termed the measure " a tremendous social advance " , and added : " At last [ women ] are established on that equitable footing because we are human beings and part of society as a whole ... once and for all , we shall destroy the artificial barrier in the way of any women who want to get education in politics and who want to come forward and take their full share in the political life of their day " . When the bill became law , 4 million voters , most of them women , were added to the register . In the 1929 general election , held on 30 May , Bondfield easily held her Wallsend seat despite the intervention of a candidate representing unemployed workers . The overall election result left Labour as the largest party with 287 seats , but without an overall majority , and MacDonald formed his second minority administration . 
 = = = Minister of Labour = = = 
 When Bondfield accepted the post of Minister of Labour in the new government , she became Britain 's first woman cabinet minister , and Britain 's first woman privy counsellor . She considered the appointment " part of the great revolution in the position of women " . Her period in office was dominated by the issue of rising unemployment and the consequent increasing costs of benefit , which created a division between the government , anxious to demonstrate its financial responsibility , and the wider Labour movement whose priority was to protect the unemployed . According to the historian Robert Skidelsky : " Ministers worried about the finances of the [ unemployment ] fund ; backbenchers worried about the finances of the unemployed " . Under increasing pressure from the TUC , Bondfield introduced a bill that reversed the " <unk> " restrictions on unemployment benefit introduced by the previous government , but with visible reluctance . Her handling of this issue is described by Marquand as " <unk> " , and by Skidelsky as showing " monumental <unk> " . 
 As the cost of unemployment benefits mounted , Bondfield 's attempts to control the fund 's deficit provoked further hostility from the TUC and political attacks from the opposition parties . In February 1931 she proposed a scheme to cut benefit and restrict entitlement , but this was rejected by the cabinet as too harsh . Instead , seeking a cross @-@ party solution , the government accepted a Liberal proposal for an independent committee , eventually set up under Sir George May , to report on how public expenditure might be reduced . With the collapse in May 1931 of Austria 's leading private bank , Kreditanstalt , and the subsequent failure of several other European banks , the sense of crisis deepened . On 30 July the May committee recommended cuts in expenditure of £ 97 million , the majority ( £ 67 million ) to be found from reductions in unemployment costs . In the ensuing weeks , ministers struggled vainly to meet these demands . Bondfield was prepared to cut general unemployment benefit , provided the most needy recipients — those on so @-@ called " transitional benefit " — were protected . No formula could be found ; by 23 August the cabinet was hopelessly split , and resigned the next day . To the outrage of the TUC and most of the Labour Party , MacDonald formed an emergency National Government with the Conservative and Liberal parties , while the bulk of the Labour Party went into opposition . 
 Bondfield did not join the small number of Labour MPs who chose to follow MacDonald , although she expressed her " deep sympathy and admiration " for his actions . In the general election that followed on 27 October 1931 , the Labour Party lost more than three @-@ quarters of its Commons seats and was reduced to 52 members . Bondfield was defeated in Wallsend by 7 @,@ 606 votes ; Abrams observes that given the attacks on her from both right and left , " it would have been a miracle had she been re @-@ elected " . Of the former Labour cabinet members who opposed the National Government , only Lansbury kept his seat . 
