 3N 
 4 , respectively . The AB layer is the same in the α and β phases , and the CD layer in the α phase is related to AB by a c @-@ glide plane . The Si 
 3N 
 4 tetrahedra in β @-@ Si 
 3N 
 4 are interconnected in such a way that tunnels are formed , running parallel with the c axis of the unit cell . Due to the c @-@ glide plane that relates AB to CD , the α structure contains cavities instead of tunnels . The cubic γ @-@ Si 
 3N 
 4 is often designated as c modification in the literature , in analogy with the cubic modification of boron nitride ( c @-@ BN ) . It has a spinel @-@ type structure in which two silicon atoms each coordinate six nitrogen atoms octahedrally , and one silicon atom coordinates four nitrogen atoms tetrahedrally . 
 The longer stacking sequence results in the α @-@ phase having higher hardness than the β @-@ phase . However , the α @-@ phase is chemically unstable compared with the β @-@ phase . At high temperatures when a liquid phase is present , the α @-@ phase always transforms into the β @-@ phase . Therefore , β @-@ Si 
 3N 
 4 is the major form used in Si 
 3N 
 4 ceramics . 
 = = Applications = = 
 In general , the main issue with applications of silicon nitride has not been technical performance , but cost . As the cost has come down , the number of production applications is accelerating . 
 = = = Automobile industry = = = 
 One of the major applications of sintered silicon nitride is in automobile industry as a material for engine parts . Those include , in diesel engines , <unk> for faster start @-@ up ; <unk> chambers ( swirl chambers ) for lower emissions , faster start @-@ up and lower noise ; turbocharger for reduced engine lag and emissions . In spark @-@ ignition engines , silicon nitride is used for rocker arm pads for lower wear , turbocharger for lower inertia and less engine lag , and in exhaust gas control valves for increased acceleration . As examples of production levels , there is an estimated more than 300 @,@ 000 sintered silicon nitride turbochargers made annually . 
 = = = Bearings = = = 
 Silicon nitride bearings are both full ceramic bearings and ceramic hybrid bearings with balls in ceramics and races in steel . Silicon nitride ceramics have good shock resistance compared to other ceramics . Therefore , ball bearings made of silicon nitride ceramic are used in performance bearings . A representative example is use of silicon nitride bearings in the main engines of the NASA 's Space Shuttle . 
 Since silicon nitride ball bearings are harder than metal , this reduces contact with the bearing track . This results in 80 % less friction , 3 to 10 times longer lifetime , 80 % higher speed , 60 % less weight , the ability to operate with lubrication starvation , higher corrosion resistance and higher operation temperature , as compared to traditional metal bearings . Silicon nitride balls weigh 79 % less than tungsten carbide balls . Silicon nitride ball bearings can be found in high end automotive bearings , industrial bearings , wind turbines , motorsports , bicycles , <unk> and skateboards . Silicon nitride bearings are especially useful in applications where corrosion , electric or magnetic fields prohibit the use of metals . For example , in tidal flow meters , where seawater attack is a problem , or in electric field seekers . 
 Si3N4 was first demonstrated as a superior bearing in 1972 but did not reach production until nearly 1990 because of challenges associated with reducing the cost . Since 1990 , the cost has been reduced substantially as production volume has increased . Although Si 
 3N 
 4 bearings are still 2 – 5 times more expensive than the best steel bearings , their superior performance and life are justifying rapid adoption . Around 15 – 20 million Si 
 3N 
 4 bearing balls were produced in the U.S. in 1996 for machine tools and many other applications . Growth is estimated at 40 % per year , but could be even higher if ceramic bearings are selected for consumer applications such as in @-@ line skates and computer disk drives . 
 = = = High @-@ temperature material = = = 
 Silicon nitride has long been used in high @-@ temperature applications . In particular , it was identified as one of the few monolithic ceramic materials capable of surviving the severe thermal shock and thermal gradients generated in hydrogen / oxygen rocket engines . To demonstrate this capability in a complex configuration , NASA scientists used advanced rapid prototyping technology to fabricate a one @-@ inch @-@ diameter , single @-@ piece combustion chamber / nozzle ( thruster ) component . The thruster was hot @-@ fire tested with hydrogen / oxygen propellant and survived five cycles including a 5 @-@ minute cycle to a 1320 ° C material temperature . 
 In 2010 silicon nitride was used as the main material in the thrusters of the JAXA space probe Akatsuki . 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 Silicon nitride has many orthopedic applications . The material is also an alternative to <unk> ( <unk> ether ketone ) and titanium , which are used for spinal fusion devices . It is silicon nitride ’ s hydrophilic , <unk> surface that contributes to the materials strength , durability and reliability compared to <unk> and titanium . 
 = = = Metal working and cutting tools = = = 
 The first major application of Si 
 3N 
 4 was abrasive and cutting tools . Bulk , monolithic silicon nitride is used as a material for cutting tools , due to its hardness , thermal stability , and resistance to wear . It is especially recommended for high speed machining of cast iron . Hot hardness , fracture toughness and thermal shock resistance mean that sintered silicon nitride can cut cast iron , hard steel and nickel based alloys with surface speeds up to 25 times quicker than those obtained with conventional materials such as tungsten carbide . The use of Si 
 3N 
 4 cutting tools has had a dramatic effect on manufacturing output . For example , face milling of gray cast iron with silicon nitride inserts doubled the cutting speed , increased tool life from one part to six parts per edge , and reduced the average cost of inserts by 50 % , as compared to traditional tungsten carbide tools . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 Silicon nitride is often used as an insulator and chemical barrier in manufacturing integrated circuits , to electrically isolate different structures or as an etch mask in bulk <unk> . As a passivation layer for microchips , it is superior to silicon dioxide , as it is a significantly better diffusion barrier against water molecules and sodium ions , two major sources of corrosion and instability in microelectronics . It is also used as a dielectric between <unk> layers in capacitors in analog chips . 
 Silicon nitride deposited by <unk> contains up to 8 % hydrogen . It also experiences strong tensile stress , which may crack films thicker than 200 nm . However , it has higher resistivity and dielectric strength than most insulators commonly available in microfabrication ( 1016 Ω · cm and 10 MV / cm , respectively ) . 
 Not only silicon nitride , but also various ternary compounds of silicon , nitrogen and hydrogen ( <unk> ) are used insulating layers . They are plasma deposited using the following reactions : 
 2 SiH 
 4 ( g ) + N 
 2 ( g ) → 2 SiNH ( s ) + 3 H 
 2 ( g ) 
 SiH 
 4 ( g ) + NH 
 3 ( g ) → SiNH ( s ) + 3 H 
 2 ( g ) 
 These SiNH films have much less tensile stress , but worse electrical properties ( resistivity 106 to 1015 Ω · cm , and dielectric strength 1 to 5 MV / cm ) . 
 Silicon nitride is also used in xerographic process as one of the layer of the photo drum . Silicon nitride is also used as an ignition source for domestic gas appliances . Because of its good elastic properties , silicon nitride , along with silicon and silicon oxide , is the most popular material for cantilevers — the sensing elements of atomic force microscopes . 
 = = History = = 
 The first reported preparation was in 1857 by Henri Etienne Sainte @-@ Claire Deville and Friedrich Wöhler . In their method , silicon was heated in a crucible placed inside another crucible packed with carbon to reduce permeation of oxygen to the inner crucible . They reported a product they termed silicon nitride but without specifying its chemical composition . Paul <unk> first reported a product with the composition of the tetranitride , Si 
 3N 
 4 , in 1879 that was obtained by heating silicon with <unk> ( a paste made by mixing charcoal , coal , or coke with clay which is then used to line crucibles ) in a blast furnace . In 1910 , Ludwig Weiss and Theodor Engelhardt heated silicon under pure nitrogen to produce Si 
 3N 
 4 . E. Friederich and L. <unk> made Si3N4 in 1925 via carbothermal reduction under nitrogen , that is , by heating silica , carbon , and nitrogen at 1250 – 1300 ° C. 
 Silicon nitride remained merely a chemical curiosity for decades before it was used in commercial applications . From 1948 to 1952 , the Carborundum Company , Niagara Falls , New York , applied for several patents on the manufacture and application of silicon nitride . By 1958 Haynes ( Union Carbide ) silicon nitride was in commercial production for thermocouple tubes , rocket nozzles , and boats and crucibles for melting metals . British work on silicon nitride , started in 1953 , was aimed at high @-@ temperature parts of gas turbines and resulted in the development of reaction @-@ bonded silicon nitride and hot @-@ pressed silicon nitride . In 1971 , the Advanced Research Project Agency of the US Department of Defense placed a US $ 17 million contract with Ford and Westinghouse for two ceramic gas turbines . 
 Even though the properties of silicon nitride were well known , its natural occurrence was discovered only in the 1990s , as tiny inclusions ( about 2 µm × 0 @.@ 5 µm in size ) in meteorites . The mineral was named <unk> after a pioneer of mass spectrometry , Alfred O. C. Nier . This mineral might have been detected earlier , again exclusively in meteorites , by Soviet geologists . 
 = Resident Evil 6 = 
 Resident Evil 6 ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Baiohazādo Shikkusu ) is an action @-@ adventure third @-@ person shooter video game developed and published by Capcom . The ninth main instalment of the Resident Evil series , it was first released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on 2 October 2012 , and for Microsoft Windows on 22 March 2013 . It was re @-@ released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One with all downloadable content on 29 March 2016 . The story is told from the perspectives of Chris Redfield , a former member and founder of the Bio @-@ terrorism Security Assessment Alliance ( BSAA ) traumatised by a failed operation ; Leon S. Kennedy , a Raccoon City survivor and agent for the US government ; Jake Muller , an illegitimate son of Albert Wesker and associate of Sherry Birkin ; and Ada Wong , a freelance agent framed for the bio @-@ terrorist attacks by the antagonistic corporation Neo @-@ Umbrella . They must all confront the force behind a massive bio @-@ terrorist attack with the newly developed C @-@ virus in cities across the world . Gameplay is centred around their four interwoven storylines , in which each player @-@ character has unique abilities and styles . 
 The game was first conceptualised in 2009 , with full development commencing the following year under Resident Evil 4 producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi . Resident Evil 6 had a development staff of more than 600 , making it Capcom 's largest production to date . The developers define the game 's genre as " dramatic horror " , although promotional materials for the Japanese version still classify the game as survival horror . The game received mixed reviews from critics upon release ; some reviewers praised the game 's storyline and themes , however the four interwoven campaigns were criticised , as well as the game 's departure from the survival @-@ horror genre . Despite the criticisms , it was a financial success ; with over 6 million copies sold , it currently stands as Capcom 's second best @-@ selling game . A sequel , Resident Evil 7 : Biohazard , is set to be released in January 2017 @,@ 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Resident Evil 6 allows players to select between four scenarios with interwoven storylines . Each scenario follows one of four main protagonists : Leon S. Kennedy , Chris Redfield , Jake Muller and Ada Wong . The player @-@ characters from each scenario will have their own partners whom are controlled by either artificial intelligence ( AI ) or another player via local or online multiplayer . In addition , each scenario features a different play @-@ style ; for example , some player @-@ characters are more vulnerable to attacks whereas others are more resilient . Each central character has unique abilities , which vary from increased reload times and carrying more ammunition . Resident Evil 6 presents new innovations and gameplay mechanics such as rolling in any direction and running whilst shooting and sliding . The game also features a four @-@ player co @-@ operative mode . When playing in single player mode , the player can allow another player to join in online at any time . While performing certain actions , quick time events may occur , in which the player must follow onscreen prompts by pressing buttons or manipulating joysticks within a limited amount of time . 
 A new feature comes in the form of tablets ; players may consume them in order to recover health , and more can be produced by mixing herbs . If one player runs out of health , that player will have a short time to try to defend themselves while their partners attempt to revive them . If any non @-@ AI players are killed , gameplay will resume at the last checkpoint . The game features several primary enemies , including zombies and the newly introduced J 'avo . Unlike zombies , J 'avo are able to interact with each other to plan an attack , use weapons , and heal themselves . Certain enemies drop skill points when killed , which can be picked up and spent on upgrades such as increased weapon effectiveness or specific ammunition drops . The campaigns feature a " Lone Wolf " ability which allows the player to remove their artificial intelligence companion character . Players can equip three of these upgrades which apply to all campaigns . The game also features a stamina bar ; which depletes once the player performs melee attacks , or uses a " <unk> " — which involves shooting a zombie with a headshot instantly . The overall gameplay of Resident Evil 6 is twice as long as its predecessor , Resident Evil 5 . 
 The game features two new modes . " Mercenaries " mode involves players fighting for survival against hordes of enemies . In the PC version , the Mercenaries mode features an exclusive sub @-@ mode named " No Mercy " , which involves the cast from Left 4 Dead 2 fighting a total number of 300 enemies against a timer . " Agent Hunt " mode allows players to take control of random enemies in other people 's online sessions , however it is only unlocked after the player clears the three main campaigns . The longer the player stays in another online session , the more points they will earn . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On 24 December 2012 , Jake Muller , a mercenary of the fictional South @-@ Slavic <unk> Liberation Army and son of late bio @-@ terrorist Albert Wesker , flees from the authorities during a bio @-@ terrorist attack . He partners with Division of Security Operations ( DSO ) agent and Raccoon City survivor Sherry Birkin , who was sent to Edonia to ensure that Jake escapes safely from the country so his blood can be tested for anti @-@ bodies for the newly developed C @-@ Virus . At the same time , Bio @-@ terrorism Security Assessment Alliance ( BSAA ) Captain Chris Redfield and his team , including sniper Piers <unk> and demolitions expert Finn Macauley fight against rebels infected with the C @-@ Virus ( referred to as " J 'avo " ) . However , they are attacked by the leader of Neo @-@ Umbrella , who refers to herself as Ada Wong and kills most of the BSAA members using a device that injects them with the C @-@ virus turning them into monsters , except Chris and Piers . The aftermath causes Chris to go into self @-@ imposed exile , being afflicted with post @-@ traumatic amnesia . Meanwhile , Sherry and Jake 's extraction from Edonia by the BSAA is sabotaged , forcing the pair to crash into the mountains , eventually leading to their capture by Ada . 
 On 29 June 2013 , US President Adam Benford has decided to officially reveal the truth behind the 1998 Raccoon City incident and the United States government 's dealings with Umbrella , believing that it will curb the current resurgence in bio @-@ terrorist activity . By the President ’ s side is his friend , DSO agent and Raccoon City survivor Leon S. Kennedy and United States Secret Service agent Helena Harper , but when the venue becomes host to another bio @-@ terrorist attack , Leon is forced to face the infected and mutated President , and kill him . Along the way , the two encounter Ada , and Helena then discloses to Leon that she was blackmailed by National Security Advisor Derek C. Simmons , into aiding the assassination of Benford . She also discloses Simmons 's affiliation with Neo @-@ Umbrella . Leon and Helena then decide to pursue Simmons into Lanshiang , China while faking their deaths with aid from Ingrid <unk> . Meanwhile , Jake and Sherry manage to escape captivity in Lanshiang after being held captive for six months . 
 At the same time , Chris returns to duty in the BSAA with Piers and a new team , arriving in Lanshiang under the threat of a bio @-@ terrorist attack . Chris recovers from his amnesia and seeks revenge against Ada , resulting in casualties for his squad . Chris and Piers confront Ada , until Leon intervenes . After being informed by Leon , Chris and Piers pursue Ada to an aircraft carrier , destroying cruise missiles laden with the C @-@ virus . Leon , Helena , Sherry , and Jake confront Simmons over his involvement with the outbreaks , where Sherry covertly hands Jake 's medical data to Leon in case of their captivity . Leon and Helena corner Simmons , who has been infected by a J 'avo , where he confesses to having killed the President to keep him from disclosing the truth behind Raccoon City , which would have led to the US losing its authority . The two temporarily defeat a mutated Simmons while Sherry and Jake are captured once again . While attempting to leave the city , Leon and Helena are warned by Chris that a missile has been launched , however they are too late to stop it . Leon discloses Jake 's real identity to Chris and has him rescue Jake and Sherry in a remote oil platform . With the assistance of Ada , Leon and Helena finally kill Simmons . 
 In the oil platform , Chris and Piers head underground , managing to free Jake and Sherry from captivity before preventing a large @-@ scale attack from the location . Heavily wounded , and in a desperate attempt to save Chris , Piers injects himself with a sample of the C @-@ virus to help turn the tide of the battle , temporarily defeating <unk> before evacuating . Aware that the mutation would worsen , Piers sacrifices himself by pushing Chris to an escape pod . After Chris ' pod is launched , <unk> makes one last attempt to kill Chris but is killed himself by a powerful lightning charge from Piers , which ensures Chris ' escape and the destruction of the Neo @-@ Umbrella base . 
 In Ada 's story , it is revealed that the Ada Wong that interacted with Chris and Piers was actually a doppelgänger created by Simmons , a scientist named Carla <unk> , and that the real Ada Wong was aiding Leon and Sherry while destroying the Neo @-@ Umbrella lab in <unk> . Although presumed dead after being shot by one of Simmons ' soldiers , Carla attempts a final attack against the real Ada , after having injected herself with a powerful dose of the C @-@ virus , but is killed . After aiding Leon and Helena in their battle with Simmons , Ada reaches the lab where her clone was developed and destroys everything . She then receives a call from someone , accepting a new assignment . Meanwhile , Leon and Helena are cleared for duty ; Chris remains with the BSAA in command of a new squad , overcoming his guilt ; and Sherry continues her duty as a DSO agent , while Jake starts a new life fighting zombies in an underdeveloped country with his real identity covered up by the BSAA . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was first conceptualised soon after the release of Resident Evil 5 , and began full development in 2010 . Resident Evil 5 producer Jun Takeuchi said that he considered a " completely new system " for Resident Evil 6 , but later ruled out his involvement with the game . In March 2009 , co @-@ producer Masachika Kawata stated that the new instalment was not decided upon , but admitted that it could take Capcom four to eight years to develop . Kawata later claimed that the new game will be drastically different from its predecessors . The game was directed by Eiichiro Sasaki , who also directed the Resident Evil Outbreak series . When development of the game first begun , producer Yoshiaki Hirabayashi wanted to revolve the game around the " ultimate horror entertainment " , bearing in mind that the team considered the upcoming Resident Evil 6 to be the flagship title of the horror genre . In a February 2012 interview , Hirabayashi stated that he went to lengths to balance " all of the things people love " about the series , so the team focused to orientate gameplay around horror themes . In March 2012 , Capcom admitted that the survival @-@ horror market was too small for Resident Evil , and issued a statement that the development team would instead choose to orientate the gameplay around the action genre . 
 The development of the game was led by Hiroyuki Kobayashi , who was stated by Capcom to be aiming to " deliver the most impressive Resident Evil title ever both in terms of scope and production values " . Capcom also asserted that the game was meant to take an approach to " evolve " the series . The staff wanted to give the game a new setting with Sasaki wishing to place it in China . While the country of Edonia was not modelled from any country in Europe , it was given an Eastern European theme . According to Famitsu , the character of Jake Muller was designed to be " someone today ’ s young people can empathize with " . The game had a development staff of more than 600 , making it Capcom 's largest production to date . The decision to bring back zombies into Resident Evil 6 was made by Kobayashi , who felt that they were a popular component for the franchise , as well as complying per fans ' requests . Hirabayashi admitted that the game had radically changed at the end of the development cycle , due to the new concepts it introduced to the series . On 21 August 2012 , Resident Evil 6 went gold and initiated its online service . 
 An official trailer was released on 19 January 2012 . At a Microsoft press briefing at E3 2012 , the first gameplay demonstration was shown , depicting Leon and Helena fighting hordes of zombies in China . A playable demo of Resident Evil 6 was scheduled for release on the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Marketplace on 5 September 2012 . Capcom later announced that the demo would become available for both Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 owners on 18 September 2012 . Early access to the demo was included with Dragon 's Dogma . As a result of criticism of the first demo , Capcom brought a different version of the demo to the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , modifying various parts of its gameplay . Originally scheduled to be released on 20 November 2012 , the game 's release date was pushed forward to 2 October 2012 . Prior to the game 's launch , several copies of the game were stolen and went on sales in Poland . 
 Resident Evil 6 was also contained in Biohazard Anniversary Package , a special edition for Resident Evil 's seventeenth anniversary , that was released in Japan on 22 March 2013 , alongside the release of the PC version . Resident Evil 6 was re @-@ released on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One which included graphical enhancements and all DLC on 29 March 2016 . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 In response to a public backlash over classifying on @-@ disc content as downloadable content ( DLC ) , Capcom released a patch in December 2012 free of charge . The patch included new camera controls , a new difficulty mode named " No Hope " , an option to play Ada 's campaign without having to complete the other three , and the addition of an online co @-@ op partner for Ada 's campaign simply called " Agent " . Unlike any other character in the game , Agent cannot interact with doors and treasure chests ; he also disappears when cutscenes are triggered . 
 On 18 December 2012 , a new multiplayer ( DLC ) was released with three new multiplayer modes : " Predator " , " Survivors " and " Onslaught " . Predator mode is a series of quick fire rounds with up to six players who take turns as the fearsome Ustanak and have full access to its weapons . The other players in " Predator " mode must avoid capture and being killed by the Ustanak . Human players score points for successful attacks , but also lose points for being caught and / or taken down . This match type is over once all have played as the Ustanak , with the participant with the most points crowned as the winner . Survivors mode is Resident Evil 's take on the classic solo and team based deathmatch mode . Survivors is available for 2 @-@ 6 players . Onslaught is a two player mode where each must clear waves of oncoming enemies . The twist comes when a player completes a combo chain as this will send enemies over to their opponent ’ s screen . 
 On 4 April 2013 , a Left 4 Dead 2 crossover DLC was released for the PC version , adding the main characters and two monsters from Left 4 Dead 2 to the PC @-@ exclusive The Mercenaries : No Mercy mode in Resident Evil 6 . Various weapons , characters , and monsters from Resident Evil 6 have also been added as optionally @-@ downloadable replacement skins on the PC version of Left 4 Dead 2 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . The PlayStation 3 version holds an aggregate score 74 % from Metacritic , the PC version hold scores of 69 % , whereas the Xbox 360 version hold a score of 67 % . 
 The game 's storyline , themes , graphics , and artificial intelligence were praised by critics . A reviewer from Game Informer stated that despite the game did not " hold back " the decadent experience from being an " unhinged flaming rollercoaster ride " . A reviewer from the Official Xbox Magazine concluded stated that the game was an accomplished shooter " on the whole " , and a fittingly " thunderous " send @-@ off for Resident Evil , while also praising the length and variety of the game . GameTrailers noted the shift away from the style and tone of past games in the series , yet still praised the overall direction , stating that despite the " old identity stripped away " , the game presented itself as a " massive " action game . Richard George of IGN was favourable toward the technical and artistic design of the game , stating that the game was among Capcom ’ s greatest successes with an " incredibly strong " world , lighting , and creature designs . Ryan McCaffrey of IGN also noted the new enemies as " some of the best " designs and concepts in the history of the franchise . Hollander Cooper of GamesRadar praised the improvements to the controls over its predecessor , stating that the game had an emphasis placed on fluidity and movement , although noted that the cover system " never seems to work right " . The Escapist also praised the improved AI companion that " does a decent job of backing you up and taking the fight to the enemy rather than just standing by " , however also disliked the cover system , calling it " the most forgettable new feature of the game " . 
 The game 's four campaigns received criticism from reviewers . Simon Parkin from Eurogamer was divided over the campaigns , citing Leon 's campaign as the strongest and " the closest we get to the series ' survival horror roots " , along with Ada 's as having " diverse flavour " . However , Parkin criticised the other two campaigns , stating that Jake 's campaign " rarely delights " while citing that Chris ' was a " second @-@ rate third @-@ person sprint " with " idiotic " cutscene dialogue . A reviewer from Edge also felt that the campaigns noticeably contrasted in quality more than others . Similarly , Kevin VanOrd from GameSpot concluded that the game 's campaigns is the ultimate test of patience for " even the most dedicated " , while Destructoid cited Resident Evil 6 as not only a " step back " for the series due to the game 's new and unconventional features , but a " step back for commonplace , unassuming action @-@ shooters " . 
 In an interview with the Official PlayStation Blog , Resident Evil 6 executive producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi responded to fan criticism shortly after release , noting the creative differences with fans . He stated " the fans and us as creators are the two parents [ ... ] and just like real parents , you ’ re not always going to agree on what is best for raising that child , " going on to say , " we want to make sure that what we do pleases them but the initial reaction might not always be positive . We do listen to the fans but we can ’ t be beholden to them at every turn or I don ’ t think we ’ ll ever make progress in terms of the series ’ development " . 
 While Capcom has dubbed the game as a " dramatic horror " , several critics instead noted the game 's departure from the survival horror genre compared to previous instalments . Reviewers from GameSpot and GamesRadar noted that the game was no longer considered a survival horror . Destructoid asserted that Capcom had " abandoned any pretense " of the survival horror genre . Many reviewers listed the game 's genre simply as a third @-@ person action shooter . After the game 's release , Capcom 's Masachika Kawata considered the possibility of rebooting the franchise back to its " classic horror roots " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In May 2012 , Capcom announced they expected the game to sell 7 million copies by the end of the 2012 fiscal year , however the company lowered their expectations to 6 million due to the game 's mixed reception . Upon release , Capcom announced that it had shipped 4 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , setting a new record for the company . In October 2012 , the game sold 806 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . According to Capcom , sales weakened following the strong start , with the company admitting that the game would not meet their goals , and consequently lowered their financial projections for the fiscal year as a result . The game had sold 4 @.@ 9 million copies by April 2013 , and , by October the same year , had sold 5 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide , becoming one of Capcom 's best @-@ selling video games . 
 Despite the slow start and mixed reviews , Resident Evil 6 became Capcom 's second best @-@ selling title as of 30 September 2015 , with a lifetime sales of 6 @.@ 3 million copies worldwide . In February 2013 , Capcom issued in a statement that the game suffered from poor sales due to various development challenges and " inadequate organisational collaboration " across the company . 
 = Ehime Maru and USS Greeneville collision = 
 The Ehime Maru and USS Greeneville collision was a ship collision between the United States Navy ( USN ) Los Angeles @-@ class submarine USS Greeneville ( SSN @-@ 772 ) and the Japanese fishery high school training ship Ehime Maru ( <unk> ) from Ehime Prefecture on 9 February 2001 , about 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ) off the south coast of Oahu , Hawaii , United States . In a demonstration for some VIP civilian visitors , Greeneville performed an emergency ballast blow surfacing maneuver . As the submarine shot to the surface , she struck Ehime Maru . Within 10 minutes of the collision , Ehime Maru sank . Nine of her crewmembers were killed , including four high school students . 
 Many Japanese , including government officials , were concerned over news that civilians were present in Greeneville 's control room at the time of the accident . Some expressed anger because of a perception that the submarine did not try to assist Ehime Maru 's survivors and that the submarine 's captain , Commander Scott Waddle , did not apologize immediately afterwards . The Navy conducted a public court of inquiry , placed blame on Waddle and other members of Greeneville 's crew , and dealt non @-@ judicial punishment or administrative disciplinary action to the captain and some crew members . After Commander Waddle had faced the Naval Board of Inquiry , it was decided that a full court @-@ martial would be unnecessary , and he was forced to retire and given an honorable discharge . 
 In response to requests from the families of Ehime Maru 's victims and the government of Japan , the USN raised Ehime Maru from the ocean floor in October 2001 and moved her to shallow water near Oahu . Once there , Navy and Japanese divers located and retrieved the remains of eight of the nine victims from the wreck . Ehime Maru was then moved back out to sea and scuttled in deep water . The Navy compensated the government of Ehime Prefecture , Ehime Maru 's survivors , and victims ' family members for the accident . Waddle traveled to Japan in December 2002 to apologize to the ship 's survivors and victims ' families . 
 The accident renewed calls by many in Japan for the United States to make more effort in reducing crimes and accidents involving U.S. military personnel who injure or kill Japanese citizens . In response to the accident , the Navy changed its policies regarding civilian visits to its ships . 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 On 10 January 2001 , Ehime Maru , a Japanese fishing trawler owned by the government of Ehime Prefecture , 191 feet ( 58 m ) in length and measuring 741 gross tons , departed from Uwajima Fisheries High School , a secondary school in Uwajima , Ehime Prefecture , Japan . The ship , captained by Hisao Ōnishi , headed for Hawaii on a planned 74 @-@ day voyage to train high school students who were interested in pursuing careers as fishermen . A total of 35 people were on board Ehime Maru : 20 crewmembers , 13 students , and two teachers . The ship 's curriculum included long @-@ line tuna fishing , maritime navigation , marine engineering , and oceanography . The ship docked at Honolulu Harbor on 8 February . 
 On 9 February , the USS Greeneville , a U.S. Navy nuclear @-@ powered attack submarine , prepared to depart Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , to conduct a public relations mission under the USN 's Distinguished Visitor Embarkation ( DVE ) program . The program took civilians , members of Congress , journalists , and other " opinion makers " for rides on nuclear submarines to demonstrate the submarines ' capabilities ; its goal was to demonstrate the need to maintain a fleet of nuclear @-@ powered submarines . Greeneville had previously participated in several DVE missions , carrying notable civilians like Tipper Gore and James Cameron . For this mission , Greeneville was to carry 16 civilian DVs , including 14 CEOs and a sportswriter and his wife . The CEOs were in Hawaii to support a fundraising effort to restore the retired battleship Missouri . This DVE visit had originally been arranged by retired Admiral Richard C. Macke . Accompanying the DV civilians on the mission was Navy Captain Robert L. Brandhuber , Chief of Staff for Rear Admiral Albert H. Konetzni Jr . , the commander of the submarine component of the United States Pacific Fleet , abbreviated as COMSUBPAC . The captain of the Greeneville , Commander Scott Waddle , was considered a rising star in the U.S. Navy at the time and had led the submarine through several trips under the Distinguished Visitors ' Program . 
 Before departing on the mission , Commander Waddle was informed that the ship 's Analog Video Signal Display Unit ( AVSDU ) was inoperative . The AVSDU was an analog video monitor , located forward of the submarine 's periscope in the control room , that displayed information from the sub 's three sonar stacks and screens . The monitor helped communicate sonar information to the officer of the deck . Waddle decided to continue with the mission without attempting to repair the monitor , believing that it was not a crucial piece of equipment . 
 Greeneville departed Pearl Harbor on time at 08 : 00 local time ( HST ) with a crew of 106 in addition to the 16 DV passengers and Chief of Staff Brandhuber . As the submarine transited the ship channel from Pearl Harbor , Waddle noticed that the weather was " <unk> than normal " , but he thought that the haze would burn off shortly . Greeneville reached its dive point south of Oahu ( 21 ° 6 ′ N 157 ° 55 ′ W ) slightly later than scheduled , at 10 : 17 , and submerged . The DVs were scheduled to be served lunch in two sittings , the first from 10 : 30 to 11 : 30 and the second from 11 : 30 to 12 : 30 . After lunch , the submarine was to display its operational abilities and then return the DVs to Pearl Harbor for a reception that was scheduled to begin at 14 : 30 . The lunch service ran late , and other Greeneville officers repeatedly reminded Waddle that the submarine needed to begin its demonstration maneuvers or it would be late back to port . Finally , at 13 : 10 , Waddle entered the submarine 's control room and prepared to execute the demonstration . Fifteen of the 16 DVs and Brandhuber entered the control room to observe the maneuvers . 
 Meanwhile , at 12 : 00 , Ehime Maru had departed Honolulu harbor en route to fishing grounds about 300 nautical miles ( 560 km ) south ( 14 ° N 156 ° W ) of Oahu . By 12 : 50 , the ship was proceeding at 11 knots ( 13 mph ; 20 km / h ) about 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ) south of Oahu and was nearing the area where Greeneville was conducting the DV cruise . 
 Three crewmen were on duty in Greeneville 's sonar room . At 12 : 30 , the submarine 's sonar operators detected a surface vessel in the vicinity and designated the contact as " Sierra 12 " ( S @-@ 12 ) . A few minutes later , they detected a second vessel about 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) away , which was designated as " Sierra 13 " ( S @-@ 13 ) . S @-@ 13 was Ehime Maru . Also tracking the sonar contacts in the control room was Patrick Seacrest , Greeneville 's sole fire control technician on duty at the time . Seacrest was responsible for " determining the course , speed , and range of surface and submerged vessels ( or targets ) potentially posing a threat to the submarine . " At 12 : 58 , Seacrest designated the track of S @-@ 13 as heading away from Greeneville 's location . Beginning at 13 : 00 , Seacrest elected to discontinue updating the Contact Evaluation Plot ( CEP ) in the control room . The CEP is a " labor intensive " paper display that plots ship data and contact information for reference by control room personnel . Seacrest stated that one of the reasons that he decided to stop updating the CEP was that the DV guests were standing between his <unk> and the CEP . 
 = = = Collision = = = 
 Before beginning the maneuvers , Waddle checked the submarine 's sonar contacts and noted that there were several surface vessels in the vicinity , but none closer than 7 nautical miles ( 13 km ) away . Ehime Maru was one of these vessels . The civilians were spread throughout the control room , with three on the periscope platform and others in front of the fire control station , restricting free access to some of the displays . According to several crewmembers , Waddle , when informed that equipment preparations would further delay the start of the demonstration maneuvers , " seemed frustrated that he couldn 't start the maneuvers right away . " 
 For 15 minutes , beginning at 13 : 15 , 46 minutes after the scheduled time , Greeneville performed a series of drastic maneuvers , including high @-@ speed , full @-@ rudder , 35 @-@ degree turns side to side , as well as rapid up @-@ and @-@ down movements . Waddle personally directed the maneuvers . According to Waddle , the DVs " were loving it . " Waddle adds , " I could barely suppress a smile as I watched the expressions of joy and amazement on the faces of our distinguished visitors . " During the maneuvers , several civilians in the sonar room conversed with the sonar technicians , who were at the same time trying to keep track of any sonar contacts in the vicinity . 
 As the high @-@ speed maneuvers finished at 13 : 30 , Waddle called for Greeneville to perform an emergency dive ( called an " emergency deep " ) followed by an emergency main ballast blow , a maneuver that brings the submarine from a depth of about 400 feet ( 120 m ) to the surface in a few seconds by using high @-@ pressure air to force the water out of the ship 's ballast tanks as quickly as possible . The rise is so rapid that the submarine 's bow rises high out of the water upon surfacing . Before executing this maneuver , the submarine was required to go to periscope depth to check for ships or dangerous obstacles on the surface . After completing the high @-@ speed maneuvers , standing orders called for the submarine to hold a steady course for three minutes to reestablish sonar contact , which had been disrupted by the high speed maneuvers , with any vessels in the area . In this case , however , Waddle ordered the submarine to change course and go to periscope depth after holding the steady course for only 90 seconds . 
 As Greeneville ascended to periscope depth , Waddle checked the sonar displays and the fire control station monitors , but reported later that he heard and saw nothing to suggest that the previously detected vessels in the area were now any closer to the submarine 's position than had been reported before the submarine began the high speed maneuvers . Because the AVSDU was not working , Greeneville 's executive officer , Lieutenant Commander Gerald K. Pfeifer , entered the sonar room and observed the contacts on the sonar screens . Pfeifer then stood in the doorway between the sonar and control rooms , but did not communicate any updated sonar information to Waddle in the control room . At 13 : 34 , sonar gained a new contact , designated S @-@ 14 . Because Greeneville had not maintained a steady , slow course for a sufficient amount of time , the sonar data available to the sonar operators did not show accurate information on Ehime Maru 's range or bearing . 
 At 13 : 38 , Greeneville reached periscope depth ( about 60 feet ( 18 m ) below the surface ) . At this time , Ehime Maru was about 2 @,@ 315 yards ( 2 @.@ 117 km ) or 1 @.@ 14 nautical miles ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) away from the submarine and heading in her direction . Although sonar data began to more accurately depict Ehime Maru 's true range and bearing at this point , this was not evident to the sonar operators . Lieutenant , Junior Grade Michael J. Coen , the officer of the deck , conducted a periscope search of the area and sighted no nearby ships . Since waves were washing over the periscope , Waddle ordered the submarine to go up another few feet . Waddle then looked through the periscope at the area where sonar had previously reported surface contacts . Although Ehime Maru was at this point heading toward Greeneville 's location , Waddle failed to see the ship . Regulations mandated that Waddle conduct a three @-@ minute , 360 @-@ degree periscope scan before executing the emergency main ballast blow maneuver . Waddle , however , aware that they were still behind schedule , conducted a <unk> to 80 @-@ second , 360 @-@ degree scan , noted that the haze was still present , and saw no ships in the vicinity . At the end of his scan , Waddle announced to the control room crew , " I hold no visual contacts . " Waddle later explained how he conducted his periscope search : 
 I swept the scope in low power , went to high power , looked , then panned to the right , saw the island [ Oahu ] ... I can only see the mountain peak , I can 't see the mountains ... because of this white haze ... Then I could see an airplane taking off . ... I panned to the right where I thought I would see [ S @-@ 13 ] the Ehime Maru . I looked over at the remote repeater [ own @-@ ship 's data ] and I saw the numbers and [ thought ] that looks right . That 's where the guy is . Didn 't see him . Then went to low power and then turned to the right . I think ... the Ehime Maru was perhaps further to the right , and as I swept in low power ... missed her . And that 's the only explanation that I can think of as to why I missed the vessel . 
 Meanwhile , Seacrest was monitoring the ship 's fire control console , which graphically displayed the relative position , bearing , and speed of any sonar contacts in the area . Seacrest had been monitoring three contacts on his screens , S @-@ 12 , S @-@ 13 ( Ehime Maru ) , and S @-@ 14 . <unk> in trying to get a clearer picture on S @-@ 14 's location , Seacrest failed to report the bearing and range of S @-@ 13 ( Ehime Maru ) to Waddle during Waddle 's periscope search , which Seacrest 's monitors now showed was about 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) away and closing . During Waddle 's periscope search , Seacrest was busy operating other control room instruments and did not actively monitor his fire control displays . After the periscope search was over , and hearing Waddle 's report of no visual contacts , Seacrest decided that his information for S @-@ 13 was incorrect and manually <unk> the S @-@ 13 contact on his screen to a distance of 9 @,@ 000 yards ( 8 @.@ 2 km ) away . 
 After completing the emergency dive at about 13 : 40 , Waddle invited two of the civilian guests , John Hall , one of the CEOs , and Jack Clary , the sportswriter , to operate the controls for the emergency main ballast blow . One of them sat in the helmsman 's chair and the other stood at the high @-@ pressure air valve levers , under close supervision by Greeneville crewmen . After the two civilians had taken their positions , at 13 : 42 : 25 Waddle ordered the maneuver executed , and they threw the control levers as instructed . The submarine began its rapid ascent toward the surface . 
 At 13 : 43 : 15 , the rapidly ascending Greeneville surfaced directly under Ehime Maru ( 21 ° 05 @.@ 5 ′ N 157 ° 49 @.@ 1 ′ W ) , and the submarine 's rudder sliced Ehime Maru 's hull from starboard to port . Personnel aboard Ehime Maru heard two loud noises and felt the ship shudder from two severe impacts . Ehime Maru 's bridge crew looked aft and saw the submarine broach the water next to their ship . Within five seconds Ehime Maru lost power and began to sink . As Waddle watched through Greeneville 's periscope , Ehime Maru stood almost vertically on its stern and sank in about five minutes as the fishing ship 's crewmembers scrambled to abandon ship . 
 = = = Emergency response = = = 
 At 13 : 48 , Greeneville radioed a distress call to COMSUBPAC at Pearl Harbor for assistance . COMSUBPAC notified the local United States Coast Guard ( USCG ) unit at 13 : 55 which began a search @-@ and @-@ rescue effort . The submarine maneuvered towards Ehime Maru 's survivors to attempt a rescue . Weather conditions were unhelpful : 15- to 20 @-@ knot winds , which , in turn , were producing waves of 8 to 12 feet . Due to these rough seas , the submarine 's main deck hatches could not be opened ; the only outside access was through the top of the sail via its access trunk . Greeneville , moreover , was still low in the water because it normally took 30 minutes to pump out the remaining water in the ballast tanks after an emergency blow . As the heavy , partially submerged submarine bobbed in the ocean , it also displaced large waves that , in Waddle 's opinion , threatened to capsize the life rafts in which Ehime Maru 's survivors were gathering . Waddle decided that it would be safer to stand off the submarine from the group of survivors and wait for assistance to arrive . Ehime Maru 's survivors , many of them struggling in the diesel fuel released from their sinking ship , were able to gather on several life rafts that had deployed automatically as their ship sank . 
 A USCG helicopter arrived at 14 : 27 , noted the survivors in the life rafts , and began searching for any survivors who might still be in the water . At 14 : 31 and 14 : 44 respectively , a USCG rigid @-@ hulled inflatable boat and patrol boat arrived and administered first aid to the survivors in the rafts . Media helicopters also arrived during the rescue operation , and the incident was quickly reported on by major news organizations . The USCG rescued 26 from Ehime Maru 's crew and took them to Oahu for medical treatment . Only one of the survivors had a serious injury , a broken clavicle ; he was hospitalized for five days . Nine other crewmembers were missing , including four 17 @-@ year @-@ old high school students and two teachers . None of the nine missing were seen by any of the survivors , Greeneville crewmembers , or USCG personnel after the ship sank . Captain Ōnishi stated that the nine missing crewmembers were probably in the ship 's galley and engine rooms when the ship sank . USCG and USN aircraft and ships searched the ocean around Ehime Maru 's last location continuously for 22 days , until 2 March . Two Japanese civilian vessels also joined in the search . No remains of any of the missing crewmembers were discovered . 
 = = Immediate aftermath = = 
 Shortly after the incident occurred , Japanese Prime Minister <unk> Mori was informed of the accident as he was playing golf in Japan . Acknowledging the message , Mori resumed his round of golf , ending it an hour and a half after the first message , an action for which he was later heavily criticized , owing in part to the use of stock photographs taken the previous summer showing Mori enjoying his round of golf . 
 Since the collision involved a commercial vessel , the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) had jurisdiction to conduct the investigation into the accident . An NTSB official , along with several USN and USCG officers , questioned Waddle and Pfeifer about the incident as soon as Greeneville moored at Pearl Harbor . That same day , Admiral Konetzni removed Waddle as captain of Greeneville and reassigned him to his staff pending the outcome of the accident investigation . 
 Two days after the sinking , on 11 February , U.S. President George W. Bush apologized for the accident on national television , stating , " I want to reiterate what I said to the prime minister of Japan : I 'm deeply sorry about the accident that took place ; our nation is sorry . " Secretary of State Colin Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld also publicly apologized . The U.S. ambassador to Japan , Tom Foley , personally apologized to both Prime Minister Mori and to the Emperor of Japan . The public apologies to the Japanese from the highest American officials stirred resentment among American veterans of the Pacific War and their families , as well as among Asian victims of Imperial Japanese aggression and occupation . Richard Cohen wrote a column in the Washington Post , saying " We 've <unk> Enough to Japan . " , denounced the " hypocrisy " of Japan 's recent gestures of compensation and remorse to some of its World War II victims , which he said were offered " grudgingly " , while noting that the U.S. had apologized profusely over the accidental collision . 
 On 11 February , during an " extremely emotional exchange " , the commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet , Admiral Thomas B. Fargo , personally apologized to families of the Ehime Maru 's victims , who had arrived in Hawaii the day before . Several of the family members asked that Ehime Maru be raised from the ocean floor . Waddle had asked to accompany Fargo to apologize to the victims ' families as well , but the COMSUBPAC public affairs office told him that he could not . The next day , the family members were taken by boat to view the accident site . 
 The perceived lack of remorse by Waddle , plus reports in the Japanese media that Greeneville had made no effort to assist Ehime Maru 's survivors as they waited for almost one hour for rescue angered many Japanese citizens , especially the family members of the missing . One Japanese family member publicly referred to Waddle as , " the most terrible criminal of them all . " Another family member , referring to Waddle said , " If you 're a man , you should fall on your knees and ask for our pardon ! " In response , Waddle delivered letters of apology to the Japanese consulate in Hawaii for delivery to the victims ' families during the last week of February . 
 Japanese government officials publicly expressed concern over the reports that civilians had been at Greeneville 's controls during the collision . Japan 's foreign minister , Yōhei Kōno , complained that U.S. officials had not provided details on the civilians ' involvement , stating , " I cannot help but say it is an extremely grave situation if it were the case that the participation of civilians in the submarine 's surfacing maneuver led to the accident . " 
 = = Damage to Greeneville = = 
 Greeneville suffered some damage in the collision . Beginning at the 31 @-@ foot ( 9 m ) mark on the submarine 's rudder , surface tiles had been sheared off , exposing bare metal , and there were several dents on the rudder 's leading edge , one of which had punctured the metal skin . A 24 @-@ foot ( 7 m ) section of acoustic hull surface treatment tiles below the sail had been sheared off as well . 
 Greeneville was repaired in a drydock at Pearl Harbor at a cost of US $ 2 million . After the repairs were completed on 18 April 2002 , the submarine returned to operational status . 
 = = Court of inquiry convenes = = 
 In addition to the NTSB investigation , the USN also initiated their own investigation on 10 February . USN Admiral Charles Griffiths was assigned to direct the investigation . Griffiths ' team completed a preliminary inquiry report and submitted it to Admiral Fargo on 16 February . The following day , Fargo announced that the USN would convene a court of inquiry , the USN 's highest form of administrative hearing . 
 A USN court of inquiry is similar to a grand jury investigation in civil court . The court has subpoena power and provides legal safeguards for the affected parties , such as the right to be represented by counsel . The court is a military investigative process and as such has no judge . Instead , a panel of three admirals make up the court and make a report based on the evidence presented in the inquiry . Testimony and other evidence presented in the court can later be used in court @-@ martial proceedings . 
 The inquiry panel into the accident consisted of Vice Admiral John B. <unk> and Rear Admirals Paul F. Sullivan and David M. Stone . At Fargo 's invitation the Japan Maritime Self @-@ Defense Force ( JMSDF ) sent Rear Admiral Isamu Ozawa to participate in the inquiry as a non @-@ voting adviser . The three named " affected " parties of the inquiry were Waddle , Pfeifer , and Coen , who were present in the hearing room throughout the inquiry . Commander Mark Patton , a classmate of Waddle 's at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis , Md . 20 years ago , was quoted as saying " The general opinion on the waterfront was that it was important that he stand up and take responsibility . We wanted to see that happen . It was important for the public to see that happen . And he did that very well . " 
 The court of inquiry began on 5 March 2001 . Representing Waddle as counsel was Charles Gittins , who arrived in Hawaii on 4 March . Family members of the Ehime Maru victims were seated directly behind Waddle in the hearing room and throughout the inquiry frequently reacted very emotionally and vocally to evidence presented during the hearings . 
 The court called numerous witnesses , including Griffiths , Brandhuber , and Ōnishi . Ōnishi testified that large waves swept him overboard and far from his sinking ship , preventing him from assisting the rest of Ehime Maru 's crew as they clung to the sinking ship . Afterwards , Waddle approached Ōnishi and apologized for the accident . 
 Waddle also apologized to several groups of Ehime Maru family members on 8 and 16 March . One of them , Naoko Nakata , wife of one of the missing crewmembers , asked Waddle to " please tell the truth in court . " Shortly thereafter , Waddle also apologized again during an interview with a Japanese television network . 
 Admiral Albert H. Konetzni testified during the inquiry that Waddle and his crew had rushed into Greeneville 's final maneuvers without taking enough time to ensure that no other vessels were in the vicinity . In a statement that was widely reported in the media , Konetzni looked at Waddle and said , " I 'd like to go over there and punch him for not taking more time . " 
 Seacrest was given testimonial immunity in exchange for his testimony . Pfeifer and Coen submitted unsworn statements to the court and , therefore , did not have to face cross @-@ examination . 
 Waddle requested immunity in exchange for his offer to testify , but Fargo denied the request , stating that Waddle 's testimony was not " essential " in determining the facts of the case . In spite of the denial of immunity , Waddle elected to testify for the court . Waddle stated later that he felt he needed to testify because he had promised some of the Ehime Maru family members that he would do so , he had heard that Greeneville 's crew expected him to , and he wanted to get his side of the story into the record . 
 After hearing testimony from 31 witnesses , the court completed its hearings on 20 March . None of the civilian DVs were asked to testify . The inquiry report was submitted to Fargo on 20 April . 
 = = Findings of the court = = 
 The court made several findings , including that Waddle failed to take positive action in response to the non @-@ availability of the AVSDU , nine of the 13 <unk> in and around the control room were manned by substitute personnel , and that one of the sonar operators was unqualified to stand watch . The court also issued numerous opinions , including that the accident was caused by " a series and combination of individual negligence ( s ) onboard Greeneville , " " artificial urgency " by Waddle to rush the submarine through its demonstration schedule as it began to run late , failure to follow standard procedures , the abbreviated periscope search , distractions and obstruction caused by the presence of the civilian guests , crew training deficiencies , overconfidence and complacency , and Waddle 's not paying enough attention to ship contact information . The court found that , although Brandhuber was the senior officer present on Greeneville , Waddle as captain was solely responsible for the safe navigation of the submarine . The inquiry report went into great detail on the purpose and rules surrounding the USN 's DVE program . 
 The court recommended against court @-@ martial for the officers involved because of an absence of any " criminal intent or deliberate misconduct . " Instead , the court recommended non @-@ judicial punishment for Waddle and Seacrest and administrative action for Brandhuber , Pfeifer , Coen , Greeneville 's chief of the boat Douglas Coffman , and sonar supervisor Edward <unk> . The court recommended that the USN DVE program continue . 
 Relatives of Ehime Maru 's crewmembers were angry that none of the USN personnel involved would face court @-@ martial and that Waddle could remain in the USN and would retain his retirement pension . Ryosuke Terata , father of one of the missing students , said with regard to Waddle , " If ( he were ) in Japan , he would be fired and indicted on charges such as professional negligence resulting in death . " 
 On 23 April , Waddle received an admiral 's mast ( a form of USN non @-@ judicial punishment ) from Fargo at the USN Pacific Fleet headquarters in Pearl Harbor . Fargo pronounced Waddle guilty of dereliction of duty and improper <unk> of a vessel . He fined Waddle a half @-@ month 's pay for two months ( fine delayed for six months , and waived after the six months with good behavior ) , gave him a verbal reprimand , and " made clear that [ Waddle 's ] resignation was expected . " Coen also received an admiral 's mast in which he was " counseled for failing to execute his duties to ensure the safe navigation of the ship and to properly supervise watch personnel in the control room . " Seacrest was admonished at a captain 's mast , and Brandhuber , Pfeifer , Coffman , and <unk> received formal administrative admonishments . The masts and administrative admonishments were documented and placed in the servicemembers ' military records , perhaps affecting their future chances for promotions and assignments . Waddle , who had been working at a Navy desk job since being relieved of command , formally retired from the USN on 1 October 2001 . Waddle did receive interviews from several private corporations who " put more value in the way Waddle handled himself during the grueling , 12 @-@ day court of inquiry than they did in any sort of blame for the collision . " . After 10 months of unemployment , Waddle worked as a project manager for an energy firm in North Carolina and , in July 2004 , started his own business as a consultant , executive coach , and public speaker . 
 = = Salvage and recovery = = 
 On 16 February , the USN Supervisor of Salvage and Diving ( SUPSALV ) and Submarine Development Squadron 5 ( <unk> 5 ) , using the Scorpio remotely piloted underwater vehicle ( ROV ) , located Ehime Maru in 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) of water on the ocean bottom ( 21 ° 04 @.@ 95 ′ N 157 ° 49 @.@ 58 ′ W ) . Over the next two weeks , the USN used the Scorpio and the Deep Drone ROVs to search the ocean bottom around Ehime Maru for the remains of any of her missing crewmembers , without success . 
 After assessing the technical feasibility and environmental impact of raising Ehime Maru from the ocean bottom , the U.S. government , in June 2001 , decided to proceed with recovering the ship from the ocean floor . The USN contracted the Dutch company Smit International and Crowley Maritime Corp. , headquartered in Washington state , to salvage the wreck of Ehime Maru . After consultation between the contractors , representatives from the Japanese government , and U.S. government officials , the decision was made not to raise Ehime Maru all the way to the surface but to lift and carry it underwater to shallow water near Oahu . Once there , divers could enter the ship . The operation would be the first to lift something of that size from such a depth . USN Rear Admiral William Klemm directed the recovery operation . 
 Using the Phoenix III ROV , contractors , beginning on 20 July 2001 , first removed Ehime Maru 's mast and other items on the ship 's decks that could interfere with the lifting operation . Assisted by technical experts from Japan , including one from the company that built Ehime Maru , the Rockwater II contract diving support vessel prepared the ship for lifting beginning the first week of August . After some difficulty , Ehime Maru was lifted off the ocean floor by Rockwater II on 5 October and slowly moved to a location closer to shore . On 14 October the wreck was set down in 115 ft ( 35 m ) of water one statute mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Honolulu International Airport 's reef runway . 
 On 15 October , the first team of divers from Mobile Diving and Salvage Unit ONE ( MDSU ONE ) began assessing the sunken vessel . Working in low- to zero @-@ visibility conditions , 66 MDSU ONE and 30 Japanese JMSDF divers from the submarine rescue ship ARS Chihaya conducted 526 dives over 29 days , searching the wreck . Ōnishi , relatives of some of the missing crewmembers , and several Japanese government officials observed the operation from the dive support ships . The divers recovered the bodies of eight of the nine missing crewmembers , many personal effects , and several items unique to the ship , such as its nameplate , bell , anchors , and helm . 
 After the recovery was complete , on 25 November , Ehime Maru was lifted , towed back out to sea suspended about 90 feet ( 27 m ) below the towing barge , and scuttled in 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) of water 12 nautical miles ( 22 km ) south of Barbers Point . The event was witnessed by three of Ehime Maru 's victims ' families on board Chihaya . The total cost of the salvage operations was about $ 60 million . 
 = = Compensation = = 
 On 10 April 2002 , the USN signed an agreement to pay the Ehime Prefectural Government US $ 11 @.@ 47 million in compensation for the sinking of Ehime Maru . Some $ 8 @.@ 87 million was to help pay to replace the ship , and the remainder was to pay for counseling and financial aid for the survivors as well as to pay for a memorial ceremony for the victims . 
 On 14 November 2002 , the USN agreed to pay $ 13 @.@ 9 million in compensation to 33 of the 35 families of victims or injured survivors . The remaining two family members accepted a $ 2 @.@ 6 million settlement from the USN on 31 January 2003 . Before accepting the settlement , the two family members had asked for face @-@ to @-@ face apologies from the USN and Waddle , a full investigation into the collision , a reasonable compensation offer , and a promise from the USN to help prevent similar accidents in the future . Masumi Terata , whose teenage son Yusuke died in the accident , said that she was happy that the settlement was behind them , but added that , " My true feeling is that if possible , I want to see my son one more time . " 
 = = Waddle 's trip to Japan = = 
 On 14 December 2002 , Waddle , accompanied by Charles Gittins , traveled to Japan to apologize personally to the victims ' families . On 15 December , Waddle visited the Ehime Maru memorial at Uwajima Fisheries High School and placed a wreath of white lilies before a monument to the dead , bowed in silence and then read the victims ' names aloud . No local officials were present during Waddle 's visit , citing statements from some victims ' families that they did not want Waddle to visit . Later that day , Waddle met with some of the families of the victims and with some of the survivors . The next day , in Tokyo , Waddle met with Masumi Terata . Speaking of her meeting with Waddle , Terata stated , " I am first and foremost the family member of a victim and Mr. Waddle is first and foremost a victimizer . But when I saw Mr. Waddle as a person who was crying and apologizing , I thought he was apologizing from the heart . " 
 In a press conference on 17 December , Gittins criticized the USN for their continued insistence that Waddle not come to Japan to visit the victims ' families . Said Gittins , " For the life of me , I cannot understand why the Navy did not want Scott to come meet with the families and do what is morally right and what is understood in Japanese culture to be the right thing to do . " Gittins added that he had received emails from the USN as recently as the week before urging Waddle not to make the trip . Gittins stated that the reason that it took two years for Waddle to make the trip to Japan was because Waddle was forbidden to do so while he was still in the USN and because of financial constraints and fear of litigation after his retirement . 
 = = Effect on Japanese – American relations = = 
 After the sinking of Ehime Maru , many Japanese , including government officials , questioned why civilians were allowed in Greeneville 's control room during maneuvers that could place other , uninvolved , vessels at risk . Also , the Japanese expressed concern that the United States Navy did not immediately take full responsibility for the accident , appeared at first to try to conceal information about the DVE program , and did not court martial Waddle or have him personally apologize immediately after the accident . The subsequent effort by the U.S. government to retrieve the victims ' remains from the sunken wreck , numerous apologies from U.S. government representatives and Waddle , and the compensation paid to the Ehime government and to the victims ' families appear to have assuaged much of the anger directed toward the U.S. government and military . Many Japanese , both government and private citizens , however , continue to call for the U.S. government to make more effort to reduce or eliminate serious accidents and crimes involving U.S. military personnel . 
 Although the United States and Japan have been strong allies since the end of World War II , the accident involving Ehime Maru showed that the relationship is not always completely harmonious , especially with regard to incidents in which U.S. military personnel or assets injure or kill Japanese citizens or damage their property . In response to crimes committed by U.S. servicemembers against Japanese citizens , such as the 1995 Okinawan rape incident , Japanese citizens and some Japanese government officials have questioned the equality of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan and the issue of responsibility and accountability by the U.S. government concerning the actions of its military members in Japan . In addition , the Japanese have questioned the U.S. commitment to safe operations of its military assets in light of several accidents , including aircraft crashes and other ship collisions that have injured or killed Japanese citizens . 
 = = Later events = = 
 Acting on a request from the Japanese government , the state of Hawaii established a non @-@ profit group , the Ehime Maru Memorial Association , on 11 November 2001 , to coordinate the activities of placing an Ehime Maru memorial at a site in Hawaii . The monument to the ship was completed on 9 February 2002 , at <unk> Waterfront Park near Honolulu . Each year since the accident , memorial ceremonies have been held on 9 February at Uwajima Fisheries High School in Ehime and at the Ehime Maru monument in Hawaii . 
 Shipbuilders in Imabari , Ehime Prefecture , began construction on a new Ehime Maru on 17 April 2002 . Upon completion , the new ship sailed to Hawaii , arriving on 17 June 2003 . In a ceremony at the Ehime Maru monument , the principal of Uwajima Fishery at the time of the disaster , <unk> Joko ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , read a message from <unk> Kato , the governor of Ehime Prefecture , addressed to the Hawaiian people . The message stated , in part , " Since the Ehime Maru tragic accident two years ago , the people of Hawaii have shown compassion and warm support . " 
 The NTSB released its report on the accident on 19 October 2005 . The NTSB report largely confirmed the USN 's inquiry findings , including that Waddle was primarily responsible for the collision . The NTSB report , however , was more critical of the distractions caused by the DV civilians on Greeneville that contributed to the accident . The report concluded that the USN had recognized the " detrimental operating conditions " aboard Greeneville and had taken " additional measures to address the safety of operations " on submarines , including additional restrictions on DVE visitors . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Barry ( 2004 ) . Investigating Human Error : Incidents , Accidents , and Complex Systems . Ashgate Pub Ltd . ISBN 0 @-@ 7546 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Waddle , Scott ; Ken Abraham ( 2003 ) . The Right Thing . Brentwood , Tennessee : Integrity Publishers . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 036 @-@ 5 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = I Luv This Shit = 
 " I Luv This Shit " ( clean version titled " I Luv This " ) is a song by American recording artist August Alsina . It features a guest appearance American rapper Trinidad James . It was released on February 19 , 2013 by Def Jam Recordings as the first single from Alsina 's debut EP Downtown : Life Under the Gun ( 2013 ) , and was included on his first studio album , Testimony ( 2014 ) . " I Luv This Shit " is an R & B song about partying with alcohol and drugs . Two remixes — one featuring Birdman and another featuring Trey Songz and Chris Brown — were released . 
 The song was well received by music critics , and peaked at number fifty @-@ one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number fifteen on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It was promoted by a Motion Family @-@ directed music video and performances on The Wendy Williams Show , 106 & Park and The Arsenio Hall Show . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " I Luv This Shit " was written by August Alsina , The Exclusives ( Sean <unk> and Ralph Jeanty ) , Samuel Irving III , Christine Massa , and Trinidad James and was produced by Knucklehead . It was recorded by <unk> and Cody <unk> at Goldie 's Playhouse and Zac Recording Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , and mixed by Jaycen Joshua with assistance from Trehy Harris at Larrabee Sound Studios , North Hollywood . Vocals were produced by The Exclusives . Knucklehead told Vibe in 2014 that he created the song 's beat and knew it would be successful , stating : " I just knew what [ Alsina 's ] voice was gonna do over my beat . And that beat didn 't sound like [ any ] thing else at the time that was out ... When I made the beat , I called him immediately after I finished it . " After playing the beat to Alsina and The Exclusives , they recorded the song in one hour . It is an R & B song instrumented by guitar , synthesizer , synth @-@ horns and a heavy bassline . The production was compared by Spin 's Brandon Soderberg to the work of The @-@ Dream . It revolves around about partying with alcohol and drugs with the central hook " I love this shit " , and references the vodka Ciroc , yet there is an element of sorrow to Alsina 's vocals . James ' verse contemplates human nature , according to Gregory Adams of Exclaim ! . " I Luv This Shit " was originally recorded for Alsina 's mixtape The Product 2 ( 2013 ) , and was included on his debut EP Downtown : Life Under the Gun ( 2013 ) . It was also a bonus track on his first studio album , Testimony ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 " I Luv This Shit " was released as a digital download by Def Jam Recordings on February 19 , 2013 in Canada and the United States . A remix of the song , titled " I Luv This Shit ( G @-@ Mix ) " , was made available for streaming in May 2013 and features Birdman . The single impacted rhythmic contemporary radio in the United States on September 3 , 2013 . Trey Songz and Chris Brown appeared on another remix of " I Luv This Shit " ; it was released for digital download by Def Jam on October 4 , 2013 in the US . Songz and Brown wrote their verses of the remix . Alsina 's vocals for the remix were recorded by <unk> at Upper Class Studios , Atlanta . Songz ' vocals were recorded by Anthony Daniels at Premier Studios in New York City and Brown 's were recorded by Brian Springer at Glenwood Studios in Burbank , California . 
 = = Reception = = 
 AllMusic 's Andy Kellman picked " I Luv This Shit " as one of the best tracks from both Downtown and Testimony . Gregory Adams of Exclaim ! praised Alsina 's " velvety " vocal delivery on the song . Brandon Soderberg from Spin called it " one of the more mazy and rewarding radio R & B songs in quite some time " , but was unimpressed with the Songz and Brown remix 's shift from partying to sexual intercourse , particularly the rewriting of the hook as " She loves this shit " or " You love this shit " . A panel of writers for Complex placed " I Luv This Shit " at number thirty @-@ three on its list of the 50 Best Songs of 2013 ; Claire Lobenfeld disapproved of James ' verse but lauded the " quivering beauty " of Alsina 's voice . At the 2014 BET Awards , " I Luv This Shit " won the award for Viewer 's Choice and was nominated for the award of Best Collaboration , losing to " Drunk in Love " by Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z. 
 " I Luv This Shit " topped the Mainstream R & B / Hip @-@ Hop chart for two weeks in October 2013 , becoming the first R & B artist to reach number one with a debut single since Jeremih with " Birthday Sex " in 2009 . On the main Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , it reached number fifteen , and peaked at number nineteen on the Rhythmic chart . It spent three weeks atop the US Heatseekers Songs in October and November 2013 , then peaked at number fifty @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 . On March 6 , 2014 the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified " I Luv This Shit " gold for shipping 500 @,@ 000 copies . The certification was updated to platinum ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) on October 2 , 2014 . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 The music video for " I Luv This Shit " was filmed in Atlanta in January 2013 and directed by Motion Family . Alsina sleeps with two women , then James delivers his verse while a woman dances next to him . At the end of the song Alsina and James go to a strip club , where the two women see each other and engage in an argument while Alsina laughs . Alsina performed " I Luv This Shit " on The Wendy Williams Show on October 28 , 2013 . For the New Year 's Eve 2013 special of 106 & Park , titled 106 & Party , he performed the remix of the song with Songz and the remix of " Numb " . On April 1 , 2014 Alsina was interviewed and performed a medley of " Make It Home " and " I Luv This Shit " on late @-@ night talk show The Arsenio Hall Show . At the 2014 BET Awards , Alsina performed " Kissin ' on My Tattoos " before transitioning into " I Luv This Shit " . Songz and Brown joined him and sang their verses of the remix . Songz finished the performance with " Na Na " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = SM U @-@ 4 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 4 or U @-@ IV was a U @-@ 3 @-@ class submarine or U @-@ boat built for and operated by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) before and during the First World War . The submarine was built as part of a plan to evaluate foreign submarine designs , and was the second of two boats of the class built by Germaniawerft of Kiel , Germany . 
 U @-@ 4 was authorized in 1906 , begun in March 1907 , launched in November 1908 , and towed from Kiel to Pola in April 1909 . The double @-@ hulled submarine was just under 139 feet ( 42 m ) long and displaced between 240 and 300 tonnes ( 260 and 330 short tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . The design of the submarine had poor diving qualities and several modifications to U @-@ 4 's diving planes and fins occurred in her first years in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . Her armament , as built , consisted of two bow torpedo tubes with a supply of three torpedoes , but was supplemented with a deck gun , the first of which was added in 1915 . 
 The boat was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in August 1909 , and served as a training boat — sometimes making as many as ten cruises a month — through the beginning of the First World War in 1914 . At the start of that conflict , she was one of only four operational submarines in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy U @-@ boat fleet . Over the first year of the war , U @-@ 4 made several unsuccessful attacks on warships and captured several smaller vessels as prizes . In July 1915 , she scored what Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 calls her greatest success when she torpedoed and sank the Italian armored cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi , the largest ship hit by U @-@ 4 during the war . 
 In mid @-@ May 1917 , U @-@ 4 was a participant in a raid on the Otranto Barrage which precipitated the Battle of Otranto Straits . In a separate action that same month , U @-@ 4 sank her second largest ship , the Italian troopship Perseo . She scored her final success in July 1917 with the sinking of a French tug . In total , U @-@ 4 sank twelve ships totaling over 18 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) . She survived the war as Austria @-@ Hungary 's longest serving submarine , was ceded to France as a war reparation , and scrapped in 1920 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 U @-@ 4 was built as part of a plan by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to competitively evaluate foreign submarine designs from Simon Lake , Germaniawerft , and John Philip Holland . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy authorized the construction of U @-@ 4 ( and sister ship , U @-@ 3 ) in 1906 by Germaniawerft of Kiel , Germany . U @-@ 4 was laid down on 12 March 1907 and launched on 20 November 1908 . After completion , she was towed via Gibraltar to Pola , where she arrived on 19 April 1909 . 
 U @-@ 4 's design was an improved version of Germaniawerft 's design for the Imperial German Navy 's first U @-@ boat , U @-@ 1 , and featured a double hull with internal saddle tanks . The Germaniawerft engineers refined the design 's hull shape through extensive model trials . 
 U @-@ 4 was 138 feet 9 inches ( 42 m ) long by 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) abeam and had a draft of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 81 m ) . She displaced 240 tonnes ( 260 short tons ) surfaced and 300 tonnes ( 330 short tons ) submerged . She was armed with two bow 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , and was designed to carry up to three torpedoes . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After U @-@ 4 's arrival at Pola in April 1909 , she was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 29 August 1909 as SM U @-@ 4 . During the evaluation of the U @-@ 3 class conducted by the Navy , the class ' poor diving and handling characteristics were noted . To alleviate the diving problems , U @-@ 4 's fins were changed in size and shape several times , and eventually , the front diving planes were removed and a stationary stern flap was affixed to the hull . U @-@ 4 served as a training boat between 1910 and 1914 and made as many as ten cruises per month in that capacity . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = 1914 – 1916 = = = 
 At the beginning of World War I , she was one of only four operational submarines in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . On 27 September 1914 , U @-@ 4 began operating reconnaissance cruises out of the naval base at Cattaro under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Hermann <unk> . U @-@ 4 attacked the cruiser Waldeck @-@ Rousseau on 17 October , but the French vessel escaped without serious damage . In late November , U @-@ 4 seized the 13 GRT Albanian sailing vessel Fiore del Mar as a prize off Montenegro . U @-@ 4 received her first radio set the following month . 
 U @-@ 4 's next success was the capture of three Montenegrin boats on 19 February 1915 . Rudolph Singule , who was to become U @-@ 4 's most successful commander , assumed command of the boat in April 1915 . Around the same time , the boat was equipped with a 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) quick firing ( QF ) deck gun . On 24 May , in the Gulf of Drin , U @-@ 4 unsuccessfully attacked an Italian Lombardia @-@ class cruiser , but on 9 June , Singule spotted the British cruiser Dublin escorting a convoy along the Montenegrin coast . Despite a screen of six destroyers , U @-@ 4 was able to torpedo Dublin off San Giovanni de Medua . Twelve men on Dublin died in the attack , but the cruiser made her way safely , albeit damaged , back to port . 
 On 18 July , U @-@ 4 chanced upon an Italian squadron of ships shelling the railroads at Dubrovnik . Singule selected the Italian armored cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi as a target and torpedoed her . Giuseppe Garibaldi — at 7 @,@ 234 GRT , the largest ship sunk by U @-@ 4 — sank with a loss of 53 men ; 525 men survived . Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 calls the sinking of Giuseppe Garibaldi as U @-@ 4 's greatest success . In August , she was sent out to search for her missing sister ship , U @-@ 3 , which was overdue , having been sunk on 13 August by the French destroyer Bisson . In November , U @-@ 4 made an unsuccessful attack on a British Topaze @-@ class cruiser . In early December , U @-@ 4 dispatched two small Albanian vessels in the Gulf of Drin . The 10 GRT sailing vessel <unk> was sunk , and the <unk> was taken as a prize . New periscopes and a new gyrocompass were installed on U @-@ 4 later in the month . On 3 January 1916 , operating again near the Gulf of Drin , Singule and U @-@ 4 seized another Albanian sailing vessel , Halil , and sank two smaller boats . 
 In early February , U @-@ 4 sank the 475 GRT French patrol vessel Jean Bart 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) southwest of Cape <unk> , off Durazzo . Just five days later , U @-@ 4 made an unsuccessful attack on a British Birmingham @-@ class cruiser . Over 26 and 27 March , U @-@ 4 participated in a search for the lost Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine U @-@ 24 . Three days later , U @-@ 4 sank the British schooner John Pritchard Of <unk> with explosive charges off the island of <unk> . In July , U @-@ 4 was outfitted with a new 66 mm / 26 ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck gun , which equaled the main gun planned for the U @-@ 20 class , under construction at the time . 
 On 2 August , U @-@ 4 missed an Italian Nino Bixio @-@ class cruiser in a torpedo attack , and three days later , was missed by two torpedoes in an attack by an enemy submarine . A week later , U @-@ 4 successfully torpedoed and sank the Italian schooner Ponte Maria off Brindisi and weathered another unsuccessful enemy submarine attack . Two days later , on 14 August , U @-@ 4 closed out her busy month of August by attacking the British steamer <unk> off Cape Nau . Some two months later , U @-@ 4 sank the Italian tanker Margaretha at position 40 ° 1 ′ N 17 ° 44 ′ E. Margaretha , originally the <unk> & Sons ship Atilla , went down without any reported loss of life on 13 October . 
 = = = 1917 – 1918 = = = 
 In early May 1917 , U @-@ 4 sank the steamer Perseo — the second largest ship sunk by the boat — in the Ionian Sea . Although Perseo was serving as an Italian troop transport at the time , there are no reports of casualties in the 4 May attack . In mid @-@ May 1917 , U @-@ 4 participated in a support role in a raid on the Otranto Barrage that precipitated the Battle of Otranto Straits . On the night of 14 / 15 May , the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruisers Helgoland , Saida , and Novara attacked the drifters that deployed the anti @-@ submarine nets that formed part of the Barrage , sinking 14 , damaging 5 , and taking 72 prisoners . Destroyers Csepel and Balaton were sent to simultaneously attack Italian transports shuttling between Italy and Valona , and sank an Italian destroyer and a munitions ship . U @-@ 4 , which was posted near Valona , was a part of a force of three U @-@ boats intended to intercept British and Italian ships responding to the attacks ; the other two were the Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ 27 ( assigned to patrol between Brindisi and Cattaro ) and the German UC @-@ 25 ( assigned to mine Brindisi ) . A squadron of British cruisers and Italian and French destroyers joined the battle against the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruisers on 15 May . Several ships on each side were damaged by the time the engagement was broken off . As a result of the attacks the drifter line of the Barrage was moved farther south and maintained only during the day , a success for the Central Powers . U @-@ 4 did not take any offensive action during the raid and ensuing battle . 
 On 30 May at Corfu , U @-@ 4 torpedoed and sank the French passenger steamer SS Italia , in operation by the French Navy as an armed boarding ship . On 19 June , U @-@ 4 scored a triple victory when she sank the French steamers <unk> <unk> and <unk> and the Greek ship Kerkyra off Taranto . U @-@ 4 sank what would be her final ship on 12 July , when she torpedoed the French tug <unk> off Cape Stilo . In September , U @-@ 4 received a new bulwark on her conning tower . 
 U @-@ 4 arrived at Pola for the final time on 1 November 1918 and was there at the war 's end . She was ceded to France as a war reparation and scrapped in 1920 . U @-@ 4 was the longest serving Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine , and sank a total of 18 @,@ 264 GRT enemy shipping during the war . 
 = Herschel Greer Stadium = 
 Herschel Greer Stadium is a former minor league baseball park located in Nashville , Tennessee , on the grounds of Fort Negley , an American Civil War fortification , approximately two miles ( 3 km ) south of the city 's downtown district . It can currently seat 10 @,@ 300 people . 
 Built in 1978 to house the Nashville Sounds , an expansion franchise of the Double @-@ A Southern League , the stadium played host to the club until 2014 . In 1985 , the Sounds transitioned into a Triple @-@ A franchise , competing first in the American Association and later the Pacific Coast League . Amidst the Sounds ' 37 @-@ season run , Greer simultaneously hosted two professional baseball clubs in 1993 and 1994 , acting as a temporary home to a displaced Southern League franchise known during that period as the Nashville Xpress . The stadium has also seen occasional use as a field for college baseball and charity events . 
 The stadium is best recognized by its distinctive guitar @-@ shaped scoreboard , which displays the line score across the neck . It has been the site of three minor league all @-@ star games , eight no @-@ hit games , including one perfect game , and a 24 @-@ inning game which tied the record for the longest game in PCL history . 
 The subject of numerous upgrades and repairs to maintain its functionality , Greer became one of the oldest stadiums used by a Triple @-@ A team , and it now falls well below professional baseball 's standards for a stadium at that class level . For over a decade , the Sounds attempted to secure agreements with the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County for a new ballpark to replace Greer , eventually resulting in the construction of First Tennessee Park , which became the Sounds ' new home in 2015 . 
 Greer Stadium has been closed and unused since the end of the 2014 baseball season , and virtually abandoned since the Sounds ' offices were moved to the new facility in early 2015 . Its future has not been officially determined , but a 2016 demolition has been proposed by the Metropolitan Nashville government . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1977 – 1979 = = = 
 When Larry Schmittou decided to bring professional baseball back to Nashville in the late 1970s , he knew he would have to build a new ballpark for his team . He negotiated a lease with the city for a plot of land at the foot of St. Cloud Hill on the grounds of Fort Negley , an American Civil War fortification , approximately two miles ( three km ) south of downtown . At the time , this was the site of a city @-@ owned softball complex that the city planned to relocate . The city was prepared to lease him the land , but Schmittou would be responsible for building the stadium , paying the property taxes , and paying the city a portion of the team 's total revenue . 
 The projected construction cost of the stadium was between US $ 300 @,@ 000 and $ 500 @,@ 000 ; but the actual cost was over $ 1 million . Schmittou looked to local suppliers to donate construction materials , took out a $ 30 @,@ 000 loan from a bank , and even mortgaged his own home to help pay for the ballpark . Country music star Conway Twitty helped Schmittou bring in fellow stars Jerry Reed , Richard <unk> , and Cal Smith as well as other members of the Nashville community as team shareholders . The stadium was posthumously named for Herschel Lynn Greer , a prominent Nashville businessman and the first president of the Nashville Vols baseball team , whose family donated $ 25 @,@ 000 for stadium construction . 
 The home opener for Greer 's first tenants , the Southern League 's Nashville Sounds , Double @-@ A affiliate of the Cincinnati Reds , was scheduled for April 25 , 1978 . Construction was underway , but Schmittou knew the ballpark would not be ready by that date . The team requested to open the season with road games and had to swap a series with the Chattanooga Lookouts in order to have more time to complete the stadium . Even with this extra time , the ballpark was still behind schedule . The original sod arrived dead , and by the time the replacement grass had arrived , the crew hired to lay the sod had left . General manager Farrell Owens organized a volunteer crew to lay the sod by calling a local radio station to announce the team was having a " sod party " . A group of approximately 50 people came out to lay and roll the sod the day before the scheduled opening game . 
 The Sounds ' home opener , scheduled for April 25 , was rained out and pushed back to April 26 . After playing their first ten games away from home , and with tractors and grading machines still preparing the field on game day , the Sounds played their first home game at Herschel Greer Stadium on April 26 , 1978 . The 12 – 4 victory against the Savannah Braves was witnessed by a sellout crowd of 8 @,@ 156 spectators . Southern League president Billy Hitchcock was on hand to witness the event , and Conway Twitty threw out the first pitch . 
 Though the stadium was opened on time , the late sod was not the only issue on opening day . The stadium 's seats , which had previously been installed in Atlanta 's Fulton County Stadium , arrived just in time . Construction of the backstop was still being completed on opening day . Players for both the Sounds and the visiting Braves had concerns about the safety of playing on the quickly installed infield , initially refusing to even play on the surface . Left fielders complained about the extra @-@ steep slope in left field that prevented them from seeing home plate . Only two women 's restrooms and one men 's restroom were functioning ; a few portable toilets were also available . 
 Initially , Greer was capable of seating 7 @,@ 200 spectators , but was expanded to 8 @,@ 800 by the end of the inaugural season . Theater @-@ type seats with back support and armrests accounted for 3 @,@ 000 of the stadium 's seats ; bleacher seats made up the remainder . The press box included two radio broadcast booths and an organ booth . There were locker rooms for two teams , which each accommodated 25 people , as well as a locker room for umpires . The field measured 330 feet ( 100 m ) down the left and right field lines , 375 feet ( 114 m ) to left- and right @-@ center fields , and 405 feet ( 123 m ) to center field . <unk> are located in foul territory in the outfield , with the home team occupying the third base dugout , and the visitors occupying the first base dugout . Eight lighting grids atop steel poles 100 feet ( 30 m ) high provided illumination for night games . Amenities for customers at the park included two men 's and women 's restrooms and seven concession stands . 
 With the addition of 5 @,@ 000 permanent seats , Greer 's seating capacity was increased to 13 @,@ 000 for the 1979 season . Improvements to the playing field included new irrigation and drainage systems which raised the field 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above its previous elevation . 
 = = = 1980 – 1989 = = = 
 Prior to the 1981 season , Greer underwent a number of renovations including the addition of over 1 @,@ 200 box seats and over 1 @,@ 000 new general admission seats . Two wooden general admission seating areas were replaced by 2 @,@ 000 contoured seats . The original backstop which consisted of several steel poles was upgraded to a steel cable system , eliminating most of the poles . Other stadium upgrades included two new dugouts , three entrance and exit ramps , a new sound system , doubling the size of the reader panel on the scoreboard , and enlarging the ticket booth . From February through mid @-@ summer 1984 , major renovations and additions were made to the stadium . A full @-@ service restaurant , The Hall of Fame Stadium Club , and a mini @-@ roof , to cover the last five rows of the reserved seating section and the main concourse , were built . A new press box included accommodations for members of the media , 2 separate booths for home and visiting radio broadcasts , and 2 separate booths for home and visiting television broadcasts . Ten sky boxes were built adjacent the press box ; by 1989 , the number of sky boxes had increased to 18 . 
 On July 2 , 1984 , Schmittou purchased the Triple @-@ A Evansville Triplets of the American Association . The team moved from Evansville to Nashville for the 1985 season , upon which the Triplets ' legacy was retired and the franchise adopted the Sounds ' name and history , effectively elevating the organization from Double @-@ A to Triple @-@ A. The Double @-@ A Southern League franchise was moved to Huntsville , Alabama , where the team began play as the Huntsville Stars at the hastily constructed Joe W. Davis Stadium . 
 To prepare for the move to Triple @-@ A , renovations continued prior to the 1985 season with the addition of 1 @,@ 200 box seats , which replaced some of the reserved grandstand seating , as well as more seating past the right field foul pole . A 4 @-@ line scoreboard 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high replaced the stadium 's original , which was relocated to far left field to serve as an out @-@ of @-@ town scoreboard , providing scores for American League , National League , and American Association baseball games . 
 Schmittou wanted " to put Nashville in contention for a future major league team . " Along with this goal , the need for more seating , and a desire to make Greer a more attractive ballpark , significant renovations began after the 1987 season . The number of box seats was increased by 40 % , the clubhouse and umpire facilities were upgraded , and the dugouts were entirely rebuilt . The new dugouts took up slightly more room than the previous ones , resulting in a minor contraction of the field 's dimensions : 327 feet ( 100 m ) down the left and right field lines , 371 feet ( 113 m ) to left and right @-@ center fields , and 400 feet ( 120 m ) to center field . The stadium 's main concourse entrance was redesigned to incorporate the stonemasonry of the adjacent Fort Negley . This expansion brought Greer 's total seating capacity up to 18 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = 1990 – 1999 = = = 
 In 1990 , Major League Baseball team owners met to demand that minor league owners improve their ballparks in order to meet their desired standards . Greer had already fallen behind other parks when it came to the quality of the field and clubhouse , and it also lacked a weight room and batting cages . Following his failed bid to secure an MLB team for Nashville in the 1993 Major League Baseball expansion process ( Nashville was one of ten cities considered , but was eliminated from contention very early in the process ; the two new franchises were eventually awarded to Denver and Miami ) , Schmittou focused on scaling @-@ back his proposed MLB stadium into a new Triple @-@ A facility for the Sounds . At a time when other Triple @-@ A cities were building new , relatively luxurious ballparks , Schmittou was unable to convince mayor Phil Bredesen or the Metro Council to pay for such a new park . He considered moving the team to a surrounding county , and even tried , unsuccessfully , to get the Metro Council to pass a referendum to let taxpayers vote on a temporary tax increase to pay off a proposed $ 40 million stadium in three years . In the end , Schmittou elected to keep the Sounds at Greer but make significant improvements to the stadium . 
 Greer 's distinctive guitar @-@ shaped scoreboard was installed behind the left @-@ center field wall prior to the 1993 season . Another addition in 1993 was that of a second team to play at Greer . From 1993 to 1994 , the ballpark simultaneously served as the home field for the Sounds and the Nashville Xpress , the Double @-@ A affiliate of the Minnesota Twins which played in the Southern League . This came about when Charlotte , North Carolina acquired a Triple @-@ A expansion franchise in 1993 , leaving the city 's Double @-@ A team , the Charlotte Knights , without a home . Sounds President Larry Schmittou offered Greer Stadium as a temporary home for the team . In order to accommodate another club at Greer , the Xpress scheduled its home games during the Sounds ' road trips . This marked the first time since the New York Mets and Yankees shared Shea Stadium in 1975 that two teams shared a facility . Baseball America ranked the dual Nashville teams as number one on its list of the " top ten happenings in minor league baseball . " In April 1994 , Michael Jordan 's foray into minor league baseball attracted 16 @,@ 842 fans to Greer to see the Xpress face his team , the Birmingham Barons , for the first time that season . In 1995 , the Xpress relocated to Wilmington , North Carolina and became the Port City Roosters . 
 Over $ 200 @,@ 000 was spent on renovations in the fall and winter before the 1995 season . The home clubhouse and weight room were remodeled , aisles behind the dugouts were resurfaced to reduce slippery areas , and the entire playing field was re @-@ sodded . This was the first replacement and upgrading of the field since the original sod was laid in 1978 . First , all of the old grass was stripped from the field . Then , the grounds crew installed a new drainage system . Four trenches were dug and laid with 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) of drainage pipe to carry water away from the field and beyond the center field wall . A layer of gravel was laid over the pipe , and a 4 @-@ to @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 10 to 15 cm ) layer of sand was placed above the gravel . After raising the level of the infield dirt and brick warning track to the same height of the new field , 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 9 @,@ 300 m ² ) of <unk> 419 Bermuda Grass was installed on the field and edged into a baseball diamond configuration . 
 Larry Schmittou sold his majority interest in the Sounds to Al Gordon , president of <unk> Companies LLC , before the 1997 season . The new ownership group refurbished every area of the stadium , including the concession stands , bathrooms , concourse , stadium exterior , home clubhouse ( a visitor 's clubhouse had been built under the third base bleachers for the 1996 season ) , and parking lots . Several sections of bleachers in left field past third base were removed and replaced by tents and a group picnic area . This brought the seating capacity to 11 @,@ 500 . 
 Following the 1997 season , the American Association was dissolved , and the Sounds became a member of the Pacific Coast League . As a result , Greer became the second @-@ easternmost stadium in PCL history behind the Indianapolis Indians ' Bush Stadium when the team played in the PCL from 1964 to 1968 . Greer was the easternmost active PCL stadium from 1998 to 2014 . 
 As consumer preferences changed and in an effort to attract larger groups to the ballpark , in the late 1990s , Greer Stadium 's fixed @-@ seating capacity was reduced to 10 @,@ 300 by eliminating the bleacher sections along the third base side and beyond right field , and constructing three party decks in their places . As a result , the general admission area became confined only to the existing bleachers behind the reserved seating along the first base line in right field . A fourth party area was created by repurposing unused space atop the grandstands behind home plate . Another deck was constructed behind the right @-@ field foul pole , which , at times , featured a rentable hot tub . 
 = = = 2000 – 2009 = = = 
 The aging Greer Stadium was not meant to last longer than 30 years , and was the subject of many renovations in the early 2000s to meet minimum Triple @-@ A standards . In 2003 , the Sounds proposed a new stadium to be built with a mix of public and private funds at the corner of 1st Avenue South and Gateway Boulevard ( now Korean Veterans Boulevard ) in Downtown Nashville on the former site of the city 's thermal transfer energy plant , targeting an opening date in April 2006 . After two years of the Sounds lobbying for the new park and threatening to leave town ( either for the suburbs or a new city altogether ) , Mayor Bill Purcell agreed to support preliminary plans for the stadium on October 25 , 2005 , and the Nashville Metro Council approved the new stadium on February 7 , 2006 , due in part to the Sounds securing construction financing through a consortium of banks and avoiding taxpayer expense . It was to be called First Tennessee Field . Opening day at the proposed new venue was repeatedly pushed back , eventually to as late as April 2009 . However , the Sounds and private developers <unk> Brothers , Eccles , & Rouse were unable to finalize financing and design plans for the new stadium by the April 15 , 2007 , deadline set by the Metro Council . As a result , the First Tennessee Field construction project was canceled and the Sounds remained at Greer with an uncertain future . 
 Following the dissolution of the plans for the new ballpark , and prior to the 2008 season , more than $ 1 million in upgrades and repairs were made to Greer Stadium . The improvements , which included a new clubhouse for the Sounds and visiting teams beyond the center field wall , improved field lighting , and improvements to restrooms , walkways , and seating , were made in order to keep the stadium functional for another three to five years . 
 MFP Baseball , which purchased the Sounds in early 2009 , invested over $ 2 million to make repairs and upgrades to the aging stadium 's playing field , restrooms , concession stands , scoreboard , sound system , and seating . The infield was re @-@ sodded and leveled , protective railing was installed along the edge of the field , and the backstop netting was replaced . The entire concourse and guitar scoreboard were repainted , broken seats were replaced , and Sluggers Sports Bar & Grill was remodeled . A permanent concert stage and a family fun zone were constructed by the concourse entrance . 
 = = = 2010 – present = = = 
 In 2011 , MFP Baseball and the Mayor 's Office began working toward a new stadium , with the city identifying three potential sites for construction , and recruiting stadium @-@ builder Populous to study each . The three sites were an area on the north end of The Gulch , the site of Nashville 's first ballpark ( Sulphur Dell ) , and various areas directly adjacent to Nissan Stadium and the eastern terminus of the John Seigenthaler Pedestrian Bridge . The Sounds still preferred the Thermal site due to its proximity to the city 's entertainment and central business districts , but the city was not willing to make a second attempt at a stadium in that location ( <unk> Amphitheater was eventually built there ) . Mayor Karl Dean preferred the Sulphur Dell site , in an attempt to bolster economic growth on downtown 's sluggish North side , while incorporating the ballpark into the surrounding neighborhoods . In late summer 2013 , the Sounds and the Nashville Metropolitan Government reached an agreement to build a new $ 37 million downtown ballpark at Sulphur Dell . Construction on First Tennessee Park began after necessary land @-@ swaps with the State of Tennessee , and the new ballpark opened in time for the start of the 2015 season . 
 Knowing that the 2014 season would be the team 's 37th and final campaign at the old ballpark , the Sounds launched the " Last Cheer At Greer " , a season @-@ long celebration of the stadium that included nods to its history and promotional giveaways to commemorate the closing . On August 27 , 2014 , the Sounds hosted their final game at Greer Stadium : an 8 – 5 loss to the Sacramento River Cats . In his only plate appearance of the evening , Nashville catcher Lucas May struck out swinging with a full count and the bases loaded to end the game . Announced attendance at the game was a standing @-@ room @-@ only crowd of 11 @,@ 067 , the first sellout since 2010 , and the largest crowd since 2007 . 
 As of May 2016 , the plans for preserving or redeveloping Greer Stadium have yet to be determined . The land on which Greer sits is currently owned by the Metro Parks department of Nashville 's government . Mayor Dean expressed interest in converting the facility to a community sporting complex or a new city park , but , nearing the end of his term , ultimately deferred the decision to the next mayor ( Megan Barry , elected 2015 ) . In February 2015 , The Tennessean reported on a few potential future uses for the stadium . These included a new home stadium for the United Soccer League 's Harrisburg City Islanders who , at one point , sought to relocate to the Nashville area , a Music City Rodeo , a Kroger grocery store , or a neighborhood park . Metro officials expect a one @-@ year public outreach and planning process before deciding what to do with the facility . Metropolitan Director of Parks Tommy Lynch has recommended that the stadium be demolished due to the potential costs for any renovation , including the removal of asbestos . The department asked Mayor Barry for $ 800 @,@ 000 to fund the demolition of the concourse and seating bowl so as to expand the green space at the property which could then be sold to private developers . Belmont University would like to turn the property into an indoor tennis facility . 
 = = Notable events = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 The Southern League All @-@ Star Game was held twice at Greer Stadium , once in 1979 and again in 1983 . In 1979 , the All @-@ Star team competed against the major league Atlanta Braves . The All @-@ Stars defeated the Braves by a score of five to two . When the game returned to Nashville in 1983 , the All @-@ Star squad played against the hosting Nashville Sounds . The Sounds lost to the All @-@ Stars by a score of three runs to two . 
 Greer played host to the Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star Game on July 14 , 1994 . Before a crowd of 11 @,@ 601 , and live television and radio audiences , the team of National League @-@ affiliated ( NL ) All @-@ Stars defeated the team of American League @-@ affiliated ( AL ) All @-@ Stars by a score of eight runs to five . Brad Woodall ( NL – Richmond Braves ) was the winning pitcher , Gary <unk> ( NL – Louisville Redbirds ) earned a save , and Kirt <unk> ( AL – Columbus Clippers ) was the losing pitcher . The " Stars of Stars " , or Most Valuable Players , were Luis Lopez ( International League – Richmond ) , Paul <unk> ( PCL – Phoenix Firebirds ) , and Ray Durham ( American Association – Nashville ) . 
 = = = Major league exhibitions = = = 
 On April 16 , 1981 , the New York Yankees made a stop in Nashville to play an exhibition game against the Sounds . The 10 – 1 Yankees victory was played in front of a standing @-@ room only crowd of 17 @,@ 318 spectators . Some Yankees present at the game included owner George Steinbrenner , coach Yogi Berra , and players Reggie Jackson , Bucky Dent , Lou Piniella , Bobby Murcer , Goose Gossage , Tommy John , and Johnny Oates . The Yankees returned for another game against the Sounds on April 28 , 1983 . Former Sound Don Mattingly , as well as Yankees manager Billy Martin and pitcher Goose Gossage were in attendance . The Sounds , who trailed the Yankees , 4 – 0 , going into the bottom of the ninth inning , scored five runs to beat the Yankees , 5 – 4 , before a crowd of 13 @,@ 641 . 
 The St. Louis Cardinals and Toronto Blue Jays played an exhibition game at Greer on April 3 , 1983 . Tennessee Governor Lamar Alexander was in attendance to watch the teams , which included players Ozzie Smith , George Hendrick , Rafael Santana , Keith Hernandez , Alfredo Griffin , former Sounds outfielder Willie McGee , and manager Bobby Cox . The Blue Jays defeated the Cardinals , 7 – 6 , before a crowd of 13 @,@ 742 . On April 4 – 5 , 1987 , the Cincinnati Reds ( managed by Pete Rose ) and Montreal Expos played a two @-@ game exhibition series at Greer . The first game ended with an 8 – 8 tie in the eleventh inning , but the Reds defeated the Expos , by a score of 5 – 3 , in the second game of the series . 
 Three major league exhibitions were to take place at Greer prior to the 1988 season . On April 1 , the Cincinnati Reds were scheduled to play against the Chicago White Sox , but the game was rained out . The White Sox were defeated by the Cleveland Indians , 8 – 6 , on April 2 . On April 3 , the Pittsburgh Pirates won over the Indians by a score of 3 – 2 . The Cincinnati Reds visited Nashville to play against the Sounds on April 23 , 1990 . A crowd of 14 @,@ 012 witnessed the Reds defeat Nashville , 3 – 0 . The Reds returned April 6 , 1991 , to face the Cleveland Indians , resulting in a 4 – 3 Cincinnati victory in 10 innings . 
 In March 1996 , Greer hosted eight major league teams competing in five games in what was billed as the Nashville Baseball Classic . On March 28 , the Chicago White Sox defeated the Texas Rangers by a score of 4 – 3 . The Cleveland Indians won over the St. Louis Cardinals , 9 @-@ 3 , in a second game played the same day . March 29 's doubleheader saw the White Sox defeat the Montreal Expos , 9 – 5 , and the Detroit Tigers beat the Cincinnati Reds , 7 – 4 . On March 31 , the Expos won over the Kansas City Royals , 3 – 1 . 
 = = = No @-@ hitters and perfect games = = = 
 Greer Stadium has been the setting for eight no @-@ hit games , including one perfect game . The first took place on May 16 , 1981 , when Jeff Cornell , of the visiting Jacksonville Suns , pitched a 4 – 0 no @-@ hit game against the Sounds . The second no @-@ hitter at Greer was Jim Deshaies ' 5 – 1 win over the Columbus Astros on May 4 , 1984 . In the second inning , Deshaies walked three batters and hit another , accounting for the only Astros run of the game , part of a seven @-@ inning doubleheader . The third , a 6 – 0 win over the Oklahoma City 89ers , was thrown by Nashville 's Bryan Kelly on July 17 , 1985 . 
 In a rare occurrence , the Sounds and the Indianapolis Indians exchanged no @-@ hitters on back @-@ to @-@ back nights ( August 6 and August 7 , 1988 ) . First , Indianapolis ' Randy Johnson and Pat <unk> combined for a no @-@ hit loss against the Sounds , a 1 – 0 Nashville win . Nashville won when Lenny Harris walked to first base , stole second base and third base , and then came home , scoring on a groundout . The next night , Nashville 's Jack Armstrong registered a no @-@ hit game against the Indians , a 4 – 0 Sounds victory . This was the first time in American Association history that teams played in back @-@ to @-@ back no @-@ hit games . 
 On April 7 , 2003 , John Wasdin tossed a perfect game at Greer in a 4 – 0 win over the Albuquerque Isotopes . This was only the second nine @-@ inning perfect complete game in the 100 @-@ year history of the PCL . Wasdin threw 100 pitches , striking out 15 batters . Later in the year , on August 2 , Colorado Springs Sky Sox pitchers Chris <unk> ( 7 innings pitched ( IP ) ) and Jesús Sánchez ( 2 IP ) combined for a no @-@ hit 3 – 0 win against Nashville . The most recent no @-@ hit effort at Greer took place on July 15 , 2006 , when Nashville pitchers Carlos Villanueva ( 6 IP ) , Mike Meyers ( 2 IP ) , and Alec Zumwalt ( 1 IP ) combined on a 2 – 0 win over the Memphis Redbirds . 
 = = = 24 @-@ Inning game = = = 
 On May 5 – 6 , 2006 , Greer was the site of a game which tied the record for the longest game , in terms of innings played , in PCL history . The Sounds and the New Orleans Zephyrs competed in a 24 @-@ inning game , played over the course of two days , which lasted a total of eight hours and seven minutes . New Orleans defeated Nashville by a score of five runs to four . The record was originally set on June 8 , 1909 in a game between the San Francisco Seals and Oakland Oaks . A few years later , on September 10 , 1911 , the record was tied by a contest between the Sacramento Solons and Portland Beavers . Seven PCL records were broken in the game , and three were tied . 
 = = Other events = = 
 In 1979 and 1980 , Greer Stadium was the home of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics ( NAIA ) World Series . The Lipscomb Bisons of Nashville 's Lipscomb University won the 1979 series , and the Grand Canyon Antelopes of Grand Canyon University won in 1980 . 
 In the early 1980s , Greer served as the home field for the Father Ryan High School football team . Father Ryan returned to playing at Greer from 2006 through 2008 , before moving to a new school athletic complex for the 2009 season . Depending on the Sounds ' schedule , some of the school 's home games were held at the visiting school 's field ( with Father Ryan designated as the home team ) or at other unused local high school fields . In the football configuration , the field runs along the first base line . 
 Until the 2011 opening of E. S. Rose Park , the Belmont Bruins baseball team played the majority of its season at Greer . When the Sounds ' home schedule prohibited its use , Belmont 's games were played at Nashville 's Shelby Park . 
 Greer was the site of the City of Hope Celebrity Softball Challenge from 1991 to 2014 . Two teams of country music stars participated in the game , from which proceeds go toward research and treatment of cancer and other life @-@ threatening diseases . Past participants include Vince Gill , Carrie Underwood , Brad Paisley , Billy Ray Cyrus , Sara Evans , Montgomery Gentry , and Phil Vassar . As of the 2008 event , more than $ 1 @.@ 5 million had been raised . In 2015 , the game relocated to First Tennessee Park . 
 From 2001 to 2011 , Greer was home to the Jeff Fisher & Friends Charity Softball Game . Tennessee Titans head coach Jeff Fisher and players from the team , past and present , competed in order to benefit local charities . Titans participants included Vince Young , Steve McNair , Eddie George , Frank <unk> , Rob <unk> , and Keith Bulluck , among others . Tomáš Vokoun and head coach Barry <unk> of the National Hockey League 's Nashville Predators have also taken part . 
 The Oak Ridge Boys , of which Sounds ' minority shareholder Richard <unk> was a member , were photographed standing in the seats along Greer 's left field line for the cover of their 1989 album , American Dreams . 
 In 2002 , the music video for Steve Earle 's " Some Dreams " , a song featured in the motion picture The Rookie , was filmed at Greer . The video , intercut with clips from the film , shows Earle and his band performing the song on the empty ballpark 's field . 
 = = Scoreboard = = 
 Greer 's distinctive guitar @-@ shaped scoreboard was manufactured by the <unk> Corporation and installed by the Joslin Sign Company prior to the 1993 season at a cost of $ 400 @,@ 000 . It was originally conceived as the centerpiece for a proposed major league ballpark in Nashville sought after by owner Larry Schmittou as a part of the 1993 Major League Baseball expansion . It is painted black with red , yellow , and white trim , and is located behind the outfield wall in left @-@ center field . 
 The line score is displayed on the guitar 's neck , while the ball / strike / out count , the batter 's uniform number , and the hit / error indicator are all situated on the headstock . Six small advertising signs represent the tuning keys . The body of the guitar currently features only an LED display board for displaying messages . Initially , the scoreboard featured two matrix message boards : a low @-@ resolution RGB color board on the left which featured advertising and animations , and a white @-@ light monochromatic board on the right , which primarily featured statistical information and other text @-@ based messages . The monochrome board was replaced by an orange @-@ tinted LED display board in 2009 which served both purposes , while the color board was deactivated and covered with advertising signage . The Greer Stadium scoreboard has never had the ability to display video or any kind of high @-@ resolution images . Between the two boards are an analog clock and a current temperature display . As of 2014 , the temperature display is no longer active . Around the boards are four large spaces for advertising ; the two on top are static , and the two on bottom rotate between three images each ( the rotating spaces have been covered with static signage since 2009 ) . High @-@ tension nets cover the electronic sections to protect them from home run balls . Above the board is a circular advertising space . This space originally displayed the team 's guitar @-@ swinger logo , and at times has displayed other Sounds logos . Originally , when a home run was hit , the guitar @-@ swinger logo would light up and perimeter lights around the entire scoreboard would begin flashing ; it was also capable of shooting fireworks after each Sounds home run . By the mid @-@ 2000s , the scoreboard had fallen into a state of disrepair and obsolescence , and was only marginally functional . Many of the lights were no longer able to be lit , and replacement parts were becoming hard to find . When MFP Baseball purchased the team in late 2008 , the organization made minor renovations to the scoreboard , rendering it once again fully functional , although not to its original specifications . It was also repainted black , red , yellow , and white over its original red , white , and blue color scheme to reflect the team 's present colors . 
 The entire scoreboard measures 115 @.@ 6 feet ( 35 @.@ 2 m ) across , 53 feet ( 16 m ) high , and 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) deep . Individual components of the guitar are as follows : 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) body , 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) neck , and 19 @.@ 6 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 0 m ) tuning key section . It is installed approximately 80 feet ( 24 m ) above the ground . It takes 243 @,@ 155 watts to power its 8 @,@ 179 total lamps , which are connected to 64 @,@ 169 feet ( 19 @,@ 559 m ) of wire . The entire display weighs 35 @,@ 825 pounds ( 16 @,@ 250 kg ) . 
 As of 2013 , due to leaks in its exterior , the scoreboard 's functionality can be crippled for a period of time following a rainstorm , rendering many of its electronic features dark . 
 Greer Stadium 's guitar scoreboard was not moved to First Tennessee Park , and remains standing . The Sounds organization installed a modern version at the new venue , capable of displaying high @-@ definition video . The first design renderings of First Tennessee Park did not feature a guitar scoreboard . On April 22 , 2014 , at the announcement of First Tennessee 's naming rights agreement , Sounds owner Frank Ward told The Tennessean : " The guitar scoreboard at Greer is staying at Greer . At some point in time we will share what our new scoreboard will look like , but it 's too early in the process . We 're trying to figure it out as we speak . " Two months later , on June 20 , 2014 , Ward announced that a new guitar scoreboard would indeed be constructed , citing overwhelming demand from the community . 
 Greer Stadium 's original scoreboard was a black , non @-@ descript , rectangular unit with a two line reader panel . In 1985 , it was moved to beside the left field foul pole to make room for a new rectangular 4 @-@ line scoreboard 10 feet ( 3 m ) high with a fully animated reader panel . The original unit was then used as an out @-@ of @-@ town scoreboard , displaying the scores of other baseball games . When the guitar display was installed in 1993 , the original scoreboard was removed and replaced by the second scoreboard , which became the new out @-@ of @-@ town board . From 2008 to 2014 , the out @-@ of @-@ town scoreboard was not used to display scores ; instead it was used only as a support for additional advertising signage . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Seating at the ballpark includes fixed stadium seats , general admission bleachers , some with contoured seats , and eighteen skyboxes located on the third floor . As of 2014 , total seating capacity is 10 @,@ 300 . Games can be watched from one of four picnic areas — one behind home plate , one on the third base line , one in the third base stands , and one beyond the right field wall . A rentable hot tub deck is located in the right field corner . There is a concert stage and family fun zone located on The Plaza inside the concourse entrance . 
 Several concession stands and cart vendors are located on the concourse . The stadium was home to a full @-@ service restaurant called Sluggers Sports Bar and Grill , which was located on the fourth floor and closed when the Sounds vacated Greer . The restaurant and bar was open during all Sounds home dates , and games could be viewed from the restaurant via windows overlooking the field . 
 = = Ground rules = = 
 The following ground rules apply to baseball games played at Greer Stadium : 
 Any thrown ball hitting any portion of the fence or screen behind home plate is in play . 
 Any thrown ball hitting the dugout railing , netting , or foundation and rebounding onto the field is in play . 
 Any fairly batted or thrown ball that goes into the dugout or dugout camera well or strikes equipment on the dugout steps is out of play . 
 Any fairly batted or thrown ball stuck in the pads behind home plate or in foul territory is in play . 
 Both bullpens are in play . Pitchers in the bullpen must allow opposing players to attempt to make a catch or play when the ball is in or near the bullpen . 
 Players may lean on the tarp by the third base line , but may not use it as a source of elevation . 
 Any batted ball hitting a foul pole above the fence line is a home run . 
 Any ball striking the upper section ( above the yellow line ) of the two @-@ tiered outfield wall on the fly is a home run , regardless of whether or not the ball re @-@ enters the playing field . 
 Any bouncing ball striking the upper section of the wall is a ground rule double , regardless of whether or not the ball re @-@ enters the playing field 
 Any ball hitting the center field batter 's eye at any height remains in play . 
 = Cannon = 
 A cannon ( plural : cannon or cannons ) is any piece of artillery that uses gunpowder or other usually explosive @-@ based propellants to launch a projectile . Cannon vary in calibre , range , mobility , rate of fire , angle of fire , and firepower ; different forms of cannon combine and balance these attributes in varying degrees , depending on their intended use on the battlefield . The word cannon is derived from several languages , in which the original definition can usually be translated as tube , cane , or reed . In the modern era , the term cannon has fallen into decline , replaced by " guns " or " artillery " if not a more specific term such as " mortar " or " howitzer " , except for in the field of aerial warfare , where it is often used as shorthand for autocannon . 
 First invented in China , cannon were among the earliest forms of gunpowder artillery , and over time replaced siege engines — among other forms of ageing weaponry — on the battlefield . In the Middle East , the first use of the hand cannon is argued to be during the 1260 Battle of Ain Jalut between the Mamluks and Mongols . The first cannon in Europe were in use in Iberia by the mid @-@ 13th century . It was during this period , the Middle Ages , that cannon became standardized , and more effective in both the anti @-@ infantry and siege roles . After the Middle Ages most large cannon were abandoned in favour of greater numbers of lighter , more maneuverable pieces . In addition , new technologies and tactics were developed , making most defences obsolete ; this led to the construction of star forts , specifically designed to withstand artillery bombardment though these too ( along with the Martello Tower ) would find themselves rendered obsolete when explosive and armour piercing rounds made even these types of fortifications vulnerable . 
 Cannon also transformed naval warfare in the early modern period , as European navies took advantage of their firepower . As rifling became commonplace , the accuracy and destructive power of cannon was significantly increased , and they became deadlier than ever , both to infantry who belatedly had to adopt different tactics , and to ships , which had to be armoured . In World War I , the majority of combat fatalities were caused by artillery ; they were also used widely in World War II . Most modern cannon are similar to those used in the Second World War , although the importance of the larger calibre weapons has declined with the development of missiles . 
 Cannon was widely known as the earliest form of a gun and artillery , before early firearms were invented . 
 = = Etymology and terminology = = 
 Cannon is derived from the Old Italian word <unk> , meaning " large tube " , which came from Latin canna , in turn originating from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , " reed " , and then generalized to mean any hollow tube @-@ like object ; cognate with Akkadian term <unk> and Hebrew <unk> , meaning " tube " or " reed " . The word has been used to refer to a gun since 1326 in Italy , and 1418 in England . Both Cannons and Cannon are correct and in common usage , with one or the other having preference in different parts of the English @-@ speaking world . Cannons is more common in North America and Australia , while cannon as plural is more common in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Cannon materials , parts , and terms = = 
 Cannon in general have the form of a truncated cone with an internal cylindrical bore for holding an explosive charge and a projectile . The thickest , strongest , and closed part of the cone is located near the explosive charge . As any explosive charge will dissipate in all directions equally , the thickest portion of the cannon is useful for containing and directing this force . The backward motion of the cannon as its projectile leaves the bore is termed its recoil and the effectiveness of the cannon can be measured in terms of how much this response can be diminished , though obviously diminishing recoil through increasing the overall mass of the cannon means decreased mobility . 
 Field artillery cannon in Europe and the Americas were initially made most often of bronze , though later forms were constructed of cast iron and eventually steel . Bronze has several characteristics that made it preferable as a construction material : although it is relatively expensive , does not always alloy well , and can result in a final product that is " spongy about the bore " , bronze is more flexible than iron and therefore less prone to bursting when exposed to high pressure ; cast iron cannon are less expensive and more durable generally than bronze and withstand being fired more times without deteriorating . However , cast iron cannon have a tendency to burst without having shown any previous weakness or wear , and this makes them more dangerous to operate . 
 The older and more @-@ stable forms of cannon were muzzle @-@ loading as opposed to breech @-@ loading — in order to be used they had to have their ordnance packed down the bore through the muzzle rather than inserted through the breech . 
 The following terms refer to the components or aspects of a classical western cannon ( c . 1850 ) as illustrated here . In what follows , the words near , close , and behind will refer to those parts towards the thick , closed end of the piece , and far , front , in front of , and before to the thinner , open end . 
 = = = Negative spaces = = = 
 Bore : The hollow cylinder bored down the centre of the cannon , including the base of the bore or bottom of the bore , the nearest end of the bore into which the ordnance ( wadding , shot , etc . ) gets packed . The diameter of the bore represents the cannon 's calibre . 
 Chamber : The cylindrical , conical , or spherical recess at the nearest end of the bottom of the bore into which the gunpowder is packed . 
 Vent : A thin tube on the near end of the cannon connecting the explosive charge inside with an ignition source outside and often filled with a length of fuse ; always located near the breech . Sometimes called the fuse hole or the touch hole . On the top of the vent on the outside of the cannon is a flat circular space called the vent field where the charge is lit . If the cannon is bronze , it will often have a vent piece made of copper screwed into the length of the vent . 
 = = = Solid spaces = = = 
 The main body of a cannon consists of three basic extensions : the foremost and the longest is called the chase , the middle portion is the reinforce , and the closest and briefest portion is the cascabel or <unk> . 
 The chase : Simply the entire conical part of the cannon in front of the reinforce . It is the longest portion of the cannon , and includes the following elements : 
 The neck : the narrowest part of the chase , always located near the foremost end of the piece . 
 The muzzle : the portion of the chase forward of the neck . It includes the following : 
 The swell of the muzzle refers to the slight swell in the diameter of the piece at the very end of the chase . It is often chamfered on the inside to make loading the cannon easier . In some guns , this element is replaced with a wide ring and is called a muzzle band . 
 The face is the flat vertical plane at the foremost edge of the muzzle ( and of the entire piece ) . 
 The muzzle mouldings are the tiered rings which connect the face with the rest of the muzzle , the first of which is called the lip and the second the fillet 
 The muzzle astragal and fillets are a series of three narrow rings running around the outside of the chase just behind the neck . Sometimes also collectively called the chase ring . 
 The chase astragal and fillets : these are a second series of such rings located at the near end of the chase . 
 The chase girdle : this is the brief length of the chase between the chase astragal and fillets and the reinforce . 
 The reinforce : This portion of the piece is frequently divided into a first reinforce and a second reinforce , but in any case is marked as separate from the chase by the presence of a narrow circular reinforce ring or band at its foremost end . The span of the reinforce also includes the following : 
 The trunnions are located at the foremost end of the reinforce just behind the reinforce ring . They consist of two cylinders perpendicular to the bore and below it which are used to mount the cannon on its carriage . 
 The <unk> are short broad rings located at the union of the trunnions and the cannon which provide support to the carriage attachment . 
 The reinforce band is only present if the cannon has two reinforces , and it divides the first reinforce from the second . 
 The breech refers to the mass of solid metal behind the bottom of the bore extending to the base of the breech and including the base ring ; it also generally refers to the end of the cannon opposite the muzzle , i.e. , the location where the explosion of the gunpowder begins as opposed to the opening through which the pressurized gas escapes . 
 The base ring forms a ring at the widest part of the entire cannon at the nearest end of the reinforce just before the cascabel . 
 The cascabel : This is that portion of the cannon behind the reinforce ( s ) and behind the base ring . It includes the following : 
 The knob which is the small spherical terminus of the piece ; 
 The neck , a short , narrow piece of metal holding out the knob ; and 
 The fillet , the tiered disk connecting the neck of the cascabel to the base of the breech . 
 The base of the breech is the metal disk that forms the most forward part of the cascabel and rests against the breech itself , right next to the base ring . 
 To pack a muzzle @-@ loading cannon , first gunpowder is poured down the bore . This is followed by a layer of wadding ( often nothing more than paper ) , and then the cannonball itself . A certain amount of windage allows the ball to fit down the bore , though the greater the windage the less efficient the propulsion of the ball when the gunpowder is ignited . To fire the cannon , the fuse located in the vent is lit , quickly burning down to the gunpowder , which then explodes violently , propelling wadding and ball down the bore and out of the muzzle . A small portion of exploding gas also escapes through the vent , but this does not dramatically affect the total force exerted on the ball . 
 Any large , smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading gun — used before the advent of breech @-@ loading , rifled guns — may be referred to as a cannon , though once standardized names were assigned to different @-@ sized cannon , the term specifically referred to a gun designed to fire a 42 @-@ pound ( 19 kg ) shot , as distinct from a demi @-@ cannon – 32 pounds ( 15 kg ) , culverin – 18 pounds ( 8 @.@ 2 kg ) , or demi @-@ culverin – 9 pounds ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) . Gun specifically refers to a type of cannon that fires projectiles at high speeds , and usually at relatively low angles ; they have been used in warships , and as field artillery . The term cannon is also used for autocannon , a modern repeating weapon firing explosive projectiles . Cannon have been used extensively in fighter aircraft since World War II , and in place of machine guns on land vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development in China = = = 
 The invention of the cannon , driven by gunpowder , was first developed in China and later spread to the Islamic world and Europe . Like small arms , cannon are a descendant of the fire lance , a gunpowder @-@ filled tube attached to the end of a spear and used as a flamethrower in China . Shrapnel was sometimes placed in the barrel , so that it would fly out along with the flames . The first documented battlefield use of fire lances took place in 1132 when Chen Gui used them to defend De 'an from attack by the Jurchen Jin . Eventually , the paper and bamboo of which fire lance barrels were originally constructed came to be replaced by metal . It has been disputed at which point flame @-@ projecting cannon were abandoned in favour of missile @-@ projecting ones , as words meaning either incendiary or explosive are commonly translated as gunpowder . The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan , dating to the 12th century that portrays a figure carrying a vase @-@ shaped bombard , firing flames and a ball . The oldest surviving gun , known as the Heilongjiang hand cannon and dated to no later than 1290 , is 34 cm long with a muzzle bore diameter of 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) . The second oldest , dated to 1332 is 35 @.@ 3 cm long , a muzzle bore diameter of 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 in ) and weighs 6 @.@ 94 kg ; both are made of bronze . 
 The earliest known illustration of a cannon is dated to 1326 . In his 1341 poem , The Iron Cannon Affair , one of the first accounts of the use of gunpowder artillery in China , Xian Zhang wrote that a cannonball fired from an eruptor could " pierce the heart or belly when it strikes a man or horse , and can even transfix several persons at once . " 
 Joseph Needham suggests that the proto @-@ shells described in the Huolongjing may be among the first of their kind . The weapon was later taken up by both the Mongol conquerors and the Koreans . Chinese soldiers fighting under the Mongols appear to have used hand cannon in Manchurian battles during 1288 , a date deduced from archaeological findings at battle sites . The Ming Chinese also mounted over 3 @,@ 000 cast bronze and iron cannon on the Great Wall of China , to defend against the Mongols . 
 Cannon were used by Ming dynasty forces at the Battle of Lake Poyang . Ming dynasty era ships had bronze cannon . One shipwreck in Shandong had a cannon dated to 1377 and an anchor dated to 1372 . From the 13th to 15th centuries cannon armed Chinese ships also travelled throughout Southeast Asia . 
 In the 1593 Siege of Pyongyang , 40 @,@ 000 Ming troops deployed a variety of cannon to bombard an equally large Japanese army . Despite both forces having similar numbers , the Japanese were easily defeated due to the Ming cannon . Throughout the Seven Year War in Korea , the Chinese @-@ Korean coalition used artillery widely , in both land and naval battles , including on the Turtle Ships of Yi Sun @-@ sin . 
 = = = Islamic world = = = 
 Arabic manuscripts dated from the 14th century document the use of the hand cannon , a forerunner of the handgun , in the Arabic world . Ahmad Y. al @-@ Hassan argues that these manuscripts are copies of earlier manuscripts and reported on hand @-@ held cannon being used by the Mamluks at the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260 . Al @-@ Hassan also interprets Ibn Khaldun as reporting cannon being used as siege machines by the Marinid sultan Abu Yaqub Yusuf at the siege of Sijilmasa in 1274 . Other historians urge caution regarding claims of Islamic firearms use in the 1204 – 1324 period as late medieval Arabic texts used the same word for gunpowder , naft , that they used for an earlier incendiary naphtha . The Mamluks had certainly acquired siege cannon by the 1360s , and possibly as early as 1320 . 
 Sixty @-@ eight super @-@ sized bombards referred to as Great Turkish Bombards were used by Mehmed II to capture Constantinople in 1453 . Orban , a Hungarian cannon engineer , is credited with introducing the cannon from Central Europe to the Ottomans . These cannon could fire heavy stone balls a mile , and the sound of their blast could reportedly be heard from a distance of 10 miles ( 16 km ) . <unk> historian Marin Barleti discusses Turkish bombards at length in his book De <unk> <unk> ( 1504 ) , describing the 1478 – 79 siege of <unk> in which eleven bombards and two mortars were employed . 
 The similar Dardanelles Guns ( for the location ) were created by Munir Ali in 1464 and were still in use during the Anglo @-@ Turkish War ( 1807 – 1809 ) . These were cast in bronze into two parts , the chase ( the barrel ) and the breech , which combined weighed 18 @.@ 4 tonnes . The two parts were screwed together using levers to facilitate moving it . 
 <unk> Shirazi , a Persian @-@ Indian who worked for Akbar the Great in the Mughal Empire , developed a volley gun in the 16th century . 
 = = = Medieval Europe = = = 
 In Europe , one of the first mentions of gunpowder use appears in a passage found in Roger Bacon 's Opus <unk> and Opus <unk> in what has been interpreted as being firecrackers . In the early 20th century , a British artillery officer proposed that another work tentatively attributed to Bacon , Epistola de <unk> <unk> Artis et Naturae , et de <unk> <unk> contained an encrypted formula for gunpowder . These claims have been disputed by historians of science . In any case , the formula claimed to have been decrypted is not useful for firearms use or even firecrackers , burning slowly and producing mostly smoke . 
 The first confirmed use of cannon in Europe was in southern Iberia , by the Moors , in the Siege of Cordoba in 1280 . By this time , hand guns were probably in use , as <unk> — " gun bearers " — were mentioned in conjunction with crossbowmen , in 1281 . In Iberia , the " first artillery @-@ masters on the Peninsula " were enlisted , at around the same time . 
 The first metal cannon was the pot @-@ de @-@ fer . Loaded with an arrow @-@ like bolt that was probably wrapped in leather to allow greater thrusting power , it was set off through a touch hole with a heated wire . This weapon , and others similar , were used by both the French and English during the Hundred Years ' War , when cannon saw their first real use on the European battlefield . While still a relatively rarely @-@ used weapon , cannon were employed in increasing numbers during the war . The Battle of <unk> , fought on 23 September 1338 , was the first naval battle using artillery , as the English ship Christofer had three cannon and one hand gun . " Ribaldis " , which shot large arrows and simplistic grapeshot , were first mentioned in the English Privy Wardrobe accounts during preparations for the Battle of Crécy , between 1345 and 1346 . The Florentine Giovanni Villani recounts their destructiveness , indicating that by the end of the battle , " the whole plain was covered by men struck down by arrows and cannon balls . " Similar cannon were also used at the Siege of Calais , in the same year , although it was not until the 1380s that the " ribaudekin " clearly became mounted on wheels . 
 A small bronze cannon unearthed in <unk> , Scania in southern Sweden is considered to be one of the earliest surviving European guns . It dates from the early @-@ mid 14th century , and is currently in the Swedish History Museum in Stockholm . They were used in Russia around 1380 , though they were used only in sieges , often by the defenders . Large cannon known as bombards ranged from three to five feet in length and were used by Dubrovnik and Kotor in defence in the later 14th century . The first bombards were made of iron , but bronze was quickly recognized as being stronger and capable of propelling stones weighing as much as a hundred pounds ( 45 kg ) . Byzantine strategists did not have the money to invest in this technology . Around the same period , the Byzantine Empire began to accumulate its own cannon to face the Ottoman threat , starting with medium @-@ sized cannon 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long and of 10 in calibre . The first definite use of artillery in the region was against the Ottoman siege of Constantinople , in 1396 , forcing the Ottomans to withdraw . They acquired their own cannon , and laid siege to the Byzantine capital again , in 1422 , using " falcons " , which were short but wide cannon . By 1453 , the Ottomans used 68 Hungarian @-@ made cannon for the 55 @-@ day bombardment of the walls of Constantinople , " hurling the pieces everywhere and killing those who happened to be nearby . " The largest of their cannon was the Great Turkish Bombard , which required an operating crew of 200 men and 70 oxen , and 10 @,@ 000 men to transport it . Gunpowder made the formerly devastating Greek fire obsolete , and with the final fall of Constantinople — which was protected by what were once the strongest walls in Europe — on 29 May 1453 , " it was the end of an era in more ways than one . " 
 = = = Early modern period = = = 
 By the 16th century , cannon were made in a great variety of lengths and bore diameters , but the general rule was that the longer the barrel , the longer the range . Some cannon made during this time had barrels exceeding 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in length , and could weigh up to 20 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) . Consequently , large amounts of gunpowder were needed , to allow them to fire stone balls several hundred yards . By mid @-@ century , European monarchs began to classify cannon to reduce the confusion . Henry II of France opted for six sizes of cannon , but others settled for more ; the Spanish used twelve sizes , and the English sixteen . Better powder had been developed by this time as well . Instead of the finely ground powder used by the first bombards , powder was replaced by a " corned " variety of coarse grains . This coarse powder had pockets of air between grains , allowing fire to travel through and ignite the entire charge quickly and uniformly . 
 The end of the Middle Ages saw the construction of larger , more powerful cannon , as well their spread throughout the world . As they were not effective at breaching the newer fortifications resulting from the development of cannon , siege engines — such as siege towers and trebuchets — became less widely used . However , wooden " battery @-@ towers " took on a similar role as siege towers in the gunpowder age — such as that used at siege of Kazan in 1552 , which could hold ten large @-@ calibre cannon , in addition to 50 lighter pieces . Another notable effect of cannon on warfare during this period was the change in conventional fortifications . Niccolò Machiavelli wrote , " There is no wall , whatever its thickness that artillery will not destroy in only a few days . " Although castles were not immediately made obsolete by cannon , their use and importance on the battlefield rapidly declined . Instead of majestic towers and merlons , the walls of new fortresses were thick , angled , and sloped , while towers became low and stout ; increasing use was also made of earth and brick in breastworks and redoubts . These new defences became known as " star forts " , after their characteristic shape which attempted to force any advance toward it directly into the firing line of the guns . A few of these featured cannon batteries , such as the Tudors ' Device Forts , in England . Star forts soon replaced castles in Europe , and , eventually , those in the Americas , as well . 
 By the end of the 15th century , several technological advancements made cannon more mobile . Wheeled gun carriages and trunnions became common , and the invention of the limber further facilitated transportation . As a result , field artillery became more viable , and began to see more widespread use , often alongside the larger cannon intended for sieges . Better gunpowder , cast @-@ iron projectiles ( replacing stone ) , and the standardization of calibres meant that even relatively light cannon could be deadly . In The Art of War , Niccolò Machiavelli observed that " It is true that the arquebuses and the small artillery do much more harm than the heavy artillery . " This was the case at Flodden , in 1513 : the English field guns <unk> the Scottish siege artillery , firing two or three times as many rounds . Despite the increased maneuverability , however , cannon were still the slowest component of the army : a heavy English cannon required 23 horses to transport , while a culverin needed nine . Even with this many animals pulling , they still moved at a walking pace . Due to their relatively slow speed , and lack of organization , and undeveloped tactics , the combination of pike and shot still dominated the battlefields of Europe . 
 Innovations continued , notably the German invention of the mortar , a thick @-@ walled , short @-@ barrelled gun that blasted shot upward at a steep angle . Mortars were useful for sieges , as they could hit targets behind walls or other defences . This cannon found more use with the Dutch , who learned to shoot bombs filled with powder from them . Setting the bomb fuse was a problem . " Single firing " was first used to ignite the fuse , where the bomb was placed with the fuse down against the cannon 's propellant . This often resulted in the fuse being blown into the bomb , causing it to blow up as it left the mortar . Because of this , " double firing " was tried where the gunner lit the fuse and then the touch hole . This , however , required considerable skill and timing , and was especially dangerous if the gun misfired , leaving a lighted bomb in the barrel . Not until 1650 was it accidentally discovered that double @-@ lighting was superfluous as the heat of firing would light the fuse . 
 Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden emphasized the use of light cannon and mobility in his army , and created new formations and tactics that revolutionized artillery . He discontinued using all 12 pounder — or heavier — cannon as field artillery , preferring , instead , to use cannon that could be manned by only a few men . One obsolete type of gun , the " <unk> " was replaced by 4 pounder and 9 pounder demi @-@ culverins . These could be operated by three men , and pulled by only two horses . Adolphus 's army was also the first to use a cartridge that contained both powder and shot which sped up reloading , increasing the rate of fire . Finally , against infantry he pioneered the use of canister shot - essentially a tin can filled with musket balls . Until then there was no more than one cannon for every thousand infantrymen on the battlefield but Gustavus Adolphus increased the number of cannon sixfold . Each regiment was assigned two pieces , though he often arranged then into batteries instead of distributing them piecemeal . He used these batteries to break his opponent 's infantry line , while his cavalry would outflank their heavy guns . 
 At the Battle of Breitenfeld , in 1631 , Adolphus proved the effectiveness of the changes made to his army , by defeating Johann <unk> , Count of Tilly . Although severely outnumbered , the Swedes were able to fire between three and five times as many volleys of artillery , and their infantry 's linear formations helped ensure they didn 't lose any ground . Battered by cannon fire , and low on morale , Tilly 's men broke ranks and fled . 
 In England cannon were being used to besiege various fortified buildings during the English Civil War . Nathaniel Nye is recorded as testing a Birmingham cannon in 1643 and experimenting with a saker in 1645 . From 1645 he was the master gunner to the Parliamentarian garrison at Evesham and in 1646 he successfully directed the artillery at the Siege of Worcester , detailing his experiences and in his 1647 book The Art of Gunnery . Believing that war was as much a science as an art , his explanations focused on triangulation , arithmetic , theoretical mathematics , and cartography as well as practical considerations such as the ideal specification for gunpowder or slow matches . His book acknowledged mathematicians such as Robert Recorde and Marcus Jordanus as well as earlier military writers on artillery such as Niccolò Tartaglia and Thomas Malthus . 
 Around this time also came the idea of aiming the cannon to hit a target . Gunners controlled the range of their cannon by measuring the angle of elevation , using a " gunner 's quadrant . " Cannon did not have sights , therefore , even with measuring tools , aiming was still largely guesswork . 
 In the latter half of the 17th century , the French engineer Vauban introduced a more systematic and scientific approach to attacking gunpowder fortresses , in a time when many field commanders " were notorious dunces in siegecraft . " Careful sapping forward , supported by enfilading ricochet fire , was a key feature of this system , and it even allowed Vauban to calculate the length of time a siege would take . He was also a prolific builder of star forts , and did much to popularize the idea of " depth in defence " in the face of cannon . These principles were followed into the mid @-@ 19th century , when changes in armaments necessitated greater depth defence than Vauban had provided for . It was only in the years prior to World War I that new works began to break radically away from his designs . 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 The lower tier of 17th @-@ century English ships of the line were usually equipped with demi @-@ cannon , guns that fired a 32 pounds ( 15 kg ) solid shot , and could weigh up to 3 @,@ 400 pounds ( 1 @,@ 500 kg ) . Demi @-@ cannon were capable of firing these heavy metal balls with such force that they could penetrate more than a metre of solid oak , from a distance of 90 m ( 300 ft ) , and could dismast even the largest ships at close range . Full cannon fired a 42 lb ( 19 kg ) shot , but were discontinued by the 18th century , as they were too unwieldy . By the end of the 18th century , principles long adopted in Europe specified the characteristics of the Royal Navy 's cannon , as well as the acceptable defects , and their severity . The United States Navy tested guns by measuring them , firing them two or three times — termed " proof by powder " — and using pressurized water to detect leaks . 
 The carronade was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1779 ; the lower muzzle velocity of the round shot when fired from this cannon was intended to create more wooden splinters when hitting the structure of an enemy vessel , as they were believed to be more deadly than the ball by itself . The carronade was much shorter , and weighed between a third to a quarter of the equivalent long gun ; for example , a 32 pounder carronade weighed less than a ton , compared with a 32 pounder long gun , which weighed over 3 tons . The guns were , therefore , easier to handle , and also required less than half as much gunpowder , allowing fewer men to crew them . Carronades were manufactured in the usual naval gun calibres , but were not counted in a ship of the line 's rated number of guns . As a result , the classification of Royal Navy vessels in this period can be misleading , as they often carried more cannon than were listed . 
 In the 1810s and 1820s , greater emphasis was placed on the accuracy of long @-@ range gunfire , and less on the weight of a broadside . The carronade , although initially very successful and widely adopted , disappeared from the Royal Navy in the 1850s after the development of wrought @-@ iron @-@ jacketed steel cannon by William George Armstrong and Joseph Whitworth . Nevertheless , carronades were used in the American Civil War . 
 Western cannon during the 19th century became larger , more destructive , more accurate , and could fire at longer range . One example is the American 3 in ( 76 mm ) wrought @-@ iron , muzzle @-@ loading rifle , or Griffen gun ( usually called the 3 @-@ inch Ordnance Rifle ) , used during the American Civil War , which had an effective range of over 1 @.@ 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) . Another is the smoothbore 12 pounder Napoleon , which originated in France in 1853 and was widely used by both sides in the American Civil War . This cannon was renowned for its sturdiness , reliability , firepower , flexibility , relatively light weight , and range of 1 @,@ 700 m ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 Cannon were crucial in Napoleon Bonaparte 's rise to power , and continued to play an important role in his army in later years . During the French Revolution , the unpopularity of the Directory led to riots and rebellions . When over 25 @,@ 000 royalists led by General Danican assaulted Paris , Paul François Jean Nicolas , vicomte de Barras was appointed to defend the capital ; outnumbered five to one and disorganized , the Republicans were desperate . When Napoleon arrived , he reorganized the defences but realized that without cannon the city could not be held . He ordered Joachim Murat to bring the guns from the <unk> artillery park ; the Major and his cavalry fought their way to the recently captured cannon , and brought them back to Napoleon . When Danican 's poorly trained men attacked , on 13 Vendémiaire , 1795 — 5 October 1795 , in the calendar used in France at the time — Napoleon ordered his cannon to fire grapeshot into the mob , an act that became known as the " whiff of grapeshot " . The slaughter effectively ended the threat to the new government , while , at the same time , made Bonaparte a famous — and popular — public figure . Among the first generals to recognize that artillery was not being used to its full potential , Napoleon often massed his cannon into batteries and introduced several changes into the French artillery , improving it significantly and making it among the finest in Europe . Such tactics were successfully used by the French , for example , at the Battle of Friedland , when sixty @-@ six guns fired a total of 3 @,@ 000 roundshot and 500 rounds of grapeshot , inflicting severe casualties to the Russian forces , whose losses numbered over 20 @,@ 000 killed and wounded , in total . At the Battle of Waterloo — Napoleon 's final battle — the French army had many more artillery pieces than either the British or Prussians . As the battlefield was muddy , recoil caused cannons to bury themselves into the ground after firing , resulting in slow rates of fire , as more effort was required to move them back into an adequate firing position ; also , roundshot did not ricochet with as much force from the wet earth . Despite the drawbacks , sustained artillery fire proved deadly during the engagement , especially during the French cavalry attack . The British infantry , having formed infantry squares , took heavy losses from the French guns , while their own cannon fired at the cuirassiers and lancers , when they fell back to regroup . Eventually , the French ceased their assault , after taking heavy losses from the British cannon and musket fire . 
 The practice of rifling — casting spiralling lines inside the cannon 's barrel — was applied to artillery more frequently by 1855 , as it gave cannon projectiles gyroscopic stability , which improved their accuracy . One of the earliest rifled cannon was the breech @-@ loading Armstrong Gun — also invented by William George Armstrong — which boasted significantly improved range , accuracy , and power than earlier weapons . The projectile fired from the Armstrong gun could reportedly pierce through a ship 's side , and explode inside the enemy vessel , causing increased damage , and casualties . The British military adopted the Armstrong gun , and was impressed ; the Duke of Cambridge even declared that it " could do everything but speak . " Despite being significantly more advanced than its predecessors , the Armstrong gun was rejected soon after its integration , in favour of the muzzle @-@ loading pieces that had been in use before . While both types of gun were effective against wooden ships , neither had the capability to pierce the armour of ironclads ; due to reports of slight problems with the breeches of the Armstrong gun , and their higher cost , the older muzzle @-@ loaders were selected to remain in service instead . Realizing that iron was more difficult to pierce with breech @-@ loaded cannon , Armstrong designed rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , which proved successful ; The Times reported : " even the fondest believers in the invulnerability of our present ironclads were obliged to confess that against such artillery , at such ranges , their plates and sides were almost as <unk> as wooden ships . " 
 The superior cannon of the Western world brought them tremendous advantages in warfare . For example , in the Opium War in China , during the 19th century , British battleships bombarded the coastal areas and fortifications from afar , safe from the reach of the Chinese cannon . Similarly , the shortest war in recorded history , the Anglo @-@ Zanzibar War of 1896 , was brought to a swift conclusion by shelling from British cruisers . The cynical attitude toward recruited infantry in the face of ever more powerful field artillery is the source of the term cannon fodder , first used by François @-@ René de Chateaubriand , in 1814 ; however , the concept of regarding soldiers as nothing more than " food for powder " was mentioned by William Shakespeare as early as 1598 , in Henry IV , Part 1 . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 Cannon in the 20th and 21st centuries are usually divided into sub @-@ categories and given separate names . Some of the most widely used types of modern cannon are howitzers , mortars , guns , and autocannon , although a few <unk> — extremely large , custom @-@ designed cannon — have also been constructed . Nuclear artillery was experimented with , but was abandoned as impractical . Modern artillery is used in a variety of roles , depending on its type . According to NATO , the general role of artillery is to provide fire support , which is defined as " the application of fire , coordinated with the manoeuvre of forces to destroy , neutralize , or suppress the enemy . " 
 When referring to cannon , the term gun is often used incorrectly . In military usage , a gun is a cannon with a high muzzle velocity and a flat trajectory , useful for hitting the sides of targets such as walls , as opposed to howitzers or mortars , which have lower muzzle velocities , and fire indirectly , lobbing shells up and over obstacles to hit the target from above . 
 By the early 20th century , infantry weapons had become more powerful , forcing most artillery away from the front lines . Despite the change to indirect fire , cannon proved highly effective during World War I , directly or indirectly causing over 75 % of casualties . The onset of trench warfare after the first few months of World War I greatly increased the demand for howitzers , as they were more suited at hitting targets in trenches . Furthermore , their shells carried more explosives than those of guns , and caused considerably less barrel wear . The German army had the advantage here as they began the war with many more howitzers than the French . World War I also saw the use of the Paris Gun , the longest @-@ ranged gun ever fired . This 200 mm ( 8 in ) calibre gun was used by the Germans against Paris and could hit targets more than 122 km ( 76 mi ) away . 
 The Second World War sparked new developments in cannon technology . Among them were sabot rounds , hollow @-@ charge projectiles , and proximity fuses , all of which increased the effectiveness of cannon against specific target . The proximity fuse emerged on the battlefields of Europe in late December 1944 . Used to great effect in anti @-@ aircraft projectiles , proximity fuses were fielded in both the European and Pacific Theatres of Operations ; they were particularly useful against V @-@ 1 flying bombs and kamikaze planes . Although widely used in naval warfare , and in anti @-@ air guns , both the British and Americans feared unexploded proximity fuses would be reverse engineered leading to them limiting its use in continental battles . During the Battle of the Bulge , however , the fuses became known as the American artillery 's " Christmas present " for the German army because of their effectiveness against German personnel in the open , when they frequently dispersed attacks . Anti @-@ tank guns were also tremendously improved during the war : in 1939 , the British used primarily 2 pounder and 6 pounder guns . By the end of the war , 17 pounders had proven much more effective against German tanks , and 32 pounders had entered development . Meanwhile , German tanks were continuously upgraded with better main guns , in addition to other improvements . For example , the Panzer III was originally designed with a 37 mm gun , but was mass @-@ produced with a 50 mm cannon . To counter the threat of the Russian T @-@ 34s , another , more powerful 50 mm gun was introduced , only to give way to a larger 75 mm cannon , which was in a fixed mount as the StuG III , the most @-@ produced German World War II armoured fighting vehicle of any type . Despite the improved guns , production of the Panzer III was ended in 1943 , as the tank still could not match the T @-@ 34 , and was replaced by the Panzer IV and Panther tanks . In 1944 , the 8 @.@ 8 cm KwK 43 and many variations , entered service with the Wehrmacht , and was used as both a tank main gun , and as the PaK 43 anti @-@ tank gun . One of the most powerful guns to see service in World War II , it was capable of destroying any Allied tank at very long ranges . 
 Despite being designed to fire at trajectories with a steep angle of descent , howitzers can be fired directly , as was done by the 11th Marine Regiment at the Battle of Chosin Reservoir , during the Korean War . Two field batteries fired directly upon a battalion of Chinese infantry ; the Marines were forced to brace themselves against their howitzers , as they had no time to dig them in . The Chinese infantry took heavy casualties , and were forced to retreat . 
 The tendency to create larger calibre cannon during the World Wars has reversed since . The United States Army , for example , sought a lighter , more versatile howitzer , to replace their ageing pieces . As it could be towed , the M198 was selected to be the successor to the World War II – era cannon used at the time , and entered service in 1979 . Still in use today , the M198 is , in turn , being slowly replaced by the M777 <unk> howitzer , which weighs nearly half as much and can be more easily moved . Although land @-@ based artillery such as the M198 are powerful , long @-@ ranged , and accurate , naval guns have not been neglected , despite being much smaller than in the past , and , in some cases , having been replaced by cruise missiles . However , the Zumwalt @-@ class destroyer 's planned armament includes the Advanced Gun System ( AGS ) , a pair of 155 mm guns , which fire the Long Range Land @-@ Attack Projectile . The warhead , which weighs 24 pounds ( 11 kg ) , has a circular error of probability of 50 m ( 160 ft ) , and will be mounted on a rocket , to increase the effective range to 100 nmi ( 190 km ) , further than that of the Paris Gun . The AGS 's barrels will be water cooled , and will fire 10 rounds per minute , per gun . The combined firepower from both turrets will give a Zumwalt @-@ class destroyer the firepower equivalent to 18 conventional M198 howitzers . The reason for the re @-@ integration of cannon as a main armament in United States Navy ships is because satellite @-@ guided munitions fired from a gun are less expensive than a cruise missile but have a similar guidance capability . 
 = = = = Autocannon = = = = 
 Autocannons have an automatic firing mode , similar to that of a machine gun . They have mechanisms to automatically load their ammunition , and therefore have a higher rate of fire than artillery , often approaching , or , in the case of rotary autocannons , even surpassing the firing rate of a machine gun . While there is no minimum bore for autocannons , they are generally larger than machine guns , typically 20 mm or greater since World War II and are usually capable of using explosive ammunition even if it isn 't always used . Machine guns in contrast are usually too small to use explosive ammunition . 
 Most nations use rapid @-@ fire cannon on light vehicles , replacing a more powerful , but heavier , tank gun . A typical autocannon is the 25 mm " Bushmaster " chain gun , mounted on the LAV @-@ 25 and M2 Bradley armored vehicles . Autocannons may be capable of a very high rate of fire , but ammunition is heavy and bulky , limiting the amount carried . For this reason , both the 25 mm Bushmaster and the 30 mm <unk> are deliberately designed with relatively low rates of fire . The typical rate of fire for a modern autocannon ranges from 90 to 1 @,@ 800 rounds per minute . Systems with multiple barrels , such as a rotary autocannon , can have rates of fire of more than several thousand rounds per minute . The fastest of these is the GSh @-@ 6 @-@ 23 , which has a rate of fire of over 10 @,@ 000 rounds per minute . 
 Autocannons are often found in aircraft , where they replaced machine guns and as shipboard anti @-@ aircraft weapons , as they provide greater destructive power than machine guns . 
 = = = = Aircraft use = = = = 
 The first documented installation of a cannon on an aircraft was on the Voisin Canon in 1911 , displayed at the Paris Exposition that year . By World War I , all of the major powers were experimenting with aircraft mounted cannon ; however their low rate of fire and great size and weight precluded any of them from being anything other than experimental . The most successful ( or least unsuccessful ) was the SPAD 12 <unk> with a single 37mm <unk> mounted to fire between the cylinder banks and through the propeller boss of the aircraft 's Hispano @-@ Suiza 8C . The pilot ( by necessity an ace ) had to manually reload each round . 
 The first autocannon were developed during World War I as anti @-@ aircraft guns , and one of these - the Coventry Ordnance Works " COW 37 mm gun " was installed in an aircraft but the war ended before it could be given a field trial and never became standard equipment in a production aircraft . Later trials had it fixed at a steep angle upwards in both the Vickers Type 161 and the Westland <unk> Gun Fighter , an idea that would return later . 
 During this period autocannons became available and several fighters of the German Luftwaffe and the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service were fitted with 20mm cannon . They continued to be installed as an adjunct to machine guns rather than as a replacement , as the rate of fire was still too low and the complete installation too heavy . There was a some debate in the RAF as to whether the greater number of possible rounds being fired from a machine gun , or a smaller number of explosive rounds from a cannon was preferable . Improvements during the war in regards to rate of fire allowed the cannon to displace the machine gun almost entirely . The cannon was more effective against armour so they were increasingly used during the course of World War II , and newer fighters such as the Hawker Tempest usually carried two or four versus the six .50 Browning machine guns for US aircraft or eight to twelve M1919 Browning machine guns on British aircraft . The Hispano @-@ Suiza HS.404 , Oerlikon 20 mm cannon , MG FF , and their numerous variants became among the most widely used autocannon in the <unk> cannon , as with machine guns , were generally fixed to fire forwards ( mounted in the wings , in the nose or fuselage , or in a <unk> under either ) ; or were mounted in gun turrets on heavier aircraft . Both the Germans and Japanese mounted cannon to fire upwards and forwards for use against heavy bombers , with the Germans calling guns so @-@ installed Schräge Musik . Schräge Musik derives from the German colloquialism for Jazz Music ( the German word <unk> literally means slanted or oblique ) 
 Preceding the Vietnam War the high speeds aircraft were attaining led to a move to remove the cannon due to the mistaken belief that they would be useless in a dogfight , but combat experience during the Vietnam War showed conclusively that despite advances in missiles , there was still a need for them . Nearly all modern fighter aircraft are armed with an autocannon and they are also commonly found on ground @-@ attack aircraft . One of the most powerful examples is the 30mm GAU @-@ 8 / A Avenger Gatling @-@ type rotary cannon , mounted exclusively on the Fairchild Republic A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II . The Lockheed AC @-@ 130 gunship ( a converted transport ) can carry a 105mm howitzer as well as a variety of autocannons ranging up to 40mm . Both are used in the close air support role . 
 = = Operation = = 
 In the 1770s , cannon operation worked as follows : each cannon would be manned by two gunners , six soldiers , and four officers of artillery . The right gunner was to prime the piece and load it with powder , and the left gunner would fetch the powder from the magazine and be ready to fire the cannon at the officer 's command . On each side of the cannon , three soldiers stood , to ram and sponge the cannon , and hold the ladle . The second soldier on the left tasked with providing 50 bullets . 
 Before loading , the cannon would be cleaned with a wet sponge to extinguish any smouldering material from the last shot . Fresh powder could be set off prematurely by lingering ignition sources . The powder was added , followed by wadding of paper or hay , and the ball was placed in and rammed down . After ramming , the cannon would be aimed with the elevation set using a quadrant and a plummet . At 45 degrees , the ball had the utmost range : about ten times the gun 's level range . Any angle above a horizontal line was called random @-@ shot . Wet sponges were used to cool the pieces every ten or twelve rounds . 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , a British gun team consisted of five gunners to aim it , clean the bore with a damp sponge to quench any remaining embers before a fresh charge was introduced , and another to load the gun with a bag of powder and then the projectile . The fourth gunner pressed his thumb on the vent hole , to prevent a draught that might fan a flame . The charge loaded , the fourth would prick the bagged charge through the vent hole , and fill the vent with powder . On command , the fifth gunner would fire the piece with a <unk> . 
 When a cannon had to be abandoned such as in a retreat or surrender , the touch hole of the cannon would be plugged flush with an iron spike , disabling the cannon ( at least until metal boring tools could be used to remove the plug ) . This was called " spiking the cannon " . 
 A gun was said to be honeycombed when the surface of the bore had cavities , or holes in it , caused either by corrosion or casting defects . 
 = = Deceptive use = = 
 Historically , logs or poles have been used as decoys to mislead the enemy as to the strength of an emplacement . The " Quaker gun trick " was used by Colonel William Washington 's Continentals , during the American Revolutionary War ; in 1780 , approximately 100 Loyalists surrendered to them , rather than face bombardment . During the American Civil War , Quaker guns were also used by the Confederates , to compensate for their shortage of artillery . The decoy cannon were painted black at the " muzzle " , and positioned behind fortifications to delay Union attacks on those positions . On occasion , real gun carriages were used to complete the deception . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Cannon sounds have sometimes been used in classical pieces with a military theme . Giuseppe Sarti is believed to be the first composer to orchestrate real cannon in a musical work . His Te Deum celebrates the Russian victory at Ochakov ( 1789 ) with the firing of a real cannon and the use of fireworks , to heighten the martial effect of the music . 
 One of the best known examples of such a piece is another Russian work , Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky 's 1812 Overture . The overture is properly performed using an artillery section together with the orchestra , resulting in noise levels requiring musicians to wear ear protection . The cannon fire simulates Russian artillery bombardments of the Battle of Borodino , a critical battle in Napoleon 's invasion of Russia , whose defeat the piece celebrates . When the overture was first performed , the cannon were fired by an electric current triggered by the conductor . However , the overture was not recorded with real cannon fire until Mercury Records and conductor Antal Doráti 's 1958 recording of the Minnesota Orchestra . Cannon fire is also frequently used annually in presentations of the 1812 on the American Independence Day , a tradition started by Arthur Fiedler of the Boston Pops in 1974 . 
 The hard rock band AC / DC also used cannon in their song " For Those About to Rock ( We Salute You ) " , and in live shows replica Napoleonic cannon and pyrotechnics were used to perform the piece . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 In the 1961 film The Guns of Navarone 
 In the 2000 film Chicken Run , Rocky is a rooster who is fired into the air by a cannon as part of a circus act . 
 In the 2003 television series Survivor : Pearl Islands , the tribes transport their own cannon through a jungle course for their first challenge . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Cannon recovered from the sea are often extensively damaged from exposure to salt water ; because of this , electrolytic reduction treatment is required to forestall the process of corrosion . The cannon is then washed in deionized water to remove the electrolyte , and is treated in tannic acid , which prevents further rust and gives the metal a bluish @-@ black colour . After this process , cannon on display may be protected from oxygen and moisture by a wax sealant . A coat of polyurethane may also be painted over the wax sealant , to prevent the wax @-@ coated cannon from attracting dust in outdoor displays . Recently archaeologists say six cannon recovered from a river in Panama that could have belonged to legendary pirate Henry Morgan are being studied and could eventually be displayed after going through a restoration process . 
 = Guitar Hero II = 
 Guitar Hero II is a music rhythm game developed by Harmonix , published by Activision and distributed by RedOctane . It is the second installment in the Guitar Hero series and is the sequel to Guitar Hero . It was first released for the PlayStation 2 in November 2006 , and then for the Xbox 360 in April 2007 , with additional content not originally in the PlayStation 2 version . 
 Like in the original Guitar Hero , the player uses a peripheral in the shape of a solid @-@ body electric guitar to simulate playing rock music as notes scroll towards the player . Most of the gameplay from the original game remains intact , and provides new modes and note combinations . The game features more than 40 popular licensed songs , many of them cover versions recorded for the game , spanning five decades ( from the 1960s to the 2000s ) . The PlayStation 2 version of Guitar Hero II can be purchased individually or in a bundle that packages the game with a cherry red Gibson SG guitar controller . The Xbox 360 version of the game is offered in a bundle that packages the game with a white Gibson Explorer guitar controller . 
 Since its release , Guitar Hero II has been met with both critical and commercial success , helping the Guitar Hero series become a cultural phenomenon . As of December 1 , 2007 , the game has sold 3 @.@ 1 million copies . It has spawned the " expansion " title Guitar Hero Encore : Rocks the 80s for the PlayStation 2 . A sequel , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , was released in 2007 . 
 = = Development = = 
 The surprise success of Guitar Hero readily led to the development of a sequel for the game . According to developer John Tam , the team felt they " hit the sweet spot " of genres and decades within the set list and wanted to maintain that for the sequel . The costs of obtaining licensing rights for music from " big bands " such as AC / DC , Led Zeppelin , Van Halen , and Metallica , in addition to the lack of understanding of how the music would be used prevented these groups from being used in Guitar Hero . However , Tam notes that with the success of Guitar Hero , " They understand that we 're not going to embarrass their music , we 're going to actually pay homage to their music and get it to the point where people are going to fall in love with their music and understand their music in a totally different way than they 've ever experienced it before . " They also had requests by artists to include master tracks within the game . 
 In addition to working more directly with artists , RedOctane and Activision worked with various musical instrument and equipment companies to provide in @-@ game product placement . Such vendors include BOSS <unk> , DW Drums , Eden Bass Amplification , EMG , Epiphone , Ernie Ball Strings , Gibson Guitar Corporation , Guitar Center , Hofner , Kramer , Krank , Line 6 , Mesa Boogie , <unk> Basses , Orange Amplifiers , Randall Amplifiers , Roland , Vans and the Vans Warped Tour , <unk> , and Zildjian . 
 Guitar Hero II was originally announced for the PlayStation 2 on April 17 , 2006 . A demo version of the PlayStation 2 version of Guitar Hero II was released with issue # 110 of Official PlayStation Magazine on October 5 , 2006 . Features of the demo included four playable songs on four difficulty levels for single player and co @-@ op modes . Demo releases do not feature the ability to flip the notes for left @-@ handed players . Demo versions feature the songs " Shout at the Devil " , " You Really Got Me " , " Strutter " and " YYZ " . The retail game was released for the PlayStation 2 on November 7 , 2006 in North America , November 15 , 2006 in Australia , and November 24 , 2006 in Europe . It was released as both a stand @-@ alone game , and as a bundle containing the game with a cherry Gibson SG guitar controller . 
 = = = Xbox 360 version = = = 
 When Activision purchased RedOctane in 2006 , the company expressed strong interest in bringing the Guitar Hero series to " every significant new format " in order to take advantage of the next generation of consoles . The Xbox 360 version was announced on September 27 , 2006 at Microsoft 's X06 . Dusty Welch of RedOctane stated that the Xbox 360 " provides an incredible platform for facilitating downloadable content " due to the integrated hard drive on the console . The Xbox 360 version of the game included 10 exclusive songs and additional content available for purchase through the Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 The Xbox 360 version was released on April 3 , 2007 in North America and Australia , and then on April 6 , 2007 in Europe ( only as a bundle containing the game and a wired Gibson X @-@ Plorer guitar controller ) . It was released as a stand @-@ alone game for the Xbox 360 in the UK on January 25 , 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay is based on the successful formula created for the first Guitar Hero game ; the player may use the guitar peripheral to play scrolling notes by holding the corresponding fret button on the guitar neck and simultaneously pressing the strum bar . Alternatively , one can play with the DualShock 2 or Xbox 360 controller by using four shoulder buttons and a face button , mapped to specific fret keys . 
 Several changes have been made to the gameplay mechanics for Guitar Hero II : hammer @-@ on and pull @-@ off functionality has been improved , and three note chords have been introduced , scored as triple points if played correctly . There are additional statistics available for a song upon completion , and the scores achieved in either Quick Play or Career mode are saved to the same in @-@ game high @-@ score list . The handedness of the guitar can now be toggled from the Pause menu when playing a song ( previously , this was only available from the game 's main menu ) . For the Xbox 360 version , scores can also be compared with other players through Xbox Live via the <unk> feature , and there are 50 Achievements that can be earned in the game . 
 = = = Career mode = = = 
 In Career mode , players create a band name and select a guitarist from among the available characters . Eight characters , each representing a unique genre of rock music - are available from the start of the game : Eddie Knox , Axel Steel , Casey Lynch , Lars Ümlaüt , Izzy Sparks , Judy Nails , Johnny Napalm , and Pandora . Additional characters can also be purchased , allowing them to be used in later sessions . 
 Only the lead guitar is available to be played in the Career mode . Over the course of the Career mode the band plays at eight available venues . The venue system from the original game has been altered slightly and has the band traveling geographically from town to town in order to play at the next arena . The venues are <unk> High School , The Rat Cellar Pub , The Blackout Bar , The RedOctane Club , the Rock City Theater , the Vans Warped Tour , Harmonix Arena and Stonehenge . The venues feature lighting and pyrotechnics that are synchronized with the music . 
 Not all songs in the main setlist are available from the start . Once a song is unlocked for play within Career Mode , it becomes available for play in all other modes . When working through Career Mode at a specific difficulty level , the next tier of songs is unlocked once the required number of songs on the current tier ( 3 @-@ 5 , depending on difficulty and console ) are completed . Additionally , the encore song for a particular tier is only made available once its requirements are completed . On the Easy difficulty setting , there are no encores available , but the next tier will be unlocked immediately after completing the required songs in the previous tier . 
 Successful completion of a song on Medium or higher difficulty during Career mode will earn the player in @-@ game cash . Higher difficulty levels and better scoring performances are rewarded with more cash . In @-@ game money can be used at The Store to buy various items . Some items are available only after completing all songs at higher difficulty levels or 5 @-@ star performances . Within The Store , the player can purchase new Gibson guitars , guitar finishes , three additional characters , alternate outfits for the eight characters available from the start , bonus songs , and videos . For unknown reasons , the bonus videos are absent from the PAL version of the game . Within the Xbox 360 version , there is also an option to access the Guitar Hero II content on the Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 There are three different multiplayer modes available : 
 Cooperative 
 One player plays lead guitar while another plays either bass guitar or rhythm guitar , depending on the song . Both players share a score , rock meter , star power meter , and streak multiplier . Cooperative mode is the only multiplayer mode in which a song can be failed . Star power can only be activated by both players simultaneously . 
 Face @-@ Off 
 This is the same multiplayer mode as featured in the original game , though in Guitar Hero II both players can select their own level of difficulty . In this mode , players alternate between playing sections of the selected song . The scores are weighted so that a player who hits fewer notes on Easy difficulty may not necessarily lose against an opponent on Expert difficulty who hits more notes . 
 Pro Face @-@ Off 
 Players play the full lead guitar track on the same difficulty . For the PlayStation 2 mode , this is available upon completion of any career level , while for the Xbox 360 version , the mode is unlocked after completing the career mode at Easy level or higher . The score system is identical as the song could be played alone , but songs cannot be failed in this mode . 
 Although , online multiplayer was not available at the release of Guitar Hero II for the Xbox 360 , RedOctane has stated that they hope to be able provide this later once they are able to work out the technical issues . 
 = = = Practice mode = = = 
 Practice mode is a new addition to the game , allowing a player to practice certain sections of a song ( " Verse 2 , " " Chorus , " " Bridge 3 , " " <unk> Solo 4 , " etc . ) on different difficulties and instruments . Practice mode gives the player the ability to toggle the speed of the notes ( Full Speed , Slow , Slower and Slowest ) and does not stop a song no matter how many mistakes are made . Players can play the bass guitar lines on most songs . On others , a rhythm guitar line is available instead . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Both the PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360 versions of Guitar Hero II feature the same core 64 playable songs ( 40 licensed , 24 bonus songs ) . Among the featured tracks are " You Really Got Me " by Van Halen , " Sweet Child O ' Mine " by Guns N ' Roses , " Girlfriend " by Matthew Sweet , " Woman " by Wolfmother , " War Pigs " by Black Sabbath , and " Free Bird " by Lynyrd Skynyrd . The Xbox 360 version of the game contains 10 exclusive tracks not included in the PlayStation 2 version , including " Billion Dollar Babies " by Alice Cooper , " Rock and Roll , Hoochie Koo " by Rick Derringer , and " The Trooper " by Iron Maiden . Additionally , the Xbox 360 version allows for downloadable songs to be purchased on the Xbox Live Marketplace . The Xbox 360 version also features a reorganized set list that provides a more balanced progression in difficulty . 
 Most of the songs featured in the main set list are cover versions , with the exception of " Stop ! " , " Possum Kingdom " , " Dead ! " , and " John the Fisherman " ; these four are based on master recordings . The unlockable bonus songs are all master recordings , including some specifically arranged for use within Guitar Hero II . Cover songs are credited on screen with the phrase " as made famous by " ( for example , " Heart @-@ Shaped Box , as made famous by Nirvana " ) , while the original songs are credited with " as performed by " ( for example , " John the Fisherman , as performed by Primus " ) . 
 RedOctane stated that the Xbox 360 version of Guitar Hero II " planned to feature more downloadable content than any other 360 title " utilizing the Xbox Live Marketplace , including many of the songs from the original Guitar Hero a week after the release of the game . Four such packs have been released since April 11 , 2007 . Additionally , two packs featuring new content to the Guitar Hero series have also been released , including songs from My Chemical Romance , Protest the Hero , Trivium , and Atreyu . There have also been individual track downloads featuring songs from bands Los Rodríguez , <unk> , and Soilwork . 
 = = Featured instruments = = 
 Guitar Hero II features many popular real world Gibson , Epiphone , and Kramer guitars , including the Gibson Les Paul , Gibson SG , Gibson Flying V , ( these three being the only ones available from the start ) Gibson <unk> 180 and Gibson Explorer . Oddities such as the double necked Gibson EDS @-@ 1275 and unusual looking Gibson Corvus also make an appearance . Several available finishes are also recognizable from popular guitarists , including Zakk Wylde 's bullseye Les Paul . As play progresses , several custom shaped guitars become available , although some are notable in the real world such as the USA and Battle Axe ( a similar looking bass is played by Gene Simmons , and the guitar was played by John Christ of Samhain / Danzig fame ) . Basses , such as the Music Man <unk> , Gibson Thunderbird , and the Höfner bass ( as made famous by Paul McCartney , the bassist for the Beatles ) are also available for co @-@ op play . 
 The band itself plays with Orange amps and DW drum kits , along with more in @-@ game endorsements . When the player passes each set of songs in career mode , his / her band is rewarded with money and equipment endorsements , including Ernie Ball strings , Boss effects , Line 6 guitar amplifiers , <unk> amplifiers , Mesa Boogie amplifiers , and Roland keyboards . These products then appear on stage while the band plays the ensuing setlists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The PlayStation 2 version of Guitar Hero II was critically acclaimed . It received a 10 / 10 review in the December 2006 issue of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine and was awarded the Game of the Month award . The game received a rating of 9 @.@ 5 / 10 from IGN , ranking higher than the original game in the series and amongst IGN 's highest rated PlayStation 2 games ever . IGN would later include it on their 2007 list of " The Top 100 Games of All Time " at # 49 . GameSpot reviewed the PlayStation 2 version with a rating of 8 @.@ 7 / 10 , and the Xbox 360 version 8 @.@ 9 , both slightly lower than its predecessor . Game Informer gave it a 9 / 10 , while its " second opinion " rating was better , at 9 @.@ 25 / 10 . According to Game Rankings , the average critic score of Guitar Hero II is 93 % , making it the 9th best reviewed game of 2006 . The Australian video game talk show Good Game 's two reviewers gave the game a 9 / 10 and 10 / 10 . 
 The Xbox 360 version has earned similarly positive reviews and slightly higher scores with a 9 @.@ 5 / 10 in the March issue of Official Xbox Magazine , a 4 @.@ 75 / 5 from GamePro , a 9 @.@ 5 / 10 from Play Magazine a 9 @.@ 6 / 10 from IGN , and a perfect score of 5 / 5 from Got @-@ Next . As of April 3 , 2007 , the Game Rankings score is 94 % . The popular G4 television show X @-@ Play gave both versions of the game a 5 / 5 . Additionally , the Australian Xbox Magazine has also awarded the game , for the first time , an 11 / 10 , in a reference to This Is Spinal Tap . Hyper 's Daniel Wilks commends the game for its " huge number of tracks " but criticises it for " some really average covers " . 
 Common praise for the game by critics is aimed at the new multiplayer and practice modes . Common critiques concern the song list , which includes more hard rock and metal than the previous game , deeming it less accessible to casual players . Other common critiques concern the quality of the covers . 
 The downloadable song packs for the Xbox 360 version have been criticized for being too pricey . The price was seen by many fans of the series as being far too expensive and was met with resistance and angst with a large number of people pledging to boycott the content . Microsoft 's Xbox Live Director of Programming , Major Nelson , defending the pricing and release scheme , and attributed the high cost of the content to " licensing issues " on the Xbox 360 platform , as all contracts drawn up for songs from the original game had to be rewritten , since they are playable on an additional console . 
 In 1UP.com 's review for the Xbox 360 version of the game , the downloadable song packs are noted as a " mixed blessing " ; praise is given for retooling the songs with better gameplay elements such as the inclusion of co @-@ op modes , but the fact that the songs come in pricey packs of three " defeats much of the appeal " . In an interview with RedOctane president Kai Huang , Huang stated that the decision to pack the songs in three was made to keep the cost of the tracks down . Though Huang felt the pricing was fair , he noted afterward " we do listen to the fans and take any feedback we receive seriously . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In December 2006 , Guitar Hero II for PlayStation 2 was the second best @-@ selling video game of the month , selling 805 @,@ 200 units . It was outsold only by Gears of War for Xbox 360 , which sold 815 @,@ 700 units . It was the fifth best @-@ selling video game of the fiscal year of 2006 , with 1 @.@ 3 million copies sold . It was also the third best @-@ selling game for the PlayStation 2 , behind Madden NFL 07 and Kingdom Hearts II . Total sales of the game during 2006 were $ 200 million . 
 On July 12 , 2007 , Dusty Welch of RedOctane stated that there have been over 300 @,@ 000 downloads of the music packs until that point and that the prices were " very attractive and desirable for consumers . " On September 11 , 2007 , Activision reported that with over 650 @,@ 000 downloads , the music packs qualified as " multi @-@ platinum " under RIAA 's definitions . 
 = = Technical issues = = 
 No official statement from RedOctane or Activision were made about the discs or the game itself having any issues , but players have reported songs freezing or skipping , causing the audio to be unsynchronized ; unusually long loading screens ; and menus that freeze or lock up entirely causing the game to crash . The RedOctane Support Center Answer Guide states , " We ’ re already in the process of looking into this and testing to replicate the experience . We ’ ll notify everyone with our results shortly , and will have a positive resolution if need be . " 
 Two models of the X @-@ Plorer controller were released for the Xbox 360 version of the game : model numbers <unk> and <unk> . Of the two versions , the <unk> has an RJ @-@ 11 jack for effect pedals near the controller cord and is subject to having an unresponsive whammy bar . RedOctane later responded , saying that they " isolated this issue to two model numbers that can be found on the guitar 's packaging " . Customers are able to exchange these models for new models . 
 On April 13 , 2007 , Activision revealed that the issue was not a problem with the hardware , and that the guitars were not defective . The cause of the problem was anti @-@ cheat protection software , and Activision released a patch on Xbox Live on April 14 , 2007 to remedy it . However , this patch may have caused some unintended side effects . Starting on April 16 , 2007 , numerous users began reporting <unk> and failures of their system after downloading and installing this patch . RedOctane stated , " We 're aware of the problem and we 're looking into it . " 
 Numerous game players have also reported problems with static shocks to the X @-@ Plorer guitars causing various fret buttons ( usually the green one ) to permanently malfunction . Multiple exchanges of guitars have not solved the problem , as exchanged guitars also exhibit the problem . To date , RedOctane has not solved the problem , and has refused to extend warranties to replacement guitars , time limiting the warranty back to the original date of purchase . 
 = Health and Morals of Apprentices Act 1802 = 
 The Health and Morals of Apprentices Act 1802 ( 42 Geo III <unk> ) , sometimes known as the Factory Act 1802 , was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom designed to improve conditions for apprentices working in cotton mills . The Act was introduced by Sir Robert Peel , who had become concerned in the issue after an 1784 outbreak of a " malignant fever " at one of his cotton mills , which he later blamed on ' gross mismanagement ' by his subordinates . 
 The Act required that cotton mills and factories be properly ventilated and basic requirements on cleanliness be met . Apprentices in these premises were to be given a basic education and to attend a religious service at least once a month . They were to be provided with clothing and their working hours were limited to no more than twelve hours a day ( excluding meal breaks ) ; they were not to work at night . 
 The Act was not effectively enforced , and did not address the working conditions of ' free children ' ( children working in mills who were not apprentices ) who rapidly came to heavily outnumber the apprentices . Regulating the way masters treated their apprentices was a recognised responsibility of Parliament and hence the Act itself was non @-@ contentious , but coming between employer and employee to specify on what terms a man might sell his labour ( or that of his child ) was highly contentious . Hence it was not until 1819 that an Act to limit the hours of work ( and set a minimum age ) for ' free children ' working in cotton mills was piloted through Parliament by Peel and his son Robert ( the future Prime Minister ) . Strictly speaking , it is Peel 's Cotton Mills and Factories Act of 1819 which ( although also ineffective for want of a means of proper enforcement ) paved the way for subsequent Factory Acts that would regulate the industry and set up effective means of regulation ; but it is Peel 's Act of 1802 which first recognised by legislation the evils of child labour in cotton mills that the Factory Acts addressed . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the early Industrial Revolution in the United Kingdom , cotton mills were water @-@ powered , and therefore sprang up where water power was available . When , as was often the case , there was no ready source of labour in the neighbourhood , the workforce had to be imported . A cheap and importable source of labour was ' parish apprentices ' ( pauper children , whose parish was supposed to see them trained to a trade or occupation ) ; millowners would reach agreement with distant parishes to employ , house and feed their apprentices . . In 1800 there were 20 @,@ 000 apprentices working in cotton mills , . The apprentices were vulnerable to maltreatment by bad masters , to industrial accidents , to ill @-@ health from their work , ill @-@ health from overwork , and ill @-@ health from contagious diseases such as smallpox , typhoid and typhus which were then widespread . The enclosed conditions ( to reduce the frequency of thread breakage , cotton mills were usually very warm and as draught @-@ free as possible ) and close contact within mills and factories allowed contagious diseases such as typhus and smallpox to spread rapidly . Typhoid ( like cholera , which did not reach Europe until after the Napoleonic wars ) is spread not by poor working conditions but by poor sanitation , but sanitation in mills and the settlements round them often was poor . 
 In about 1780 a water @-@ powered cotton mill was built for Robert Peel on the River Irwell near Radcliffe ; the mill employed child labour bought from workhouses in Birmingham and London . Children were unpaid and bound apprentice until they were 21 . They boarded on an upper floor of the building , and were locked in . Shifts were typically 10 – 10 @.@ 5 hours in length ( i.e. 12 hours after allowing for meal breaks ) , and the apprentices ' hot <unk> ' : a child who had just finished his shift would sleep in a bed only just vacated by a child now just starting his shift . Peel himself admitted that conditions at the mill were " very bad " . 
 In 1784 it was brought to the attention of the magistrates of the Salford Hundred that an outbreak of " low , putrid fever , of a contagious nature " had " prevailed many months in the cotton mills and among the poor , in the township of Radcliffe " . The doctors of Manchester , led by Dr Thomas Percival were commissioned to investigate the cause of the fever and to recommend how to prevent its spread . They could not identify the cause , and their recommendations were largely driven by the contemporary view that fevers were spread by putrid atmospheres and hence were to be combatted by removing smells and improving ventilation : 
 Windows and doors should be left open every night and during the lunch break : when the mill was running as many windows as possible were to be left open . ( Natural ventilation was poor because there were too few opening lights in the mill windows , and they were all at the same height ( too high ) . 
 The stoves currently used for heating did not give much airflow . Chimneys should be built in each work room and turf fires lit in them to give better ventilation and combat contagion by their " strong , penetrating , and pungent " smoke . 
 Rooms should be swept daily and floors washed with lime water once a week . The walls and ceilings should also be whitewashed two or three times a year . 
 The apartments should be fumigated weekly with tobacco . 
 <unk> should be washed daily and ventilated to ensure that the smell did not permeate to the work rooms . 
 Rancid oil used to lubricate machinery should be replaced with purer oil . 
 To prevent contagion and to preserve health , all employees should be involved in keeping the factory clean . Children should bathe occasionally . The clothes of those infected with fever should be washed in cold water , then in hot and be left to fumigate before being worn again . Those who died of fever should be wrapped promptly in cloth and those in the vicinity advised to smoke tobacco to avoid infection . 
 The last recommendation expressed a much wider concern about the welfare of mill children : 
 We earnestly recommend a longer recess from labour at noon , and a more early <unk> from it in the evening , to all those who work in the cotton mills : but we deem this indulgence essential to the present health , and future capacity for labour , of those who are under the age of fourteen ; for the active recreations of childhood and youth are necessary to the growth , vigour , and the right conformation of the human body . And we cannot excuse ourselves , on the present occasion , from suggesting to you , who are the guardians of the public weal , this further very important consideration , that the rising generation should not be debarred from all opportunities of instruction at the only season of life in which they can be properly improved . 
 As a result of this report the magistrates decided not to allow parish apprentices to be indentured to cotton mills where they worked at night or more than ten hours in the day . Conditions at the Radcliffe mill were improved ; in 1795 John Aikin 's A Description of the Country from thirty to forty miles round Manchester said of Peel 's mills " The peculiar healthiness of @-@ the people employed may be imputed partly to the judicious and humane regulations put in practice by Mr. Peel , and partly to the <unk> of the air and climate . " 
 = = = Peel introduces his Bill = = = 
 In 1795 , the medical men of Manchester ( with Percival playing a leading part ) formed the Manchester Board of Health , which promptly investigated the employment of children in Manchester factories , taking evidence from ( amongst others ) Peel now MP for Tamworth . The Board concluded : 
 It appears that the children and others who work in the large cotton factories , are peculiarly disposed to be affected by the contagion of fever , and that when such infection is received , it is rapidly propagated , not only amongst those who are crowded together in the same apartments , but in the families and neighbourhoods to which they belong . 
 The large factories are generally injurious to the constitution of those employed in them , even where no particular diseases prevail , from the close confinement which is enjoined , from the debilitating effects of hot or impure air , and from the want of the active exercises which nature points out as essential in childhood and youth to invigorate the system , and to fit our species for the employments and for the duties of manhood . 
 The untimely labour of the night , and the protracted labour of the day , with respect to children , not only tends to diminish future expectations as to the general sum of life and industry , by impairing the strength and destroying the vital stamina of the rising generation , but it too often gives encouragement to idleness , extravagance and profligacy in the parents , who , contrary to the order of nature , subsist by the oppression of their offspring . 
 It appears that the children employed in factories are generally debarred from all opportunities of education , and from moral or religious instruction . 
 From the excellent regulations which subsist in several cotton factories , it appears that many of these evils may be in a considerable degree obviated ; we are therefore warranted by experience , and are assured , we shall have the support of the liberal proprietors of these factories in proposing an application for parliamentary aid ( if other methods appear not likely to effect the purpose ) to establish a general system of laws for the wise , humane and equal government of all such works . " 
 Peel ( presumably one of the liberal proprietors with excellent regulations who assured his support ) introduced his Bill in 1802 . In doing so Peel said that he was convinced of the existence of gross mismanagement in his own factories , and having no time to set them in order himself , was getting an Act of Parliament passed to do it for him but ( given his dealings with the Manchester Board of Health ) this may well have been a <unk> , rather than the whole truth . . In 1816 Peel introduced a further Factory Bill ; his explanation to the consequent Select Committee of the need for further legislation included this account of the origins of the 1802 Act : 
 The house in which I have a concern gave employment at one time to near one thousand children of this description . Having other pursuits , it was not often in my power to visit the factories , but whenever such visits were made , I was struck with the uniform appearance of bad health , and , in many cases , <unk> growth of the children ; the hours of labour were regulated by the interest of the overseer , whose remuneration depending on the quantity of the work done , he was often induced to make the poor children work excessive hours , and to stop their complaints by trifling bribes 
 Finding our own factories under such management , and learning that the like practices prevailed in other parts of the kingdom where similar machinery was in use , the children being much over @-@ worked , and often little or no regard paid to cleanliness and ventilation of the buildings ; having the assistance of Dr Percival and other eminent medical gentlemen of Manchester , together with some distinguished characters both in and out of Parliament , I brought in a Bill in the 42nd year of the King , for the regulation of such parish apprentices . The hours of work allowed by that Bill being fewer in number than those formerly practised , a visible improvement in the health and general appearance of the children soon became evident , and since the complete operation of the Act contagious diseases have rarely occurred 
 The Act met little opposition in Parliament , although there was discussion as to whether it should be extended to all manufactories and all workers . The amendment was dismissed as the Act only served to ensure education for apprentices not to improve conditions in factories . 
 = = Provisions = = 
 Under the Act , regulations and rules came into force on 2 December 1802 and applied to all mills and factories employing three or more apprentices ( unless the total workforce was less than twenty ) . It stated that all mills and factories should be cleaned at least twice yearly with quicklime and water ; this included ceilings and walls . There was a requirement that the buildings have sufficient windows and openings for ventilation . 
 Each apprentice was to be given two sets of clothing , suitable linen , stockings , hats , and shoes , and a new set each year thereafter . Working hours were limited to 12 hours a day , excluding the time taken for breaks . Apprentices were no longer permitted to work during the night ( between 9 pm and 6 am ) . A grace period was provided to allow factories time to adjust , but all night @-@ time working by apprentices was to be discontinued by June 1804 . 
 All apprentices were to be educated in reading , writing and arithmetic for the first four years of their apprenticeship . The Act specified that this should be done every working day within usual working hours but did not state how much time should be set aside for it . Educational classes should be held in a part of the mill or factory designed for the purpose . Every Sunday , for one hour , apprentices were to be taught the Christian religion ; every other Sunday , a divine service should be held in the factory , and every month the apprentices should visit a church . They should be prepared for confirmation in the Church of England between the ages of 14 and 18 and must be examined by a clergyman at least once a year . Male and female apprentices were to sleep separately and not more than two per bed . 
 Local magistrates had to appoint two inspectors known as visitors to ensure that factories and mills were complying with the Act ; one was to be a clergyman and the other a Justice of the Peace , neither to have any connection with the mill or factory . The visitors had the power to impose fines for non @-@ compliance and the authority to visit at any time of the day to inspect the premises . 
 The Act was to be displayed in two places in the factory . Owners who refused to comply with any part of the Act could be fined between £ 2 and £ 5 . 
 = = Effect of the Act = = 
 The Act required magistrates to appoint visitors , whom it empowered to inspect mills and report on their findings , but it did not require them to exercise their powers . Consequently , unless local magistrates were particularly interested in the issue , the Act was poorly enforced . Where factories were inspected , the visitors were amateurs ( as indeed they were ) in comparison to the paid Factory Inspectorate set up by the 1833 Act . Furthermore , the Act applied only to apprentices , and not to ' free children ' whose fathers ' right to dispose of their children 's labour on whatever terms they chose were unaffected by the Act . Improvements in the generation of rotary motion by steam engines made steam @-@ powered cotton mills a practical proposition ; they were already operating in Manchester in 1795 , using free children drawn from the local population . The great advantage parish apprentices had had was that they were tied to the mill , no matter how remote the mill had to be to avail itself of water power . If the mill no longer had to be remote , it became a problem that the mill was tied to the apprentices . Apprentices had to be housed clothed and fed whether or not the mill could sell what they produced ; they were in competition with free children whose wages would fall if the mill went on short time ( and might not reflect the full cost of housing clothing and feeding them , since that was incurred whether they were working or not ) and who could be discharged if sick , injured or otherwise incapable of work . Consequently , the use of free children came to predominate : the Act became largely a dead letter within its limited scope , and inapplicable to most factory children . 
 In 1819 , when Peel introduced a Bill to introduce an eleven @-@ hour day for all children under 16 working in cotton mills , a Lords Committee heard evidence from a Bolton magistrate who had investigated 29 local cotton mills ; 20 had no apprentices but employed a total of 550 children under 14 ; the other nine mills employed a total of 98 apprentices , and a total of 350 children under 14 . Apprentices were mostly found in the larger mills , which had somewhat better conditions ; some even worked a 12 @-@ hour day or less ( the Grant brothers ' mill at Tottington worked an 11 @.@ 5 hour day : " This establishment has perfect ventilation ; all the apprentices , and in fact all the children , are healthy , happy , clean , and well clothed ; proper and daily attention is paid to their instruction ; and they regularly attend divine worship on Sundays . " ) : in other mills children worked up to 15 hours a day in bad conditions ( e.g. <unk> and Roberts ' Elton mill : " Most filthy ; no ventilation ; the apprentices and other children ragged , puny , not half clothed , and seemingly not half fed ; no instruction of any sort ; no human beings can be more wretched " ) . 
 Although the Act was largely ineffective , it has been seen as the first piece of Health & Safety legislation , leading the way to subsequent regulations covering industrial workplaces ; its requirement for factory walls to be whitewashed continued to be a legal requirement until the Factories Act 1961 . 
 Opinions differ as to the deeper significance of the Act . Some scholars have linked the Act to a move away from laissez @-@ faire capitalism , or see it as marking the point where the state began to recognise its responsibility for very poor children , and to address the conditions in which they were living ; it has also been seen as presaging subsequent legislation regarding the health of towns . Others see it as at heart one of the last manifestations of the old Elizabethan Poor Law , which directed that destitute children should be apprenticed in a trade ; ( more accurately of the Statute of <unk> of 1562 which set up systems for regulating apprenticeships ) : during Parliamentary debates on the Bill that interpretation was successfully urged against any attempt to widen its applicability . 
 = U.S. Route 322 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 322 ( US 322 ) is a U.S. highway running from Cleveland , Ohio east to Atlantic City , New Jersey . The easternmost segment of the route in New Jersey runs 62 @.@ 64 miles ( 100 @.@ 81 km ) from the Commodore Barry Bridge over the Delaware River in Logan Township , Gloucester County , where it continues southeast to Atlantic Avenue and Pacific Avenue in Atlantic City , Atlantic County . The portion of the route between the Commodore Barry Bridge and Route 42 is mostly a two @-@ lane undivided road that is concurrently signed with County Route 536 , passing through Mullica Hill and Glassboro . From Williamstown , US 322 follows the Black Horse Pike , a four @-@ lane road , southeast to Atlantic City . In Hamilton Township , Atlantic County , US 322 forms a concurrency with U.S. Route 40 , continuing with that route all the way to Atlantic City . US 322 intersects several major roads including U.S. Route 130 and Interstate 295 in Logan Township , the New Jersey Turnpike in Woolwich Township , Route 55 in Harrison Township , Route 42 in Williamstown , Route 50 and U.S. Route 40 in Hamilton Township , the Garden State Parkway in Egg Harbor Township , and U.S. Route 9 in Pleasantville . 
 East of Williamstown , US 322 follows the Black Horse Pike , a turnpike between Camden and Atlantic City that was created in 1855 . Pre @-@ 1927 Route 18S was designated along the portion of the current route east of McKee City in 1923 , with the US 40 designation along this portion following in 1926 . In 1927 , Route 18S became Route 48 and Route 42 was designated along the road between Williamstown and McKee City . US 322 was extended to New Jersey in 1936 , running from a ferry dock on the Delaware River in Bridgeport east to Williamstown , where it followed Route 42 and U.S. Route 40 / Route 48 to Atlantic City . In 1938 , Route 55 was legislated along US 40 / US 322 in Atlantic City while in 1939 , US 322 between the ferry dock and Route 44 ( now US 130 ) became Route S44 and the route between there and Route 42 became Route 51 . In 1953 , the state highway designations were removed from US 322 . After the Commodore Barry Bridge opened in 1974 , the old approach to the ferry dock became Route 324 . In 1960 , a freeway was proposed for US 322 in Gloucester County , running from the site of the Commodore Barry Bridge to Williamstown . This $ 59 @.@ 6 million proposal was canceled by the 1970s due to diversion of funds to mass transit . Subsequent proposals for freeways in 1983 and 1995 also failed . A bypass of Mullica Hill was completed in 2012 for US 322 in order to relieve traffic through that town ; the former alignment is now unsigned US 322 Bus . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Gloucester County = = = 
 US 322 enters New Jersey from Chester , Pennsylvania on the Commodore Barry Bridge over the Delaware River . Upon entering New Jersey , the highway runs concurrently with County Route 536 . The road heads southeast into swampy areas of Logan Township as a five @-@ lane road maintained by the Delaware River Port Authority , eventually becoming a six @-@ lane divided highway as it passes over the access road to Route 324 and comes to the westbound toll plaza for the bridge . A short distance later , US 322 has a cloverleaf interchange with U.S. Route 130 and continues south through the community of Bridgeport as it narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road known as <unk> @-@ Bridgeport Road . It continues through rural areas of farms and woods prior to an interchange with Interstate 295 , at which point the road widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway . After I @-@ 295 , US 322 makes a turn to the east and crosses into Woolwich Township , narrowing back into a two @-@ lane undivided road with no name . Here , the route crosses County Route 551 prior to an interchange with the New Jersey Turnpike . 
 Past the New Jersey Turnpike , US 322 starts to curve southeast and crosses into Harrison Township , where it passes suburban neighborhoods as Bridgeport @-@ Mullica Hill Road and jurisdiction of the road is transferred to Gloucester County . It continues into Mullica Hill , where it intersects Route 45 and unsigned US 322 Bus . At this point , CR 536 turns south along with US 322 Bus . / Route 45 and US 322 heads along the Mullica Hill Bypass concurrent with unsigned CR <unk> , running southeast through wooded areas with some farm fields . At the end of the bypass , the route intersects US 322 Bus . / CR 536 again and turns east onto Mullica Hill Road , again becoming concurrent with CR 536 . US 322 continues through a mix of woods , farms , and homes , passing through Richwood . The route interchanges with Route 55 where state jurisdiction resumes . At the interchange , US 322 is briefly a four @-@ lane road , before entering Glassboro . In Glassboro , the route becomes Best Avenue , passing residential areas prior to bisecting the campus of Rowan University , where it comes to a roundabout at Rowan Boulevard . A short distance later , US 322 crosses County Route 553 before coming to Route 47 . Here , it turns south to form a concurrency with that route on three @-@ lane Delsea Drive , passing more homes and businesses . US 322 splits from Route 47 by heading east on High Street , a two @-@ lane road , and enters wooded areas with some development and farmland . 
 After exiting Glassboro for Monroe Township , US 322 continues east and crosses County Route 555 prior to reaching Williamstown , where the road passes residential and business development . Here , US 322 turns north , while County Route 536 splits from the route by continuing southeast on Main Street . A short distance after the split , US 322 intersects Route 42 ( Black Horse Pike ) and turns southeast onto it . At this intersection , County Route 536 Spur continues to the north . On the Black Horse Pike , a four @-@ lane divided highway line with businesses , the route soon crosses County Route 536 before leaving the Williamstown area and becoming a four @-@ lane undivided road . US 322 continues southeast through predominantly forested areas with occasional development , intersecting County Route 538 . In 2006 , an average of 10 @,@ 615 vehicles used the road annually in Gloucester County . 
 = = = Atlantic County = = = 
 Entering Folsom in Atlantic County , US 322 passes a couple lakes and some wooded residences before coming to an interchange with Route 54 , where the route has a median . Past this interchange , the road continues southeast through heavily forested areas to an intersection with the southern terminus of Route 73 ( signed as County Route 561 Spur ) . After this intersection , US 322 turns south and enters Hamilton Township , where it encounters County Route 559 at a traffic circle that has been modified to have US 322 run through it . After passing more woods and a clearing for farms , the road widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and has an interchange with Route 50 . A short while after , the route enters a residential and commercial area , passing by Atlantic Cape Community College before heading to the south of the Hamilton Mall . Here , US 322 intersects U.S. Route 40 , which merges onto the Black Horse Pike . 
 The two routes continue to the southeast through business areas , meeting County Route 575 and a ramp to the Atlantic City Expressway . CR 575 turns east to form a concurrency with US 40 / US 322 . The road enters Egg Harbor Township , with CR 575 splitting from US 40 / US 322 by turning to the south . The route passes more wooded residential and commercial areas , as well as the Storybook Land amusement park , before intersecting County Route 563 . US 40 / US 322 forms a concurrency with that route and passes through a business district that includes the Harbor Square shopping center . CR 563 splits from the road by continuing southeast and the Black Horse Pike heads east interchange with the Garden State Parkway . The only direct ramp present is between the Black Horse Pike westbound and the Garden State Parkway northbound , with all other movements provided by CR 563 . Past here , US 40 / US 322 continues east past more businesses , crossing County Route 651 before entering Pleasantville . In Pleasantville , the road crosses U.S. Route 9 , where the name changes to Verona Avenue . Upon crossing County Route 585 , the Black Horse Pike continues past residences as an undivided road , crossing back into Egg Harbor Township . The road passes more businesses , closely paralleling the Atlantic City Expressway before entering Atlantic City . Here , the name becomes Albany Avenue and it comes to a pair of ramps that provide access to and from the Black Horse Pike eastbound and the Atlantic City Expressway westbound . US 40 / US 322 enters marshland , crossing the Great Thorofare onto Great Island before passing over the Beach Thorofare . Past this bridge , the road passes between businesses to the west and the closed Bader Field airport and the abandoned Bernie Robbins Stadium to the east . US 40 / US 322 crosses the Inside Thorofare on a drawbridge and continues as a county maintained road to its end at Atlantic Avenue and Pacific Avenue , one block from the boardwalk . In 2006 , an average of 6 @,@ 910 vehicles used the road daily in Atlantic County . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before 1953 = = = 
 What is now U.S. Route 322 east of the Route 42 junction was established in 1855 as the Black Horse Pike , a turnpike that ran from Camden to Atlantic City via Blackwoodtown . In 1923 , the portion of present US 322 along the US 40 concurrency was designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 18S , a route that was built to connect Penns Grove to Atlantic City . As a result of the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , U.S. Route 40 was also signed along the alignment Route 18S . A year later , in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the current alignment of US 322 through New Jersey was designated as a part of Route 42 between Williamstown and McKee City , while Route 48 replaced the Route 18S designation along the portion between McKee City and Atlantic City . The portion of US 40 / US 322 in Atlantic City was legislated as Route 55 in 1938 . 
 In 1936 , US 322 was extended into New Jersey , running from a ferry dock on the Delaware River in Bridgeport and continuing east from there through Mullica Hill and Glassboro to Williamstown , where it followed Route 42 to McKee City and U.S. Route 40 / Route 48 to Atlantic City . In 1939 , the portion of US 322 between the ferry dock and Route 44 ( now U.S. Route 130 ) was legislated as Route S44 , a spur of Route 44 , while the route between there and Route 42 in Williamstown was legislated as Route 51 . It is also this section between Bridgeport and Williamstown that was not in state highway jurisdiction at the time . 
 = = = 1953 to present = = = 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , several state highways concurrent with US 322 were removed , including Route S44 , Route 51 , Route 42 , Route 48 , and Route 55 . The section of US 322 between former US 130 and Route 42 became state highway jurisdiction in 1955 after a state takeover . This portion was also designated as part of County Route 536 with the creation of the 500 @-@ series county routes in 1952 . When the Commodore Barry Bridge opened in 1974 and replaced the ferry across the Delaware River , US 322 was moved to the new bridge approach and the former piece of the route to the ferry dock became Route 324 . 
 In the 1960s , plans started forming for a freeway along the US 322 corridor in Gloucester County . A parkway had been planned in 1932 to run from Bridgeport east to the planned Camden @-@ Atlantic City Parkway as part of a network of such roads proposed for the Philadelphia area ; however , it was never built . The freeway , which was planned to connect the then @-@ proposed Commodore Barry Bridge to Route 42 in Williamstown , was projected to cost $ 59 @.@ 6 million . This freeway was proposed to be incorporated into the Interstate Highway System in 1970 ; however , this was denied . By the end of the 1970s , the US 322 freeway was canceled due to the desire to use highway funds for mass transit . However , plans resurfaced for a freeway along the US 322 corridor in 1987 , when Congressman William J. Hughes made a proposal for a road running from the New Jersey Turnpike to the Atlantic City Expressway , with access to the Route 55 freeway . This proposal was never built though . In 1995 , the New Jersey Turnpike Authority planned to build a toll road between the Commodore Barry Bridge and the Atlantic City Expressway , connecting with I @-@ 295 , the New Jersey Turnpike , and Route 55 . This proposal resulted from increased traffic volume on US 322 after the completion of Interstate 476 in Pennsylvania . However , this proposal was soon canceled due to the possible destruction it would cause to residences , businesses , and the environment . The Cardiff Circle along US 40 / US 322 at CR 563 and CR 608 in Egg Harbor Township was eliminated in a $ 3 @.@ 7 million project completed in 2002 . 
 In December 2008 , jurisdiction of US 322 from the Woolwich – Harrison township line to the Route 55 interchange and a 0 @.@ 35 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 56 km ) segment within Glassboro was transferred from the state highway agency , the New Jersey Department of Transportation , to Gloucester County . Construction of a bypass around Mullica Hill began in December 2010 in order to relieve severe traffic congestion through the town . The route originally went through the town 's historical district , where it briefly joined Route 45 . The new alignment removes the concurrency , so that the routes merely cross at an intersection . The road was estimated to cost $ 12 million , and is described by a freeholder as being the " largest infrastructure project that has ever been undertaken in Gloucester County . " In addition to the bypass , a portion of US 322 in the Mullica Hill area was widened . Construction of the bypass portion initially awaited approval from the New Jersey Historical Sites Council to determine if it would impact the Mullica Hill Historic District . The Mullica Hill Bypass opened to traffic on January 11 , 2012 . With the rerouting of US 322 onto the Mullica Hill Bypass , the former alignment of US 322 to Mullica Hill is now US 322 Bus . , which is unsigned . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 2 / 15th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 15th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that served during World War II . Formed in May 1940 primarily from Queensland volunteers , the battalion saw action in North Africa in 1941 – 42 as part of the 20th Brigade , which was part of the 7th Division before being reassigned to the 9th Division . 
 After completing training in Palestine , in early 1941 , the 2 / 15th took up positions along the front line in the Western Desert , before being pushed back to Tobruk . Between April and October 1941 , along with a garrison of British and other Australian personnel , the battalion helped to hold the strategically important port , which had been surrounded following the landing of German troops at Tripoli . It was withdrawn by sea in late October 1941 as the 9th Division was relieved by the British 70th Division . Following its withdrawal from Tobruk , the battalion re @-@ formed at Gaza before undertaking garrison duties in Syria . In mid @-@ 1942 , the 2 / 15th returned to North Africa to fight in the First and Second Battles of El Alamein . 
 In early 1943 , the 2 / 15th returned to Australia and was re @-@ organised and re @-@ trained for jungle warfare . It took part in campaigns against the Japanese in New Guinea in 1943 – 44 and Borneo in 1945 , before being disbanded in 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 2 / 15th Battalion was raised at Victoria Barracks in Brisbane on 26 April 1940 from Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) volunteers . It was one of three infantry battalions assigned to the 20th Brigade that were initially part of the 7th Division , the other two being the 2 / 13th and 2 / 17th Battalions . The battalion had an authorised strength of around 900 personnel like other Australian infantry battalions of the time , and was organised into four rifle companies – designated ' A ' through to ' D ' – each consisting of three platoons ; these were supported by a battalion headquarters and a headquarters company with six specialist platoons : signals , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administrative and mortars . 
 Upon formation , the 2 / 15th was placed under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Robert Marlan , an Australian Staff Corps officer of the Permanent Military Forces who arrived on promotion from major , having previously served in World War I with the 20th Battalion . The colours initially chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 15th Battalion , a unit that had served during World War I before being raised as a Militia formation in 1921 . These colours were initially purple and red in a diamond shape , but after representations from World War I veterans the colour patch was changed to brown over dark blue , in a rectangle shape . The patch was placed inside a grey diamond border added to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart ; this would change following the unit 's involvement in the fighting at Tobruk , when it adopted a ' T ' -shaped UCP consisting of blue and green . 
 Following the battalion 's establishment , Marlan set about choosing a cadre of senior commissioned and non @-@ commissioned personnel around which to build the battalion . These personnel included the battalion second @-@ in @-@ command , the quartermaster and adjutant , as well as senior enlisted soldiers to undertake administrative and instructional work . These were recruited from several of the existing Queensland @-@ based Militia battalions including the 25th , 42nd and 47th Battalions . One member recruited at the time had served with the 15th Battalion that had been raised as part of the First Australian Imperial Force , during World War I. 
 After the first groups of personnel began arriving at Redbank , in south @-@ east Queensland , in the middle of May , the battalion 's headquarters moved to the camp and basic training commenced in June under instructors from the Australian Instructional Corps . In early July , the majority of the battalion was transported by train to <unk> , and from there to Darwin , in Australia 's north , aboard the troopship Zealandia . Tasked with defending the port and its surrounds , the battalion was based around <unk> 's <unk> near <unk> Beach , and in the months that followed was occupied with vital asset protection and area defence in between individual and collective training exercises . Personnel were joined by the majority of their vehicles , including 14 tracked Bren carriers in August , as well as a group of reinforcements . In October , elements of the battalion were used as stevedores during a wharf labourers ' strike . 
 In the absence of the Darwin personnel , the battalion 's rear details shifted from Redbank to <unk> where route marches were carried out in the Samford Valley . In late October , the rear details personnel returned to Redbank at the end of the month where more equipment was received . The main body of the battalion remained in Darwin , forming part of the town 's defensive garrison . They were relieved by the 2 / 25th Battalion in late October 1940 , and embarked again on the Zealandia . Sailing via Bowen where shore leave was granted , the 2 / 15th reached Hamilton , in Brisbane , in early November to marry up with the rear details at Redbank . Further training was undertaken at Redbank at this time before the whole battalion entrained for Brisbane on Christmas Day , embarking aboard the Queen Mary bound for Sydney . There , the ship joined up with a larger convoy that was bound for the Middle East theatre . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Sailing via Colombo , the battalion disembarked in Bombay , transferring to the <unk> for the remainder of the journey . <unk> the Suez Canal , it disembarked at El Kantara , in Egypt , in February 1941 . En route to the Middle East , the 20th Brigade was reassigned to the 9th Division , as part of a reorganisation of the Australian divisions in the Middle East prior to I Corps ' deployment to Greece . Upon arrival in Egypt , the battalion moved to a base in Gaza dubbed Kilo 89 , where it concentrated with the 2 / 13th and 2 / 17th Battalions , which had arrived earlier in Palestine as the 9th Division attempted to make good its equipment and training deficiencies . The battalion 's war equipment , including vehicles , arrived in mid @-@ February and throughout the month the troops were introduced to the Bren light machine gun , firing it for the first time at the Jaffa Range and practicing constructing defensive systems in preparation for desert warfare . Individual training undertaken at this time was aimed at identifying those who would be unfit for the coming battle , and many were subsequently transferred to the divisional guard battalion . 
 In early March 1941 , the 2 / 15th entrained at Gaza and moved to Mersa Matruh , as the 9th Division began to relieve the 6th Division along the front line in the Western Desert so that the latter could be transferred to Greece , where a German invasion was expected . A few days later the battalion was moved to Tobruk . From there it moved by road in captured Italian vehicles to Derna and on to <unk> , then Benghazi , and eventually Barce . Throughout early April , the 2 / 15th became involved in the large @-@ scale withdrawal that followed the landing of German forces around Tripoli as part of Axis efforts to reinforce the Italians in North Africa following British gains in western Egypt and Cyrenaica during Operation Compass in 1940 – 41 . The battalion subsequently fell back east along the coast towards Tobruk . During the retreat about 180 men , including the battalion 's commanding officer , Marlan , were taken prisoner when their headquarters was surrounded by a force of 18 tanks and unsuccessfully attempted to fight their way out . These men spent several years in captivity , being held initially in camps in North Africa before moving to Italy and later Germany ; some managed to escape either in North Africa , or from Italy ; several eventually rejoined the battalion , while others linked up with Italian or Yugoslavian partisans with whom they fought against German forces later in the war . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Ogle took over command of the battalion following Marlan 's capture . It subsequently joined the defence of Tobruk , as part of the defensive garrison that held the strategically important port after it was placed under siege by the advancing German and Italian forces . The battalion remained there for over six months conducting patrols and raids , and holding positions around the perimeter until late October 1941 , when the bulk of the 9th Division , less the 2 / 13th Battalion and two companies from the 2 / 15th , were withdrawn by sea and replaced by British troops from the 70th Division . The 2 / 15th 's casualties during the withdrawal from Benghazi and the siege of <unk> amounted to 45 killed in action or died of wounds , one accidentally killed , 103 wounded in action and 205 captured . 
 The 2 / 15th was subsequently withdrawn to Gaza , where it stayed into the new year , before moving to Syria , where it formed part of the Allied occupation force established there at the end of the Syria – Lebanon campaign . In July 1942 , in the face of a heavy German onslaught that threatened to break through to Suez , the 9th Division was hurriedly moved back to North Africa . The 2 / 15th subsequently took part in the First and Second Battles of El Alamein during the remainder of the year . Throughout August , the 2 / 15th subsequently held a position in the north @-@ east sector of the line from Hill 33 to the coast . On 1 September , the 2 / 15th participated in the 9th Division 's diversionary attack south of Tel @-@ el @-@ Eisa , codenamed Operation <unk> , which was planned as a response to German offensive actions further south during the lead @-@ up to the final assault in late October and early November 1942 . In heavy fighting near Point 23 , a low rocky outcrop , the battalion lost about half of its fighting strength , sustaining 183 casualties , amidst heavy hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting as the battalion came up against heavy resistance after penetrating a German minefield . Ogle 's carrier struck a mine during the operation , and he was seriously wounded . The battalion 's role in the September attack , including the efforts of Corporal Horton McLachlan , who received the Distinguished Conduct Medal , was later depicted in a painting by Ivor Hele . Among the casualties at El Alamein was the 2 / 15th 's recently appointed replacement commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Keith Magno , who was mortally wounded by artillery fire after the battalion was heavily shelled while forming up during an attack around Trig 29 – a valuable piece of high ground south @-@ west of Tel @-@ el @-@ Eisa – on 28 October . Casualties over both periods the battalion fought around Alamein totaled 81 killed , 23 died of wounds , 276 wounded and seven captured . 
 = = = New Guinea and Borneo = = = 
 By early 1943 the Australian Army 's focus had shifted to operations in the Pacific theatre against the Japanese , and the 9th Division received orders to return to Australia to join the other two 2nd AIF divisions , the 6th and 7th , which had departed earlier in 1942 . A divisional parade was held in Gaza , after which the 2 / 15th embarked upon the transport <unk> and sailed with a large convoy established under Operation Pamphlet as part of the final stage in the withdrawal of the 2nd AIF divisions from the Middle East . After a journey of just over a month , the <unk> berthed at Sydney in late February 1943 . During this time the battalion was under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Raymond Barham . 
 After disembarking in Sydney , the troops received three weeks of leave during which time they were allowed to return to their homes . The 9th Division then carried out welcome home marches across Australia , with the 2 / 15th taking part in the march through Brisbane . After this , the division was transported to Kairi on the Atherton Tableland in north Queensland where it was converted to the jungle establishment and began training for operations against the Japanese . The reorganisation saw the battalion establishment drop to around 800 men , and the loss of many vehicles and heavy equipment . Lieutenant Colonel Colin Henry Grace was appointed to command the battalion in May 1943 and would do so for the rest of the war . Amphibious training was carried out at Trinity Beach , near Cairns , with the US 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment in July 1943 . 
 Following training , the battalion was deployed to New Guinea , arriving in Milne Bay in early August 1943 . It saw action in the final stages of the Salamaua – Lae campaign in September 1943 . The 2 / 15 took part in the landing at Lae , the first amphibious operation undertaken by Australian forces since the failed Gallipoli campaign in 1915 . During the operation , the 2 / 15th was initially assigned the task of securing the beachhead following the 20th Brigade 's landing . After being relieved it joined the advance west towards the town , slowed by heavy rains that turned the many creeks in the area into raging torrents , which were invariably covered by heavy Japanese fire from the opposite bank . 
 Later in September , after Lae had fallen to troops of the 7th Division advancing from Nadzab , the 20th Brigade undertook a follow @-@ up operation further east , an opposed amphibious landing at Scarlet Beach , as part of Allied efforts to secure the Huon Peninsula . During the landing , the 2 / 15th formed the 20th Brigade 's reserve force , coming ashore around Katika due to a navigational error ; here it fought to dislodge strongly entrenched Japanese forces as the Australians established a beachhead . This was followed by the capture of Finschhafen , during which the 2 / 15th advanced alongside the 2 / 17th Battalion . The battalion 's main effort was focused around securing a crossing over the Bumi River northwest of Finschhafen . After the town had been captured , it was tasked with expanding the Australian beachhead further west towards Kumawa as part of the drive on Sattelberg . For his actions during the battalion 's attack around Kumawa on 13 October 1944 , Corporal William Woods – who had destroyed two machine gun positions singlehandedly after most of his section had been wiped out – was recommended for the Victoria Cross , the only member of the battalion to be nominated for the award . It was subsequently downgraded to a Distinguished Conduct Medal . 
 After a short period of rest while Sattelberg was captured by the 26th Brigade , in late November the 2 / 15th joined the advance to Wareo , capturing Nongora village , crossing the Song River , and then undertaking patrols through the Christmas Hills until relieved by elements of the 4th Brigade , which pushed the Australian advance along the coast , forcing the Japanese north towards Sio as the Australians sought to secure the Huon Peninsula . In late December , the 20th Brigade rotated back into the lead , and the 2 / 15th took over the from the 22nd Battalion around the <unk> River , where the battalion headquarters came under aerial attack . After a brief pause near the flood swollen <unk> , the advance continued throughout December and into January 1944 with minor skirmishes punctuating the battalion 's advance . Finally , on 21 January , at the edge of the <unk> River , the order arrived for the 2 / 15th to be withdrawn to Finschhafen for rest prior to repatriation to Australia . The fighting in New Guinea cost the battalion 30 killed in action , six dead from wounds , four dead from accidents and 119 wounded . 
 The 2 / 15th Battalion returned to Australia in mid @-@ March 1944 aboard the Klipfontein . After docking in Brisbane , a 42 @-@ day leave period followed before the battalion came together again at Ravenshoe to begin the process of rebuilding in preparation for the next phase of the war . Between June and August , training progressed from individual instruction up to brigade @-@ level exercises as the unit was re @-@ constituted for its next campaign . During training it experienced a high turnover of personnel and a large influx of reinforcements , including several officers , was received in the middle of 1944 from the disbanded 62nd Battalion , a Queensland @-@ based Militia battalion that had previously been assigned to Merauke Force . A long period of training followed the battalion 's return to Australia in early 1944 , as there was a degree of uncertainty about the Australian Army 's role in future operations in the Pacific after the US military assumed primary responsibility for combat operations in the theatre . Nevertheless , in the final months of the war the 2 / 15th took part in efforts to recapture North Borneo as part of Operation Oboe Six . After a battalion @-@ level exercise in early 1945 , the 2 / 15th sailed from Australia aboard the Charles Lummis in early May . 
 Staging out of Morotai Island , a detachment of the battalion landed on Muara Island on 10 June 1945 , disembarking from US @-@ operated LVTs and securing the island without opposition , while later , other elements from the 2 / 15th were put ashore on the peninsula around Brunei Town , as part of Allied operations to secure northern Borneo . While the main Australian force advanced towards Kuching and the oil fields around Seria , two companies of the 2 / 15th served as a " floating reserve " for the 2 / 13th Battalion 's landing around Lutong , while the main body of the 2 / 15th subsequently moved inland towards Limbang , and began patrolling along the Limbang and <unk> Rivers that forked inland from the bay , using landing craft for mobility , and securing several small villages around the edge of the bay . Limbang was taken on 18 June , and two days later the two detached companies rejoined the battalion . Subsequently , several engagements were fought with the Japanese during patrols in June and July , but these were mainly small @-@ scale ; two members of the battalion were killed in an ambush around Brunei in late June , the heaviest fighting occurring in early July , when a patrol killed over 20 Japanese in a short but sharp encounter . By the end of July , a draft of 170 long @-@ service personnel were released to return to Australia in early August , just as the war came to an end . Casualties for the 20th Brigade were light ; the 2 / 15th suffered five battle casualties during its last campaign , two killed and three wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 After the war , the 2 / 15th remained on Brunei until November when it moved to <unk> as personnel were returned to Australia in drafts based on priority of discharge . A small group of personnel volunteered at this time to undertake occupation duties in Japan and were subsequently transferred to the 66th or 67th Battalions . In early December , the battalion 's vehicles were returned and after the appropriate clearances were received , the remaining cadre was transported to Labuan . From there , they sailed back to Australia aboard the Pachaug Victory , arriving at Brett 's Wharf , in Brisbane on 19 December . The cadre moved into a camp at Chermside , where they completed unloading of stores and equipment before a short Christmas leave . Early in the new year , the final administrative tasks were completed and the last group of personnel were posted for demobilisation and discharge . Finally , the 2 / 15th was officially disbanded on 21 January 1946 . 
 During its service a total of 2 @,@ 758 men served with the 2 / 15th Battalion , of whom 191 were killed or died of wounds , another 25 died on active service , 501 were wounded , and 212 were captured . Members of the 2 / 15th received three Distinguished Service Orders , 10 Military Crosses , seven Distinguished Conduct Medals , 18 Military Medals , one British Empire Medal , 47 Mentions in Despatches and nine Commander @-@ In @-@ Chief Commendation Cards . In addition , four were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 15th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 North Africa 1941 – 43 , El Adem Road , Alam el Halfa , West Point 23 , Finschhafen , Scarlet Beach , Bumi River , Defence of Scarlet Beach , Nongora , Borneo , Brunei , Miri , Defence of Tobruk , The Salient 1941 , El Alamein , South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Lae – Nadzab , Liberation of Australian New Guinea and Sio . 
 These honours were subsequently entrusted to the 15th Battalion in 1961 , a Queensland @-@ based part @-@ time unit that was the successor to the unit of the same designation that had been raised during World War I. 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2 / 15th : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Francis Marlan ( 1940 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert William George Ogle ( 1941 – 42 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Charles Keith Massy Magno ( 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Raymond James Barham ( 1942 – 43 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Colin Henry Grace ( 1943 – 45 ) . 
 = James Cagney = 
 James Francis Cagney , Jr . ( July 17 , 1899 – March 30 , 1986 ) was an American actor and dancer , both on stage and in film , though he had his greatest impact in film . Known for his consistently energetic performances , distinctive vocal style , and deadpan comic timing , he won acclaim and major awards for a wide variety of performances . He is best remembered for playing multifaceted tough guys in movies such as The Public Enemy ( 1931 ) , Taxi ! ( 1932 ) , Angels with Dirty Faces ( 1938 ) , and White Heat ( 1949 ) and was even typecast or limited by this view earlier in his career . In 1999 , the American Film Institute ranked him eighth among its list of greatest male stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema . Orson Welles said of Cagney , " [ he was ] maybe the greatest actor who ever appeared in front of a camera " , and Stanley Kubrick considered him to be one of the best actors of all time . 
 In his first professional acting performance , Cagney danced costumed as a woman in the chorus line of the 1919 revue Every Sailor . He spent several years in vaudeville as a dancer and comedian , until he got his first major acting part in 1925 . He secured several other roles , receiving good notices , before landing the lead in the 1929 play Penny Arcade . After rave reviews , Warner Bros. signed him for an initial $ 500 @-@ a @-@ week , three @-@ week contract to reprise his role ; this was quickly extended to a seven @-@ year contract . 
 Cagney 's seventh film , The Public Enemy , became one of the most influential gangster movies of the period . Notable for a famous scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit against Mae Clark 's face , the film thrust him into the spotlight . He became one of Hollywood 's biggest stars and one of Warner Bros. ' biggest contracts . In 1938 , he received his first Academy Award for Best Actor nomination , for Angels with Dirty Faces for his subtle portrayal of the tough guy / man @-@ child Rocky Sullivan . In 1942 , Cagney won the Oscar for his energetic portrayal of George M. Cohan in Yankee Doodle Dandy . He was nominated a third time in 1955 for Love Me or Leave Me . Cagney retired from acting and dancing in 1961 to spend time on his farm with his family . He exited retirement , 20 years later , for a part in the 1981 movie Ragtime , mainly to aid his recovery from a stroke . 
 Cagney walked out on Warner Bros. several times over the course of his career , each time returning on much improved personal and artistic terms . In 1935 , he sued Warners for breach of contract and won . This was one of the first times an actor prevailed over a studio on a contract issue . He worked for an independent film company for a year while the suit was being settled — and established his own production company , Cagney Productions , in 1942 , before returning to Warners four years later . In reference to Cagney 's refusal to be pushed around , Jack L. Warner called him " the Professional <unk> " . Cagney also made numerous morale @-@ boosting troop tours before and during World War II , and was president of the Screen Actors Guild for two years . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cagney was born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City . His biographers disagree as to the actual location : either on the corner of Avenue D and 8th Street or in a top @-@ floor apartment at 391 East Eighth . His father , James Francis Cagney , Sr. , was of Irish descent . By the time of his son 's birth , he was a bartender and amateur boxer , though on Cagney 's birth certificate , he is listed as a <unk> . His mother was Carolyn ( née Nelson ) ; her father was a Norwegian ship captain while her mother was Irish . 
 Cagney was the second of seven children , two of whom died within months of birth . He was sickly as a young child — so much so that his mother feared he would die before he could be baptized . He later attributed his sickness to the poverty his family had to endure . The family moved twice while he was still young , first to East 79th Street , and then to East 96th Street . He was confirmed at St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan , where he would eventually have his funeral service . 
 The red @-@ haired , blue @-@ eyed Cagney graduated from Stuyvesant High School in New York City , in 1918 , and attended Columbia College of Columbia University , where he intended to major in Art . He also took German and joined the Student Army Training Corps but dropped out after one semester , returning home upon the death of his father during the 1918 flu pandemic . 
 Cagney held a variety of jobs early in his life , giving all his earnings to his family : junior architect , copy boy for The New York Sun , book custodian at the New York Public Library , bellhop , draughtsman , and night doorkeeper . While Cagney was working for the New York Public Library , he met Florence James , who helped him into an acting career . Cagney believed in hard work , later stating , " It was good for me . I feel sorry for the kid who has too <unk> a time of it . Suddenly he has to come face @-@ to @-@ face with the realities of life without any mama or papa to do his thinking for him . " 
 He started tap dancing as a boy ( a skill that eventually contributed to his Academy Award ) and was nicknamed " Cellar @-@ Door Cagney " after his habit of dancing on slanted cellar doors . He was a good street fighter , defending his older brother Harry , a medical student , when necessary . He engaged in amateur boxing , and was a runner @-@ up for the New York State lightweight title . His coaches encouraged him to turn professional , but his mother would not allow it . He also played semiprofessional baseball for a local team , and entertained dreams of playing in the Major Leagues . 
 His introduction to films was unusual . When visiting an aunt who lived in Brooklyn opposite Vitagraph Studios , Cagney would climb over the fence to watch the filming of John Bunny movies . He became involved in amateur dramatics , starting as a scenery boy for a Chinese pantomime at Lenox Hill Neighborhood House , one of the first settlement houses in the nation , where his brother Harry performed and his soon @-@ to @-@ be friend , Florence James , directed . He was initially content working behind the scenes and had no interest in performing . One night , however , Harry became ill , and although Cagney was not an understudy , his photographic memory of rehearsals enabled him to stand in for his brother without making a single mistake . Therefore , Florence James has the unique distinction of being the first director to put him on a stage . Afterward , he joined a number of companies as a performer in a variety of roles . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1919 – 30 : Early career = = = 
 While working at Wanamaker 's Department Store in 1919 , Cagney learned , from a colleague who had seen him dance , of a role in the upcoming production Every Sailor . A wartime play in which the chorus was made up of servicemen dressed as women , it was originally titled Every Woman . Cagney auditioned for the role of a chorus girl , despite considering it a waste of time ; he only knew one dance step , the complicated Peabody , but he knew it perfectly . This was enough to convince the producers that he could dance , and he copied the other dancers ' moves while waiting to go on . He did not find it odd to play a woman , nor was he embarrassed . He later recalled how he was able to shed his own natural shy persona when he stepped onto the stage : " For there I am not myself . I am not that fellow , Jim Cagney , at all . I certainly lost all consciousness of him when I put on skirts , wig , paint , powder , feathers and spangles . " 
 Had Cagney 's mother had her way , his stage career would have ended when he quit Every Sailor after two months ; proud as she was of his performance , she preferred that he get an education . Cagney appreciated the $ 35 a week he was paid , which he called " a mountain of money for me in those worrisome days . " In deference to his mother 's worries , he got employment as a brokerage house runner . This did not stop him looking for more stage work , however , and he went on to successfully audition for a chorus part in the William B. Friedlander musical Pitter Patter , for which he earned $ 55 a week — he sent $ 40 to his mother each week . So strong was his habit of holding down more than one job at a time , he also worked as a dresser for one of the leads , <unk> the casts ' luggage , and understudied for the lead . Among the chorus line performers was 16 @-@ year @-@ old Frances Willard " Billie " Vernon , whom he married in 1922 . 
 The show began Cagney 's 10 @-@ year association with vaudeville and Broadway . Cagney and his wife were among the early resident of Free Acres , a social experiment established by Bolton Hall in Berkeley Heights , New Jersey . 
 Pitter Patter was not hugely successful , but it did well enough to run for 32 weeks , enabling Cagney to join the vaudeville circuit . Vernon and he toured separately with a number of different troupes , reuniting as " Vernon and Nye " to do simple comedy routines and musical numbers . " Nye " was a rearrangement of the last syllable of Cagney 's surname . One of the troupes Cagney joined was Parker , Rand , and Leach , taking over the spot vacated when Archie Leach — who later changed his name to Cary Grant — left . 
 After years of touring and struggling to make money , Cagney and Vernon moved to Hawthorne , California , in 1924 , partly for Cagney to meet his new mother @-@ in @-@ law , who had just moved there from Chicago , and partly to investigate breaking into the movies . Their train fares were paid for by a friend , the press officer of Pitter Patter , who was also desperate to act . They were not successful at first ; the dance studio Cagney set up had few clients and folded , and Vernon and he toured the studios , but garnered no interest . Eventually , they borrowed some money and headed back to New York via Chicago and Milwaukee , enduring failure along the way when they attempted to make money on the stage . 
 Cagney secured his first significant <unk> role in 1925 . He played a young tough guy in the three @-@ act play Outside Looking In by Maxwell Anderson , earning $ 200 a week . As with Pitter Patter , Cagney went to the audition with little confidence he would get the part . He had no experience with drama at this point . Cagney felt that he only got the role because his hair was redder than that of Alan Bunce , the only other red @-@ headed performer in New York . Both the play and Cagney received good reviews ; Life magazine wrote , " Mr. Cagney , in a less spectacular role [ than his co @-@ star ] makes a few minutes silence during his mock @-@ trial scene something that many a more established actor might watch with profit . " Burns Mantle wrote that it " ... contained the most honest acting now to be seen in New York . " 
 Following the show 's four @-@ month run , Cagney went back to vaudeville for the next few years . He achieved varied success , but after appearing in Outside Looking In , the Cagneys were more financially secure . During this period , he met George M. Cohan , whom he later portrayed in Yankee Doodle Dandy , though they never spoke . 
 Cagney secured the lead role in the 1926 – 27 season West End production of Broadway by George Abbott . The show 's management insisted that he copy Broadway lead Lee Tracy 's performance , despite Cagney 's discomfort in doing so , but the day before the show sailed for England , they decided to replace him . This was a devastating turn of events for Cagney ; apart from the logistical difficulties this presented — the couple 's luggage was in the hold of the ship and they had given up their apartment . He almost quit show business . As Vernon recalled , " Jimmy said that it was all over . He made up his mind that he would get a job doing something else . " 
 The Cagneys had run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ play contracts , which lasted as long as the play did . Vernon was in the chorus line of the show , and with help from the Actors ’ Equity Association , Cagney understudied Tracy on the Broadway show , providing them with a desperately needed steady income . Cagney also established a dance school for professionals , then landed a part in the play Women Go On Forever , directed by John Cromwell , which ran for four months . By the end of the run , Cagney was exhausted from acting and running the dance school . 
 He had built a reputation as an innovative teacher , so when he was cast as the lead in Grand Street Follies of 1928 , he was also appointed the choreographer . The show received rave reviews and was followed by Grand Street Follies of 1929 . These roles led to a part in George Kelly 's Maggie the Magnificent , a play the critics disliked , though they liked Cagney 's performance . Cagney saw this role ( and Women Go on Forever ) as significant because of the talented directors he met . He learned " ... what a director was for and what a director could do . They were directors who could play all the parts in the play better than the actors cast for them . " 
 = = = 1930 – 35 : Warner Bros. = = = 
 Playing opposite Cagney in Maggie the Magnificent was Joan Blondell , who starred again with him a few months later in Marie Baumer 's new play Penny Arcade . While the critics panned Penny Arcade , they praised Cagney and Blondell . Al Jolson , sensing film potential , bought the rights for $ 20 @,@ 000 . He then sold the play to Warner Bros. , with the stipulation that they cast Cagney and Blondell in the film version . Retitled Sinners ' Holiday , the film was released in 1930 . Cagney was given a $ 500 @-@ a @-@ week , three @-@ week contract . In the film , he portrays Harry Delano , a tough guy who becomes a killer , but generates sympathy because of his unfortunate upbringing . This role of the sympathetic " bad " guy was a recurring character type for Cagney throughout his career . During filming of Sinners ' Holiday , he also demonstrated the stubbornness that characterized his work attitude . He later recalled an argument he had with director John Adolfi about a line : " There was a line in the show where I was supposed to be crying on my mother 's breast ... [ The line ] was ' I 'm your baby , ain 't I ? ' I refused to say it . Adolfi said ' I 'm going to tell Zanuck . ' I said ' I don 't give a shit what you tell him , I 'm not going to say that line . ' " They took the line out . 
 Despite this outburst , the studio liked him , and before his three @-@ week contract was up — while the film was still shooting — they gave Cagney a three @-@ week extension , which was followed by a full seven @-@ year contract at $ 400 a week . The contract , however , allowed Warners to drop him at the end of any 40 @-@ week period , effectively only guaranteeing him 40 weeks income at a time . As when he was growing up , Cagney shared his income with his family . Cagney received good reviews , and immediately starred in another gangster role in The Doorway to Hell . The film was a financial hit , helping cement Cagney 's growing reputation . He made four more movies before his breakthrough role . 
 Warner Brothers ′ succession of gangster movie hits , in particular Little Caesar with Edward G. Robinson , culminated with the 1931 film The Public Enemy . Due to the strong reviews in his short film career , Cagney was cast as nice @-@ guy Matt Doyle , opposite Edward Woods as Tom Powers . However , after the initial rushes , each was reassigned the other 's part . The film cost only $ 151 @,@ 000 to make , but it became one of the first low @-@ budget films to gross $ 1 million . 
 Cagney received widespread praise for his role . The New York Herald Tribune described his performance as " ... the most ruthless , unsentimental appraisal of the meanness of a petty killer the cinema has yet devised . " He received top billing after the film , but while he acknowledged the importance of the role to his career , he always disputed that it changed the way heroes and leading men were portrayed ; he cited Clark Gable 's slapping of Barbara Stanwyck six months earlier ( in Night Nurse ) as more important . Night Nurse was actually released three months after The Public Enemy , and Gable punched Stanwyck in the film , knocking her character unconscious , then carried her across the hall , where she woke up later . 
 Many critics view the scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit into Mae Clarke 's face as one of the most famous moments in movie history . The scene itself was a late addition , and who thought of the idea is a matter of debate . Producer Darryl Zanuck claimed he thought of it in a script conference , director William Wellman claimed that the idea came to him when he saw the grapefruit on the table during the shoot , and writers <unk> and Bright claimed it was based on the real life of gangster Hymie Weiss , who threw an omelette into his girlfriend 's face . Cagney himself usually cited the writers ' version , but the fruit 's victim , Clarke , agreed that it was Wellman 's idea , saying , " I 'm sorry I ever agreed to do the grapefruit bit . I never dreamed it would be shown in the movie . Director Bill Wellman thought of the idea suddenly . It wasn 't even written into the script . " . 
 However , according to Turner Classic Movies ( TCM ) , the grapefruit scene was a practical joke that Cagney and costar Mae Clarke decided to play on the crew while the cameras were rolling . Wellman liked it so much that he left it in . TCM also notes that the scene made Clarke 's ex @-@ husband , Lew Brice , very happy . " He saw the film repeatedly just to see that scene , and was often <unk> by angry patrons when his delighted laughter got too loud . " 
 Filmmakers have mimicked it many times , such as Lee Marvin 's character splashing scalding coffee in the face of Gloria Grahame in The Big Heat . Cagney himself was offered grapefruit in almost every restaurant he visited for years after , and Clarke claimed it virtually ruined her career because of typecasting . 
 Cagney 's stubbornness became well known behind the scenes , not least after his refusal to join in a 100 % participation @-@ free charity drive pushed by Douglas Fairbanks , Jr . Cagney did not object to donating money to charity , but rather to being forced to . Already he had acquired the nickname " The Professional <unk> " . 
 Warner Bros. was quick to team its two rising gangster stars — Edward G. Robinson and Cagney — for the 1931 film Smart Money . So keen was the studio to follow up the success of Robinson 's Little Caesar that Cagney actually shot Smart Money ( for which he received second billing in a supporting role ) at the same time as The Public Enemy . As in The Public Enemy , Cagney was required to be physically violent to a woman on screen , a signal that Warner Bros. was keen to keep Cagney in the public eye . This time , he slapped co @-@ star Evalyn Knapp . 
 With the introduction of the United States Motion Picture Production Code of 1930 , and particularly its edicts concerning on @-@ screen violence , Warners allowed Cagney a change of pace . They cast him in the comedy Blonde Crazy , again opposite Blondell . As he completed filming , The Public Enemy was filling cinemas with all @-@ night showings . Cagney began to compare his pay with his peers , thinking his contract allowed for salary adjustments based on the success of his films . Warner Bros. disagreed , however , and refused to give him a raise . The studio heads also insisted that Cagney continue promoting their films , even ones he was not in , which he opposed . Cagney moved back to New York , leaving his brother Bill to look after his apartment . 
 While Cagney was in New York , his brother , who had effectively become his agent , angled for a substantial pay raise and more personal freedom for his brother . The success of The Public Enemy and Blonde Crazy forced Warner Bros. ' hand . They eventually offered Cagney a contract for $ 1000 a week . Cagney 's first film upon returning from New York was 1932 's Taxi ! . The film is notable for not only being the first time that Cagney danced on screen , but it was also the last time he allowed himself to be shot at with live ammunition ( a relatively common occurrence at the time , as blank cartridges and squibs were considered too expensive and hard to find to use in most motion picture filming ) . He had been shot at in The Public Enemy , but during filming for Taxi ! , he was almost hit . 
 In his opening scene , Cagney spoke fluent Yiddish , a language he had picked up during his boyhood in New York City . Critics praised the film . 
 Taxi ! was the source of one of Cagney 's most misquoted lines ; he never actually said , " <unk> , you dirty rat ! " , a line commonly used by impressionists . The closest he got to it in the film was , " Come out and take it , you dirty , yellow @-@ bellied rat , or I 'll give it to you through the door ! " The film was swiftly followed by The Crowd Roars and Winner Take All . 
 Despite his success , Cagney remained dissatisfied with his contract . He wanted more money for his successful films , but he also offered to take a smaller salary should his star wane . Warner Bros. refused , so Cagney once again walked out . He held out for $ 4000 a week , the same salary as Edward G. Robinson , Douglas Fairbanks , Jr . , and Kay Francis . Warner Bros. refused to cave in this time , and suspended Cagney . Cagney announced that he would do his next three pictures for free if they canceled the five years remaining on his contract . He also threatened to quit Hollywood and go back to Columbia University to follow his brothers into medicine . After six months of suspension , Frank Capra brokered a deal that increased Cagney 's salary to around $ 3000 a week , and guaranteed top billing and no more than four films a year . 
 Having learned about the block @-@ booking studio system that almost guaranteed the studios huge profits , Cagney was determined to spread the wealth . He regularly sent money and goods to old friends from his neighborhood , though he did not generally make this known . His insistence on no more than four films a year was based on his having witnessed actors — even teenagers — regularly being worked 100 hours a week to turn out more films . This experience was an integral reason for his involvement in forming the Screen Actors Guild in 1933 . 
 Cagney returned to the studio and made Hard to Handle in 1933 . This was followed by a steady stream of films , including the highly regarded Footlight Parade , which gave Cagney the chance to return to his song @-@ and @-@ dance roots . The film includes show @-@ stopping scenes with Busby Berkeley @-@ choreographed routines . His next notable film was 1934 's Here Comes the Navy , which paired him with Pat O 'Brien for the first time . The two would have an enduring friendship . 
 In 1935 , Cagney was listed as one of the Top Ten <unk> in Hollywood for the first time , and was cast more frequently in <unk> roles ; he played a lawyer who joins the FBI in G @-@ Men , and he also took on his first , and only , Shakespearean role , as top @-@ billed Nick Bottom in A Midsummer Night 's Dream alongside Joe E. Brown as Flute and Mickey Rooney as Puck 
 Cagney 's last movie in 1935 was Ceiling Zero , his third film with Pat O 'Brien . O 'Brien received top billing , which was a clear breach of Cagney 's contract . This , combined with the fact that Cagney had made five movies in 1934 , again against his contract terms , caused him to bring legal proceedings against Warner Bros. for breach of contract . The dispute dragged on for several months . Cagney received calls from David Selznick and Sam Goldwyn , but neither felt in a position to offer him work while the dispute went on . Meanwhile , while being represented by his brother William in court , Cagney went back to New York to search for a country property where he could indulge his passion for farming . 
 = = = 1936 – 37 : Independent years = = = 
 Cagney spent most of the next year on his farm , and went back to work only when Edward L. <unk> from Grand National Films , a newly established , independent studio , approached him to make movies for $ 100 @,@ 000 a film and 10 % of the profits . Cagney made two films for Grand National : Great Guy and Something to Sing About . He received good reviews for both , but overall the production quality was not up to Warner Bros. standards , and the films did not do well . A third film , Dynamite , was planned , but Grand National ran out of money . 
 Cagney also became involved in political causes , and in 1936 , agreed to sponsor the Hollywood Anti @-@ Nazi League . Unknown to Cagney , the League was in fact a front organization for the Communist International ( Comintern ) , which sought to enlist support for the Soviet Union and its foreign policies . 
 The courts eventually decided the Warner Bros. lawsuit in Cagney 's favor . He had done what many thought unthinkable : taking on the studios and winning . Not only did he win , but Warner Bros. also knew that he was still their foremost box office draw and invited him back for a five @-@ year , $ 150 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ film deal , with no more than two pictures a year . Cagney also had full say over what films he did and did not make . Additionally , William Cagney was guaranteed the position of assistant producer for the movies in which his brother starred . 
 Cagney had demonstrated the power of the walkout in keeping the studios to their word . He later explained his reasons , saying , " I walked out because I depended on the studio heads to keep their word on this , that or other promise , and when the promise was not kept , my only recourse was to deprive them of my services . " Cagney himself acknowledged the importance of the walkout for other actors in breaking the dominance of the studio system . Normally , when a star walked out , the time he or she was absent was added onto the end of an already long contract , as happened with Olivia de Havilland and Bette Davis . Cagney , however , walked out and came back to a better contract . Many in Hollywood watched the case closely for hints of how future contracts might be handled . 
 Artistically , the Grand National experiment was a success for Cagney , who was able to move away from his traditional Warner Bros. tough guy roles to more sympathetic characters . How far he could have experimented and developed will never be known , but back in the Warner fold , he was once again playing tough guys . 
 = = = 1938 – 42 : Return to Warner Bros. = = = 
 Cagney 's two films of 1938 , Boy Meets Girl and Angels with Dirty Faces , both <unk> Pat O 'Brien . The former had Cagney in a comedy role , and received mixed reviews . Warner Bros. had allowed Cagney his change of pace , but was keen to get him back to playing tough guys , which was more lucrative . Ironically , the script for Angels was one that Cagney had hoped to do while with Grand National , but the studio had been unable to secure funding . 
 Cagney starred as Rocky Sullivan , a gangster fresh out of jail and looking for his former associate , played by Humphrey Bogart , who owes him money . While revisiting his old haunts , he runs into his old friend Jerry Connolly , played by O 'Brien , who is now a priest concerned about the Dead End Kids ' futures , particularly as they idolize Rocky . After a messy shootout , Sullivan is eventually captured by the police and sentenced to death in the electric chair . Connolly pleads with Rocky to " turn yellow " on his way to the chair so the Kids will lose their admiration for him , and hopefully avoid turning to crime . Sullivan refuses , but on his way to his execution , he breaks down and begs for his life . It is unclear whether this cowardice is real or just feigned for the Kids ' benefit . Cagney himself refused to say , insisting he liked the ambiguity . The film is regarded by many as one of Cagney 's finest , and garnered him an Academy Award for Best Actor nomination for 1938 . He lost to Spencer Tracy in Boys Town . Cagney had been considered for the role , but lost out on it due to his typecasting . ( He also lost the role of Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne in Knute Rockne , All American to his friend Pat O 'Brien for the same reason . ) Cagney did , however , win that year 's New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor . 
 His earlier insistence on not filming with live ammunition proved to be a good decision . Having been told while filming Angels with Dirty Faces that he would be doing a scene with real machine gun bullets ( a common practice in the Hollywood of the time ) , Cagney refused and insisted the shots be added afterwards . As it turned out , a ricocheting bullet passed through exactly where his head would have been . 
 During his first year back at Warner Bros. , Cagney became the studio 's highest earner , making $ 324 @,@ 000 . He completed his first decade of movie @-@ making in 1939 with The Roaring Twenties , his first film with Raoul Walsh and his last with Bogart . After The Roaring Twenties , it would be a decade before Cagney made another gangster film . Cagney again received good reviews ; Graham Greene stated , " Mr. Cagney , of the bull @-@ calf brow , is as always a superb and witty actor " . The Roaring Twenties was the last film in which Cagney 's character 's violence was explained by poor upbringing , or his environment , as was the case in The Public Enemy . From that point on , violence was attached to mania , as in White Heat . In 1939 , Cagney was second to only Gary Cooper in the national acting wage stakes , earning $ 368 @,@ 333 . 
 His next notable role was as George M. Cohan in Yankee Doodle Dandy , a film Cagney " took great pride in " and considered his best . Producer Hal Wallis said that having seen Cohan in I 'd Rather Be Right , he never considered anyone other than Cagney for the part . Cagney , though , insisted that Fred Astaire had been the first choice , but turned it down . 
 Filming began the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor , and the cast and crew worked in a " patriotic frenzy " as the United States ' involvement in World War II gave the cast and crew a feeling that " they might be sending the last message from the free world " , according to actress Rosemary DeCamp . Cohan was given a private showing of the film shortly before his death , and thanked Cagney " for a wonderful job " . A paid première , with seats ranging from $ 25 to $ 25 @,@ 000 , raised $ 5 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 for war bonds for the US treasury . 
 Many critics of the time and since have declared it Cagney 's best film , drawing parallels between Cohan and Cagney ; they both began their careers in vaudeville , struggled for years before reaching the peak of their profession , were surrounded with family and married early , and both had a wife who was happy to sit back while he went on to stardom . The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won three , including Cagney 's for Best Actor . In his acceptance speech , Cagney said , " I 've always maintained that in this business , you 're only as good as the other fellow thinks you are . It 's nice to know that you people thought I did a good job . And don 't forget that it was a good part , too . " 
 = = = 1942 – 48 : Independent again = = = 
 Cagney announced in March 1942 that his brother William and he were setting up Cagney Productions to release films though United Artists . Free of Warner Bros. again , Cagney spent some time relaxing on his farm in Martha 's Vineyard before volunteering to join the USO . He spent several weeks touring the US , entertaining troops with vaudeville routines and scenes from Yankee Doodle Dandy . In September 1942 , he was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild . 
 Almost a year after its creation , Cagney Productions produced its first film , Johnny Come Lately , in 1943 . While the major studios were producing patriotic war movies , Cagney was determined to continue dispelling his tough @-@ guy image , so he produced a movie that was a " complete and exhilarating exposition of the Cagney ' alter @-@ ego ' on film " . According to Cagney , the film " made money but it was no great winner " , and reviews varied from excellent ( Time ) to poor ( New York 's PM ) . 
 Following the film 's completion , Cagney went back to the USO and toured US military bases in the UK . He refused to give interviews to the British press , preferring to concentrate on rehearsals and performances . He gave several performances a day for the Army Signal Corps of The American Cavalcade of Dance , which consisted of a history of American dance , from the earliest days to Fred Astaire , and culminated with dances from Yankee Doodle Dandy . 
 The second movie Cagney 's company produced was Blood on the Sun . Insisting on doing his own stunts , Cagney required judo training from expert Ken <unk> and Jack Halloran , a former policeman . The Cagneys had hoped that an action film would appeal more to audiences , but it fared worse at the box office than Johnny Come Lately . At this time , Cagney heard of young war hero Audie Murphy , who had appeared on the cover of Life magazine . Cagney thought that Murphy had the looks to be a movie star , and suggested that he come to Hollywood . Cagney felt , however , that Murphy could not act , and his contract was loaned out and then sold . 
 While negotiating the rights for his third independent film , Cagney starred in 20th Century Fox 's 13 Rue Madeleine for $ 300 @,@ 000 for two months of work . The wartime spy film was a success , and Cagney was keen to begin production of his new project , an adaptation of William Saroyan 's Broadway play The Time of Your Life . Saroyan himself loved the film , but it was a commercial disaster , costing the company half a million dollars to make ; audiences again struggled to accept Cagney in a <unk> @-@ guy role . 
 Cagney Productions was in serious trouble ; poor returns from the produced films , and a legal dispute with Sam Goldwyn Studio over a rental agreement forced Cagney back to Warner Bros. He signed a distribution @-@ production deal with the studio for the film White Heat , effectively making Cagney Productions a unit of Warner Bros. 
 = = = 1949 – 55 : Back to Warner Bros. = = = 
 Cagney 's portrayal of Cody Jarrett in the 1949 film White Heat is one of his most memorable . Cinema had changed in the 10 years since Walsh last directed Cagney ( in The Strawberry Blonde ) , and the actor 's portrayal of gangsters had also changed . Unlike Tom Powers in The Public Enemy , Jarrett was portrayed as a raging lunatic with few if any sympathetic qualities . In the 18 intervening years , Cagney 's hair had begun to gray , and he developed a paunch for the first time . He was no longer a romantic commodity , and this was reflected in his performance . Cagney himself had the idea of playing Jarrett as psychotic ; he later stated , " it was essentially a <unk> one @-@ two @-@ three @-@ four kind of thing , so I suggested we make him nuts . It was agreed so we put in all those fits and headaches . " 
 Cagney 's final lines in the film – " Made it , Ma ! Top of the world ! " – was voted the 18th @-@ greatest movie line by the American Film Institute . Likewise , Jarrett 's explosion of rage in prison on being told of his mother 's death is widely hailed as one of Cagney 's most memorable performances . Some of the extras on set actually became terrified of the actor because of his violent portrayal . Cagney attributed the performance to his father 's alcoholic rages , which he had witnessed as a child , as well as someone that he had seen on a visit to a mental hospital . 
 The film was a critical success , though some critics wondered about the social impact of a character that they saw as sympathetic . Cagney was still struggling against his gangster typecasting . He said to a journalist , " It 's what the people want me to do . Some day , though , I 'd like to make another movie that kids could go and see . " However , Warner Bros. , perhaps searching for another Yankee Doodle Dandy , assigned Cagney a musical for his next picture , 1950 's The West Point Story with Doris Day , an actress he admired . 
 His next film , Kiss Tomorrow Goodbye , was another gangster movie , which was the first by Cagney Productions since its acquisition . While compared unfavorably to White Heat by critics , it was fairly successful at the box office , with $ 500 @,@ 000 going straight to Cagney Productions ' bankers to pay off their losses . Cagney Productions was not a great success , however , and in 1953 , after William Cagney produced his last film , A Lion Is in the Streets , the company came to an end . 
 Cagney 's next notable role was the 1955 film Love Me or Leave Me , his third with Day . Cagney played Martin " Moe the <unk> " Snyder , a lame Jewish @-@ American gangster from Chicago , a part Spencer Tracy had turned down . Cagney described the script as " that extremely rare thing , the perfect script " . When the film was released , Snyder reportedly asked how Cagney had so accurately copied his limp , but Cagney himself insisted he had not , having based it on personal observation of other people when they limped : " What I did was very simple . I just slapped my foot down as I turned it out while walking . That 's all " . 
 His performance earned him another Best Actor Academy Award nomination , 17 years after his first . Reviews were strong , and the film is considered one of the best of his later career . In Day , he found a co @-@ star with whom he could build a rapport , such as he had had with Blondell at the start of his career . Day herself was full of praise for Cagney , stating that he was " the most professional actor I 've ever known . He was always ' real ' . I simply forgot we were making a picture . His eyes would actually fill up when we were working on a tender scene . And you never needed drops to make your eyes shine when Jimmy was on the set . " 
 Cagney 's next film was Mister Roberts , directed by John Ford and slated to star Spencer Tracy . Tracy 's involvement ensured that Cagney accepted a supporting role , although in the end , Tracy did not take part . Cagney had worked with Ford before on What Price Glory ? , and they had gotten along fairly well . However , as soon as Ford met Cagney at the airport , the director warned him that they would " tangle asses " , which caught Cagney by surprise . He later said , " I would have kicked his brains out . He was so goddamned mean to everybody . He was truly a nasty old man . " The next day , Cagney was slightly late on set , incensing Ford . Cagney cut short his imminent tirade , saying " When I started this picture , you said that we would tangle asses before this was over . I 'm ready now – are you ? " Ford walked away , and they had no more problems , though Cagney never particularly liked Ford . 
 Cagney 's skill at noticing tiny details in other actors ' performances became apparent during the shooting of Mister Roberts . While watching the Kraft Music Hall anthology television show some months before , Cagney had noticed Jack Lemmon performing left @-@ handed . The first thing that Cagney asked Lemmon when they met was if he was still using his left hand . Lemmon was shocked ; he had done it on a whim , and thought no one else had noticed . He said of his co @-@ star , " his powers of observation must be absolutely incredible , in addition to the fact that he remembered it . I was very flattered . " 
 The film was a success , securing three Oscar nominations , including Best Picture , Best Sound Recording and Best Supporting Actor for Lemmon , who won . While Cagney was not nominated , he had thoroughly enjoyed the production . Filming on Midway Island and in a more minor role meant that he had time to relax and engage in his hobby of painting . He also drew caricatures of the cast and crew . 
 = = = 1955 – 61 : Later career = = = 
 In 1955 , Cagney replaced Spencer Tracy on the Western film Tribute to a Bad Man for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . He received praise for his performance , and the studio liked his work enough to offer him These Wilder Years with Barbara Stanwyck . The two stars got on well ; they had both previously worked in vaudeville , and they entertained the cast and crew off @-@ screen by singing and dancing . 
 In 1956 , Cagney undertook one of his very rare television roles , starring in Robert Montgomery 's Soldiers From the War Returning . This was a favor to Montgomery , who needed a strong fall season opener to stop the network from dropping his series . Cagney 's appearance ensured that it was a success . The actor made it clear to reporters afterwards that television was not his medium : " I do enough work in movies . This is a high @-@ tension business . I have tremendous admiration for the people who go through this sort of thing every week , but it 's not for me . " 
 The following year , Cagney appeared in Man of a Thousand Faces , in which he played Lon Chaney . He received excellent reviews , with the New York Journal American rating it one of his best performances , and the film , made for Universal , was a box office hit . Cagney 's skill at mimicry , combined with a physical similarity to Chaney , helped him generate empathy for his character . 
 Later in 1957 , Cagney ventured behind the camera for the first and only time to direct Short Cut to Hell , a remake of the 1941 Alan Ladd film This Gun for Hire , which in turn was based on the Graham Greene novel A Gun for Sale . Cagney had long been told by friends that he would make an excellent director , so when he was approached by his friend , producer A. C. Lyles , he instinctively said yes . He refused all offers of payment , saying he was an actor , not a director . The film was low budget , and shot quickly . As Cagney recalled , " We shot it in twenty days , and that was long enough for me . I find directing a bore , I have no desire to tell other people their business " . 
 In 1959 , Cagney played a labor leader in what proved to be his final musical , Never Steal Anything Small , which featured a comical song and dance duet with Cara Williams , who played his girlfriend . 
 For Cagney 's next film , he traveled to Ireland for Shake Hands with the Devil , directed by Michael Anderson . Cagney had hoped to spend some time tracing his Irish ancestry , but time constraints and poor weather meant that he was unable to do so . The overriding message of violence inevitably leading to more violence attracted Cagney to the role of an Irish Republican Army commander , and resulted in what some critics would regard as the finest performance of his final years . 
 Cagney 's career began winding down , and he made only one film in 1960 , the critically acclaimed The Gallant Hours , in which he played Admiral William F. " Bull " Halsey . The film , although set during the Guadalcanal Campaign in the Pacific Theater during World War II , was not a war film , but instead focused on the impact of command . Cagney Productions , which shared the production credit with Robert Montgomery 's company , made a brief return , though in name only . The film was a success , and The New York Times ' Bosley Crowther singled its star out for praise : " It is Mr. Cagney 's performance , controlled to the last detail , that gives life and strong , heroic stature to the principal figure in the film . There is no braggadocio in it , no straining for bold or sharp effects . It is one of the quietest , most reflective , subtlest jobs that Mr. Cagney has ever done . " 
 Cagney 's penultimate film was a comedy . He was hand @-@ picked by Billy Wilder to play a hard @-@ driving Coca @-@ Cola executive in the film One , Two , Three . Cagney had concerns with the script , remembering back 23 years to Boy Meets Girl , in which scenes were reshot to try to make them funnier by speeding up the pacing , with the opposite effect . Cagney received assurances from Wilder that the script was balanced . Filming did not go well , though , with one scene requiring 50 takes , something to which Cagney was unaccustomed . In fact , it was one of the worst experiences of his long career . For the first time , Cagney considered walking out of a film . He felt he had worked too many years inside studios , and combined with a visit to Dachau concentration camp during filming , he decided that he had had enough , and retired afterward . One of the few positive aspects was his friendship with Pamela Tiffin , to whom he gave acting guidance , including the secret that he had learned over his career : " You walk in , plant yourself squarely on both feet , look the other fella in the eye , and tell the truth . " 
 = = = 1961 – 86 : Later years and retirement = = = 
 Cagney remained in retirement for 20 years , conjuring up images of Jack L. Warner every time he was tempted to return , which soon dispelled the notion . After he had turned down an offer to play Alfred Doolittle in My Fair Lady , he found it easier to rebuff others , including a part in The Godfather Part II . He made few public appearances , preferring to spend winters in Los Angeles , and summers either at his Martha 's Vineyard farm or at Verney Farms in New York . When in New York , Billie Vernon and he held numerous parties at the Silver Horn restaurant , where they got to know Marge Zimmermann , the proprietress . 
 Cagney was diagnosed with glaucoma and began taking eye drops , but continued to have vision problems . On Zimmermann 's recommendation , he visited a different doctor , who determined that glaucoma had been a misdiagnosis , and that Cagney was actually diabetic . Zimmermann then took it upon herself to look after Cagney , preparing his meals to reduce his blood triglycerides , which had reached alarming levels . Such was her success that , by the time Cagney made a rare public appearance at his American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement award ceremony in 1974 , he had lost 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) and his vision had improved . Charlton Heston opened the ceremony , and Frank Sinatra introduced Cagney . So many Hollywood stars attended — said to be more than for any event in history — that one columnist wrote at the time that a bomb in the dining room would have ended the movie industry . In his acceptance speech , Cagney lightly chastised the impressionist Frank <unk> , saying , " Oh , Frankie , just in passing , I never said ' <unk> , you dirty rat ! ' What I actually did say was ' Judy , Judy , Judy ! ' " — a joking reference to a similar misquotation attributed to Cary Grant . 
 While at Coldwater Canyon in 1977 , Cagney had a minor stroke . After two weeks in the hospital , Zimmermann became his full @-@ time caregiver , traveling with Billie Vernon and him wherever they went . After the stroke , Cagney was no longer able to undertake many of his favorite pastimes , including horseback riding and dancing , and as he became more depressed , he even gave up painting . Encouraged by his wife and Zimmermann , Cagney accepted an offer from the director Miloš Forman to star in a small but pivotal role in the film Ragtime ( 1981 ) . 
 This film was shot mainly at Shepperton Studios in Surrey , England , and on his arrival at Southampton aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2 , Cagney was mobbed by hundreds of fans . Cunard Line officials , who were responsible for the security at the dock , said they had never seen anything like it , although they had experienced past visits by Marlon Brando and Robert Redford . 
 Despite the fact that Ragtime was his first film in 20 years , Cagney was immediately at ease : <unk> lines and miscues were committed by his co @-@ stars , often simply through sheer awe . Howard Rollins , who received a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination for his performance , said , " I was frightened to meet Mr. Cagney . I asked him how to die in front of the camera . He said ' Just die ! ' It worked . Who would know more about dying than him ? " Cagney also repeated the advice he had given to Pamela Tiffin , Joan Leslie , and Lemmon . As filming progressed , Cagney 's sciatica worsened , but he finished the nine @-@ week filming , and reportedly stayed on the set after completing his scenes to help the other actors with their dialogue . 
 Cagney 's frequent co @-@ star , Pat O 'Brien , appeared with him on the British chat show Parkinson in the early 1980s and they both made a surprise appearance at the Queen Mother 's command birthday performance at the London Palladium in 1980 . His appearance on stage prompted the Queen Mother to rise to her feet , the only time she did so during the whole show , and she later broke protocol to go backstage to speak with Cagney directly . 
 Cagney made a rare TV appearance in the lead role of the movie Terrible Joe Moran in 1984 . This was his last role . Cagney 's health was fragile and more strokes had confined him to a wheelchair , but the producers worked his real @-@ life mobility problem into the story . They also decided to dub his impaired speech , using the impersonator Rich Little . The film made use of fight clips from Cagney 's boxing movie Winner Take All ( 1932 ) , despite the fact that the TV movie is about an entirely different character . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1920 , Cagney was a member of the chorus for the show Pitter Patter , where he met Frances Willard " Billie " Vernon . They married on September 28 , 1922 , and the marriage lasted until his death in 1986 . Frances Cagney died in 1994 . In 1941 , they adopted a son whom they named James Cagney , Jr . , and later a daughter , Cathleen " Casey " Cagney . Cagney was a very private man , and while he was very willing to give the press opportunities for photographs , he generally spent his time out of the public eye . 
 Cagney 's son married Jill Lisbeth Inness in 1962 . The couple had two children , James III and Cindy . Cagney Jr. died from a heart attack on January 27 , 1984 in Washington , DC , two years before his father 's death . He had become estranged from his father and had not seen or talked to him since 1982 . 
 Cagney 's daughter Cathleen married Jack W. Thomas in 1962 . She , too , was estranged from her father during the final years of his life . She died on August 11 , 2004 . 
 As a young man , Cagney became interested in farming – sparked by a soil conservation lecture he had attended – to the extent that during his first walkout from Warner Bros. , he helped to found a 100 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) farm in Martha 's Vineyard . Cagney loved that no concrete roads surrounded the property , only dirt tracks . The house was rather run @-@ down and ramshackle , and Billie was initially reluctant to move in , but soon came to love the place , as well . After being inundated by movie fans , Cagney sent out a rumor that he had hired a gunman for security . The ruse proved so successful that when Spencer Tracy came to visit , his taxi driver refused to drive up to the house , saying , " I hear they shoot ! " Tracy had to go the rest of the way on foot . 
 In 1955 , having shot three films , Cagney bought a 120 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 49 km2 ) farm in <unk> , Dutchess County , New York , for $ 100 @,@ 000 . Cagney named it Verney Farm , taking the first syllable from Billie 's maiden name and the second from his own surname . He turned it into a working farm , selling some of the dairy cattle and replacing them with beef cattle . He expanded it over the years to 750 acres ( 3 @.@ 0 km2 ) . Such was Cagney 's enthusiasm for agriculture and farming that his diligence and efforts were rewarded by an honorary degree from Florida 's Rollins College . Rather than just " turning up with Ava Gardner on my arm " to accept his honorary degree , Cagney turned the tables upon the college 's faculty by writing and submitting a paper on soil conservation . 
 Cagney , born in 1899 ( prior to widespread use of automobiles ) loved horses from childhood . As a child , he often sat on the horses of local deliverymen , and rode in horse @-@ drawn streetcars with his mother . As an adult , well after horses were replaced by automobiles as the primary mode of transportation , Cagney raised horses on his farms , specializing in Morgans , a breed of which he was particularly fond . 
 Cagney was a keen sailor and owned boats harbored on both US coasts , His joy in sailing , however , did not protect him from occasional seasickness — becoming ill , sometimes , on a calm day while weathering rougher , heavier seas at other times . Cagney greatly enjoyed painting , and claimed in his autobiography that he might have been happier , if somewhat poorer , as a painter than a movie star . The renowned painter Sergei <unk> taught Cagney in his later life and owned two of Cagney 's works . Cagney often gave away his work , but refused to sell his paintings , considering himself an amateur . He signed and sold only one painting , purchased by Johnny Carson to benefit a charity . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 In his autobiography , Cagney said that as a young man , he had no political views , since he was more concerned with where the next meal was coming from . However , the emerging labor movement of the 1920s and 1930s soon forced him to take sides . The first version of the National Labor Relations Act was passed in 1935 and growing tensions between labor and management fueled the movement . Fanzines in the 1930s , however , described his politics as " radical " . This somewhat exaggerated view was enhanced by his public contractual wranglings with Warner Bros. at the time , his joining of the Screen Actors Guild in 1933 , and his involvement in the revolt against the so @-@ called " Merriam tax " . The " Merriam tax " was an underhanded method of funneling studio funds to politicians ; during the 1934 Californian gubernatorial campaign , the studio executives would ' tax ' their actors , automatically taking a day 's pay from their biggest @-@ earners , ultimately sending nearly half a million dollars to the gubernatorial campaign of Frank Merriam . Cagney ( as well as Jean Harlow ) publicly refused to pay and Cagney even threatened that , if the studios took a day 's pay for Merriam 's campaign , he would give a week 's pay to Upton Sinclair , Merriam 's opponent in the race . 
 He supported political activist and labor leader Thomas Mooney 's defense fund , but was repelled by the behavior of some of Mooney 's supporters at a rally . Around the same time , he gave money for a Spanish Republican Army ambulance during the Spanish Civil War , which he put down to being " a soft touch " . This donation enhanced his liberal reputation . He also became involved in a " liberal group ... with a leftist slant , " along with Ronald Reagan . However , when Reagan and he saw the direction the group was heading , they resigned on the same night . 
 Cagney was accused of being a communist sympathizer in 1934 , and again in 1940 . The accusation in 1934 stemmed from a letter police found from a local Communist official that alleged that Cagney would bring other Hollywood stars to meetings . Cagney denied this , and Lincoln Steffens , husband of the letter 's writer , backed up this denial , asserting that the accusation stemmed solely from Cagney 's donation to striking cotton workers in the San Joaquin Valley . William Cagney claimed this donation was the root of the charges in 1940 . Cagney was cleared by U.S. Representative Martin Dies , Jr . , on the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . 
 Cagney became president of the Screen Actors Guild in 1942 for a two @-@ year term . He took a role in the Guild 's fight against the Mafia , which had begun to take an active interest in the movie industry . His wife , Billie Vernon , once received a phone call telling her that Cagney was dead . Cagney alleged that , having failed to scare off the Guild and him , they sent a hitman to kill him by dropping a heavy light onto his head . Upon hearing of the rumor of a hit , George Raft made a call , and the hit was supposedly canceled . 
 During World War II , Cagney raised money for war bonds by taking part in racing exhibitions at the Roosevelt Raceway and selling seats for the premiere of Yankee Doodle Dandy . He also let the Army practice maneuvers at his Martha 's Vineyard farm . 
 After the war , Cagney 's politics started to change . He had worked on Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt 's presidential campaigns , including the 1940 presidential election against Wendell Willkie . However , by the time of the 1948 election , he had become disillusioned with Harry S. Truman , and voted for Thomas E. Dewey , his first non @-@ Democratic vote . By 1980 , Cagney was contributing financially to the Republican Party , supporting his friend Ronald Reagan 's bid for the presidency in the 1980 election . As he got older , he became more and more conservative , referring to himself in his autobiography as " arch @-@ conservative . " He regarded his move away from liberal politics as " ... a totally natural reaction once I began to see undisciplined elements in our country stimulating a breakdown of our system ... Those functionless creatures , the hippies ... just didn 't appear out of a vacuum . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Cagney died at his Dutchess County farm in <unk> , New York , on Easter Sunday 1986 , of a heart attack . He was 86 years old . A funeral Mass was held at Manhattan 's St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church . The eulogy at the funeral was given by his close friend , who was also the President of the United States at the time , Ronald Reagan . His pallbearers included the boxer Floyd Patterson , the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov ( who had hoped to play Cagney on Broadway ) , actor Ralph Bellamy , and the director Miloš Forman . Governor Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Edward I. Koch were also in attendance at the service . 
 Cagney was interred in a crypt in the Garden Mausoleum at Cemetery of the Gate of Heaven in Hawthorne , New York . 
 = = Honors and legacy = = 
 In 1974 , Cagney received the American Film Institute 's Life Achievement Award . Charlton Heston , in announcing that Cagney was to be honored , called him " ... one of the most significant figures of a generation when American film was dominant , Cagney , that most American of actors , somehow communicated eloquently to audiences all over the world ... and to actors as well . " 
 He received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1980 . In 1984 , Ronald Reagan awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom . 
 In 1999 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a 33 @-@ cent stamp honoring Cagney . 
 Cagney was among the most favored actors for the director Stanley Kubrick and the actor Marlon Brando , and was considered by Orson Welles to be " ... maybe the greatest actor to ever appear in front of a camera . " Warner Bros. arranged private screenings of Cagney films for Winston Churchill . 
 On May 19 , 2015 , a brand @-@ new musical celebrating Cagney , and dramatizing his relationship with Warner Bros. , opened off @-@ Broadway in New York City at the York Theatre . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Source : " James Cagney " . IMDb . Retrieved October 4 , 2013 . 
 = = Television = = 
 What 's My Line 1960 - Secret Guest 
 The Ballad of Smokey the Bear ( 1966 ) – voice , narrator 
 Terrible Joe Moran ( 1984 ) 
 = = Radio appearances = = 
 = Increase Sumner = 
 Increase Sumner ( November 27 , 1746 – June 7 , 1799 ) was an American lawyer , jurist , and politician from Massachusetts . He was the fifth governor of Massachusetts , serving from 1797 to 1799 . Trained as a lawyer , he served in the provisional government of Massachusetts during the American Revolutionary War , and was elected to the Confederation Congress in 1782 . Appointed to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court the same year , he served there as an associate justice until 1797 . 
 He was three times elected governor of Massachusetts by wide margins , but died not long after the start of his third term . His descendants include his son William H. Sumner , for whom the Sumner Tunnel in Boston , Massachusetts is named , and 20th @-@ century diplomat Sumner Welles . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Increase Sumner was born on November 27 , 1746 in Roxbury , Province of Massachusetts Bay , one of eight children of Increase Sumner and Sarah Sharp . The elder Increase Sumner was a successful farmer descended from early settlers of Dorchester ; he held a number of public offices including coroner for Suffolk County , and selectman of Roxbury . 
 In 1752 Sumner enrolled in the grammar school in Roxbury , now Roxbury Latin School , where the headmaster was William Cushing , future justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . Sumner excelled at school , and over the resistance of his father ( who envisioned his son 's future to be in agriculture ) was enrolled at Harvard College in 1763 . He graduated in 1767 . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 After graduating from Harvard , Sumner took charge of the Roxbury school , where he taught for two years while he apprenticed law under Samuel Quincy , the provincial solicitor general . He sought to study under John Adams , but the latter had enough students . Adams wrote that Sumner " was a promising genius , and a studious and virtuous youth . " Sumner was admitted to the bar in 1770 and opened a law office in Roxbury that year . 
 Sumner was chosen a member of the Massachusetts Provincial Congress in 1776 where he represented the town of Roxbury . In 1777 he participated in a state convention to draft a new constitution , whose result was not adopted . He continued to serve in the provincial congress until the state constitution was adopted in 1780 , when he was elected state senator for Suffolk County . This post he held for two years . In June 1782 he was elected to the Confederation Congress by the state legislature , replacing Timothy Danielson , who resigned , but Sumner never actually took the seat . In August 1782 Governor John Hancock nominated him as an associate justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court to replace James Sullivan . He accepted this position instead of the senate seat , and served from 1782 to 1797 . Details on his judicial record are sparse , in part because few official court records survive from the time , and decisions were usually oral ( the court did not begin formal record keeping with written decisions until 1805 ) . Sumner did take detailed notes of many of the cases he heard ; these notes , preserved at the Massachusetts Historical Society , now form a valuable repository of early Massachusetts judicial history . 
 The period when he served in the Supreme Judicial Court included a time of great turmoil in Massachusetts . Following the American Revolutionary War the value of the paper currency then in circulation fell significantly leaving many citizens in financial difficulties . The administration of James Bowdoin in 1786 raised taxes to pay the public debt which had run up during the war , and stepped up collection of back taxes . These economic pressures led to outbreaks of civil unrest which culminated in Shays ' Rebellion , an uprising in central and western Massachusetts lasting from 1786 to 1787 . Sumner sat on the criminal cases in which participants of the rebellion were tried . Many participants were pardoned , but eighteen were convicted and sentenced to death . Most of these sentences were commuted ; two men were hanged . 
 Sumner sat on the court when it heard the appeals in the Quock Walker cases in 1783 , concerning a former slave who was seeking confirmation of his freedom . A ruling in one of these cases confirmed that the state constitution had effectively abolished slavery . In 1785 he was chosen by the legislature to sit on a committee which revised the laws of the state , to modernize them and remove references to British authority . In 1789 he was a member of the state convention that met to ratify the United States Constitution , in which he explained to the convention the meaning and importance of habeas corpus . He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1791 . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 In 1795 some factions of the Federalist Party sought to promote Sumner as a candidate for governor , but he was not formally nominated , and Governor Samuel Adams was reelected . The following year Sumner was actively promoted by the Federalists , but Adams was able to prevail by a comfortable margin . The campaign was not very divisive : Sumner was presented as comparatively youthful alternative to the aging Adams . Sumner wrote afterwards that Adams " has waded through a sea of political troubles and grown old in labors for the good of his country . " 
 Adams ' popularity , however , was declining , and he decided not to run for reelection in 1797 . A number of popular figures were raised as nominees , and in that year 's election , Sumner won the vote with 15 @,@ 000 out of a total of 25 @,@ 000 votes cast against a divided opposition . On June 2 Sumner rode from his home in Roxbury accompanied by 300 citizens on horseback to the State House in Boston , where the Secretary of the Commonwealth proclaimed his governorship from the eastern balcony . Sumner was the last governor to preside in what is now called the Old State House as the seat of government was moved to the New State House the following year . 
 Sumner was reelected in 1798 and 1799 against minimal opposition . His popularity as governor was seen by his garnering a larger share of the vote for his third term , where he won 17 @,@ 000 out of 21 @,@ 000 votes cast , receiving unanimous votes in 180 towns out of 393 in the state . During Sumner 's period in office the state was principally preoccupied with the threat of attack by France as a result of the ongoing naval Quasi @-@ War . Comparatively younger and more vigorous than his predecessors , Sumner actively built up the state militia and worked to ensure its preparedness in case of attack . 
 Sumner never assumed the duties of office after winning the 1799 election as he was sick on his death bed at the time . In order to avoid constitutional issues surrounding the succession to the governor 's office , he managed to take the oath of office in early June . He died in office from angina pectoris , aged 52 on June 7 , 1799 . His funeral , with full military honors , took place on June 12 , and was attended by United States President John Adams . The funeral procession which included four regiments of militia ran from the governor 's Roxbury mansion to a service at the Old South Meeting House . He is interred at the northerly corner of Boston 's Granary Burying Ground . The brass epitaph indicates : 
 " Here repose the remains of Increase Sumner . He was born at Roxbury , November 27 , 1746 , and died at the same place , June 7 , 1799 in the 53rd year of his age . He was for sometime a practitioner at the bar ; and for fifteen years an associate judge of the supreme judicial court ; was thrice elected governor of Massachusetts in which office he died . As a lawyer he was faithful and able . As a judge , patient , impartial and decisive . As a chief magistrate , accessible , frank and decisive . In private life , he was affectionate and mild . In public life was dignified and firm . Party feuds were allayed by the correctness of his conduct . <unk> was silenced by the weight of his virtues and rancour softened by the amenity of his manners in the vigour of intellectual attainments and in the midst of usefulness . He was called by Divine Providence to rest with his fathers and went down to the chambers of death in the full belief that the grave is the pathway to future existence . " 
 The lieutenant governor , Moses Gill , became acting governor and ran the state until elections were held in 1800 . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 Sumner was married on September 30 , 1779 to Elizabeth Hyslop , daughter of William Hyslop . Upon his father @-@ in @-@ law 's death , Sumner inherited a sizable estate which allowed him to maintain a dignified lifestyle during his public service . The couple had three children ; his son William H. Sumner is well known for his efforts to develop what is now East Boston and for whom Boston 's Sumner Tunnel is named . His later descendants include Sumner Welles , a 20th @-@ century diplomat and advisor to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt . Sumner , Maine , incorporated while he was governor in 1798 , was named in his honor . 
 Sumner was described by his son as a talented and practical farmer and an excellent horseman . He was fond of agriculture and personally grafted an entire orchard of fruit trees on his farm . He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and President of the Board of Trustees of the Roxbury Latin School . 
 = Through the Rain = 
 " Through the Rain " is a song by American singer Mariah Carey , taken from her ninth studio album , Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) . It was written by Carey and Lionel Cole , and produced by the former and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . The song was released as the album 's lead single on October 17 , 2002 , and a shorter version was used as the ending credits theme for a 2002 Japanese drama known as You 're Under Arrest . Classified by Carey as a ballad , it is influenced by pop and R & B music genres , and features a simple and under @-@ stated piano melody , backed by soft electronic synthesizers . " Through the Rain " was meant to be an insight into Carey personal struggles throughout 2001 , and lyrically talks about encouraging others . 
 The song has been well @-@ received , with many complimenting its inspirational lyrical content , and described it as an open window into Carey 's personal life for listeners . Commercially it was Carey 's lowest charting lead single to date on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and her first lead single to that point to not reach the top ten in the United States . Though stalling at number 81 , it managed to achieve higher placements in international markets , reaching the top in Spain and peaking within the top ten in Canada , the Netherlands , Italy , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " Through the Rain " live on several television and award show appearances around the world . She debuted the song at the 2002 NRJ Awards , and features it on a one @-@ hour special titled Mariah Carey : Shining Through the Rain , which aired three days later on MTV . In the United States , Carey performed the song on Today , The Oprah Winfrey Show , and American Music Awards of <unk> . Throughout Europe , Carey performed the song on The Graham Norton Show and on talent competition , Fame Academy . Additionally , " Through the Rain " was included on the set @-@ list of Carey 's Charmbracelet World Tour : An Intimate Evening with Mariah Carey , which spanned throughout 2003 – 04 . 
 The music video , directed by Dave Meyers , was set in the late 1960s . It features a past and present story @-@ line based on Carey 's childhood , and stars J. D. Williams and Jamie @-@ Lynn Sigler as the singer 's parents . The video begins with past scenes of Carey 's mother being disowned by her family after becoming romantically involved with a black man , and finds the singer in the present walking through a heavy rainstorm in New York . The song was covered on live television by Filipino singers Regine Velasquez and Charice Pempengco . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2000 , Carey parted from Columbia Records and signed a record @-@ breaking $ 100 million five @-@ album recording contract with Virgin Records America ( EMI Records ) . She often stated that Columbia had regarded her as a commodity , with her separation from Tommy Mottola exacerbating her relations with label executives . However , in July 2001 , Carey had suffered a physical and emotional breakdown . Due to this situation , Virgin and 20th Century Fox delayed the release of Carey 's film Glitter , as well as its soundtrack of the same name . Both the releases received negative feedback and were commercially unsuccessful . This also resulted in her deal with Virgin being bought out for $ 50 million . Soon after , Carey flew to Capri , Italy for a period of five months , in which she began writing material for her new album , stemming from all the personal experiences she had endured throughout the past year . Carey later said that her time at Virgin was " a complete and total stress @-@ fest [ ... ] I made a total snap decision which was based on money and I never make decisions based on money . I learned a big lesson from that . " Later that year , she signed a contract with Island Records , valued at more than $ 24 million , and launched the record label MonarC . To add further to Carey 's emotional burdens , her father , with whom she had little contact since childhood , died of cancer that year . 
 = = Release = = 
 Throughout the first years of her career , Carey 's musical styles mainly involved pop influenced R & B. Additionally , her image was of a reserved and modestly dressed female , or as Carey 's later described it " the 90s version of Mary Poppins " . As the 1990s wore on , Carey began featuring rappers on remixes , and began infusing hip @-@ hop into her musical palette . As her music changed , so too did her image , which became more sexual , and aimed at younger audiences than the more contemporary appeal of her earlier works . According to Michael Paoletta from Billboard , " Through the Rain " was used not only as a vehicle for listeners to become more in @-@ tune with Carey 's personal struggles , but also as a means to " re @-@ capture " her audience throughout the earlier stages of her career . A contemporary and pop ballad , he felt the song would find " much embrace " from her older fans , while her audience that grew accustomed to her hip @-@ hop flavored music would feel " lost and abandoned " . In an interview with MTV News , the song 's co @-@ producer Jimmy Jam described why Carey chose to release it as the lead single : " I think ' Through the Rain ' is a great way to start the record , because it is emotional and it kind of speaks directly to the questions people might have about the last year of her life . It 's a good idea to get that out of the way and move on to happy , less emotional songs . " 
 = = = Remix = = = 
 The song 's official remix features guest vocals from Kelly Price and Joe . The remix incorporates a more up @-@ tempo background , and differs melodically from the original . While the album 's co @-@ producer , Jimmy Jam , described it as a " star search , " Sarah Rodman from the Boston Herald felt that even though the remix was more up @-@ beat than the original , it " failed to quicken the pulse . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Through the Rain " is a mid @-@ tempo ballad , which is influenced by pop and R & B music genres . The song is built around a piano melody , and features a beat that is accentuated by synthesizers . Aside from its pop @-@ driven melody and structure , Jeff <unk> of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted an hint of gospel towards the song 's crescendo , describing it as " lite @-@ gospel " . Vocally , " Through the Rain " finds Carey singing in a " restrained " style for the duration of most of the song , as the first verse and chorus are sung in breathy vocals . After the second chorus , the bridge is linked to the song 's climax through a long belted note . The Daily Union 's David Germain felt the song 's composition , as well as Carey 's vocal performance were " simple and reserved " , with Carey in " complete control " of her voice . " Through the Rain " was written by Carey and Lionel Cole and produced by the former and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Ltd . , " Through the Rain " is set in common time with a tempo of 64 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A @-@ flat major but with the transposing key to B @-@ major , with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of E ♭ 3 to the high @-@ note of F ♯ 5 . 
 Lyrically , the song features an inspirational message of inner strength , and finds Carey reaching out to listeners . The song uses a rainstorm as a metaphor for troubles in life , while encouraging others to " make it through the rain " through perseverance . The fist chorus begins : " When you get caught in the rain / With no where to run / When your distraught and in pain without anyone / When you keep crying out to be saved " , illustrating a moment in an individual 's life where they are surrounded by conflict . The chorus then serves as a guide to those still suffering , " I can make it through the rain , I can stand up once again on my own / And I know that I 'm strong enough to mend / And every time I feel afraid I hold tighter to my faith / And I live one more day and I make it through the rain " . Similarly , the second verse once again revisits difficult times when " shadows grow close " , before continuing into the second chorus and climax . While the song in meant for listeners to gain confidence and strength , it also allows them into Carey 's personal struggles she endured throughout 2001 . Lola <unk> of The New York Times described the song as a " triumph over adversity " , while a writer from the Sydney Morning Herald wrote " it 's an insight into her recent troubles . " In an interview with MTV News , Carey described the song 's lyrical content in depth : 
 I 've always tried to insert positivity into my songs wherever I can , to inspire other people who go through stuff . I mean the stuff they talked about in tabloids and the things that were so overly exaggerated , that 's one aspect . I also went through a lot of personal stuff , a lot of family stuff this year . Losing a parent is an intense thing for anybody . It 's brought me to another place . People are going to read into it as , ' This is Mariah and her struggle ' . But the way I try to word it is , ' It 's OK once you say I can make it through the rain . ' Not just me going , ' I can make it through the rain , ' it 's me telling people that if you believe you can get through whatever you 're going through , you can get to the other side . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Through the Rain " received positive reviews from music critics ; many complimented Carey 's restrained vocal performance , as well as the song 's simple instrumental accompaniment , while others criticized it for being overly @-@ dramatic . Jon Pareles of The New York Times described it as " inspirational " , and felt that due to its vagueness , the song is would be applicable to all listeners , not just Carey . The Daily Union 's David Germain commented how the song 's simple musical arrangement and Carey 's " restrained " vocal delivery aided it in becoming " modest and reserved " . Writing for Billboard , Michael Paoletta chose " Through the Rain " as a top pick from the album , as did Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine . He described it as a song that was designed as " ' Vision of Love ' meets ' Hero ' " , and wrote , " Mariah is back in the adult contemporary camp , no longer trying to prove that she 's real . " Cara <unk> from the Chicago Tribune called it a " powerhouse ballad " , while Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair wrote " embellished with her trademark vocal pyrotechnics , it is one of those highly personal songs about finding your way out of an emotional wilderness , but it sinks in its own sodden sentimentality " . Similarly , a writer from Newsday also described " Through the Rain " as a " powerhouse ballad " , and felt it was reminiscent of Carey 's previous single " One Sweet Day " ( 1995 ) . Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Randy Lewis noted how the song was able to effectively take listeners right into Carey 's personal struggles from the previous year . Tina Brown from Newsweek felt that while Carey 's personal troubles may not have been fully solved , the song made her appear " strong and triumphant " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 After premiering in the United States , " Through the Rain " managed to peak at number 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Though accompanied by several live promotional appearances , the song failed to garner sufficient airplay to make much of an impact on radio stations . While barely managing to crack the primary US charts , it reached number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs . While radio appeal was primarily weak throughout the United States , the song managed to sustain strong airplay throughout Asia . In Canada , " Through the Rain " peaked at number five on the singles chart , and was certified Gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of over 50 @,@ 000 units . Throughout Australasia and Europe , the song managed to peak within the top five in several countries . In Australia , " Through the Rain " debuted at its peak position of number fifteen on the singles chart , during the week of November 14 , 2002 . The following week , the song began its decline , and had a total chart trajectory of ten weeks . On November 11 , 2002 , " Through the Rain " debuted at number forty @-@ eight on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 chart . The song peaked at number forty @-@ five the next week , and fell out of the chart in its eleventh week , while it was at sixty @-@ eight . 
 The song achieved relatively weak charting in both the Flemish and Wallonian territories in Belgium , peaking at numbers forty @-@ four and twenty @-@ nine , respectively . Making its debut at its peak position of number sixteen , " Through the Rain " charted for a total of nineteen weeks in France , before falling out on March 22 , 2003 . On the Dutch Top 40 chart , the song made its debut at number thirty @-@ two . Four weeks later , the song peaked at number nine , before dropping outside the top 40 five weeks later , ending its eleven @-@ week run . " Through the Rain " entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ seven , during the week dated December 1 , 2002 . In total , the song spent three weeks at its peak position of number thirty @-@ seven , and a total of seven weeks on the chart . In both Denmark and Norway , the song saw moderate success , peaking at numbers thirteen and fifteen , and lasting on the chart for one and three weeks , respectively . On November 28 , 2002 , " Through the Rain " debuted at number twelve on the Swedish Singles Chart , and reached a peak of number seven . Though released at the end of the year , it managed to finish at number 83 on the year @-@ end chart . Similarly in Switzerland , the song peaked at number seven , and finished at number 98 on the end of year chart . On the UK Singles Chart , " Through the Rain " debuted at its peak of number eight . The following week , the song dropped to number twenty @-@ one on the chart , before dropping outside the top @-@ forty two weeks later . 
 = = Music video = = 
