 = = = Background = = = 
 The music video , directed by Dave Meyers , was filmed on location in New York City on September 30 , and October 1 , 2002 . It is loosely based on the singer 's parents , Alfred and Patricia Carey , during the times that she was conceived . The characters are played by J. D. Williams and Jamie @-@ Lynn Sigler respectively and incorporates themes from Charmbracelet as well as from Carey 's life . In an interview with MTV News , Carey said that originally , the plot for the video wasn 't going to have anything to do with her parent 's past experiences with racism , but was changed a few days before shooting began . During the interview , she described how to plot came into reality : 
 Originally it wasn 't going to have anything to do with that , but people were looking through my photo albums this year . My father and I had made some photo albums together of his relatives and different people in the family . A couple people saw [ the albums ] and they were like , ' This is amazing that you have this . ' I guess everybody was like , ' How would you feel about this type of concept [ for a video ] ? ' So I guess I thought if someone 's going to do it might as well be me . The story line [ of the video ] is about an interracial couple . It 's sort of Romeo and Juliet but it 's set in the ' 60s and they 're kind of torn apart . It 's about their struggle and I 'm sort of the narrator . I don 't want to give too much away about it , but it 's nice . Something I could relate to , being the product of an interracial union , though [ my parents ] did not wind up happily ever after standing in church together . 
 Sigler , who was offered the role only days before filming commenced , said that she had always been a fan of Carey , and accepted the offer immediately . She described that the shoot was set in the 1960s , and that she played the singer 's mother during and after her pregnancy . Sigler described the plot : " With my character , she 's basically going against her parent 's wishes to be with this gentleman . She 's pregnant with a baby , which is Mariah , and they run away together . So it 's kind of an epic love story , it 's nice . " Carey revealed that the video would incorporate a rainstorm scene in New York City . Carey jokingly explained how she originally did not intend to get wet , but felt it added a lot to the video . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with a view of a Carey 's personal family album . As the pages open , the camera zooms to one particular photograph , of her young mother facing a wall , with her back turned . As the picture comes into full view , it turns into actual footage . Her mother turns around in anguish , as her own mother begins shouting at her and calling her a disgrace to the family . This is due to the fact that she is pregnant with the child of a black man , with whom she wants to move out with . As she goes to leave the home , her mother grabs her arm and rips off a " <unk> " from her wrist . As she picks it up off the floor , she tells her mother she hates her and leaves in a taxi . From the clothing and scenery , it is notable that the scenes depicted are happening in the late 1960s , prior to Carey 's birth . As the song starts playing , the video focuses on Carey , walking down the street in New York City . As she continues singing and walking down the street , the camera aims to the sky , which is darkened with cloud while light starts to peer through . 
 While rain starts to fall , and people start to clear the streets , Carey remains walking on the pathway . The girl now reaches her destination , and is welcomed into the home of her lover . They soon board a bus , and travel to a new home where they will live together . As they are about to enter the bus , the girl 's mother is seen screaming in tears for her daughter to return to her . She hesitates , and then continues with her lover onto the transport . The scene once again focuses on Carey , who is standing in the midst of a torrential downpour , singing to the heavens . As she reaches the song 's climax , Carey , now dry and dressed in a long black gown , is shown singing at the altar of a church . As she sings at the church , scenes of the girl lighting a candle , and her lover laying together with her on a bed are shown , before focusing back on Carey . She stares at an elderly couple in the first row at the church , an inter @-@ racial couple now revealed to be her parents , and smiles while wearing her mother 's <unk> . The elderly woman begins crying , as her husband holds her hand as they intently stare at Carey . Their faces rejuvenate to show them as a young couple , as their photo is taken and placed into the family album from the beginning of the video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Following the release of " Through the Rain " , Carey embarked on several stateside , European and Asian promotional tours in support of Charmbracelet , as well as its accompanying singles . Promotion for the former song began at the 2002 NRJ Awards , where Carey appeared on stage sporting a long wavy style and wearing a long black skirt and denim blazer . Three days prior to the album 's stateside release , a one @-@ hour special titled Mariah Carey : Shining Through the Rain aired on MTV , in which Carey was interviewed and sang several songs from Charmbracelet and of her catalog . During the interview , Carey addressed rumors of her breakdown and its cause , as well as of the album and its inspiration , followed by a question and answer with fans . During the album 's month of release , Carey appeared on several television talk shows , launching her promotional tour on Today , where she performed a four song set @-@ list at Mall of America for a crowd of over 10 @,@ 000 . On December 3 , 2002 , Carey appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show , where she performed " Through the Rain " and " My Saving Grace " , and covered a highly publicized interview regarding Carey 's hospitalization . On December 4 , Carey traveled to Brazil for South American promotion of Charmbracelet , appearing on the popular Brazilian program , Fantástico . She sang " My All " , and reprised performances of " Through the Rain " and " I Only Wanted " wearing a long pink gown . On December 7 , 2002 , Carey performed " Through The Rain " in front of a crowd of 50 @,@ 000 people , at the closing concert of the Mexican Teletón , which took place in the country 's Azteca Stadium . 
 One month later , Carey was featured as one of the headlining performers at the 30th annual American Music Awards , held on January 13 , 2003 . Introduced by Sharon Osbourne , Carey performed " Through the Rain " alongside a complete live gospel choir , and wore a long black evening gown . During the recital , images of newspaper headlines describing Carey 's breakdown were projected on a large curtain behind her , with one reading " When you fall down , you get back up . " Following the song 's completion , Carey received a standing ovation . Towards the end of March , Charmbracelet saw release throughout Europe , prompting Carey to appear on several programs in promotion of the album . She first performed the album 's leading two singles on the British music chart show , Top of the Pops , followed by a similar set on The Graham Norton Show and Fame Academy . On the latter program , Carey was joined on stage by the show 's finalists , as they all sang the climax on " Through the Rain " alongside her . " Through the Rain " was only performed on Carey 's Charmbracelet World Tour : An Intimate Evening with Mariah Carey , which spanned throughout 2003 – 04 . During the performances , Carey wore a sparkling bra and mini @-@ skirt . During most of the song , Carey performed it while sitting on a large sofa , before standing for the climax . At her concert in Manila , Rito P. Asilo from Philippine Daily Inquirer praised Carey 's live rendition of the song , describing it as one of the show 's high @-@ lights . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 The song was covered by several Asian artists . In 2003 , singer Regine Velasquez performed a live rendition of " Through the Rain " as part of an intimate concert that was later broadcast on Asian television . 
 The song was also covered by Rachelle Ann Go in the 2004 singing competition Search for a Star as her winning song . Additionally , while promoting her debut EP in the Philippines in 2007 , Charice Pempengco sang an a cappella version of the song 's bridge and climax . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Through the Rain " adapted from the Charmbracelet liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – songwriting , producer , vocals 
 Lionel Cole – songwriting 
 James Wright – keyboard , co @-@ producer 
 James Harris III – producer 
 Terry Lewis – producer 
 Steve Hodge – engineer ( vocals ) 
 Brad Yost – engineer ( assistant ) , audio mixing 
 Xavier Smith – engineer ( assistant ) , audio mixing 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Jane Williams = 
 Jane Williams ( née Jane Cleveland ; 21 January 1798 – 8 November 1884 ) was a British woman best known for her association with the Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley . Jane was raised in England and India , before marrying a naval officer and settling in London . She soon left him for another military officer , Edward Ellerker Williams . After Edward and she left England for Italy , they became acquainted with Percy and Mary Shelley . Though she never had a romantic relationship with Shelley , near the end of his life he became deeply infatuated with her and addressed several of his poems to her . After Shelley and Edward Williams perished in a boating accident , she lived with Thomas Jefferson Hogg , also a close friend of Shelley , and had two children with him . The rest of her life was spent as a housewife in London . 
 = = Early life and first marriage = = 
 Jane was born in Marylebone into a wealthy family who owned an extensive library . Her mother gave birth to her when she was close to forty years old . Her father , who had spent much of his life working in India , died shortly after her birth . Her mother soon gambled away much of the family fortune . 
 As a girl , she learned to sing and to play the harp , the guitar , and the piano . By her mid teens , Jane possessed an annual annuity of only ₤ 30 . Jane spent much of her early life around military officers . Her brother , John Wheeler <unk> , was an officer in the British Army who eventually reached the rank of general . He was deployed to India as a young man . Jane spent part of her childhood in India . While in India , she learned Hindustani and remained proficient in the language throughout her life . She often incorporated Indian harmonies into her music . 
 After returning to London , she fell in love with John Edward Johnson , who was the captain of an East Indiaman . This was a potentially lucrative career , and they were married at St Pancras Old Church in 1814 . Though she could have travelled with him , Jane remained at home . They soon separated , most likely due to abuse by John . Jane later said that she suffered " irreparable injuries " while married to him . 
 = = Relationship with Edward Williams = = 
 After John Johnson left on a voyage in May 1817 Jane decided to leave him for Edward Ellerker Williams , to whom she may have been introduced by John . Williams was an Eton College graduate who had served in the Navy before becoming a lieutenant in the 8th Dragoons . Edwards had inherited enough money from his father , a military historian and descendant of Oliver Cromwell , to allow them to live comfortably . Although they never legally married , she became his common @-@ law wife and began referring to herself as Mrs. Jane Williams . Their relationship initially drew disapprobation from their families , with Jane 's brother and Edward 's stepmother reproaching them for their decisions . Jane 's brother later apologised , and declared Johnson a " vile fellow " . Edward 's stepmother , however , always resented Jane . Though long distance mail moved very slowly then , Jane and her husband exchanged angry letters shortly after she left him for Edward . When John returned to London in late 1818 , he made no attempt to force Jane to return to him , although it was his legal right to do so . 
 Jane and Edward decided to leave London in 1819 after listening to Edward 's friend Thomas Medwin discuss his travels of Europe . They travelled to Geneva in September 1819 and stayed in a house that Medwin had found for them . By the time they arrived , Jane was four months pregnant . In February 1820 , she gave birth to their first child , Edward Medwin Williams . That summer , Jane became pregnant again . Medwin left Geneva in September 1820 to visit his cousin , Percy Shelley , in Pisa . Jane and Edward then travelled to France for several months , before joining Medwin and the Shelleys in Pisa in January 1821 . 
 = = = In Italy = = = 
 Jane and Edward enjoyed living in Italy and immediately got along well with Percy and Mary Shelley . Medwin soon left them to travel to Rome . Their second child , Jane Rosalind , was born in March 1821 . While they lived in Pisa the Shelleys and the Williamses often dined and went for walks together . Edward and Percy Shelley soon became close friends and often went boating , though this practice made their wives nervous . Percy Shelley often read his poetry to Edward , who was very impressed by its quality . Shelley also encouraged Edward to begin writing a play himself . 
 That summer , both couples moved into nearby summer homes . In November , they returned to Pisa and met Lord Byron , who had recently arrived there himself . The two couples later shared a house in a remote location near Lerici , where they were visited in early 1822 by Edward John Trelawny . Though they enjoyed each other 's company , the house was small and the arrangements led to numerous conflicts between the servants of each family . 
 = = Shelley 's infatuation = = 
 In June 1822 , Mary Shelley suffered a miscarriage that left her depressed and irritable . After the conflicts this caused in her marriage , Percy Shelley developed strong feelings for Jane . He was particularly taken by her musical gifts and skill as a housewife . Shelley saw Jane as an ideal or even utopian woman , the embodiment of the qualities that he had always sought in a woman . This attraction and the close quarters in which the couples lived caused what has been described as " an extraordinary and mounting tension within the isolated household " . Though she was flattered by the attention , Jane was careful not to reciprocate openly in order to avoid arousing her husband 's suspicions . She was successful in her attempts to prevent Edward from suspecting infidelity on her part . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Shelley wrote eleven poems for Jane during that time . She served as the primary inspiration for the last poems that he wrote before his death . This did not bother Edward ; he was proud that his wife inspired such poetry . Some biographers of Shelley have maintained that Shelley 's feelings for Jane were strictly platonic , although different scholars have observed themes of frustrated sexual desires in Shelley 's poetry during this period . Other critics have noted that Shelley 's poems during this period struggle to define his feelings . 
 Having previously been drawn to other musical women , Shelley greatly appreciated her talents . Jane could skilfully play the flute , harp , and guitar . Shelley was particularly captivated by Jane 's singing voice , to the extent that some commentators have suggested it had a hypnotic effect on him . Shelley once purchased a guitar for Jane , and commemorated the gift in the poem " With a Guitar , to Jane " . In this poem , he ascribes to her voice the ability to alter the consciousnesses of her audience . Jane kept the guitar for her entire life and played it often . Shelley also purchased her a <unk> and wanted to give her a harp , but abandoned that plan due to its expense . 
 Shelley attempted to disguise his feelings for her in these poems because he expected that Edward and she would read them together . In some cases , Shelley addressed the poems that were inspired by his feelings for Jane to both Edward and Jane . After writing poems in which his affections were less disguised , such as " The Serpent is shut out from Paradise " , he hinted to Edward that he did not want Jane to see the poem . Shelley also used Edward as a stand @-@ in for himself , having Edward read poems to Jane that Shelley had filled with ambiguous pronouns and innuendos . During this time , Percy Shelley concealed many of his interactions with Jane from his wife Mary . Jane later passed on the poems that Shelley had given her to Thomas Medwin and Edward John Trelawny ; Trelawny later published them . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 In July 1822 , Edward Williams and Percy Shelley drowned when their boat sank during a storm while returning to Lerici from Pisa . Shortly before their deaths , Jane dreamed of floods and on one occasion thought that she had seen Shelley 's ghost through a window . After hearing of their deaths , Jane and Mary travelled back to Pisa for the funerals of their husbands ; Williams and Shelley were cremated on consecutive days in August 1822 . After Shelley 's cremation , Jane was forced to settle a dispute between Mary Shelley and Leigh Hunt over what to do with what they believed was the unburnt heart of Percy Shelley . Though Hunt had initially taken it from Shelley 's pyre , Mary insisted that he return it to her . Though Hunt was initially unwilling to do so , Jane later convinced him that it should be returned . Mary Shelley and Jane Williams briefly settled in <unk> , before proceeding to Genoa together . There they separated in September due to Jane 's desire to quickly return to England . Jane brought Edward 's ashes with her back to England . 
 Upon returning to England , Jane initially stayed with her elderly mother and often visited Vincent Novello and his family . Leigh Hunt was acquainted with Novello and had provided Jane with a letter of introduction . Novello enjoyed her company due to her excellent knowledge of music . When Edward 's stepmother learned that Jane had returned , she unsuccessfully attempted to gain control of Edward 's ashes and their children . 
 Though she initially contemplated returning to Italy , Jane remained in England , though she described it as a " vile country " . Part of the reason she disliked England was the climate , which she blamed for her poor health upon returning to England . Though her legal husband , John Edward Johnson , lived in London as well , Jane referred to herself as a widow during that period . While Jane was in Italy , John Johnson had also told people that he was widowed in order to freely attempt to find a new wife . Soon after her return to England , Jane met Thomas Jefferson Hogg , a lawyer who had been a longtime friend of Percy Shelley , after Mary suggested that Jane consult him about Edward 's estate . Hogg had been a schoolmate and a close friend of Percy Shelley , and was drawn to Jane immediately upon her return from Italy . Hogg immediately began pursuing her and in early 1823 they began regularly spending time together . In March 1823 , Jane moved out of her mother 's home into a home of her own due to renovations at her mother 's house . This allowed Hogg to visit her more freely . In the summer and early autumn of 1823 , however , Hogg left for northern England on business . 
 After Mary returned to England in 1823 , Jane and Mary initially remained close friends and lived together in Kentish Town . During that time , Jane helped introduce Mary into society . 
 = = Relationship with Hogg = = 
 Hogg 's father died in late 1823 . This removed one of the potential obstacles to him openly living with Jane , the possibility of his father disinheriting him . Jane was initially hesitant to pursue a relationship with Hogg , however . As a condition of her acceptance , she insisted that he qualify by taking a tour of Europe . He left England in August 1825 and returned nine months later . She moved into his house in April 1827 , and shortly after became pregnant . Few people in London knew that they were not married , with the exception of Hogg 's family and their close friends . Mary Shelley was particularly approving of their union . 
 In November 1827 , Jane gave birth to Mary Prudentia Hogg after a difficult pregnancy . Mary Prudentia only lived 18 months , however , dying in May 1829 . During Jane 's pregnancy , Mary Shelley learned that Jane had spoken openly of Percy Shelley 's attraction to her and coolness towards Mary late in his life . These revelations significantly hurt Mary 's feelings . Their friendship survived , however , and Mary Shelley was selected as the godmother of Jane 's daughter Prudentia Sarah Jefferson Hogg in 1836 . 
 Jane 's legal husband , who was still living in London , attempted to blackmail her in 1838 by publishing the details of her marital status in Barnard Gregory 's The Satirist . Johnson published the notice after learning that she was living with a Mr. Hogg . He was mistaken as to the identity of her lover , however , and attempted to blackmail James Hogg , a Member of Parliament for Beverly . After James Hogg prepared to bring a libel suit , Johnson quickly disappeared . Although one journalist initially planned to publish the correct identities of the parties involved , at Mary Shelley 's request Leigh Hunt convinced him not to publish the story . Johnson died in Hammersmith in 1840 , ensuring an end to the matter . Though they were now free to marry , Jane and Thomas declined to marry in order not to draw attention to the fact that they had been unmarried for so long . 
 When Jane Rosalind and Henry , Leigh Hunt 's son , became romantically involved , Jane strongly disapproved of the relationship . She sent Jane Rosalind to live with her old friend Claire Clairmont in France in an attempt to thwart the match . Clairmont , however , took Jane Rosalind 's side and sent her back to England to be with Henry . Jane then relented and allowed them to marry , which they did in 1842 . Jane 's disapproval of the match caused serious offence to Leigh Hunt and his family . 
 After Hogg 's father died , he had to opportunity to move into his family home north of London . Although he initially considered doing so , he chose to stay in London due to the expense that maintaining a large home would involve . Jane also enjoyed living in London , she visited with friends and often gardened with her husband in his later years . The family led a quiet and stable life together , though at times their finances were strained . 
 = = Widowhood = = 
 Thomas Jefferson Hogg died in 1862 . Though the bulk of Hogg 's estate was left to their daughter Prudentia , Jane was provided for in the will as well . 
 Though Jane never used her connection with Shelley to gain any publicity , she did entertain prominent admirers and biographers of Shelley , including George Eliot and William Michael Rossetti . In the years before Hogg 's death , a nephew of Jane 's , one of John Cleveland 's seven children , came to live with them after leaving the military due to an illness . Jane and her nephew , Harry Cleveland , became close friends and he began to run her household as she grew older . In her later years , Jane often read novels , played the piano , and spent time with Harry 's daughter and her grandchildren . 
 She lived a long life , and in her later years often wrote on census forms that she was born later than she actually was . Shortly before she died in 1884 , she suffered a stroke that left her deaf and bedridden . After her death , she was buried along with the ashes of Edward Williams next to Thomas Jefferson Hogg in Kensal Green Cemetery . 
 = Sand Point and Middle Hope = 
 Sand Point in Somerset , England , is the peninsula stretching out from Middle Hope , an 84 @.@ 1 @-@ hectare ( 208 @-@ acre ) biological and geological Site of Special Scientific Interest . It lies to the north of the village of <unk> , and the stretch of coastline called Sand Bay north of the town of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On a clear day it commands views over Flat Holm , of the Bristol Channel , South Wales , Clevedon , the Second Severn Crossing and the Severn Bridge . A line drawn between Sand Point and Lavernock Point in South Wales marks the lower limit of the Severn Estuary and the start of the Bristol Channel . 
 Middle Hope is a sequence of carboniferous limestone with unusual geological features including a Pleistocene @-@ aged fossil cliff and as a result has been designated as a regionally important geological site . The underlying geology and soil types support scarce plants such as the <unk> buttercup , honewort , Cheddar pink and Somerset hair grass . Human use of the sites is shown by a bowl barrow and disc barrow from late Neolithic or Bronze Age and the site of a likely motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle . Woodspring Priory , a former Augustinian priory which was founded in the early 13th century , sits just inland of the rocky promontory . The priory and surrounding land is owned by the National Trust and is a popular place for walking . 
 = = Geology = = 
 At Middle Hope a sequence of carboniferous limestone is exposed , which includes thick volcanic tuffs and lavas , demonstrating <unk> carbonate sections . The site contains a Pleistocene @-@ aged fossil cliff and shore platform . These features have led to the designation of Middle Hope as a regionally important geological site ( <unk> ) . 
 The raised beach of wave @-@ cut platforms has been created by changes in sea level of the Bristol Channel since the Quaternary period . The arrangement of volcanic and sedimentary rocks , including the Black Rock Limestone , illustrates the events of 350 million years ago . The strata have been tilted and compressed during the <unk> orogeny . 
 = = Flora = = 
 Among scarce plants found on Sand Point are <unk> buttercup , and honewort . The range of soils at the site support various flora and fauna . The calcareous grassland is dominated by Festuca species and Dactylis glomerata , while the scrub towards the west of the site is dominated by hawthorn ( Crataegus monogyna ) and blackthorn ( Prunus spinosa ) , while that to the east consists of common gorse ( Ulex europaeus ) and bramble ( Rubus <unk> <unk> ) . Less common plants include the cheddar pink ( Dianthus gratianopolitanus ) and Somerset hair grass ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Evidence of early human occupation if provided by a bowl barrow and disc barrow from the late Neolithic or Bronze Age have been identified on the higher ground . The bowl barrow is 10 metres ( 33 ft ) in diameter and approximately 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 ft 8 in ) high . Slightly west of the bowl barrow is a disc barrow surrounded by a bank and ditch which enclose an area about 8 metres ( 26 ft ) across . These are situated at the highest point where the Ordnance Survey have constructed a triangulation station . 
 A motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle may have been constructed after the Norman Conquest . The site is known as Castle Mound or Castle Batch and can be seen as a 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) high mound which is approximately 30 metres ( 98 ft ) in diameter and marked by a ditch on the landward eastern edge . The mound was damaged by the construction of a building during World War II . The medieval date for the construction is in doubt with some sources suggesting that the mound may have been a watchtower constructed in the 16th century . The walls of the sheep fold were built by prisoners from the Napoleonic Wars . Hope Cove on the northern coast had a reputation for smuggling as it was " well away from the men of HM Customs and Excise " . 
 Woodspring Priory was an Augustinian priory . It was founded by William de Courtney , in the early 13th century , and dedicated to Thomas Becket . The small community built a church and monastic lodgings during the next hundred years . They were Victorine Canons who were influenced by the Cistercians emphasis on manual labour and self @-@ sufficiency . As a result , the clerks who had taken holy orders worked on the farm , as well as providing clergy for surrounding churches . Despite endowments of land the priory was not wealthy until the 15th century when further building work , including the current priory church , infirmary and barn was undertaken . It was dissolved in 1536 and then owned by local noblemen and leased to local farmers . In 1969 the priory was taken over by the Landmark Trust who spent 20 years on restoration work , and since the 1990s have rented out the farmhouse as holiday accommodation . The surviving buildings include the priory church , which was a 15th @-@ century replacement for the earlier 13th century structure , infirmary , barn and 16th century prior 's lodging which was converted into a farmhouse . The whole site was arranged around a central cloister from which only the east wall and west wall of the chapter house remain , the sacristy , refectory , chapter house , lady chapel and parlour having been demolished . 
 Because of the biological and geological interest the site was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1952 . In 1968 the priory and adjoining land of Middle Hope was purchased by the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty as part of Project Neptune . 
 During World War II weapons were tested at Sand Point , in association with the base at Birnbeck Pier which was commissioned as " HMS Birnbeck " by the Admiralty as part of the Department of Miscellaneous Weapons Development ( DMWD ) for research into new weapons . To support this buildings were constructed at St Thomas Head , east of Middle Hope . Some of these have since been removed and the site is now used by QinetiQ as an explosives and shock test facility . 
 = Drakengard 3 = 
 Drakengard 3 is an action role @-@ playing game developed by Access Games and published by Square Enix exclusively for the PlayStation 3 . The game was released in December 2013 in Japan and in May 2014 in North America and Europe . It is the third game in the Drakengard series and a prequel to the original game . The game , like the rest of the series , features a mixture of ground @-@ based hack @-@ and @-@ slash combat and aerial battles . The story focuses on Zero , a woman who can manipulate magic through song . Partnering with a dragon named Mikhail , Zero set out to kill her five sisters , who rule the world 's regions . As she travels , the player discovers the true reason behind Zero 's rampage . 
 The game , created to cater for hardcore role @-@ playing game audiences , was developed by the same team who created the original Drakengard and series spin @-@ off Nier , including producer Takamasa Shiba , director Taro Yoko and writer Sawako Natori . The music was composed by Keiichi Okabe , who also scored Nier . Unlike previous titles in the series , the team developed the game at Access Games , due to the company 's experience at developing action titles and the team 's wish to address criticisms laid at the gameplay of previous Drakengard games . Drakengard 3 received mixed to positive reviews and sales in Japan and mixed reviews in the west . The ground @-@ based gameplay and story were generally praised , while common criticisms included the dragon gameplay , graphics and multiple technical issues . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Drakengard 3 features hack @-@ and @-@ slash gameplay and aerial combat on a dragon , as with previous entries in the series . The player controls the main protagonist Zero during the entire campaign and for most levels is accompanied by up to two AI @-@ controlled companions . In ground @-@ based combat , Zero performs multiple attacks on various enemies . These can be combined into combos , which fill up Zero 's Tension Gauge . When the gauge is filled to any degree , Zero can temporarily enter Intoner Mode , a hyperactive state which enables her to move quickly and deal high damage to enemies while also making her immune to attack . As Zero levels up , weapons grow more powerful and Zero gains access to multiple weapon types as the game progresses . Each weapon type produces a different set of attacking moves . Unlike previous titles in the series , the player does not have to pause the games to switch weapons , instead being able to do it at any time without pausing . 
 Zero can switch between four weapon types : swords , spears , combat bracers and <unk> . Each weapon has a four @-@ level cap and can be leveled up either through combat or by spending money acquired during levels . Each weapon has different effects depending on enemy @-@ type and combat situation , with spears being useful against heavily @-@ armored or shielded enemies and swords being a default weapon . While exploring levels , Zero can collect items from chests and fallen enemies which earn money for buying potions , as well as buying and leveling weapons . Zero can also complete sidequests as the player progresses through the game : these sidequests place within areas of normal levels and limitations on the player 's abilities . The player 's performance during them earns special items and the number of items you earn increases with the number of enemies killed . 
 For aerial combat , Zero mounts her dragon Mikhail . The two main types of aerial combat are rail shooter @-@ style missions and free @-@ roaming combat which enables both aerial and ground @-@ based combat . Mikhail has multiple attack types at his disposal : while on the ground , after Zero has mounted , the dragon can perform a sweeping attack using his wings and snap at them . During combat in the air , Mikhail can breathe fire down onto the ground and at airborne enemies . Mikhail is fully controllable while in the air , flying through the environment and being able to evade enemy fire . Mikhail 's main attack , breathing fire , features a lock @-@ on feature which can take in multiple enemies . Mikhail can also enter Intoner Mode while Zero is mounted , which magnifies the amount of damage he can deal . During ground @-@ based missions , Zero can also call in Mikhail to deal damage to enemy units . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Drakengard 3 takes place roughly one hundred years before the events of Drakengard , acting as a prequel to the first two games in the series . Despite being a prequel , Drakengard 3 mostly follows separate timelines unrelated to the events of Drakengard . In earlier times , the land was ravaged by conflict between warlords . At the height of the carnage , five mysterious figures called Intoners appeared and using their ability to utilize magic through song , defeated the warlords and ended the conflict . Due to this , they become worshiped as deities and became rulers of various regions of the land . An unspecified time later , in the game 's present , the strongest Intoner , One , wishes to unite the five once again and bring stability to the land . The source of the Intoners ' power is an evil flower that saved Zero from death to use her as an instrument for mankind 's destruction . Zero was its original host and she now wishes to destroy all those affected by its power , herself and ' sisters ' spawned when Zero attempted suicide and ensure the safety of the world . 
 The player controls Zero ( ゼロ , Zero ) , the main protagonist and antihero , considered a traitor by the Intoners and their followers because of her mission to kill them . Aiding her on her quest is the dragon Mikhail ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who aids her and is her mount in aerial battle . The other five Intoners are : One ( <unk> , Wan ) , the current ruler of the Intoners ; Two ( <unk> , Tou ) , the more cheerful member of the group and ruler of the Country of Sand ; Three ( <unk> , <unk> ) , ruler of the Country of Forest and an obsessive over dolls ; Four ( <unk> , Fou ) , ruler of the Country of Mountain and the only virgin of the group ; and Five ( <unk> , Faibu ) , ruler of the Country of Sea and a woman consumed by greed for everything . Traveling with Zero on her quest are the disciples , a group who formerly served the Intoners and accompany Zero after their original mistresses are killed . They include : Cent ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a dumb and overconfident man , as well as the lover of the Intoner Two ; Octa ( <unk> , <unk> ) , an old and cunning man obsessed with sex ; Decadus ( <unk> , <unk> ) a gentlemanly warrior with a masochistic streak ; and Dito ( <unk> , Dito ) , a sadistic young man . Each of the disciples helps the Intoner summon angels and daemons into battle . The game is narrated to the player by Accord ( <unk> , <unk> ) , an android created by the " old world " to monitor and document all timelines . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Zero and her dragon Michael slaughter their way into the Cathedral City , the center of power for the Intoners . Zero 's attempt to kill them directly ends disastrously : she and Michael are gravely wounded by One 's own dragon , Gabriel . A year later , Zero and her dragon , now a childlike reincarnation named Mikhail , set off to try killing the Intoners again . They first travel to the Land of Seas to face Five : during the fight , Five is killed by her disciple Dito , whom Zero takes into her service . The group then journey to the Land of Mountains and face Four : after Four 's death , Zero recruits Decadus . They then proceed to the Land of Forests . There , Three 's disciple Octa attempts to betray his mistress , but she forces him to help her fight Zero . She is killed by Mikhail , who is then attacked and captured by daemons summoned by Two and Cent . Zero pursues them to the Land of Sand , freeing Mikhail from captivity and facing the two . Mikhail kills Two and Cent joins Zero . The group then fight their way into the Cathedral City , where Zero transforms the Disciples into their true dove forms , freeing them from their service to her . During her battle with One , Mikhail dies wounding Gabriel , allowing a distraught Zero to finish off Gabriel and One . Zero is then killed by a male clone of One , who decides to create a new religious order in memory of his " sister " . 
 After this , Accord tells of three alternate series of events or " branches " , caused by a group of singularities ( Zero , her sisters , and the disciples ) coming together . In the second branch , while in the Land of Forests and having already recruited Cent , Zero finds the surviving sisters being driven insane by the power of the flower : Three dies of unknown causes , causing her soldiers to go mad . Eventually , the group find One has been killed by a deranged Two . Brought back under her influence , Cent turns on the group , killing Octa and Dito . Two and Decadus kill each other , while Zero kills Cent : before dying , Two and Cent summon their angel Raphael , which poisons Mikhail before being killed . In order to save Mikhail , Zero activates the flower 's power and forms a " pact " , resurrecting him . In the third branch , after rescuing Mikhail from Two 's stronghold , the dragon is devolved back to his child form by Two 's powers . Upon arrival in the Cathedral City , the group faces Two , who destroys the four disciples when they kill her . Zero then faces One , who reveals that she knows the true nature of the Intoners and reveals the reason behind Zero 's partnership with Mikhail : once the other Intoners were dead , Mikhail was to kill Zero , destroying the flower 's power . Gabriel and Mikhail kill each other and Zero and One engage in an enraged battle . After killing One , Zero , still in shock from Mikhail 's death , sets off to try to find another dragon who can kill her . It is implied in Accord 's closing report that she fails . 
 In the fourth and final branch of Zero 's set of timelines , as she proceeds on her quest , she encounters each of her sisters possessed by the flower 's power , as well as interacting directly with Accord . In each battle with the sisters , the Disciples summon their angels and transform into doves until only Octa remains . In the Cathedral City , Zero and Octa face off against One while Mikhail challenges Gabriel . Octa sacrifices himself to restrain One . Finally , Accord decides to intervene and sacrifices herself so Zero can kill One , which in turn kills Gabriel . Upon absorbing the power of all five Intoners , Zero transforms into a stone monster and goes with Mikhail to another realm , where they engage in a rhythm game @-@ style battle . Upon winning , Mikhail destroys the monster and Accord 's voice declares that the flower 's evil has been sealed away , although there is still the possibility of it reappearing in another time and place . She also suspects that Zero might have survived . In a post @-@ credits scene , a new version of Accord replaces the one destroyed by Zero and many others join her in helping record world events . As they disperse , the new Accord speaks to the player , hoping to see them again and thanking them for playing , before the screen goes black . 
 = = Development = = 
 Drakengard 3 was conceived when Takamasa Shiba and Taro Yoko , the respective producer and director of the original game , met up years after Cavia , the company where they created the series , was absorbed into AQ Interactive . The two resurrected early plans to create a third entry in the series . As part of the brainstorming process , the company used fan questionnaires , from which the team learned that many wanted a dark story similar to Nier for the next entry in the series . Speaking about the creation of the game , Shiba said that Drakengard 3 was made partly because the company was making fewer single @-@ player RPG console games and he wished to capture the atmosphere of earlier days . Alongside that was Shiba 's ambition to show that the RPG fanbase was now a mainstream community that wanted a more hardcore gaming experience . The game was developed by Access Games , who were noted for the survival horror Deadly Premonition . Shiba noted that the company was " just really good at creating action games " , which would enable the team to address criticisms laid at the previous games in the series for their poor combat while still being able to craft a story true to the Drakengard series . By the time the game was unveiled in early 2013 , it was 60 % complete , and Yoko commented " It 's not Drakengard or Nier . If you 're expecting that , you 'll be disappointed . " 
 = = = World design = = = 
 Kimihiko Fujisaka , character designer for the previous entries in the series , reprised his role . In designing the characters , Fujisaka used the previous two games ' " Medieval Europe " inspiration for the enemies , while leaning towards more modern designs for the main characters . In addition to Fujisaka , actor Shinnosuke Ikehata , who had voiced key characters in previous games in the series , returned to do voice work , and writer Sawako Natori , who had worked on Drakengard , Drakengard 2 and Nier , returned to write the scenario with Yoko . The story was written to have " a good balance of darkness and humor " , according to Shiba : he said that there was " actually a good bit of [ darkness ] , in the in @-@ game dialogue for example . " The team did not want to turn it into a completely dark story , instead still having scenes that people could laugh at . Yoko did not want the emotions of the various characters to fall into simple stereotypes , or for there to be a simplistic take on the situation . He also wanted to create a strange " abnormal " picture for the players : the cited instance was the contrast between the fear and terror displayed by enemy soldiers and the often vulgar dialogue between Zero and her companions . He also stated that he went through a large part of the game 's development " half @-@ laughing " . 
 During the story development process , the team decided upon a female protagonist as the game 's lead , in contrast to the previous games which had featured male protagonists , along with a large number of other female characters : this was primarily because all other proposals had been rejected or scrapped . Many aspects of Zero 's design and abilities were intended to evoke the game 's gritty atmosphere , while the flower growing from her eye was almost cut when Shiba thought it would be too much of a risk for the series when coupled with the character 's gender . A couple of Yoko 's ideas that were cut out or rejected during development included a fully contemporary setting with a school @-@ girl protagonist , and calling the game Drakengard 4 instead of Drakengard 3 , with the story revolving around searching for the missing installment in the series . Yoko , Natori and supplementary writer Emi Nagashima were jointly responsible for creating the disciples ' personalities . Yoko wanted Nagashima to write Cent to be as much of an idiot as possible , while she received some negative feedback for her portrayal of Decadus despite her best efforts . Octa was the character Natori and Nagashima best understood , though Nagashima found it difficult writing his novella . While writing Mikhail 's dialogue , Natori was asked by Yoko to embody the good qualities of animals and children in him . Instead of being realistic , Natori borrowed elements from other fiction to create his personality , finding him the most fun to write . The dialogue between Zero and her disciples was written by Yoko to contrast in content with the violent combat . Elements of fourth @-@ wall breaking were included in the game , such as some of Zero 's dialogue or Accord 's actions during the final ending : this both acted as a callback to Drakengard , and to suggest that the real world was simply another branch of the Drakengard universe . 
 Fujisaka 's design for Zero was the first to be approved by Yoko . The other Intoners were designed fairly quickly after that : Yoko told Fujisaka to " think Puella Magi Madoka Magica " when designing them . Each character had different design themes : for example , Five 's was nudity and knitwear , Four 's was her being a female captain , and Two 's were underwear and " lolita " . Three was meant to have bangs covering her face and multiple hairpins , but this was dropped . The characters ' number @-@ based names and differing eye colors were meant to help players identify them , while aspects of Zero 's design were incorporated into the other Intoners to emphasize their connections . The Apostles were designed and approved quickly as they were not a high priority . They were designed around prime male archetypes : Cent , originally the group 's sadist , was the " pretty boy " , Octa was the " old man " , Decadus was the " middle @-@ aged man " , and Dito was the " little boy " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's music was composed by Keiichi Okabe , who also created the score for Nier . Okabe wished to match the work of Nobuyoshi Sano , finding creating it a new experience . He was also requested by Yoko not to follow the musical route of either Drakengard or Nier and was inspired by the games theme of " the sense of contrast " . One of the game 's theme songs , " Kuroi Uta " ( <unk> , Black Song ) , was sung by Eir Aoi , a singer native to Hokkaido who was a self @-@ confessed fan of the Drakengard series . Her liking of the series was the reason Shiba selected her to perform the theme song . The lyrics were written by Kikuchi Hana , one of Nier 's scenario writers . The game 's second theme song , " This Silence Is Mine " , used in the game 's Tokyo Game Show trailer , was specially written and sung by Onitsuka Chihiro . Drag @-@ on Dragoon 3 Original Soundtrack was released on January 21 , 2014 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 5 . The theme songs were released both as part of the soundtrack and as singles . 
 = = Release and merchandise = = 
 Drakengard 3 received few gameplay previews and was promoted in the form of novellas : this was because Shiba wished for the game 's story to be a mystery for players . The game was originally meant to be released in October 2013 in Japan , but was pushed back to December due to Square Enix wanting to improve the overall quality of the game and ensure it met fan expectation . While it received a physical and digital release in Japan and North America , Drakengard 3 was released in digital format only in Europe . It was also localized into Chinese with the assistance of Sony Computer Entertainment Japan Asia , in an attempt to actively tap into the Chinese @-@ speaking market . The collector 's edition released in Japan also included an outfit inspired by Kainé , the female protagonist of Nier . A limited collector 's edition was also released in North America , Europe and Australia through Square Enix . It contained a prequel novel concerning the game 's main characters , a scenario involving One , and DLC for both Japanese voice acting and a costume for Zero inspired by the first game 's protagonist . 
 Alongside the game , there were also two manga released in Japan written by Emi Nagashima under her pen name Jun Eishima : Drag @-@ On Dragoon : Utahime Five , a prequel focusing on the other Intoners , and Drag @-@ On Dragoon : Shi ni Itaru Aka , which acts as the game 's sequel . Both manga were created and written with Yoko 's supervision . The game was complemented with multiple DLC packs : they included multiple character outfits for Zero inspired by previous series protagonists , cosmetic adornments for Mikhail , and six prequel chapters detailing past events in the lives of both Zero and her sisters . This DLC was later released in the west along with alternate music for Zero 's Intoner Mode sequences . ASCII Media Works also published a complete guide to the game , which included guides to the series history and a novella following on from Shi ni Itaru Aka which retold the events of Drakengard . A novel , Drag @-@ on Dragoon 3 Side Story , was released on 28 August 2014 . The novel detailed a fifth series of events connecting the narratives of Drakengard 3 and Drakengard , as none of the game 's endings did so . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its first week on sale in Japan , Drakengard 3 sold 114 @,@ 024 copies , coming fourth in Japanese sale charts and reached 125 @,@ 500 units by the end of the year . Total physical sales in Japan as of May 2014 have reached 150 @,@ 866 units . It reached 79th place on Famitsu 's list of 100 best @-@ settling titles of the year , while it reached 62nd place Dengeki Online 's list . Drakengard 3 received a 34 / 40 from Famitsu , with the four reviewers giving it scores of 9 , 9 , 8 and 8 . The game received " average " reviews , according to Western video game review aggregator Metacritic . Anime News Network 's Todd Ciolek named Drakengard 3 Game of the Year in 2014 . 
 The story received mixed reviews . Dengeki PlayStation called it the best story of the Drakengard series , while Famitsu was generally positive about the world and characters , praising the character dialogue . Destructoid 's Chris Carter stated that the story compelled him to " truck forward and figure it all out for [ himself ] " , while he found the dialogue between the characters funny and their relationships entertaining . Game Informer 's Kimberley Wallace was less enthusiastic , saying that while there were a few interesting scenes , " the narrative and characters make a lot of missteps . " IGN 's Meghan Sullivan criticized the story for being too slow and too reliant on foreknowledge of the previous games , while calling the main characters " poorly written " . Gamespot 's Heidi Kemps generally praised the story , especially the ways it poked fun at the genre and focus on the many paths the game took players down , while GamesRadar 's Becky Cunningham called the story " the main reason to play [ the game ] , especially as it approaches medieval fantasy with dark comedy instead of straight @-@ laced tropes . " Eurogamer 's Chris Schilling said that the game played out " like a jet @-@ black comedy " , calling its narrative far colder than that of Nier , while praising Zero 's characterization . 
 In contrast to previous titles in the series , the gameplay received praise . Dengeki praised the redesigned battle system , citing the ability to switch weapons instantly as its best feature . Famitsu was also positive , despite it not having many distinguishing features to separate it from other video games in the genre . Sullivan praised the ground aspect of gameplay , especially Zero 's Intoner Mode , but criticized the dragon gameplay as awkward and exacerbated by the poor control layout . Cunningham said that the combat will " keep [ players ] on [ their ] toes " , praising the balance between character and enemy power and the weapon switching ability , but being more mixed about the dragon gameplay . Carter called the action gameplay his " favorite part " , referring to it as a faster and smoother version of combat from the Dynasty Warriors series , while Kemps found it generally satisfactory despite its simplicity , while citing the dragon sections as " a welcome , if not always particularly well @-@ designed , break from stabbing troops directly . " Wallace was positive about many aspects of the system , but stated that it got bogged down by the level design and predictable enemy movements . Schilling enjoyed the ground @-@ based gameplay despite its simplicity , comparing it to " a cross between [ DmC : Devil May Cry ] and Dynasty Warriors " , but cited the dragon gameplay as far less enjoyable . Poor AI for Zero 's companions and dragon drew criticism . 
 The graphics and level design were generally criticized . Cunningham called the environments " very bland " when compared to the narrative , while Wallace generally criticized the in @-@ game level and character design , though cited the cinematic cutscenes as an improvement . In contrast , Carter praised the character design and called the other visuals " absolutely beautiful " . Sullivan was generally negative , citing the level design and narrow color palate as part of her critique , and comparing the graphics to a game from the PlayStation 2 era . Schilling generally faulted the game for its textures , graphics and character design , despite noting the developers ' attempts to lampoon gaming conventions . Technical issues such as frequent frame rate drops , an erratic camera and screen tearing were cited as general faults with the game . 
 = = = Game quotes = = = 
 = Slipknot ( band ) = 
 Slipknot is an American heavy metal band from Des Moines , Iowa . The band was founded in September 1995 by percussionist Shawn Crahan and bassist Paul Gray . After several lineup changes in its early years , the band settled on nine members for more than a decade : Corey Taylor , Mick Thomson , Jim Root , Paul Gray , Craig Jones , Sid Wilson , Shawn Crahan , Chris Fehn and Joey Jordison . Gray died on May 24 , 2010 , and was replaced from 2011 – 14 by former guitarist Donnie Steele . Jordison left the band on December 12 , 2013 . Steele left during the recording sessions for .5 : The Gray Chapter because he wanted to focus on his marriage . The band is now touring with replacement musicians Alessandro Venturella on bass and Jay Weinberg on drums . After the departure of Jordison , as of December 2015 the only founding member in the current lineup is percussionist Shawn Crahan ; the other remaining members of Slipknot have been members since the release of the band 's 1999 eponymous debut . 
 Slipknot is well known for its attention @-@ grabbing image , aggressive style of music , and energetic and chaotic live shows . The band rapidly rose to success following the release of their eponymous debut album in 1999 . The 2001 follow @-@ up album , Iowa , made the band more popular . After a brief hiatus , Slipknot returned in 2004 with Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) , before going on another hiatus and returning in 2008 with its fourth album , All Hope Is Gone , which debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart . After another long hiatus , Slipknot released its fifth studio album , .5 : The Gray Chapter , in 2014 . The band has released a live album titled 9 @.@ 0 : Live , a compilation album titled Antennas to Hell , and four live DVDs . In 2015 , Slipknot headlined the Download Festival in the UK for the third time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 In the years before Slipknot formed , a state of shifting band membership existed throughout the metal scene in Des Moines , Iowa . In 1991 , the biggest metal band in Des Moines was Atomic Opera , with Jim Root on guitar . Drummer Joey Jordison founded a thrash metal band called Modifidious , playing at a club called Runway . Modifidious opened for Atomic Opera on December 1 , 1991 , at the Runway , after which their guitarist left for the more successful Atomic Opera . Jordison replaced him with local guitarist Craig Jones . Drummer Shawn Crahan formed another Des Moines band called Heads on the Wall , playing funk metal cover songs at clubs and releasing a demo tape in July 1992 . A fourth Des Moines band called <unk> played death metal with Anders Colsefni on drums , Paul Gray on bass , and Josh Brainard on guitar and vocals . Colsefni later took over vocal duties , but <unk> never recorded . During this time , Crahan often went to the Runway on Sundays when the club opened to all ages , where he met other young musicians with whom he could jam . By March 1993 , Crahan was jamming with vocalist Colsefni , bassist Gray and guitarist Pat Neuwirth , writing and playing songs in Gray 's basement , discussing possible band names such as Pull My Finger , but never making a final decision . One of the songs they recorded was titled " Slipknot " ; another was titled " <unk> " , which Colsefni later used to name his band <unk> . 
 In 1993 , a new band called <unk> Catharsis formed in Des Moines , with Gray on bass , Brainard on guitar and Colsefni on drums . Jordison jammed occasionally with this group . Brainard eventually left to join Jordison and Jones in Modifidious , participating in demo recordings at the end of ' 93 and early in ' 94 . During 1994 Modifidious sometimes played the same shows as Crahan 's Heads on the Wall band . Gray formed a death metal band called Body Pit , soon becoming popular in the local scene . Modifidious stopped playing in the wake of death metal 's increasing pull . Gray failed to get Jordison to join Body Pit , but soon after he recruited local guitar teacher Mick Thomson , the band broke up . 
 In September 1995 , Crahan and Gray started a band named the Pale Ones . The lineup was made up of friends who met through the local music scene , including vocalist Colsefni and guitarist Donnie Steele . Not long after their inception , Gray invited Jordison to a rehearsal because the band was interested in experimenting with additional drum elements . Jordison subsequently joined the band as their main drummer , moving Crahan to custom percussion . Furthermore , Colsefni also took up custom percussion while remaining the band 's vocalist . The band then decided to invite Brainard as their second guitarist , bringing their lineup to six members . On December 4 , the band made their live debut ; playing a benefit show using the name Meld . 
 Much of the band 's early development was retrospectively attributed to late @-@ night planning sessions between Gray , Crahan and Jordison at a Sinclair gas station where Jordison worked nights . It was there , in late 1995 , that Jordison suggested changing the band name to Slipknot after their song of the same name . In December , Slipknot began recording material at SR Audio , a studio in the band 's hometown . Without a recording budget , the band was forced to self @-@ finance the project , the costs of which came to an estimated $ 40 @,@ 000 . In February 1996 , guitarist Donnie Steele decided to leave Slipknot due to his Christian beliefs . When questioned in 1999 about Steele 's departure , Jordison explained : " We were prepared to keep him on , but he didn 't want to stay . " During the mixing stages of their project at SR Audio , Craig Jones was recruited as Steele 's replacement on guitar . However , throughout their time in the studio , the band were adding samples to their recordings but could not produce these sounds live . Subsequently , Jones became the band 's sampler and Mick Thomson was brought in as the replacement guitarist . After a complicated time with mixing and mastering , the band self @-@ released Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. on Halloween , October 31 , 1996 . 
 Distribution for the demo was initially left to the band and their producer Sean McMahon , before it was handed over to the distribution company <unk> in early 1997 . Slipknot received a small amount of airplay on local radio stations off the back of the demo . However , it did not lead to any kind of interest from record labels , so the band returned to the studio to develop new material . It was at this time that the band sought more melodic vocals for their music . As a result , Corey Taylor was recruited from fellow Des Moines band Stone Sour ; this moved Colsefni to backing vocals and percussion . While working in the studio , Slipknot continued to do local shows , during one of which in September 1997 , Colsefni announced on stage that he was leaving the band . The gap on percussion was filled by Greg Welts , who was affectionately known as " <unk> . " In early 1998 , Slipknot produced a second demo featuring five tracks exclusively for record labels . The band began to receive a lot of attention from record labels , and in February 1998 , producer Ross Robinson offered to produce their debut album after attending rehearsals in Des Moines . Soon after , DJ Sid Wilson was recruited as the band 's ninth member after showing great interest and impressing band members . In late June , Slipknot received a $ 500 @,@ 000 , seven @-@ album deal , from Roadrunner Records ; the band signed the deal publicly on July 8 , 1998 . Two days prior to this , Welts was fired from the band , something which Slipknot refuse to comment on . Welts was replaced by Brandon Darner , who departed from the band shortly after joining . 
 = = = Slipknot and emergence ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Chris Fehn was brought in to replace Darner on percussion before Slipknot traveled to Malibu , California , to work on their debut album in September 1998 . Partway through the recording process of the album , Slipknot returned to Des Moines for the Christmas period . During that period , guitarist Brainard decided to leave the band . Brainard said , " some decisions were made that I wasn 't particularly happy with " . Slipknot later recruited Jim Root to complete their lineup and the band returned to Malibu to continue work on the album . Work on the album concluded in early 1999 , allowing the band to go on their first tour as part of the Ozzfest lineup in 1999 . Ozzfest greatly increased Slipknot 's audience , furthering the band 's success with their self @-@ titled album that was released on June 29 , 1999 . Slipknot released its first home video Welcome to Our Neighborhood , which was directed by Thomas Mignone , and the singles " Wait and Bleed " and " Spit It Out " , which were also directed by Mignone . The singles received some airplay , but Slipknot quickly developed a large following , mainly from touring and word of mouth . The band toured several countries throughout 1999 and 2000 in support of the album . In early 2000 , Slipknot was certified platinum ; a first for an album released by Roadrunner Records . 
 = = = Iowa and hiatus ( 2001 – 03 ) = = = 
 Anticipation for Slipknot 's second album was intense . In early 2001 , the band began recording the second album at Sound City and Sound Image studios in Los Angeles . Around this time , conflicts arose between band members due to extensive touring and recording schedules . Recording of their second album ended in February 2001 and the band embarked on their Iowa World Tour . Entitled Iowa , Slipknot 's second album was released on August 28 , 2001 ; it peaked at number three on the Billboard album charts and at number one on the UK album chart . The album produced three singles ; " The Heretic Anthem " ( promotional single ) , " Left Behind " , and " My Plague " , which appeared on the soundtrack for the film Resident Evil . In 2002 , Slipknot appeared in Rollerball ( 2002 ) , performing the song " I Am Hated " in a scene . The release and intense promotion of the album resulted in sold @-@ out shows in large arenas in several countries . 
 In mid @-@ 2002 , Slipknot went on hiatus because of internal conflicts . This temporary split allowed several band members to focus on various side projects . Vocalist Taylor and guitarist Root revived their band Stone Sour , drummer Jordison created Murderdolls , percussionist Crahan founded To My Surprise and DJ Wilson went solo as DJ Starscream . For a while , the future of Slipknot was uncertain and there was much speculation about whether there would be a third album , or if the split would become permanent . Despite this , on November 22 , 2002 , Slipknot released their second DVD , Disasterpieces . 
 = = = Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) and second hiatus ( 2003 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After several delays , Slipknot moved into The Mansion in Los Angeles , California , in mid @-@ 2003 to work on their third album alongside producer Rick Rubin . By early 2004 , work on the album had finished and the band began The Subliminal Verses World Tour with their appearance on the Jägermeister Music Tour in March 2004 . Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) was released on May 24 , 2004 ; it peaked at number two on the Billboard album charts . The album produced six singles ; " Duality " , " Vermilion " , " Vermilion , Pt . 2 " , " Before I Forget " , " The Nameless " , and The Blister Exists . Slipknot recorded its first live album , 9 @.@ 0 : Live , while touring in support of the band 's third album . Released on November 1 , 2005 9 @.@ 0 : Live peaked at number 17 on the Billboard album charts . Touring in support of Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) continued through 2004 and up to the end of 2005 before Slipknot went on hiatus for the second time . 
 In 2005 , several members of Slipknot were involved in Roadrunner United : The All @-@ Star Sessions , an collaborative album recorded by artists signed to Roadrunner Records . 2006 saw Slipknot win their first Grammy Award , picking up the Best Metal Performance award for the single " Before I Forget " . On December 5 , 2006 , Slipknot released its third DVD Voliminal : Inside the Nine . While Slipknot was on hiatus , several band members again focused their attentions on side projects ; vocalist Taylor and guitarist Root returned to Stone Sour , drummer Jordison toured with several bands and produced 3 Inches of Blood 's third album Fire Up the Blades , Crahan founded Dirty Little Rabbits and Wilson returned as DJ Starscream once again . 
 = = = All Hope Is Gone , third hiatus and Gray 's death ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Preparation for Slipknot 's fourth album began towards the end of 2007 ; work began at Sound Farm Studio in Jamaica , Iowa , with producer Dave Fortman in February 2008 . The album was finished in June , and the band the All Hope Is Gone World Tour on July 9 , 2008 . Slipknot 's fourth album , All Hope Is Gone , was released on August 20 , 2008 , debuting at number one on the Billboard albums chart . The album produced five singles ; " All Hope Is Gone " , " Psychosocial " , " Dead Memories " , " Sulfur " and " Snuff " . 2009 marked the 10th anniversary of Slipknot 's debut album ; to commemorate the event , the band released a special edition version of Slipknot on September 9 , 2009 . The band toured in support of the album throughout 2008 and continued until October 31 , 2009 , resulting in Slipknot 's third hiatus . 
 During the hiatus , several band members focused on respective side projects ; Taylor founded Junk Beer Kidnap Band and returned to Stone Sour with guitarist Root ; Crahan continued working with his band Dirty Little Rabbits ; and drummer Jordison returned with his band Murderdolls and became the new permanent drummer of Rob Zombie . Percussionist Fehn is now a full @-@ time bassist with metalcore band Will Haven and Sid Wilson founded the eponymous band Sid . 
 In 2010 , Gray was planning to tour with the supergroup , Hail ! , but on May 24 , 2010 , he was found dead in a Urbandale , Iowa hotel room . Circumstances surrounding his death at the time were not immediately known ; an autopsy suspected his death was not intentional but did not reveal the cause . The day after his death , the remaining eight members of the band held a live , unmasked , press conference alongside Gray 's widow and brother . On June 21 , the cause of death was confirmed as an accidental overdose of morphine and synthetic morphine substitute fentanyl . 
 The band was hesitant to comment on the future of Slipknot . The members made conflicting statements in interviews ; drummer Jordison told The Pulse of Radio " there is another Slipknot record already kinda in the making " . Vocalist Taylor told FMQB Productions ' he was " very conflicted about whether or not [ he wants ] to do anything with Slipknot " . The band released their fourth video album ( sic ) nesses on September 28 , 2010 ; it debuted at number one on the Billboard Top Music Video Charts . The DVD features Slipknot 's entire live performance at the 2009 Download Festival and a 45 @-@ minute film documenting their tour in support of All Hope Is Gone , and served as a tribute to Paul Gray . 
 = = = Return to the stage , Antennas to Hell and Knotfest ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 Regarding the continuation of Slipknot , Taylor told NME Gray would want them to continue and he felt they should but he was ambivalent about returning to the band . Slipknot returned to touring in 2011 , performing a small number of shows in Europe . They headlined the Sonisphere Festival and Rock in Rio alongside Iron Maiden and Metallica , and performed at Belgium 's Graspop Metal Meeting . Donnie Steele substituted for Gray in the concerts ; he was positioned behind Jordison and obscured from the audience 's view . 
 Slipknot also said the band would complete and release the band 's fifth studio album , and that there were no plans to replace Gray . Jordison said the writing process for the album had already begun and that he had written 17 songs . Slipknot performed at Mayhem Festival 2012 . 
 On May 29 , 2012 , Roadrunner Records posted a teaser video titled Antennas to Hell on its website . Later that day , on Twitter , Corey Taylor said Slipknot will release a greatest hits album on June 17 , 2012 . He also said the band was not yet recording new material but was putting together demos for a new album . 
 Slipknot 's first annual music festival , called Knotfest , was held on August 17 , 2012 , at Mid @-@ America <unk> near Pacific Junction , Iowa , and on August 18 , 2012 , in Somerset , Wisconsin . Deftones , Lamb of God , Serj Tankian also performed at the festival . The festival shows also debuted a Slipknot museum . On 14 , June 2013 , Slipknot headlined the Download Festival for a second time . The band performed to roughly 90 @,@ 000 people and was twice forced to stop the set — once in the middle of a song — to allow the front barricade , which had split open under crowd pressure , to be repaired . 
 = = = Jordison 's departure , .5 : The Gray Chapter and new members ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 Production of the band 's fifth album began in late 2013 . Taylor described the album as " very dark " and a cross between Iowa and Vol . 3 ( The Subliminal Verses ) . Guitarist Jim Root did not participate in Stone Sour 's January tour so he could write material for Slipknot . 
 On December 12 , 2013 , the band announced through its official website that Joey Jordison had left the band after 18 years , citing personal reasons . On his official Facebook page , Jordison later said he " did not quit Slipknot " and that he was " shocked " and " blindsided " by the news . Both Jordison and Slipknot independently promised to release further details about the split . Taylor said Jordison would not be appearing on the new album because he did not participate in any songwriting sessions before his departure . 
 In July 2014 , Slipknot began releasing teasers for the new album on the band 's website and social media using cryptic messages and gory imagery . " The Negative One " , the band 's first song in six years , was released on August 1 ; it was accompanied by a music video directed by Crahan that was released four days later . The video did not feature any band members . On August 24 , Slipknot released an official radio single titled " The Devil In I " , and the name of the upcoming album was announced as .5 : The Gray Chapter on iTunes , with an expected release date of October 28 . The release was later preponed to October 17 for the Netherlands and Australia , October 20 for the UK and October 21 worldwide . 
 Slipknot began touring North America in support of the album on October 25 at the second iteration of Knotfest . The tour dubbed the " Prepare for Hell " was co @-@ headlined by Korn with King 810 as support . The band also performed at 2015 's Soundwave festival in Australia . A bassist and drummer were brought in to replace Gray and Jordison respectively ; Crahan designing a mask that would differentiate them from the band . The official video for " The Devil In I " , featuring musicians wearing modified versions of the band 's old masks — with the exception of Taylor who wore a new mask — was released on September 12 . Fans speculated upon the identities of the drummer and bassist shown in the video but the band did not officially name them . 
 Taylor later said he was upset at the leak of the identity of the bassist , alleged to be Alessandro Venturella because of a unique tattoo on his hand . Root told Guitar World the drummer 's identity would not be released , and that the bassist and the drummer were not permanent members of the band . On December 3 , a former Slipknot road crew member posted a photograph of a touring band personnel list that confirmed bassist Alessandro Venturella and drummer Jay Weinberg were members of the tour . The new musicians had been viewed unfavorably by some of the band members ; Shawn Crahan told Kerrang ! magazine , " This is Slipknot , fuck both of those guys ... [ t ] hey 'll never be in the band . Never . " Taylor also said the two " got a crack at designing their own masks and they failed miserably " , and they were wearing masks given to them by the band . 
 " The Negative One " was nominated for the 2014 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance at the 57th Grammy Awards . 
 On March 11 , 2015 , while the band was not touring , guitarist Mick Thomson was hospitalized after a drunken knife fight with his brother at Thomson 's home in Iowa . The pair sustained serious , but non life @-@ threatening , injuries . On August 2 , 2015 , during a concert in Hartford , Connecticut , the band was forced to stop performing after Venturella was suddenly rushed to hospital , after undergoing a medical emergency . After 20 minutes , singer Taylor told the audience the band would continue the concert , performing without Venturella . It was later discovered that Venturella had collapsed because of extreme dehydration . During the band 's following three concerts , Venturella played bass from backstage , returning to the stage on August 8 . 
 = = Style and lyrical themes = = 
 Slipknot 's music is influenced by many styles and bands including hard rock and heavy metal bands Kiss , Anthrax , Black Sabbath , Iron Maiden , Faith No More , Helmet , Tool , Slayer , Fear Factory , Skinny Puppy , Neurosis , Judas Priest , Metallica , Led Zeppelin and Beastie Boys . The band is regarded as a pioneer of the New Wave of American Heavy Metal ; its output has been compared to that of Pantera , Machine Head , Hatebreed , Life of Agony , and Prong , among others . 
 Slipknot is considered a nu metal band . The band 's members prefer to distance themselves musically from other nu metal bands such as Korn and Limp Bizkit . Slipknot describes its sound as " metal metal " and regards the link to nu metal as coincidental and a result of nu metal 's emergence being concurrent with that of Slipknot . The band 's sound typically features a heavily down @-@ tuned guitar setup , a large percussive section , samples , and turntables . Using a variety of vocal styles , the music typically features growled vocals , screaming , backing vocals , and occasional melodic singing . The band has continually experimented with its sound — most notably developing tracks led by acoustic guitars and melodic singing that first appeared on Vol . 3 ( The Subliminal Verses ) . 
 Slipknot 's lyrics are generally very aggressive ; they sometimes include profanity while exploring themes such as darkness , nihilism , anger , disaffection , love , misanthropy , and psychosis . They often draw upon topics including the music industry , politics , personal strife , and reflection , among others . Rick Anderson of Allmusic said , " those lyrics that are discernible are not generally quotable on a family website " . On Vol . 3 , Taylor deliberately avoided using profanity in response to claims he relied on it . The album All Hope is Gone saw a change to a standard metal style that includes elements of groove metal , death metal , and thrash metal . The band has also been considered alternative metal . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Slipknot is known for its chaotic , energetic live shows that contributed to the band 's success . During performances , most of the band 's members <unk> , stage dive , and fight . The band 's early performances included extreme acts such as stage dives from high balconies and band members setting each other on fire . In recent years , they tended to refrain from acts this extreme . Ex @-@ bassist Gray said this was due to receiving lawsuits and to avoid harming other people , and that it was a " better move " for the longevity of the band . Along with the energetic and unpredictable performances , Slipknot often use elaborate stage setups that use pyrotechnics , elevated stage areas , hydraulic drum risers , and computer screens . Reviewing a Slipknot performance , Alistair Lawrence of Kerrang ! said , " the choreographed chaos is too multi @-@ faceted to fully describe " . and NME described one Slipknot show as " a scene of chaos " . 
 = = Image and identities = = 
 The band is known for its attention @-@ grabbing image ; the members perform wearing unique , individual facemasks and matching uniforms — typically jumpsuits — while each member is typically assigned and referred to by number based on their role in the band ( # 0 through # 8 ) , although the latter practice has diminished following the death of Paul Gray . 
 The band has said the idea of wearing masks stemmed from a clown mask that Crahan took to rehearsals when the band first started . Crahan later became known for his clown masks , adopting the pseudonym " Shawn the Clown " . The concept developed ; by late 1997 , the band decided every band member would wear a unique mask and matching jumpsuit . Taylor said in 2002 , " it 's our way of becoming more intimate with the music . It 's a way for us to become unconscious of who we are and what we do outside of music . It 's a way for us to kind of crawl inside it and be able to use it . " The concept of wearing matching jumpsuits has been described as a response to commercialism in the music industry and led to the idea of assigning the band members numerical aliases . According to Taylor , " Originally , we were just going to wear the jumpsuits ... we figured we might as well take that further and number ourselves ... We were basically saying , ' Hey , we 're a product ! ' " . 
 During their careers , the members of Slipknot have developed their images , updating their uniforms and each member 's mask upon the release of each album . The appearance and style of the masks do not usually differ significantly between albums ; members typically maintain the established theme of their mask while adding new elements . Jordison , in an interview in 2004 , said the masks are updated to show growth within each individual . Slipknot 's members have worn special masks for specific occasions , most notably for the music video and live performances of " Vermilion " in 2004 and 2005 when they wore life masks made from casts of their own faces . In 2008 , the band wore a set of large masks titled " purgatory masks " during photograph shoots before the release of All Hope Is Gone ; in the music video for " Psychosocial " they are seen burning them . Shortly after its inception , Slipknot 's masks were homemade , but since 2000 they have been custom @-@ made by special effect artist and musician Screaming Mad George . 
 The band 's image has been the subject of much criticism and controversy , with critics generally accusing it of being a sales gimmick . The band 's members object to these claims ; according to them the masks are used to divert attention from themselves and put it on the music . Several band members have said wearing the masks helps to maintain privacy in their personal lives . During an interview in 2005 , percussionist Fehn said the masks were a " blessing " because they meant the members are not recognized in public . In 2012 , Slipknot released an app for iOS and Android called " Slipknot : Wear the Mask " , which invites fans to construct their own masks , defining the kind of Slipknot fans they are . 
 = = Clothing brand = = 
 The clothing line , ' Tattered and Torn ' , was launched by the band Slipknot in 2008 and runs as an imprint of Bravado , a company that runs the band 's merchandising . While the band recognize that their merchandise is their biggest revenue income , they insist Tattered and Torn is more than just band merchandising . Vocalist Corey Taylor said , " It 's a way for [ the fans ] to get cool clothing at affordable prices . " The first items from the clothing line went on sale in late July 2008 through Hot Topic stores across North America and the Hot Topic website . Currently the line is limited to shirts and hoodies but was expected to develop into a full @-@ range clothing line . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 Slipknot 's music and image have been the subject of many controversies throughout its career . The lyrical content of some of Slipknot 's songs has been linked to several violent and criminal incidents . In 2003 , two young killers blamed the lyrics of " Disasterpiece " for their crime . In 2006 , the lyrics of " Surfacing " were found at the site of a grave robbery . 
 In 2008 , Corey Taylor commented on a slashing incident at a South African school to which Slipknot was linked ; he said : 
 ... obviously , I 'm disturbed by the fact that people were hurt and someone died , as far as my responsibility for that goes , it stops there , because I know our message is actually very positive ... there are always going to be mental disorders and people who cause violence for no other reason than the fact that they 're fucked up and lost . 
 The band 's image has also been the subject of several controversies . Slipknot had a longstanding feud with the band Mushroomhead which — along with their fans — said Slipknot " stole their image " . While Slipknot acknowledged their images had similarities , its members were not actively involved in the feud , saying the similarities were coincidental . Taylor said , " we both started at the same time — neither one of us knowing anything about each other " . Taylor also said that at a live show in Cleveland , Ohio , several Mushroomhead fans threw objects including a padlock at Slipknot and that when Slipknot 's set was finished , Mushroomhead , Machine Head , and Amen went into the crowd and " handled it right there " . In 2009 , Mushroomhead vocalist Waylon Reavis said his band 's members were no longer interested in feuding with Slipknot , saying , " they 're not the first masked band , we 're not , no one was " . 
 Slipknot 's 2005 lawsuit against Burger King said the company created the advertising @-@ based band Coq Roq to capitalize on Slipknot 's image . Burger King responded with a countersuit , saying many other bands , such as Mr. Bungle , Mushroomhead , Mudvayne , Kiss , Insane Clown Posse , and Gwar have used masks as part of their images . After negotiations , the advertising campaign and lawsuit were withdrawn . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 ( # 0 ) Sid Wilson – turntables , keyboards ( 1998 – present ) 
 ( # 3 ) Chris Fehn – custom percussion , backing vocals ( 1998 – present ) 
 ( # 4 ) Jim Root – guitars ( 1999 – present ) 
 ( # 5 ) Craig " 133 " Jones – samples , media , keyboards ( 1996 – present ) 
 ( # 6 ) Shawn " Clown " Crahan – custom percussion , backing vocals ( 1995 – present ) 
 ( # 7 ) Mick Thomson – guitars ( 1996 – present ) 
 ( # 8 ) Corey Taylor – vocals ( 1997 – present ) 
 Alessandro Venturella – bass ( 2014 – present ) 
 Jay Weinberg – drums ( 2014 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Anders Colsefni – lead vocals , custom percussion ( 1995 – 1997 ) ; samples , programming ( 1996 ) ; custom percussion , backing vocals ( 1997 ) 
 Josh Brainard – guitar , backing vocals ( 1995 – 1999 ) 
 Greg Welts – custom percussion ( 1997 – 1998 ) 
 Brandon Darner – custom percussion ( 1998 ) 
 ( # 2 ) Paul Gray – bass , backing vocals ( 1995 – died in 2010 ) 
 ( # 1 ) Joey Jordison – drums ( 1995 – 2013 ) 
 Donnie Steele – guitar ( 1995 – 1996 ) ; bass ( 2011 – 2014 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Slipknot ( 1999 ) 
 Iowa ( 2001 ) 
 Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) ( 2004 ) 
 All Hope Is Gone ( 2008 ) 
 .5 : The Gray Chapter ( 2014 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = RIAA certifications = = = 
 These statistics were compiled from the RIAA certification online database . 
 = = = Grammy Awards and Nominations = = = 
 Slipknot have been nominated for ten Grammy Awards and have won one . 
 = = Tours = = 
 = The Substitute ( Glee ) = 
 " The Substitute " is the seventh episode of the second season of the American television series Glee , and the twenty @-@ ninth episode overall . It was written by Ian Brennan , directed by Ryan Murphy , and premiered on Fox on November 16 , 2010 . The episode guest stars Gwyneth Paltrow as Holly Holliday , a substitute teacher who takes the place of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) while he is ill . Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) becomes principal of William McKinley High School , and glee club members Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) and Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) experience tension in their friendship . 
 The episode features cover versions of six songs , which received mixed reviews from critics . While the Glee cover of Cee Lo Green 's " Forget You " and mash @-@ up of " Singin ' in the Rain " with Rihanna 's " Umbrella " attracted critical praise and charted both on the Billboard Hot 100 and internationally , the episode 's dance @-@ based performances were criticized for their choreography and strict adherence to the original versions . The episode was watched by 11 @.@ 70 million US viewers , and was the top scripted show among adults aged 18 – 49 for the week of broadcast . 
 Paltrow 's guest appearance attracted positive commentary , but the episode 's sub @-@ plots were less well received . Aly Semigran of MTV , Robert Canning of IGN and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack all deemed the episode one of the best of the season . Time 's James Poniewozik felt that it was a relatively subdued , mediocre episode , and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club found it to be an improvement on the previous two episodes , if not genuinely good . The National Alliance on Mental Illness criticized the episode for its depiction of bipolar disorder . Paltrow won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) is appointed acting principal of William McKinley High School after having Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) infected with the flu . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is also infected , and takes time off work to recover . He is cared for by his ex @-@ wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , which leads to them sleeping together . 
 Glee club co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) attempts to take over for Will , but this results in chaos . At the request of Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , club lessons are instead covered by substitute teacher Holly Holliday ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , whose unconventional methods include discussing Lindsay Lohan 's rehabilitation in Spanish , singing " Conjunction Junction " to her English class , and roleplaying as a bipolar Mary Todd Lincoln for the History class . When Holly first arrives at glee club rehearsal , she impresses the club with her rendition of Cee Lo Green 's " Forget You " . Rachel is annoyed and worries that Holly may be unable to sufficiently prepare them for the upcoming Sectionals competition . Holly later wins over Rachel by duetting with her on " Nowadays / Hot Honey Rag " from Chicago . 
 Kurt neglects his best friend Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) in favor of his new friend Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) . Mercedes is offended when Kurt tries to set her up on a date with a football player on the basis that they are both black , and feels left out when she accompanies Kurt and Blaine to dinner , where conversation is dominated by gay issues and icons . When Sue begins a healthy eating initiative and declares a ban on " <unk> Tots " , Mercedes organizes a student protest and fills the tailpipe of Sue 's car with Tots , causing $ 17 @,@ 000 worth of damage . 
 Sue 's initiative proves popular with the students ' parents , and her appointment as principal is made permanent . She fires Will , who is later visited by Holly seeking advice . Holly feels out of her depth as a teacher , having enabled Mercedes ' behavior . She confesses that she originally took her work seriously , until a student ( Lindsay Sims @-@ Lewis ) punched her in the face , prompting her more laid @-@ back approach . Terri arrives while they are talking and is angered by Holly 's presence . Will asks her to leave , telling her that their reunion was a mistake and concluding their relationship for good . 
 Kurt confronts Mercedes , suggesting that she is substituting food for love and their friendship for a romantic relationship . Mercedes decides to talk to the student Kurt attempted to set her up with . As she departs , Kurt is approached by school bully Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) , who threatens to kill him if Kurt reveals his closeted homosexuality . 
 At the urging of the glee club members , Sue reinstates Will . He suggests a group performance of " Singin ' in the Rain " , but asks for Holly 's help to modernize it , resulting in a mash @-@ up with Rihanna 's " Umbrella " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Paltrow 's Glee appearance marked her first ever scripted @-@ series guest performance . The role of Holly was created for her by series creator Ryan Murphy , a personal friend who suggested that she showcase her vocal and dancing talent ahead of the December 2010 release of the film Country Strong , in which Paltrow plays a country singer . Upon announcing her casting in September 2010 , BBC News reported that she would appear in two episodes of the series . E ! Online 's Kristin dos Santos stated that Holly would serve as a love interest for Will , with Murphy later confirming that Holly 's appearance would create a love quadrangle between herself , Will , guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) and her boyfriend Carl Howell ( John Stamos ) . However , Fancast later reported that Paltrow 's guest @-@ arc had been reduced to a single episode , and neither Mays nor Stamos appear in " The Substitute " . Post @-@ broadcast , Murphy stated that both he and Paltrow hoped that she would appear on Glee again in the future , depending on the right storyline . In December 2010 , Paltrow confirmed that she would return to the series for another episode at a later date , and in January 2011 , Murphy confirmed her reappearance , this time as a sex education teacher planned for episodes 15 and 16 . Paltrow won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her appearance in " The Substitute " . 
 " The Substitute " includes a fantasy sequence in which Will hallucinates the club members as kindergarten @-@ aged children . Child actors were hired to portray the characters ' younger selves , including Jake Vaughn and Lauren Boles as a young Finn and Rachel . The episode also features the return of Gilsig , following an absence spanning several episodes . The actress felt that Will 's illness allowed viewers to see the couple with their defences down for the first time , and that the addition of Holly highlighted a double standard in their relationship . She explained that while Terri is not " the most palatable person " , she is at least faithful to Will , while he has " a wandering eye " and treats Terri badly in " The Substitute " . Recurring characters in this episode include glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Principal Figgins , school bully Dave Karofsky , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , wrestler Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) and Kurt 's friend Blaine Anderson . 
 The episode features cover versions of six songs . Paltrow performs on four , which she recorded in a single afternoon . Her numbers include " Conjunction Junction " from Schoolhouse Rock ! , and a clean version of Cee Lo Green 's " Fuck You ! " entitled " Forget You " . The producers considered having Paltrow sing a Coldplay song , but decided to save the band 's work for a competition episode . Morrison and Shum , Jr. enact a frame @-@ by @-@ frame recreation of " Make ' Em Laugh " from the musical film Singin ' in the Rain . Paltrow and Michele duet on " Nowadays / Hot Honey Rag " from the musical Chicago , and the glee club with Morrison and Paltrow perform a mash @-@ up of " Singin ' in the Rain " with " Umbrella " by Rihanna featuring Jay @-@ Z. The staging of " Singin ' in the Rain / Umbrella " required the cast to spend twelve hours filming in a tank of water . 
 All of the songs performed , with the exception of " Conjunction Junction " , were released as singles , available for download , and " Forget You " is featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 . " Forget You " and " Singing in the Rain / Umbrella " charted both on the Billboard Hot 100 and internationally . The former reached number 11 in the US and 12 in Canada , while the latter peaked at number 10 in Ireland . Green 's " Fuck You ! " entered the top ten of the Hot 100 for the first time following the Glee cover , with sales rising 94 % in a week . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 During its original broadcast , " The Substitute " was watched by 11 @.@ 70 million US viewers . It attained a 5 @.@ 0 / 14 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , making it the top @-@ rated show of the night amongst adults aged 18 – 49 . In the weekly program rankings , Glee was the top scripted show among adults 18 – 49 , and placed twentieth in overall viewers . Viewership and ratings both increased from the previous episode , " Never Been Kissed " , which was watched by 10 @.@ 99 million viewers and attained a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 rating / share . In Canada , viewership also improved on " Never Been Kissed " , with " The Substitute " drawing 2 @.@ 29 million viewers and ranking ninth for the week , up from 1 @.@ 97 million and twelfth for the previous episode . In Australia , the episode drew 1 @.@ 06 million viewers , making Glee the seventh most @-@ watched show of the night , and nineteenth of the week . Viewership declined from " Never Been Kissed " , which was watched by 1 @.@ 08 million viewers ; despite this , the series registered a rise from eighth and twenty @-@ seventh in the daily and weekly program rankings respectively . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 55 million viewers — 2 @.@ 11 million on E4 , and 439 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 — becoming the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Aly Semigran of MTV , Robert Canning of IGN and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack all deemed it one of the best of the season , with Canning rating it an " incredible " 9 @.@ 5 / 10 , and Semigran stating that it contained all of the series ' best elements : " surprising musical numbers , with the right balance of humor and life lessons . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club found it to be an improvement on the previous two episodes , writing that if not genuinely good , " The Substitute " at least proved that Glee has not been entirely subsumed by its own hype . Time 's James Poniewozik felt that it was a relatively subdued , mediocre episode , which contained " a collection of good small moments " . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair criticized the focus it placed on the adult characters at the expense of the teenagers and the disregard for continuing plot strands in favor of a celebrity cameo , but concluded that " despite all that , some of it kind of worked . " The National Alliance on Mental Illness ( NAMI ) took exception to this episode , which , it stated , " mocked and trivialized bipolar disorder " during Paltrow 's history classroom scene , in which she role @-@ plays as Mary Todd Lincoln . NAMI encouraged people to contact Murphy and Fox TV to convey their disappointment with the scene . 
 Paltrow 's guest appearance attracted critical praise . Both Stack and E ! Online 's Kristin dos Santos called it Emmy @-@ worthy , with the former rating it amongst her best ever performances , and the latter stating that Holly received " some of Glee 's best @-@ ever one @-@ liners . VanDerWerff enjoyed her role , and wrote that Holly injected an effortless sense of fun , despite much of her plot being nonsensical . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker praised Paltrow for being one of the first guest stars to perform well alongside Sue , and wrote that her classroom scenes made the episode " one in which the guest star both stood out and meshed with the cast " . The Atlantic 's Meghan Brown commented that Paltrow " brought a massive spark to what could have been a one @-@ note role " , and her Atlantic co @-@ author Kevin Fallon wrote that her energetic performance saved an episode that might have been " in shambles without her presence " . Canning stated that Paltrow 's casting could have been distracting , but instead she fit the role " seamlessly " , and CNN 's Lisa Respers France compared her performance favorably to Britney Spears 's cameo in the episode " Britney / Brittany " . Several critics stated that they enjoyed Paltrow 's appearance despite experiencing trepidation about it prior to broadcast . Berk found her " surprisingly great " , and Poniewozik <unk> that while her casting was somewhat distracting , she was able to make Holly a sympathetic character without overdoing her neediness and commitment @-@ phobia . Jen Chaney of The Washington Post recommended a " lengthy moratorium " on internet criticism of Paltrow , suggesting that with her Glee appearance , her " mission to charm the American public may be complete " . 
 Critics were divided over the Schuester sub @-@ plot . Both Semigran and Poniewozik enjoyed Will 's characterization , with Poniewozik commenting that he became an " identifiable human " again , following a season throughout which his behavior has been erratic and unreliable . In contrast , VanDerWerff criticized the sub @-@ plot for ignoring Will 's culpability in the breakdown of his marriage , and expressed displeasure at his inconsistent characterization , deeming it one of the season 's biggest problems . Stack commented negatively on the return of Terri , finding her dislikeable and unnecessary , as Glee already has a villain in Sue . 
 The Mercedes storyline attracted criticism . Fallon took offence at Glee 's sole overweight black character turning into a " fried potato @-@ addicted junkie " , and both Berk and Stack commented that while they had hoped for Mercedes to receive a major storyline , they did not want it to be centered on her weight issues . Semigran called it " rather disposable " but appreciated the " silliness and levity " it introduced , and Respers France noted that she did not mind the storyline itself , but disliked Kurt lecturing his supposed best friend . VanDerWerff felt that the Tots plot was " one element too many " in what could have been a " pretty potent emotional storyline " , but praised the performances by Colfer and Riley . Stack appreciated their dinner with Blaine , finding it representative of what he enjoys about the show , commenting : " Last week , Kurt 's sexuality was the central emotional storyline of the episode , and this week it was played for laughs . Kurt 's character has to walk that fine line between being a role model and becoming too saintly . I think the writers are navigating that tightrope quite , quite well . " 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Musical performances also received mixed reviews . Anthony Benigno of the Daily News gave " Conjunction Junction " a grade of " A " ; he noted that ordinarily he would have declined to review it due to its short length , but said " what a glorious ten seconds it is " . Benigno and Poniewozik criticized the sanitization of " Forget You " , but while the latter found it inferior to the original version , the former preferred Paltrow 's deeper voice and graded the song " A " . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman felt the censorship of the song did not adversely affect its success , and deemed Paltrow 's rendition " charming and sassy " . Megan Vick of Billboard called it " the most exciting number " of the episode , and Stack went further in his praise : he bestowed a grade of " A + " and lauded it as " one of the most memorable and energetic Glee performances ever , thanks in no small part to Paltrow " . Green told MTV that he was flattered by the cover , particularly as he was not aware Paltrow would perform it when granting Glee clearance . He called her performance " great " , and commented that he had not been aware she was such an accomplished vocalist . 
 Benigno and Stack praised the choreography of " Make ' Em Laugh " , but both graded it lower than " Forget You " , at a " B " and " B + " respectively . Futterman called the recreation an " impressive feat " , but likened it to hallucinatory Britney Spears covers in the episode " Britney / Brittany " in that it " stands alone better than it fits into the plot . " Vick was critical of the performance , observing that Glee covers from musicals often introduce classic songs to viewers with a modern twist , an element which was absent in " Make ' Em Laugh " . The Chicago cover also left some critics wanting , and Futterman , The Wall Street Journal 's Raymund Flandez and The Atlantic 's Patrick Burns all found its choreography lacking . Fallon suggested that Glee should be wary of overusing recreations , having already done so in " The Power of Madonna " , " Britney / Brittany " and " The Rocky Horror Glee Show " , and VanDerWerff criticized the performances as " outright plagiarism , not homage " . 
 Benigno and Futterman compared " Singin ' in the Rain / Umbrella " favorably to mash @-@ ups performed in the preceding episode . Benigno graded it " B " , though he said that by using " Singin ' in the Rain " as the chorus , the song lacked catharsis , a sentiment echoed by Flandez , who praised the costumes , props and staging , but wished the rendition had had more " bite " and " attitude " . Futterman described it as a " buoyant and catchy homage to the old and the new [ that ] perfectly captures Glee 's musical spirit " . In contrast , Vick felt the song could not compare to the previous episode 's mash @-@ ups . She deemed the staging implausible , questioning how a glee club in financial difficulty could afford elaborate water features for a rehearsal number . Stack was willing to overlook such improbability ; he wrote that he loved the mash @-@ up and graded it an " A − " . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times appreciated the choreography and the manner in which " Paltrow 's sassiness undercuts [ Morrison 's ] overripe sweetness " , and named it potentially her favorite group number of the season . 
 = Sherron Collins = 
 Sherron Marlon Collins ( born March 18 , 1987 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Windsor Express of the National Basketball League of Canada ( NBL ) . He formerly played for the Charlotte Bobcats of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He has also played for the Texas Legends and Maine Red Claws of the NBA D @-@ League and Hacettepe <unk> in the Turkish Basketball League . As an All @-@ American member of the Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team , he earned a national championship in the 2008 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , three Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament championships , and four consecutive Big 12 Conference regular season championships . He was regarded as one of the leaders of the team and was its captain during his senior year . 
 Collins grew up in Chicago where he was a <unk> standout athlete at Crane High School . He was regarded as the second best point guard in the nation by Scout.com and was considered one of the two best class of 2006 basketball prospects in the state of Illinois ( along with Jon Scheyer ) . 
 Collins was a well @-@ decorated basketball player at Kansas . He was unanimously selected to the Big 12 All @-@ Freshman Team for the 2006 – 07 Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team . After leading the 2008 – 09 Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team to the Big 12 Conference regular season title , Collins was named to the 2009 first team All @-@ Big 12 team . That season , he was named a consensus second team 2009 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American . He was also a consensus first team 2010 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American as a senior and earned the Most Outstanding Player award while leading his team to the 2010 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament championship . He was included on many of the watchlists for the most prestigious college basketball awards as both a junior and senior . Collins holds the school record for most consecutive free throws . 
 Following his senior season , Collins was eligible for the 2010 NBA Draft but went undrafted . Shortly after , he signed a free @-@ agent contract with the Charlotte Bobcats and participated in their summer camp . He represented them in the Orlando Summer League before being signed for the regular season . In October 2012 , he signed with the San Antonio Spurs , but he did not make their final roster . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Collins was born in Chicago , Illinois to Stacey Harris . While growing up in Chicago he overcame the adversity of a father who periodically spent time in jail as well as an environment filled with gang life . He lost his best friend to gunfire at the age of 16 . Collins had had two children by the time of his National Championship season : Sherron Jr. and Sherr <unk> Marlon Collins ( born April 6 , 2007 ; mother is Re <unk> Aguirre ) . In 2006 , he dealt with the death of his first born and the following year , he endured a sex scandal . 
 Growing up , Collins was very active playing several sports including football , basketball , and baseball . In 2002 , Collins began his high school career at Crane Tech Prep High School . During his time at Crane , Collins was a standout multi @-@ sport athlete , playing wide @-@ receiver / free safety on the football team and pitching for the baseball team . On the basketball court , Collins averaged 19 @.@ 8 points , 3 @.@ 1 rebounds and 5 @.@ 1 assists as a junior during the 2004 @-@ 05 season . During his senior season , he averaged 33 points , 8 rebounds and 6 assists for the Cougars . He was regarded as the number 2 Chicago metropolitan area and Illinois basketball prospect in the class of 2006 behind Jon Scheyer . As a result , he was named a McDonald 's All @-@ American as well as a third @-@ team Parade All @-@ American . He was selected as a First @-@ Team All @-@ State selection in 2006 . Additionally , Collins played in the Michael Jordan All @-@ American Classic in April 2006 . Scout.com ranked him as the number 2 point guard in the nation . He was the No. 21 @-@ ranked player in the class of 2006 and the No. 4 @-@ ranked point guard by Rivals.com. Collins helped guide Crane to the 2003 and 2005 conference and city championship titles . His best game was a 45 @-@ point performance against Whitney Young Magnet High School during his senior season . In 2009 , ESPN named Collins to the Illinois Prep All @-@ Decade Team . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman season = = = 
 As a freshman , Collins was an honorable mention All @-@ Big 12 selection and a unanimous selection to the Big 12 All @-@ Rookie team . He averaged 22 @.@ 3 minutes and 9 @.@ 3 points per game . He led Kansas in scoring five times and in assists on 12 occasions . On January 15 , 2007 , Collins scored 23 points vs. Missouri . He scored 20 points at Kansas State on February 19 and he had 20 vs. Texas on March 11 in the 88 – 84 overtime 2007 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament championship game victory . Collins was also a solid student earning Athletic Director 's and Big 12 Commissioner 's honor rolls in the spring of 2007 . 
 = = = Sophomore season = = = 
 In his second season with the Jayhawks , Collins won the 2008 Big 12 Sixth Man Award . For the week of March 12 , he earned Big 12 Player of the week . Collins helped the Jayhawks capture the 2008 national championship , averaging 8 @.@ 3 points and 3 @.@ 8 assists in the NCAA tournament . He made two key plays in the title game versus the Memphis Tigers , first stealing an inbound pass with under two minutes remaining in regulation and Kansas trailing by seven , then hitting a three to cut the deficit to four . Later , with seconds remaining in regulation and with Kansas trailing by three , he took the ball down the court following a Memphis free throw , barely escaping fouls , and passed the ball to teammate Mario Chalmers , who made a three @-@ pointer to tie the game with two seconds remaining . Kansas would go on to win in overtime . He missed six games due to a stress fracture of his foot . Following the season , he had arthroscopic surgery on his left knee . 
 = = = Junior season = = = 
 Collins was the top returning scorer for the 2008 – 09 Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team his junior year ; every starter from the previous year 's National Championship team graduated or departed for the NBA . Collins was on the early season Top 50 watchlist for the Naismith Award . He was also selected as being among the 17 Bob Cousy Award finalists , the Top 30 midseason Wooden Award candidates , the Top 30 midseason Naismith Award candidates and the Top 15 Oscar Robertson Trophy candidates . The team captain and vocal leader of the team , Collins was awarded the team 's Danny Manning MVP award with Cole Aldrich following the season . Collins led the 2008 – 09 Jayhawks in points , minutes , assists and free @-@ throw percentage . He led the team in scoring in 27 games , including the final 10 of the season . In the Big 12 , he ranked third in scoring and fourth in assists . Collins made 35 consecutive free @-@ throws over an eight @-@ game span from January 10 – February 2 to set KU 's all @-@ time record . Over the course of the season he was named Big 12 Player of the Week three times . He was a unanimous selection to the 2008 – 09 Big 12 All @-@ conference first team . He was a second @-@ team 2009 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American by the United States Basketball Writers Association ( <unk> ) and the National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) and was a third @-@ team All America selection by the Associated Press and The Sporting News . On Monday , April 13 , Collins announced that he would return to KU for his senior season . 
 = = = Senior season = = = 
 After having been named a consensus second @-@ team All @-@ American selection the at the end of his junior year , he was a unanimous selection to the preseason All @-@ Big 12 first @-@ team . The 2009 @-@ 10 Kansas Jayhawks men 's basketball team were the preseason number @-@ one ranked team in the 2009 – 10 Big 12 Conference poll , marking the third time in Collins ' career the Jayhawks were preseason number one in conference . Collins was a preseason top 50 watchlist candidate for both the 2010 Naismith Award and the 2010 Wooden Award . As the season progressed , Collins was named to the Midseason top 30 candidates list for the Wooden Award , Midseason top 30 list for the Naismith Trophy , 20 finalists list for the 2010 Bob Cousy Award and the finalist list for the 2010 Oscar Robertson Trophy . At the end of the regular season , he was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ Big 12 member by the league 's coaches . Then , he earned the Most Outstanding Player Award of the 2010 Big 12 Men 's Basketball Tournament after leading Kansas to the championship . Collins has been recognized as a first team 2010 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American by the <unk> and NABC , making him a consensus first team selection . He was a second team selection by Associated Press , Fox Sports , The Sporting News , and Yahoo ! Sports . He was also included on the final 26 @-@ man ballot for the Wooden Award and subsequently selected to the ten @-@ man Wooden All @-@ American team as one of ten finalists for the award . At the end of the year he was recognized as the inaugural recipient of the Lute Olsen Award as National Player of the Year at the <unk> awards banquet . He was recognized along with Jon Scheyer , Scottie Reynolds , and Greivis Vasquez for the NABC Career Achievement Awards . Collins was awarded the 2010 Frances Pomeroy Naismith Award , which recognizes a seniors male basketball player 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and shorter , who excel in both academics and athletics . He was one of five finalists flown out to Los Angeles for the announcement of the Wooden Award along with eventual winner Evan Turner , John Wall , Wesley Johnson and Da 'Sean Butler . Collins went undrafted in the 2010 NBA Draft . 
 = = = College stats = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After going undrafted in the 2010 NBA draft , Collins joined the Charlotte Bobcats for the 2010 NBA Summer League . During the Orlando Summer League , he played four games , including a 32 @-@ point performance in his finale . On August 6 , 2010 , the Bobcats signed Collins to a two @-@ year deal . He made his NBA debut on November 3 , 2010 against the New Jersey Nets and posted two assists in four minutes . On December 4 , 2010 , he scored his first NBA points . On December 8 , 2010 , Collins was assigned to the Maine Red Claws of the NBA Development League . The Bobcats recalled Collins on December 21 , 2010 . That night , he played a career @-@ high 14 minutes , made his first three point shot , recorded his first two steals and scored five points for the first time in his career in a 99 – 81 loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder . 
 On February 24 , 2011 , Collins was waived by the Bobcats to create roster room following a trade between the Bobcats and Portland Trail Blazers . On March 18 , 2011 , it was reported that he signed contract with Lietuvos Rytas until the end of the season . However , a few days later , another player was reported to be the choice to fill the roster slot . In June , he signed with <unk> Pirates of the Baloncesto Superior Nacional , but he supposedly failed a physical and returned to the United States before appearing in a game for them . 
 In August 2011 , Collins signed with Hacettepe <unk> of the Turkish Basketball League . He had been slated to play in Russia and Puerto Rico before signing in Turkey . In June 2012 , he was rehabilitating a knee injury with hopes of signing an NBA Summer League contract the following month . 
 On October 1 , 2012 , Collins signed with the San Antonio Spurs . However , he was later waived by the Spurs on October 5 , 2012 . 
 On April 3 , 2014 , Collins was acquired by the Texas Legends of the NBA Development League , where he spent the rest of the 2013 – 14 season . However , he did not appear in a game for the Legends . 
 On October 31 , 2015 , Collins returned to the Legends . He played in two games for the team before being waived on November 20 . 
 On January 21 , 2016 , Collins signed a contract to play with the Chicago Blues of the Midwest Professional Basketball Association . In March , he signed with the Windsor Express of the National Basketball League of Canada with no indication that he ever played for the Blues . 
 = = = NBA statistics = = = 
 = Forest cobra = 
 The forest cobra ( Naja melanoleuca ) , also called the black cobra and black and white @-@ lipped cobra , is an elapid native to Africa , mostly the central and western parts of the continent . It is the largest true cobra species with a length up to 3 @.@ 1 meters . Although it prefers lowland forest and moist savanna habitats , this cobra is highly adaptable and can be found in drier climates within its geographical range . It is a very capable swimmer and is often considered to be semi @-@ aquatic . The forest cobra is a generalist in its feeding habits , having a highly varied diet : anything from large insects to small mammals and other reptiles . This species is alert , nervous and is considered to be a very dangerous snake . When cornered or molested , it will assume the typical cobra warning posture by raising its fore body off the ground , spreading a narrow hood and hissing loudly . Bites to humans are less common than for other African cobras due to various factors , though a bite from this species is a life @-@ threatening emergency . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The forest cobra is classified under the genus Naja of the family Elapidae . Naja melanoleuca was first described by American herpetologist Edward Hallowell in 1857 . The generic name Naja is a Latinisation of the Sanskrit word <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " cobra " . The specific epithet melanoleuca is Ancient Greek and means " of black and white " . The word <unk> is Greek for " black " , while <unk> comes from the Ancient Greek word for " white " . This species is also known as the black cobra and black and white @-@ lipped cobra . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The forest cobra is classified under the genus Naja of the family Elapidae . The genus was first described by Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti in 1768 . The species Naja melanoleuca was first described by Edward Hallowell in 1857 . The genus Naja was split into several subgenera based on various factors , including morphology , diet , and habitat . Naja melanoleuca is part of the subgenus <unk> , along with three other species : Naja annulata , Naja <unk> , and Naja <unk> . The subgenus is united by their restriction to central and west African forest and / or forest @-@ edge type habitat . They are also more aquatic and feed more on aquatic species . The species of the subgenus <unk> show great diversity in size , however , ranging from the forest cobra ( Naja melanoleuca ) which can attain lengths of 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 8 @.@ 9 feet ) to the burrowing cobra ( Naja <unk> ) which doesn 't grow larger than 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 feet ) in length . The below cladogram illustrates the taxonomy and relationships among species of Naja : 
 = = Description = = 
 The forest cobra is Africa 's largest cobra of the genus Naja and possibly the largest of all the true cobra ( Naja ) species in the world . The length of an average adult is 1 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 2 m ( 4 @.@ 6 to 7 @.@ 2 ft ) , but they may attain lengths of 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 8 @.@ 9 feet ) , and lengths up to 3 @.@ 1 metres ( 10 feet ) are also possible in rare cases . Males and females grow to be similar in length , as there is no sexual dimorphism within this species . The head of this snake is large , broad , flattened and is slightly distinct from the neck . It is a slightly depressed , tapered and moderately thick bodied snake with a slender tail that is medium in length . The body is compressed dorsoventrally ( where the dorsal upper scales and the ventral lower scales meet at either side of the body ) and sub @-@ cylindrical posteriorly ( the tail end of the body ) . The forest cobra has long cervical ribs capable of expansion to form a long , wedge shaped hood when threatened . The angle between the crown of the head and the side of the head between the eye , also known as the canthus is distinct , while the snout is rounded . Its eyes are large with round pupils . 
 = = = Scalation = = = 
 Like other snake species , the forest cobra has skin covered in scales . Snakes are entirely covered with scales or scutes of various shapes and sizes , known as snakeskin as a whole . Scales protect the body of the snake , aid it in locomotion , allow moisture to be retained within , and alter the surface characteristics such as roughness to aid in camouflage . The dorsal scales of the forest cobra are smooth , glossy and strongly oblique . The colour of this species is variable , with three main colour morphs . Those from the forest or forest fringe , from Sierra Leone east to western Kenya and south to Angola are glossy black , the chin , throat and anterior region of the belly are cream or white , with broad black cross @-@ bars and blotches . The sides of the head are strikingly marked with black and white , giving the impression of vertical black and white bars on the lips . The second colour morph , from the west African savanna , is banded black and yellow , with a black tail , the head is brownish @-@ yellow on top , the lips , chin and throat are yellow . The third colour morph , from the coastal plain of east Africa , south to KwaZulu @-@ Natal , inland to Zambia and southern Democratic Republic of Congo , is brownish or blackish @-@ brown above , paler below , the belly is yellow or cream , heavily speckled with brown or black , and specimens from the southern part of its range have black tails . Melanistic ( all black ) specimens have been documented from west Africa . 
 The head , body and tail scalation of the forest cobra : 
 = = = Venom = = = 
 The venom of this cobra is a postsynaptic neurotoxin and bites result in severe neurotoxicity . Ernst and Zug et al . 1996 list a value of 0 @.@ 225 mg / kg SC . According to Brown and Fry of the Australian Venom and Toxin Database , the murine intraperitoneal LD50 value is 0 @.@ 324 mg / kg . The average venom yield per bite is 571 mg and the maximum venom yield is 1102 mg . This snake can be highly dangerous due to the quantity of venom it can inject in a single bite and its aggressive nature when defending . Death can occur rapidly , within 30 to 120 minutes in severe cases of envenomation . Signs and symptoms of envenomation include ptosis , drowsiness , limb paralysis , hearing loss , inability to speak , dizziness , ataxia , shock , hypotension , abdominal pain , fever , pallor , and other neurological and respiratory symptoms . 
 The forest cobra is one of the least frequent causes of snake bite among the African cobras , largely due its forest @-@ dwelling habits but a bite by this species should be taken very seriously because it ranks as the 4th most venomous Naja ( True Cobra ) species . The <unk> is thought to be very similar to that of the Egyptian cobra ( Naja haje ) . Clinical experience with this species has been very sparse , and few recorded bites have been documented . Deaths from respiratory failure due to severe neurotoxicity have been reported , but most victims will survive if prompt administration of antivenom is undertaken as soon as clinical signs of envenomation have been noted . Rare cases of spontaneous recoveries without the use of specific antivenom have also been seen ; however , neglecting the use of antivenom places the patient at increased risk for major morbidity and mortality . If the snake becomes cornered or is agitated , it can quickly attack the aggressor , and because a large amount of venom is injected , a rapidly fatal outcome is possible . The mortality rate of an untreated bite is not exactly known but it is thought to be quite high . The forest cobra does not spit or spray its venom . This species is considered to be among the most intelligent of the African elapids by herpetologists . 
 Two cases from Liberia experienced severe neurological symptoms , including ptosis , nausea , vomiting , <unk> , and respiratory distress . A child in Ghana died within 20 minutes after being bitten by a snake suspected to be from this species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The forest cobra occurs mainly in western and central Africa . It is found from Senegal , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Guinea , southeastern Mali , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Côte d 'Ivoire , Burkina Faso , Ghana , Togo , Benin , Nigeria , Equatorial Guinea , Cameroon , and Gabon in western Africa to the Republic of Congo , the Democratic Republic of Congo , Central African Republic , and northern Angola in central Africa to western Kenya , Uganda , Rwanda , and Burundi in eastern Africa , and to fragmented parts of southern Africa , including the Natal . 
 A snake of forest or woodland , it is the only one of Africa 's cobras that will live in high forest . The forest cobras are snakes that are well adapted to many environments and the habitat of the forest cobra is strongly dependent on what part of its African range the snake originates from . Forest cobras originating in the southern African regions are typically found in savanna and grassland , but they can also be found in broken rock country . They are mainly found in the tropical and subtropical rainforest regions of west and central Africa . It also inhabits mangroves in western Africa . The banded form of forest cobra in west Africa lives in savanna and grassland ( but usually along streams ) and well vegetated areas , especially riverine forest , up to latitude 14 N. The species ' preferred habitat are lowland forest and moist savanna where it favours coastal thickets . This snake seems to be highly adaptable and will readily move into drier areas if it can . In western Kenya , the forest cobra has been found in wide stretched grassland areas . The population of forest cobras in Uganda are almost always found close to water . The brown colour phase occurs in coastal and high altitude forest , woodland and thicket , and grassland areas ( i.e. Nyanga , Zimbabwe ) . Due to its secretive habits , and fondness for living in holes , it often persists in quite well @-@ inhabited areas , common in and around many central African towns , even long after most vegetation has gone . They are also found on fruit plantations where they live in the trees . It occurs through a wide altitude range , from sea @-@ level to forested mountains at 2 @,@ 800 metres ( 9 @,@ 200 feet ) above sea @-@ level . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The forest cobra is an agile , diurnal species that climbs well and is one of the most aquatic of the true cobras of the genus Naja . It is terrestrial , but it is fast , graceful climber , known to ascend trees to a height of 10 metres ( 33 feet ) or more . It is quick moving and alert . It swims well and readily takes to the water ; in some areas its main diet is fish and could be regarded as semi @-@ aquatic . Although it is active mostly during the day ( diurnal ) in uninhabited areas , it can also be active by night ( nocturnal ) where it goes into urban areas . When not active , it takes cover in holes , brush piles , hollow logs , among root clusters or in rock crevices , or in abandoned termite mounds at forest fringe or clearings . In certain areas , it hides along river banks , in overhanging root systems or bird holes , and in urban areas will hide in junk piles or unused buildings . When agitated , it rears up to a considerable height and spreads a long , narrow hood . It can strike quickly , to quite a long distance , and if molested and cornered , it will rush forward and make a determined effort to bite . It is an alert and agile species of cobra . Some authorities believe it is one of the most dangerous African snakes to be kept as many captive forest cobras are described to be particularly aggressive when handled . This species is not able to " spit " its venom . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Forest cobras will feed on a wide variety of prey , including amphibians , fish , other snakes , monitor lizards and other lizards , bird eggs , rodents , and other small mammals . It has been recorded as taking mudskippers , and in west Africa , one specimen had eaten a Gifford 's giant shrew , an insectivore with a smell so noxious , most other snakes would not touch it . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 This is an oviparous species . In the summer , females will lay between 11 and 26 smooth white eggs , each roughly 30 to 60 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 inches ) . The eggs stick together in a bunch . The eggs are laid in hollow trees , termite mounds , holes in the ground or females will make their own nests . Before mating , a pair of will " dance " , raising their heads a foot or more off the ground and moving to and fro . This may continue for an hour before mating takes place , when the male presses his cloaca ( the chamber into which the reproductive , urinary , and intestinal canals empty ) against that of the female . Female forest cobras may stand guard and are irritable and aggressive during the breeding period . A female is liable to attack without provocation , with potentially fatal consequences for passers @-@ by if her nest is near a footpath . Hatchlings are born completely independent and are usually 22 to 25 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 to 9 @.@ 8 inches ) in length . Although some sources claim that hatchlings may measure up to 47 centimetres ( 19 inches ) Incubation period is anywhere from 55 to 70 days ( or over 80 days in one captive study ) at temperatures of 27 – 30 ° C ( 81 – 86 ° F ) . These snakes are known to have a long lifespan . One captive specimen lived for 28 years , which is the record for the longest lived venomous snake in captivity . Another specimen held at the Melbourne Zoo in Australia turned 35 on September 1 , 2014 . 
 = Acércate = 
 " Acércate " ( English : " Come Closer " ) is a song recorded by Puerto Rican reggaetón recording artist Ivy Queen and duo Wisin & Yandel for Queen 's seventh studio album Drama Queen ( 2010 ) . It was composed by Queen and Marcos Masis alongside the duo , while being produced by Luny Tunes and Tainy . Originally entitled " No Te Equivoques " , the song was leaked onto the Internet prior to the album 's release , which prompted Ivy Queen and Wisin & Yandel to re @-@ record the song . 
 Wisin & Yandel released a solo version of the song with lead vocals performed by them under the original title . While failing to chart on main Latin songs charts in Billboard magazine , it did manage to debut and peak at number sixteen on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Digital Songs chart , charting simultaneously with the lead single off the album " La Vida Es Así " which obtained the number two position . The song brings together the first studio album released by Ivy Queen in three years and first for Machete Music , after being with Univision Records since 2005 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the success of her 2007 effort Sentimiento , which was certified Platinum by the United States Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , a substantial live album was distributed by Machete in 2008 . Subsequently , Queen signed a new record deal with the label in April 2010 , as they celebrated their fifth anniversary . The signing , described as a 360 deal , includes profit sharing in tours , sponsorships and merchandising . Ivy Queen was previously signed to a distribution deal with Univision Records , which in turn was acquired by Machete 's parent company Universal Music Latin Entertainment in 2008 . 
 President of Universal Music Latino and Machete , Walter Kolm , commented in a press release that : " It 's a privilege to have Ivy Queen apart of over artistic roster . Ivy is an extraordinary woman with incomparable talent , and she 's number one in her genre . We 're happy to be able to work with her on her new album as well as future projects " . " I 'm very proud to be a part of Machete Music . They are a young , vibrant company that has created a name for itself in Latin music in the United States and the world . They are a strong and important company that has been recognized for nurturing their artists ’ creative talents , " said Ivy Queen , regarding the partnership . Ivy Queen told Efe that the composition process started while she was heartbroken at home . Her emotions then burst out in the recording studio . She added the song is one of 26 songs she wrote during this period . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The song was composed by Queen , Marcos Masis , Juan Luis <unk> Luna and <unk> <unk> Malavé ; the duo known as Wisin & Yandel . Musically , it features minor key tonality and synthesizers . Production was handled by the Dominican @-@ born duo of Luny Tunes and Tainy . Frances Tirado from Primera Hora described the song as being pure reggaeton and as a song that brings out the figure in Ivy Queen . " Acércate " , along with the rest of the album , was recorded at Mas Flow Studios in Carolina , Puerto Rico . A version with lead male vocals by Wisin & Yandel without lead vocals from Ivy Queen remains unreleased , with a running time of two minutes and fifty @-@ three seconds . It too was produced by Luny Tunes and Tainy . 
 " Acércate " was leaked onto the Internet prior to the album 's release ; a first in Queen 's 15 @-@ year career . Originally entitled " No Te Equivoques " , it was re @-@ recorded in response to the infringement and included on the album retitled " Acércate " . Reflecting on the situation Queen stated : " Sometimes they try to hurt you are when you do well . I 'm proud and grateful that Wisin & Yandel have gone with me to the studio to record the song . We have good chemistry and friendship . We tried to change the song and lyrics , but with their agenda , which is tight , and mine too , we could not do it again . We have no idea who hacked , all the music was in a studio and to mobilize it to another was what someone did . " The collaboration stemmed from Queen 's previous collaboration with Wisin & Yandel on their seventh studio album La Revolución ( 2009 ) on " Perfecto " which also featured <unk> . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Mas Flow Studios in Carolina , Puerto Rico 
 Personnel 
 José Cotto — Mixing 
 Ivy Queen — Primary Artist , Composer 
 Marcos " Tainy " Masis — Composer , Producer 
 Francisco Saldaña — Composer 
 Luny Tunes — Producer 
 Wisin & Yandel — Composers , Featured Artist 
 = = Charts = = 
 While failing to chart on main Latin songs charts in Billboard magazine , it did manage to debut and peak at number sixteen on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Digital Songs chart , for the week of July 31 , 2010 . It charted simultaneously with the lead single " La Vida Es Así " , which was at number two on the chart . 
 = Frank Black ( character ) = 
 Frank Black is a fictional character in the crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . Black serves as the primary character of the series , which centers his investigation into unusual crimes as part of the private investigative organisation the Millennium Group . Black appeared in all but one of the series ' sixty @-@ seven episodes , with " Anamnesis " being the exception ; the character was portrayed by Lance Henriksen throughout the series . 
 The character of Black was conceived by series creator Chris Carter as a modern Western hero , and has been considered the main constant throughout the series ' changes in tone and direction . Henriksen was described by Carter as his " first and last " choice for the role , and has garnered critical acclaim for his portrayal , including three Golden Globe Award nominations . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) started his career as an offender profiler for the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , where his unusual gift for empathising with the killers he was investigating aided in their capture . However , Black retires when he finds that his family — wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) — are being threatened by an unknown stalker , who is mailing polaroid photographs of the family to Black . After retiring from the FBI , Black moves to Seattle , Washington , and begins to consult for the Millennium Group , a private investigative organisation that aid law enforcement in violent criminal cases . 
 Despite the change in career , the stalker ( Doug Hutchison ) catches up with Black , kidnapping Catherine . Black is able to track them down and rescue Catherine , stabbing the stalker to death in the process . Disturbed by both the abduction and Black 's rage , Catherine moves out of their family home with Jordan for a time . Before they can reconcile , Catherine dies in a virus outbreak orchestrated by the Millennium Group , who Black discovers are attempting to control the possibility of the end of the world at the turn of the millennium . Disgusted by the group 's motives and actions , Black breaks rank and returns to work with the FBI in order to take them down . 
 Working with his new partner Emma Hollis ( Klea Scott ) , Black finds himself struggling to combat the far @-@ reaching influence of the Millennium Group . Due to the workings of the Group , Black is framed for the death of a fellow agent , prompting his resignation from the FBI and fleeing Washington D.C. with Jordan ; likewise , Hollis is convinced to abandon Black and work with the Group . Several months later , Black is able to work with FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to foil a last @-@ ditch effort by the Group to bring about the end of the world ; vindicated , he reunites with Jordan after the case . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 Millennium 's creator Chris Carter conceived Frank Black 's character early in the series ' genesis , knowing that he wanted to build the show around a retired law enforcement agent ; the tone of Millennium came to Carter later in the process but shaped Black 's character . Carter saw Black as an archetypal Western hero , describing him as " self @-@ reliant , quiet , capable , dangerous " and comparing him to the title character of the 1953 film Shane . Actor William Hurt was considered for the role early in the conception of the series , although Carter denies that Hurt was seriously approached for the part , saying Henriksen was their " first and last choice " . David Nutter , a frequent director for the series , described Henriksen as an " everyman " who appears to have " seen hell , and has reached for heaven but not often had it " . 
 When Henriksen first received the script for " Pilot " , he was impressed with what he saw as " vivid and edgy " writing , but was incredulous as the possibility of it being a television script , having initially mistaken it for a feature film . He also held reservations about working on television , as he was primarily a known for acting in films . The initial casting of Henriksen was not well received by executives at Fox Broadcasting Company , who had envisioned the lead role being played by " someone hot and in his mid @-@ thirties , at worst " according to producer Ken Horton . 
 Producer John Peter Kousakis has noted that Black remained the main constant throughout the series , as each season featured a marked change in tone and plotting . Black appeared in every episode of the series bar one — the second season episode " Anamnesis " did not feature the character at all , focussing instead on another Millennium Group member . Henriksen used the break from production to take a trip to Hawaii . Following the cancellation of Millennium , character of Black — again portrayed by Henriksen — appeared in " Millennium " , an episode of The X @-@ Files which served as a crossover between the two programmes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Henriksen 's portrayal of Black has been met with positive criticism . Henriksen was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Drama for each of the series ' three seasons , without winning . Henriksen 's first loss was to David Duchovny 's role as Fox Mulder in The X @-@ Files , followed by a loss to Anthony Edwards as ER 's Mark Greene , and finally coming in behind Dylan McDermott 's portrayal of Bobby Donnell in The Practice . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen noted that " Henriksen invests [ Black 's ] world @-@ weariness with a soothing , almost beautiful patience , and those few moments of delight he 's allowed on the show [ ... ] are sincere instead of cloying " . DVD Talk 's Randy Miller considered the character to have been " masterfully played " by Henriksen . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , felt that Henriksen " <unk> [ ed ] the part with a confidence that makes him immediately a more credible character " than Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , the lead roles in Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files . Writing for Slant magazine , Keith Uhlich described Henriksen 's portrayal of Black as " the perfect <unk> complement to Carter 's thematic obsessions " , calling the character a " mortal survivalist pushing ever @-@ forward , even in the face of the devil 's idle temptations " . 
 = Hail = 
 Hail is a form of solid precipitation . It is distinct from American sleet ( called ice pellets outside of the United States ) , though the two are often confused . It consists of balls or irregular lumps of ice , each of which is called a hailstone . Sleet ( ice pellets ) falls generally in cold weather while hail growth is greatly inhibited during cold surface temperatures . 
 Unlike graupel , which is made of rime , and ice pellets , which are smaller and translucent , hailstones consist mostly of water ice and measure between 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) and 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) in diameter . The METAR reporting code for hail 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) or greater is GR , while smaller hailstones and graupel are coded GS . 
 Hail is possible within most thunderstorms as it is produced by <unk> , and within 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) of the parent storm . Hail formation requires environments of strong , upward motion of air with the parent thunderstorm ( similar to tornadoes ) and lowered heights of the freezing level . In the mid @-@ latitudes , hail forms near the interiors of continents , while in the tropics , it tends to be confined to high elevations . 
 There are methods available to detect hail @-@ producing thunderstorms using weather satellites and weather radar imagery . Hailstones generally fall at higher speeds as they grow in size , though complicating factors such as melting , friction with air , wind , and interaction with rain and other hailstones can slow their descent through Earth 's atmosphere . Severe weather warnings are issued for hail when the stones reach a damaging size , as it can cause serious damage to human @-@ made structures and , most commonly , farmers ' crops . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Any thunderstorm which produces hail that reaches the ground is known as a hailstorm . Hail has a diameter of 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) or more . Hailstones can grow to 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) and weigh more than 0 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) . 
 Unlike ice pellets , hailstones are layered and can be irregular and clumped together . Hail is composed of transparent ice or alternating layers of transparent and translucent ice at least 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) thick , which are deposited upon the hailstone as it travels through the cloud , suspended aloft by air with strong upward motion until its weight overcomes the updraft and falls to the ground . Although the diameter of hail is varied , in the United States , the average observation of damaging hail is between 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) and golf ball @-@ sized ( 1 @.@ 75 in ) . 
 Stones larger than 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 80 in ) are usually considered large enough to cause damage . The Meteorological Service of Canada issues severe thunderstorm warnings when hail that size or above is expected . The US National Weather Service has a 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) or greater in diameter threshold , effective January 2010 , an increase over the previous threshold of ¾ -inch hail . Other countries have different thresholds according local sensitivity to hail ; for instance grape growing areas could be adversely impacted by smaller hailstones . Hailstones can be very large or very small , depending on how strong the updraft is : weaker hailstorms produce smaller hailstones than stronger hailstorms ( such as supercells ) . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Hail forms in strong thunderstorm clouds , particularly those with intense updrafts , high liquid water content , great vertical extent , large water droplets , and where a good portion of the cloud layer is below freezing 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) . These types of strong updrafts can also indicate the presence of a tornado . The growth rate is maximized where air is near a temperature of − 13 ° C ( 9 ° F ) . 
 = = = Layer nature of the hailstones = = = 
 Like other precipitation in cumulonimbus clouds , hail begins as water droplets . As the droplets rise and the temperature goes below freezing , they become supercooled water and will freeze on contact with condensation nuclei . A cross @-@ section through a large hailstone shows an onion @-@ like structure . This means the hailstone is made of thick and translucent layers , alternating with layers that are thin , white and opaque . Former theory suggested that hailstones were subjected to multiple descents and ascents , falling into a zone of humidity and refreezing as they were uplifted . This up and down motion was thought to be responsible for the successive layers of the hailstone . New research , based on theory as well as field study , has shown this is not necessarily true . 
 The storm 's updraft , with upwardly directed wind speeds as high as 110 miles per hour ( 180 km / h ) , blows the forming hailstones up the cloud . As the hailstone ascends it passes into areas of the cloud where the concentration of humidity and supercooled water droplets varies . The hailstone ’ s growth rate changes depending on the variation in humidity and supercooled water droplets that it encounters . The accretion rate of these water droplets is another factor in the hailstone ’ s growth . When the hailstone moves into an area with a high concentration of water droplets , it captures the latter and acquires a translucent layer . Should the hailstone move into an area where mostly water vapour is available , it acquires a layer of opaque white ice . 
 Furthermore , the hailstone ’ s speed depends on its position in the cloud ’ s updraft and its mass . This determines the varying thicknesses of the layers of the hailstone . The accretion rate of supercooled water droplets onto the hailstone depends on the relative velocities between these water droplets and the hailstone itself . This means that generally the larger hailstones will form some distance from the stronger updraft where they can pass more time growing . As the hailstone grows it releases latent heat , which keeps its exterior in a liquid phase . Because it undergoes ' wet growth ' , the outer layer is sticky ( i.e. more adhesive ) , so a single hailstone may grow by collision with other smaller hailstones , forming a larger entity with an irregular shape . 
 The hailstone will keep rising in the thunderstorm until its mass can no longer be supported by the updraft . This may take at least 30 minutes based on the force of the updrafts in the hail @-@ producing thunderstorm , whose top is usually greater than 10 km high . It then falls toward the ground while continuing to grow , based on the same processes , until it leaves the cloud . It will later begin to melt as it passes into air above freezing temperature . 
 Thus , a unique trajectory in the thunderstorm is sufficient to explain the layer @-@ like structure of the hailstone . The only case in which multiple trajectories can be discussed is in a multicellular thunderstorm , where the hailstone may be ejected from the top of the " mother " cell and captured in the updraft of a more intense " daughter " cell . This , however , is an exceptional case . 
 = = = Factors favoring hail = = = 
 Hail is most common within continental interiors of the mid @-@ latitudes , as hail formation is considerably more likely when the freezing level is below the altitude of 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) . Movement of dry air into strong thunderstorms over continents can increase the frequency of hail by promoting <unk> cooling which lowers the freezing level of thunderstorm clouds giving hail a larger volume to grow in . Accordingly , hail is less common in the tropics despite a much higher frequency of thunderstorms than in the mid @-@ latitudes because the atmosphere over the tropics tends to be warmer over a much greater altitude . Hail in the tropics occurs mainly at higher elevations . 
 Hail growth becomes <unk> small when air temperatures fall below − 30 ° C ( − 22 ° F ) as supercooled water droplets become rare at these temperatures . Around thunderstorms , hail is most likely within the cloud at elevations above 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . Between 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) and 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) , 60 percent of hail is still within the thunderstorm , though 40 percent now lies within the clear air under the anvil . Below 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , hail is equally distributed in and around a thunderstorm to a distance of 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) . 
 = = Climatology = = 
 Hail occurs most frequently within continental interiors at mid @-@ latitudes and is less common in the tropics , despite a much higher frequency of thunderstorms than in the mid @-@ latitudes . Hail is also much more common along mountain ranges because mountains force horizontal winds upwards ( known as orographic lifting ) , thereby intensifying the updrafts within thunderstorms and making hail more likely . The higher elevations also result in there being less time available for hail to melt before reaching the ground . One of the more common regions for large hail is across mountainous northern India , which reported one of the highest hail @-@ related death tolls on record in 1888 . China also experiences significant hailstorms . Central Europe and southern Australia also experience a lot of hailstorms . Popular regions for hailstorms are southern and western Germany , northern and eastern France and southern and eastern Benelux . In south @-@ eastern Europe , Croatia and Serbia experience frequent occurrences of hail . 
 In North America , hail is most common in the area where Colorado , Nebraska , and Wyoming meet , known as " Hail Alley " . Hail in this region occurs between the months of March and October during the afternoon and evening hours , with the bulk of the occurrences from May through September . Cheyenne , Wyoming is North America 's most hail @-@ prone city with an average of nine to ten hailstorms per season . 
 = = Short @-@ term detection = = 
 Weather radar is a very useful tool to detect the presence of hail @-@ producing thunderstorms . However , radar data has to be complemented by a knowledge of current atmospheric conditions which can allow one to determine if the current atmosphere is conducive to hail development . 
 Modern radar scans many angles around the site . <unk> values at multiple angles above ground level in a storm are proportional to the precipitation rate at those levels . Summing reflectivities in the Vertically Integrated Liquid or VIL , gives the liquid water content in the cloud . Research shows that hail development in the upper levels of the storm is related to the evolution of VIL . VIL divided by the vertical extent of the storm , called VIL density , has a relationship with hail size , although this varies with atmospheric conditions and therefore is not highly accurate . Traditionally , hail size and probability can be estimated from radar data by computer using algorithms based on this research . Some algorithms include the height of the freezing level to estimate the melting of the hailstone and what would be left on the ground . 
 Certain patterns of reflectivity are important clues for the meteorologist as well . The three body scatter spike is an example . This is the result of energy from the radar hitting hail and being deflected to the ground , where they deflect back to the hail and then to the radar . The energy took more time to go from the hail to the ground and back , as opposed to the energy that went direct from the hail to the radar , and the echo is further away from the radar than the actual location of the hail on the same radial path , forming a cone of weaker reflectivities . 
 More recently , the polarization properties of weather radar returns have been analyzed to differentiate between hail and heavy rain . The use of differential reflectivity ( <formula> ) , in combination with horizontal reflectivity ( <formula> ) has led to a variety of hail classification algorithms . Visible satellite imagery is beginning to be used to detect hail , but false alarm rates remain high using this method . 
 = = Size and terminal velocity = = 
 The size of hailstones is best determined by measuring their diameter with a ruler . In the absence of a ruler , hailstone size is often visually estimated by comparing its size to that of known objects , such as coins . Using the objects such as hen 's eggs , peas , and marbles for comparing hailstone sizes is imprecise , due to their varied dimensions . The UK organisation , TORRO , also scales for both hailstones and hailstorms . When observed at an airport , METAR code is used within a surface weather observation which relates to the size of the hailstone . Within METAR code , GR is used to indicate larger hail , of a diameter of at least 0 @.@ 25 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 mm ) . GR is derived from the French word <unk> . Smaller @-@ sized hail , as well as snow pellets , use the coding of GS , which is short for the French word <unk> . 
 = = = Hail records = = = 
 <unk> , large rocks of ice that are not associated with thunderstorms , are not officially recognized by the World Meteorological Organization as " hail , " which are aggregations of ice associated with thunderstorms , and therefore records of extreme characteristics of <unk> are not given as hail records . 
 Heaviest : 1 @.@ 02 kg ( 2 @.@ 25 lb ) ; <unk> District , Bangladesh , 14 April 1986 . 
 Largest diameter officially measured : 7 @.@ 9 inches ( 20 cm ) diameter , 18 @.@ 622 inches ( 47 @.@ 3 cm ) circumference ; Vivian , South Dakota , 23 July 2010 . 
 Largest circumference officially measured : 18 @.@ 74 inches ( 47 @.@ 6 cm ) circumference , 7 @.@ 0 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 cm ) diameter ; Aurora , Nebraska , 22 June 2003 . 
 Terminal velocity of hail , or the speed at which hail is falling when it strikes the ground , varies . It is estimated that a hailstone of 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) in diameter falls at a rate of 9 metres per second ( 20 mph ) , while stones the size of 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter fall at a rate of 48 metres per second ( 110 mph ) . Hailstone velocity is dependent on the size of the stone , friction with air it is falling through , the motion of wind it is falling through , collisions with raindrops or other hailstones , and melting as the stones fall through a warmer atmosphere . As hail stones are not perfect spheres it is difficult to calculate their speed accurately . 
 = = Hazards = = 
 Hail can cause serious damage , notably to automobiles , aircraft , skylights , glass @-@ roofed structures , livestock , and most commonly , farmers ' crops . Hail damage to roofs often goes unnoticed until further structural damage is seen , such as leaks or cracks . It is hardest to recognize hail damage on shingled roofs and flat roofs , but all roofs have their own hail damage detection problems . Metal roofs are fairly resistant to hail damage , but may accumulate cosmetic damage in the form of dents and damaged coatings . 
 Hail is one of the most significant thunderstorm hazards to aircraft . When hailstones exceed 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) in diameter , planes can be seriously damaged within seconds . The hailstones accumulating on the ground can also be hazardous to landing aircraft . Hail is also a common nuisance to drivers of automobiles , severely denting the vehicle and cracking or even shattering windshields and windows . Wheat , corn , soybeans , and tobacco are the most sensitive crops to hail damage . Hail is one of Canada 's most expensive hazards . Rarely , massive hailstones have been known to cause concussions or fatal head trauma . Hailstorms have been the cause of costly and deadly events throughout history . One of the earliest known incidents occurred around the 9th century in Roopkund , Uttarakhand , India , where 200 to 600 nomads seem to have died of injuries from hail the size of cricket balls . The largest hailstone in terms of diameter and weight ever recorded in the United States fell on July 23 , 2010 in Vivian , South Dakota ; it measured 7 @.@ 9 inches ( 20 cm ) in diameter and 18 @.@ 62 inches ( 47 @.@ 3 cm ) in circumference , weighing in at 1 @.@ 94 pounds ( 0 @.@ 88 kg ) . This broke the previous record for diameter set by a hailstone 7 inches diameter and 18 @.@ 74 inches circumference ( still the greatest circumference hailstone ) which fell in Aurora , Nebraska in the United States on June 22 , 2003 , as well as the record for weight , set by a hailstone of 1 @.@ 67 pounds ( 0 @.@ 76 kg ) that fell in Coffeyville , Kansas in 1970 . 
 = = Accumulations = = 
 Narrow zones where hail accumulates on the ground in association with thunderstorm activity are known as hail streaks or hail swaths , which can be detectable by satellite after the storms pass by . Hailstorms normally last from a few minutes up to 15 minutes in duration . Accumulating hail storms can blanket the ground with over 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) of hail , cause thousands to lose power , and bring down many trees . Flash flooding and mudslides within areas of steep terrain can be a concern with accumulating hail . 
 Depths of up to 18 in ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) have been reported . A landscape covered in accumulated hail generally resembles one covered in accumulated snow and any significant accumulation of hail has the same restrictive effects as snow accumulation , albeit over a smaller area , on transport and infrastructure . Accumulated hail can also cause flooding by blocking drains , and hail can be carried in the floodwater , turning into a snow @-@ like slush which is deposited at lower elevations . 
 On somewhat rare occasions , a thunderstorm can become stationary or nearly so while prolifically producing hail and significant depths of accumulation do occur ; this tends to happen in mountainous areas , such as the July 29 , 2010 case of a foot of hail accumulation in Boulder County , Colorado . On June 5 , 2015 , hail up to four feet deep fell on one city block in Denver , Colorado . The hailstones , described as between the size of bumble bees and ping pong balls , were accompanied by rain and high winds . The hail fell in only the one area , leaving the surrounding area untouched . It fell for one and a half hours between 10 p.m. and 11 : 30 p.m. A meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Boulder said , " It 's a very interesting phenomenon . We saw the storm stall . It produced copious amounts of hail in one small area . It 's a meteorological thing . " Tractors used to clear the area filled more than 30 dump @-@ truck loads of hail . 
 Research focused on four individual days that accumulated more than 5 @.@ 9 inches ( 15 cm ) of hail in 30 minutes on the Colorado front range has shown that these events share similar patterns in observed synoptic weather , radar , and lightning characteristics , suggesting the possibility of predicting these events prior to their occurrence . A fundamental problem in continuing research in this area is that , unlike hail diameter , hail depth is not commonly reported . The lack of data leaves researchers and forecasters in the dark when trying to verify operational methods . A cooperative effort between the University of Colorado and the National Weather Service , for the summer of 2016 , is in progress . The joint project 's goal is to enlist the help of the general public to develop a database of hail accumulation depths . 
 = = Suppression and prevention = = 
 During the Middle Ages , people in Europe used to ring church bells and fire cannons to try to prevent hail , and the subsequent damage to crops . Updated versions of this approach are available as modern hail cannons . Cloud seeding after World War II was done to eliminate the hail threat , particularly across the Soviet Union – where it was claimed a 70 to 98 percent reduction in crop damage from hail storms was achieved by deploying silver iodide in clouds using rockets and artillery shells . Hail suppression programs have been undertaken by 15 countries between 1965 and 2005 . 
 = Roderigo Lopez = 
 Roderigo Lopez ( also called Ruy Lopes , Ruy Lopez or Roger Lopez ; c . 1517 – 7 June 1594 ) served as physician @-@ in @-@ chief to Queen Elizabeth I of England from 1581 until his death by execution , having been found guilty of plotting to poison her . A Portuguese converso or New Christian of Jewish ancestry , he is the only royal doctor in English history to have been executed , and may have inspired the character of Shylock in Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice , which was written within four years of his death . 
 The son of a Portuguese royal physician of Jewish descent , Lopez was raised a Catholic and educated at the University of Coimbra . Amid the Portuguese Inquisition he was accused of secretly practising Judaism , and compelled to leave the country . He settled in London in 1559 , joined the Church of England and became house physician at St Bartholomew 's Hospital . Gaining a reputation as a careful and skilled physician , he acquired several powerful clients , including the Earl of Leicester and Sir Francis Walsingham , and eventually the Queen of England herself . 
 The Earl of Essex accused Lopez of conspiring to poison the Queen by in January 1594 . Insisting his innocence , the doctor was convicted of high treason in February and hanged , drawn and quartered in June , reportedly after averring from the scaffold that " he loved the Queen as well as he loved Jesus Christ " — a statement that , from a man of Jewish background , prompted mocking laughter from the crowd . Elizabeth 's three @-@ month delay signing Lopez 's death warrant is sometimes interpreted as evidence that she doubted the case against him . In any case she returned almost all of his estate to his widow and children . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Roderigo ( or Rodrigo ) Lopez was born into a family of Jewish origin in Portugal around 1517 . His father , António Lopes , was physician to King John III of Portugal , and had been baptised into the Roman Catholic Church under coercion in 1497 . Lopez was baptised and raised in the Catholic faith as a converso or New Christian , and educated at the University of Coimbra . He received a BA degree under the name Ruy Lopes on 7 February 1540 , then an MA on 4 December 1541 ; he enrolled for a medical course on 23 December that year . Records do not survive regarding his doctorate , but according to his biographer Edgar Samuel it is probable that he received it in 1544 . 
 Amid the Portuguese Inquisition , Lopez was alleged to be a Crypto @-@ Jew or <unk> — one of Jewish descent who professed the Christian faith , but secretly adhered to the Judaism of his ancestors — and was compelled to leave Portugal . He settled in England in 1559 , <unk> his first name as " Roger " , and successfully resumed his practice as a doctor in London . He joined the Church of England . He soon became the house physician at St Bartholomew 's Hospital in Smithfield . A colleague there , the surgeon William Clowes , noted in 1591 that " Lopez showed himself to be both careful and very skilful ... in his counsel in dieting , purging and bleeding . " 
 Around 1563 Lopez married Sarah Anes ( b . 1550 ) , the eldest daughter of another New Christian refugee from the Portuguese Inquisition , the merchant Dunstan Anes , who had settled in London in 1540 . According to Samuel , both the Anes and Lopez households secretly practised Judaism , which was then illegal in England , while outwardly conforming as Anglicans . Other scholars are ambivalent on the matter ; Lopez would always insist that he was a Christian . Roderigo and Sarah had four sons and two daughters , of whom at least the eldest five — Ellyn ( Elinor ) , Ambrose , Douglas , William and Ann — were baptised within the hospital precincts at St Bartholomew @-@ the @-@ Less between 1564 and 1579 . Lopez 's brother Lewis lived with them in Holborn ; a second brother , Diego Lopes <unk> , became a merchant in Antwerp and Venice . 
 = = Royal physician = = 
 Lopez developed a large practice among powerful people , including Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester and the principal secretary Sir Francis Walsingham , and in 1581 he was made physician @-@ in @-@ chief to Queen Elizabeth I of England and her household , with a life pension of £ 50 per year . In June 1584 , Elizabeth granted him a monopoly on the importation of <unk> and sumac to England for ten years ; this was renewed in January 1593 . In 1588 he was given land and tithes in Worcestershire belonging to the Bishop of Worcester Edmund Freke . Gabriel Harvey , an English scholar of the era , remarked on Lopez 's rise on the title page of a book he owned , Judaeorum <unk> <unk> : 
 Doctor Lopus , the <unk> <unk> , is descended of <unk> : but <unk> A Christian , & Portugall . He none of the <unk> , or <unk> <unk> in ye Court : but one , that maketh as great account of himself , as the best : & by a kind of Jewish <unk> , hath <unk> to much wealth , & sum reputation : <unk> with ye Queen <unk> as with sum of ye greatest <unk> , & <unk> . 
 There were sections of English society at the time that believed there to be a plot , orchestrated by Catholics and carried out by Jewish physicians , to poison patients . <unk> doctors in Iberia were similarly often accused of murdering their patients or attempting to poison them . In 1584 , an anonymous Catholic pamphlet denouncing the Earl of Leicester suggested that " Lopez the <unk> " was one of the earl 's agents " for <unk> & for the arte of destroying children in women 's bellies " . 
 Fluent in five languages , Lopez was involved in diplomatic intrigue , as many Christians of Jewish origin were at this time . Amid England 's war with Spain in the 1580s , Lopez became an important member of a circle of Portuguese exiles in England , and the Queen 's intermediary with the Portuguese pretender Dom António , Prior of Crato , who was staying near Windsor Castle . Lopez supported Dom António , but in 1586 one of the pretender 's entourage , António da Veiga , wrote to the Spanish Ambassador in Paris , Don Bernardino de Mendoza , claiming that he could persuade Lopez to poison Dom António . The Spanish did not act on this idea . 
 In 1590 , Lopez approached Mendoza , possibly on Walsingham 's behalf , with the intention of opening peace negotiations . The Spanish gave Manuel de Andrada , Lopez 's intermediary , a jewelled ring worth £ 100 as a gift for Lopez 's daughter . After Walsingham 's death in 1591 , Lopez continued exchanging letters with Spanish officials without the English government 's knowledge or authority . There is no surviving evidence to suggest that Lopez conspired against England or Elizabeth personally , but these Spanish connections would come back to punish him — according to Samuel , " Lopez had acted stupidly and dishonestly " . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 By the early 1590s , Lopez was wealthy and generally respected . He owned a comfortable house in Holborn and had his youngest son Anthony enrolled at Winchester College . He incurred the fury of one of his former patients , Queen Elizabeth 's favourite Robert Devereux , Earl of Essex , when he described to Dom António and the Spanish statesman Antonio Pérez occasions on which he had treated Essex for venereal diseases . Learning of this from Perez , Essex began to assemble evidence implicating Lopez as some sort of fifth columnist in the pay of King Philip II of Spain . The Lord High Treasurer Lord Burghley initially thought Essex 's allegations against Lopez absurd ; the Queen herself also rebuked Essex . 
 Late in 1593 , Essex discovered a secret correspondence between <unk> Ferreira da Gama , one of Dom António 's former supporters , and officials in the Spanish Netherlands , and had a messenger , Manuel Luis Tinoco , arrested . Lopez 's courier Gomez d 'Avila , a London @-@ based Portuguese New Christian , was also arrested . Both implicated Lopez during interrogation . On 28 January 1594 Essex wrote to Anthony Bacon of " a most dangerous and desperate treason " , the target of which was Queen Elizabeth : " The executioner should have been Dr Lopus . The manner by poison . " Parallels were drawn with a letter written by Andrada to Burghley in 1591 , in which reference was made to a plot whereby the King of Spain would deploy " three Portuguese to kill her Majesty and three more to kill the King of France " . Tinoco was tortured and Ferreira da Gama threatened with torture until they confessed along the lines Essex suspected ; Ferreira da Gama , asked if Lopez might have been willing to poison the Queen , replied in the affirmative . Lopez was arrested and held first at Essex House , then the Tower of London . He confessed when threatened with torture , but promptly recanted this statement . 
 Revelations regarding Lopez 's secret correspondence with Spanish officials did not help his case , particularly when it emerged that he had given the Spanish information about the English court , and apparently donated money to a secret synagogue in Antwerp . Burghley and the spymaster William Wade were soon " ready to believe the worst " , to quote Samuel . Lopez , Ferreira da Gama and Tinoco were tried by a commission headed by Essex at Guildhall on 28 February 1594 . Lopez insisted that he was innocent . The prosecutor , Sir Edward Coke , denounced the doctor as " a perjured , murdering villain and a Jewish doctor worse than Judas himself ... [ not ] a new Christian ... [ but ] a very Jew " . The three were convicted of high treason and sentenced to death . 
 The Queen waited over three months before signing the death warrant ; this delay is sometimes interpreted as evidence that the Queen doubted the case against her doctor . Lopez , Ferreira da Gama and Tinoco were hanged , drawn and quartered at Tyburn on 7 June 1594 . Lopez insisted to the end that he was innocent and that his professed Christian faith was genuine . He fell into a state of depression , but on the scaffold gathered his resolve and , according to the 16th @-@ century historian William Camden , declared that " he loved the Queen as well as he loved Jesus Christ " . The crowd roared with derision and laughter , taking this , from a man of Jewish background , for a thinly veiled confession . 
 Lopez 's property was forfeited on his attainder . His widow Sarah petitioned the Queen to be allowed to keep his estate ; the Queen kept the ring given to Lopez 's daughter by the Spanish , but returned the rest . Elizabeth also granted £ 30 per year to Anthony Lopez to support him at Winchester . A letter written by the Spanish diplomat Count Gondomar to King Philip III of Spain a decade after the trial seems to indicate that Lopez and Ferreira da Gama had been unjustly convicted , and that there had been no plot involving the Portuguese doctor : " the King our master [ Philip II ] had never conceived nor approved such measures ... the Count of Fuentes neither received nor gave such an order , moreover it is understood that Dr Lopez never passed through his thoughts , because he was a friend of the Queen and a bad Christian . " Lopez remains the only royal physician executed in English history . 
 = = Possible literary legacy = = 
 Some historians and literary critics consider Lopez and his trial to have been an influence on William Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice ( written c . 1596 – 98 ) , specifically as a prototype for the play 's principal antagonist Shylock , a Venetian Jewish moneylender who hates Christians . The Lopez case prompted a revival of Christopher Marlowe 's play The Jew of Malta ( c . 1589 – 90 ) , which according to Elizabeth Lane <unk> began rehearsals in London the same day Lopez was taken to Essex House . There is a mention of Lopez in Marlowe 's Doctor Faustus ( c . 1592 ) , comparing him to the title character : " Doctor Lopus was never such a doctor ! " This was probably added after Marlowe 's death in 1593 . 
 = Systemin = 
 Systemin is a plant peptide hormone involved in the wound response in the Solanaceae family . It was the first plant hormone that was proven to be a peptide having been isolated from tomato leaves in 1991 by a group led by Clarence A. Ryan . Since then other peptides , with similar functions have been identified in tomato and outside of the Solanaceae . <unk> @-@ rich glycopeptides were found in tobacco in 2001 and <unk> ( Arabidopsis thaliana Plant <unk> Peptides ) were found in Arabidopsis thaliana in 2006 . Their precursors are found both in the cytoplasm and cell walls of plant cells , upon insect damage , the precursors are processed to produce one or more mature peptides . The receptor for systemin was first thought to be the same as the <unk> receptor but this is now uncertain . The signal transduction processes that occur after the peptides bind are similar to the cytokine @-@ mediated inflammatory immune response in animals . Early experiments showed that systemin travelled around the plant after insects had damaged the plant , activating systemic acquired resistance , now it is thought that it increases the production of jasmonic acid causing the same result . The main function of systemins is to coordinate defensive responses against insect herbivores but they also affect plant development . Systemin induces the production of protease inhibitors which protect against insect herbivores , other peptides activate defensins and modify root growth . They have also been shown to affect plants ' responses to salt stress and UV radiation . <unk> have been shown to affect resistance against oomycetes and may allow A. thaliana to distinguish between different pathogens . In Nicotiana attenuata , some of the peptides have stopped being involved in defensive roles and instead affect flower morphology . 
 = = Discovery and structure = = 
 In 1991 a research group led by Clarence A. Ryan , isolated an 18 amino acid polypeptide from tomato leaves that induced the production of protease inhibitor proteins ( <unk> ) in response to wounding . Experiments using synthetic radio @-@ labelled forms of the polypeptide demonstrated that it was able to travel systemically through the plant and induce PI production in unwounded leaves . Because of the systemic nature of the wounding signal , it was named systemin , it was the first polypeptide found to function as a hormone in <unk> mRNA encoding for systemin is found in all tissues of the plant except the roots . Later studies identified homologs of tomato systemin in other members of the Solanaceae including potato , black nightshade and bell pepper . <unk> have only been identified in the <unk> subtribe of the Solanaceae , but other members of the family , such as tobacco , also respond to wounding by systemically producing protease inhibitors . 
 = = = Peptides with similar functions = = = 
 In 2001 , biologically active hydroxyproline @-@ rich glycopeptides were isolated from tobacco which activated the production of protease inhibitors in a similar way to systemin in tomatoes . Although they are structurally unrelated to systemins , their similar function resulted in them being named hydroxyproline @-@ rich systemins ( HypSys ) . Following the initial discovery other HypSys peptides were found in tomato , Petunia and black nightshade . In 2007 , HypSys were found outside the Solanaceae , in sweet potato ( Ipomoea <unk> ) and sequence analysis identified HypSys analogs in poplar ( Populus trichocarpa ) and coffee ( Coffea <unk> ) . <unk> are highly conserved between species , whereas HypSys are more divergent but all contain a conserved proline or hydroxyproline @-@ rich central domain . 
 In 2006 , AtPEP1 , a 23 amino acid polypeptide was isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana , which was found to activate components of the innate immune response . Unlike HypSys , AtPEP1 is not post @-@ translationally modified by hydroxylation or glycosylation . Six paralogs of the precursor have been identified in A. thaliana as well as orthologs in grape , rice , maize , wheat , barley , canola , soybean , <unk> and poplar , although the activity of these orthologs has not been tested in assays . The predicted structures of the paralogs of AtPEP1 are varied within A. thaliana but all contain a <unk> / <unk> sequence motif . The orthologs identified in other species are more varied but still contain components of the sequence motif . 
 = = <unk> and precursors = = 
 Systemin and AtPEP1 are found in the cell cytosol . The precursor to tomato systemin is transcribed as a 200 amino acid polypeptide . It does not contain a putative signal sequence suggesting that it is synthesised on free ribosomes in the cytosol . The precursor to AtPEP1 is a 92 amino acid polypeptide and also lacks a signal sequence . In tomato , mRNA encoding the precursor for systemin is present at very low levels in unwounded leaves but accumulates upon wounding , particularly in the cells surrounding the sieve elements of the phloem in vascular bundles of mid veins . The precursor accumulates exclusively in the phloem parenchyma cells of leaves in tomato after wounding . The precursor to potato systemin is also localised in a similar manner suggesting it is under the same cell @-@ type @-@ specific regulation in both species . 
 HypSys are localised in the cell wall . The precursor for tobacco HypSys is transcribed as a 165 amino acid polypeptide which has no structural homology to the precursor for systemin in tomato . The structural properties of HypSys , containing hydroxyproline and being glycosylated , indicate that they are synthesised through the secretory system . The precursor to HypSys in tomato is a 146 amino acid polypeptide , exclusively synthesised within the vascular bundles of leaves and petioles associated with parenchyma cells of phloem bundles . Unlike systemin , it is primarily associated with the cell wall . The precursors to HypSys appear to represent a distinct subfamily of hydroxyproline @-@ rich proteins found in cell walls . Upon wounding it is thought that a protease from the cytosol , the cell wall matrix , or the pathogen , processes the precursor producing active HypSys peptides . 
 = = = Processing of precursors = = = 
 The precursors for systemin and AtPEP1 are both processed to yield one active peptide from the C @-@ terminus of the precursor . It has been speculated that <unk> is processed by <unk> <unk> <unk> 1 , an <unk> aspartic protease . The precursors to HypSys are processed into more than one active peptide . In tobacco , it is processed into two peptides , in petunia into three , and in sweet potato , possibly into six . At 291 amino acids long , the precursor to HypSys in sweet potato is the longest precursor described . The production of multiple signalling peptides from one precursor is a common feature found in animals . 
 = = Receptors = = 
 Exceedingly small amounts of tomato systemin are active , <unk> @-@ molar concentrations of the peptide are sufficient to elicit a response at the whole plant level , making it one of the most potent gene activators identified . A receptor for tomato systemin was identified as a <unk> leucine @-@ rich repeat receptor like kinase ( LRR @-@ RLK ) , <unk> . After being isolated it was found that was very similar in structure to BRI1 from A. thaliana , the receptor that <unk> bind to on the cell membrane . This was the first receptor which was found to be able to bind both a steroid and a peptide ligand and also to be involved in both defensive and developmental responses . Recent studies have found that the initial conclusion that BRI1 is the receptor for tomato systemin may be incorrect . In <unk> mutants of tomato , a null allele with a stop codon present in the extracellular LRR domain of BRI1 prevents the receptor from being localised correctly and it also lacks the kinase domain , required for signalling . These mutants are insensitive to <unk> yet still respond to tomato systemin by producing protease inhibitors and causing an alkalisation response . This led Holton et al. to suggest that there is another mechanism by which systemin is perceived . Further investigation showed that binding of systemin to BRI1 does not cause the receptor to become phosphorylated , as when <unk> bind , suggesting that it does not <unk> a signal . When BRI1 is silenced in tomato , the plants have a similar phenotype to <unk> mutants yet are still able to respond normally to systemin , strengthening the view that BRI1 is not the systemin receptor . 
 In 1994 , tomato systemin was found to bind to a <unk> protein in the cell membrane of tomato . The protein has a structure similar to proteases of the <unk> @-@ like <unk> <unk> . This led Schaller and Ryan to suggest that it is not a receptor , but instead is involved in the processing of <unk> into the active form , or the degradation of Sys . Synthetic forms of tomato systemin , with substituted amino acids at the predicted <unk> cleavage site , remained stable in cell cultures for longer than the native form . Later studies have noted that the enzymes responsible for processing <unk> remain unidentified . No further research has been reported on the <unk> protein to date , and the gene has not been identified . 
 No receptors for HypSys have so far been reported , but it is thought that they are perceived on the cell membrane by a LRR @-@ RLK . 
 The receptor for AtPep1 has been identified as a <unk> LRR @-@ RLK and has been named AtPEPR1 . AtPep1 is active at 0 @.@ 1 nano @-@ molar ( <unk> ) concentrations and the receptor saturates at <unk> . An analysis of the structure of the AtPEPR1 receptor has shown that it is a member of the LRR XI subfamily of LRR @-@ <unk> in A. thaliana which includes the receptor for another peptide hormone <unk> . Transforming tobacco cell cultures with AtPEPR1 allowed them to respond to AtPep1 in an alkalisation assay , whereas normal tobacco did not show such a response . BRI1 @-@ associated receptor kinase 1 ( <unk> ) is an LRR @-@ RLK found in A. thaliana , which has been proposed to function as an adaptor protein that is required for the proper functioning of other <unk> . Yeast two @-@ hybrid assays have shown that AtPEPR1 and its closest analog , <unk> , interact with <unk> . 
 = = Signal transduction = = 
 Although the receptors for systemins and HypSys remain poorly understood , we have a better understanding of the signal transduction that occurs once the peptide had bound to its receptor . <unk> acid is an essential , albeit late component , in the systemin and wound @-@ signalling pathways . In tomato , the signal is transduced from the receptor by mitogen @-@ activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) . <unk> of two MAPKs , <unk> and <unk> , in tomato compromised their defence response against insect larvae compared to wild type plants . <unk> these genes also decreased production of jasmonic acid and of jasmonic acid @-@ dependent defence genes . Applying methyl jasmonate to <unk> plants rescued them , indicating that jasmonates are the signal responsible for causing changes in gene expression . The alkalisation of the <unk> is a downstream effect of signalling processing by MAPKs . Applying <unk> , which activates the H + ATPase inhibited by systemin , along with systemin still activates MAPKs , even though the pH of the <unk> does not change . 
 Within minutes of systemin perception , the cytosolic Ca2 + concentration increases , and linolenic acid is released from cell membranes after a phospholipase has been activated . <unk> acid is then converted to jasmonic acid via the <unk> pathway and jasmonic acid activates defensive genes . Production of methyl jasmonate is induced by systemins and also upregulates systemin precursor genes creating a feedback loop , amplifying the defensive signal . Methyl jasmonate is volatile and can therefore activate systemic acquired resistance in neighbouring plants , preparing their defences for attack . These signalling events are analogous to the cytokine @-@ mediated inflammatory immune response in animals . When the inflammatory response is activated in animals , MAPKs are activated which in turn activate phospholipases . Lipids in the membrane are converted to arachidonic acid and then to prostaglandins , which are analogs of jasmonic acid . Both pathways can be inhibited by <unk> . 
 Early experiments with <unk> systemin in tomato demonstrated that it is transported through the phloem sap in tomato plants and was therefore thought to be the systemic signal that activated systemic acquired resistance . This view was challenged by grafting experiments which showed that mutants deficient in jasmonic acid biosynthesis and perception were unable to activate systemic acquired resistance . It is now thought that jasmonic acid is the systemic signal and that systemin upregulates the pathways for jasmonic acid synthesis . 
 = = Functions = = 
 = = = Defence = = = 
 Systemin plays a critical role in defence signalling in tomato . It promotes the synthesis of over 20 defence @-@ related proteins , mainly <unk> proteins , signaling pathway proteins and proteases . The over @-@ expression of the prosystemin resulted in a significant decrease of the larvae damage , indicating that a high level of constitutive protection is superior to an inducible defence mechanism . However , the continuous activation of prosystemin is costly , affecting the growth , the physiology and the reproductive success of tomato plants . When systemin was silenced , production of protease inhibitors in tomato was severely impaired and larvae feeding on the plants grew three times as fast . HypSys caused similar changes in gene expression in tobacco , for example polyphenol oxidase activity increased tenfold in tobacco leaves and protease inhibitors caused a 30 % decrease in chymotrypsin activity within three days of wounding . When HypSys was over @-@ expressed in tobacco , larvae feeding on transgenic plants weighed half as much after ten days feeding , as those feeding on normal plants . The concentration of hydrogen peroxide increased in the vasculature tissues when the production of systemin , HypSys or AtPep1 is induced , this may also be involved in initiating systemic acquired resistance . 
 Tomato plants over @-@ expressing systemin also accumulated HypSys but did not if the systemin precursor was silenced , indicating that in tomato , HypSys is controlled by systemin . Each of the three HypSys peptides in tomato is able to activate the synthesis and accumulation of protease inhibitors . When HypSys is silenced the production of protease inhibitors induced by wounding is halved compared to wild type plants indicating that both systemin and HypSys are required for a strong defence response against herbivores in tomato . 
 When applied through cut petioles in Petunia , HypSys did not induce the production of protease inhibitors , but instead increased expression of defensin , a gene which produces a protein that inserts into microbial membranes , forming a pore . <unk> expression is also induced by AtPEP1 . 
 Tomato plants over @-@ expressing systemin produced more volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) than normal plants and parasitoid wasps found them more attractive . Systemin also upregulates the expression of genes involved in the production of biologically active VOCs . Such a response is crucial if <unk> defences are to be effective , since without predators , developing insects would consume more plant material while completing their development . It is likely that VOC production is upregulated through different pathways , including <unk> pathway that synthesises jasmonic acid aldehydes and alcohols that function in wound healing . 
 Different <unk> may allow A. thaliana to distinguish between different pathogens . When inoculated with a fungus , oomycete and a bacterium , the increases in <unk> expression varied depending on the pathogen . A. thaliana overexpressing <unk> was more resistant to the oomycete <unk> <unk> . 
 Silencing systemin did not affect the ability of black nightshade to resist herbivory and , when competing against normal plants , silenced plants produced more above @-@ ground biomass and berries . Upon herbivory , systemin was down @-@ regulated in black nightshade in contrast to the other peptides which are up @-@ regulated after herbivory . By contrast HypSys were up @-@ regulated and activated the synthesis of protease inhibitors . The down @-@ regulation of systemin was associated with increased root mass but did not decrease shoot mass , demonstrating that systemin can cause developmental changes as a result of herbivory , allowing the plant to tolerate , rather than directly resist attack . Tomato roots were also affected by tomato systemin , with root growth increasing at high tomato systemin concentrations . By allocating more resources to the roots , plants under attack are thought to store carbon and then use it to re @-@ grow when the attack ends . <unk> AtPEP1 also increased root and shoot biomass in A. thaliana . 
 = = = Abiotic stress resistance = = = 
 <unk> of systemin and HypSys has been found to improve plants ' tolerance to abiotic stress , including salt stress and UV radiation . When prosystemin was over @-@ expressed in tomato , transgenic plants had lower stomatal conductance than normal plants . When grown in salt solutions , transgenic plants had higher stomatal conductances , lower leaf concentrations of <unk> acid and proline and a higher biomass . These findings suggest that systemin either allowed the plants to adapt to salt stress more efficiently or that they perceived a less stressful environment . Similarly , wounded tomato plants were less susceptible to salt stress than unwounded plants . This may be because wounding decreases the growth of the plant and therefore slows the uptake of toxic ions into the roots . An analysis of salt @-@ induced changes in gene expression found that the differences measured between the transgenic and normal plants could not be accounted for by changes in conventional salt stress @-@ induced pathways . Instead Orsini et al. suggested that the activation of the jasmonic acid pathway determines a physiological state that not only directs resources towards the production of compounds active against pests , but also pre @-@ adapts plants to minimize water loss . These effects are achieved by negatively regulating the production of hormones and metabolites that will force plants to invest additional resources to counteract water loss , a secondary effect of herbivores . 
 Plants grown under UVB light are more resistant to insect herbivory compared with plants grown under filters that exclude the radiation . When tomato plants are exposed to a pulse of UVB radiation and then weakly wounded , <unk> accumulate throughout the plant . By themselves , neither the radiation nor weak wounding is sufficient to induce systemic PI accumulation . Tomato cell cultures respond similarly , with systemin and UVB acting together to activate MAPKs . Short pulses of UVB also cause alkalisation of the culturing medium . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In Nicotiana attenuata HypSys is known to not be involved in defence against insect herbivores . Silencing and over @-@ expression of HypSys does not affect the feeding performance of larvae compared to normal plants . Berger silenced HypSys and found that it caused changes in flower morphology which reduced the efficiency of self @-@ pollination . The flowers had pistils that protruded beyond their anthers , a similar phenotype to <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ silenced plants which lack a jasmonate receptor . Measurement of jasmonate levels in the flowers revealed that they were lower than in normal plants . The authors suggested that HypSys peptides in N. attenuata have diversified from their function as defence related peptides to being involved in controlling flower morphology . The signalling processes remain similar however , being mediated through jasmonates . 
 Systemin also increases root growth in Solanum <unk> suggesting that it may also play some role in plant development . 
 = Radical Dreamers = 
 Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> <unk> , lit . " Radical Dreamers : The <unk> Jewel " ) is a Japanese video game developed by Square in 1996 for the Satellaview add @-@ on for the Super Famicom . It is a text @-@ based visual novel in which the player takes the role of Serge , a young adventurer accompanied by Kid , a teen @-@ aged thief , and Gil , a mysterious masked magician . 
 The game belongs to the Chrono series and is a gaiden , or side story , to the 1995 game Chrono Trigger . It was released to complement its predecessor 's plot , and later served as inspiration for Chrono Cross . It features text @-@ based gameplay with minimal graphics and sound effects , and was scored by composer Yasunori Mitsuda . Unlike many Satellaview titles , Radical Dreamers was not designed to lock after a certain number of playthroughs , so players owning an <unk> Memory Pack onto which the game was downloaded can still play today . 
 Square tried to integrate Radical Dreamers into the Japanese PlayStation port of Chrono Trigger as an Easter egg . Writer and director Masato Kato halted this and other releases , unhappy with the quality of his work . Though the game was never officially released abroad , ROM hackers completed an English fan translation in 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay consists of word @-@ based scenarios presented to the player through the narration of the main character , Serge . As the narrative progresses , the game presents a list of possible actions and the player must choose his or her course . Depending on the choices made , the player may enter a new area , be presented with a new situation or character , or have to choose again if the previous selection was incorrect . In combat with enemies , the player must select from options such as " Fight " , " Magic " , " Run " , and often more complex situational commands like " Run my knife into the goblin 's chest ! " or " Quickly slash at its hand ! " . Some decisions must be made before an invisible timer runs out ; in combat , hesitation results in injury or death . Serge 's health is tracked by an invisible point count , restored by various events ( such as finding a potion ) . The game also tracks Kid 's affection for Serge , influenced by battles and scripted events . Her feelings determine whether Serge survives the story 's climactic fight . 
 Radical Dreamers features minimal graphics and animation ; most areas are rendered with dim , static backgrounds . The game also uses atmospheric music and sounds . Like other Chrono games , Radical Dreamers contains a variant of New Game + mode . Only one scenario is available on the first play @-@ through ; after finishing it and obtaining one of three possible endings , players can explore six others . These later stories often feature comical situations or allusions to Chrono Trigger . 
 = = Characters and story = = 
 Radical Dreamers features three protagonists — Serge , Kid , and Magil — who seek out treasure as venturesome , reputable thieves . The young adult narrator , Serge , is a drifting musician who met Kid by chance three years ago in a remote town . Serge enjoys adventure with a carefree attitude . Kid , only sixteen years old , is a renowned professional thief with a reputation for boisterous behavior . Possessing a turbulent history , Kid dubiously fancies herself as a kind of Robin Hood . Magil is an enigmatic , handsome masked man skilled in magic who rarely speaks and can fade into shadow at will . Crowned by flowing , blue hair , Magil accompanied Kid well before Serge joined the group . They seek the Frozen Flame , a mythic artifact capable of granting any wish . It is hidden in Viper Manor — the home of a terrible and powerful aristocrat named Lynx , who gained control of the estate after usurping power from and killing the Acacia Dragoons , a familial unit of warriors . 
 Following Kid , the group infiltrates Viper Manor on the night of a full moon . While sneaking through the corridors , they battle goblins and other creatures of legend while unraveling the history of the manor and its occupants . Magil explains that the Frozen Flame is a fragment of the massive , extraterrestrial creature known as Lavos , splintered off when Lavos impacted the planet in prehistory and burrowed to its core . The thieves locate Lynx and the Frozen Flame deep within an underground ruin of the Kingdom of Zeal — an ancient , airborne civilization destroyed after it awakened Lavos in search of immortality . Serge discovers that Kid is an orphan , hoping to exact revenge upon Lynx for killing her caretaker , Lucca . Kid attempted to find Lynx in her childhood after Lucca 's death , but was stopped and saved from certain defeat by Magil , who accompanied her thereafter . 
 The trio battle Lynx for the Frozen Flame , and Lynx gains the upper hand after trapping Magil with a powerful spell . He plans to acquire Kid 's special gift from Lucca — a Time Egg , or Chrono Trigger . With a Time Egg and the Frozen Flame , Lynx boasts that he shall achieve control over time . Kid lunges at him , but Lynx easily parries her attack and wounds her . She desperately removes the Chrono Trigger from her back pocket . The Trigger shatters and causes a localized temporal distortion , leading Serge to see various scenes in history . Kid learns of her heritage as princess Schala of Zeal , a meek girl who was coerced to help awaken Lavos with her magical power . As Zeal collapsed , Schala was wracked with anguish and guilt for her role in the incident . Nearby in the Ocean Palace , the Frozen Flame felt her grief and changed her to a baby , sending her to the modern era where Lucca found her . It is also <unk> revealed that Magil is in fact Magus , Schala 's wayward brother who searched for her after battling Lavos in Chrono Trigger . Once the distortion subsides , an army from Porre — a large nation in search of the Frozen Flame — storms the mansion . Lynx withdraws as Kid , Serge , and Magil flee . Kid tells Serge that she is aware of her true origin , and knowing that is a treasure which cannot be stolen . She bids him goodbye before disappearing into the darkness with Magil . 
 Other scenarios are available after players complete the first . These include both humorous and serious variations of the main plot . 
 " Magil : Caught Between Love and Adventure " – Magil is actually a lifelong friend of Riddel who courts her . When the manor is alerted to his presence , Magil throws Riddel over his shoulder and dashes off into the morning sun as her proud father Lynx <unk> bids goodbye . 
 " Kid and the Sunflower " – Kid insults a lecherous sunflower who transforms her into a malicious monster . Serge must kiss her to change her back , or use a special dagger to take her soul at risk of his own soul 's capture . Three endings are available . 
 " <unk> <unk> Police Case EX Ultra " – Magil is a space cop searching for Lynx , secretly a green Martian creature with tentacles . Magil 's rock guitar forces Lynx out of hiding , and Serge assaults him with a Martian Forest League Concealed Lesser Armament Bunny . 
 " Homecoming : Shea 's Light " – Kid learns that Lynx and her caretaker Shea are trapped in a magical seal as part of Lynx 's effort to escape a spirit prison . Shea selflessly instructs Magil to destroy the Frozen Flame , killing Lynx forever . 
 " The Enigmatic <unk> : Paradise X " – Serge finds an odd crystal inhabited by an entity named Gange , who tests his strength with gladiatorial combat . Using Gange 's Paradise X mecha , Serge and Gange challenge Mecha @-@ Lynx for the Frozen Flame . 
 " The Shadow Realm and the Goddess of Death " – Kid accidentally summons Lilith , the Goddess of Death . She tries to take Kid 's soul , but Magil intervenes . The outcome is slightly affected by Kid 's affection for Serge . 
 = = Development = = 
 Masato Kato wrote Radical Dreamers after Chrono Trigger 's release , feeling that Trigger concluded with " unfinished business " . He composed the main story and drafted the concepts for the sub @-@ scenarios , leaving them to be completed by his peers . He allowed Makoto Shimamoto to write the entire " Kid and the Sunflower " segment , later joking that he " avoided having any part in that episode , " while Miwa Shoda was in charge of the " Shadow Realm and the Goddess of Death " segment . According to scenario writer Daisuke Fukugawa ( responsible for the game 's " The Enigmatic <unk> : Paradise X " subplot ) , the game 's graphical content pushed the Satellaview 's technical limits , requiring developers to redraw prerendered models until functional gameplay could be ensured . Kato remarked that his " savage feelings " from Chrono Trigger 's hectic development manifested in Kid 's " unusually nihilistic attitude " . He explained his approach towards the project in 1999 : 
 ... due to the fact that this was a text @-@ based game , the contents of the game ended up being rather serious and emotional . The game itself was a real life @-@ or @-@ death kind of survival adventure game . I think there was a feeling somewhere deep in my heart that said , ' I wanna try making a horror game ! ' But soon after that , they came out with Biohazard , so I quickly got over that phase ( laughs ) . 
 ... the comical sub @-@ scenarios were written to be extremely comical beyond any measurement , so I think it sorta ' balances out ... But I can say that since this game wasn 't expected to be widely sold on the market , and also since there wasn 't any profit on our part , there was a feeling that I wanted to make this game out of my sole interest . In a way , I think that ' Radical ' helped me to find my own path ... But then again , I guess you could say that I strayed away from the paths of normal people . 
 Kato 's team completed Radical Dreamers in only three months under a rushed production schedule , prompting him to label the game " unfinished " in an interview for the Ultimania Chrono Cross guide . Kato regretted that the schedule hampered the quality of his work , and explained that the connections to Chrono Trigger were evoked towards the end of the project : 
 When I originally started working on Radical Dreamers , I never thought that it would have such an ending . We only had three months for development , and I was just making up the story while inputting data . When I finally realized the connection of the identities of Kid and Magil near the final stage of development , I even amazed myself , saying , ' So , that 's who they were ! ? ' ( laughs ) Also , since there were issues with the media , the connections between Radical Dreamers and Chrono Trigger were intentionally left blurred in the background so that it 'd only be recognizable by those who would understand . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Radical Dreamers was written by composer Yasunori Mitsuda , who scored Chrono Trigger and later Chrono Cross . The soundtrack includes several ambient pieces , including the sound of water running in a fountain and wind accompanied by strings . Players can listen to the game 's songs by accessing a hidden menu in the " Gil : Caught Between Love and Adventure " scenario . Several themes and musical patterns were later adapted for Chrono Cross on the suggestion of director Masato Kato ; many appear unchanged except for new instrumentation . 
 = = Fan translation = = 
 In April 2003 , the ROM hacking group <unk> released a fan translation rendering Radical Dreamers in English . The patch works by modifying the ROM image of Dreamers used for playing console @-@ based video games on personal computers through emulation . The ability to save games was not enabled with the first patch , and some minor typos were left in , later remedied by successive releases . On Christmas Day 2005 , <unk> and Radical R released the final version ( 1 @.@ 4 ) of the translation , which fixed remaining minor bugs . The French team Terminus <unk> made a French translation patch soon after . Masato Kato did not perceive significant demand to include Radical Dreamers as a bonus with the release of Chrono Trigger DS , and omitted it to preserve continuity between Trigger and Cross . He expressed concern in 2009 over re @-@ releasing Radical Dreamers " as @-@ is " , citing a need to revise the work . 
 A reviewer for Home of the Underdogs lauded the game 's excellent writing and the " superb " English translation patch , noting that the " interesting plot " would appeal to fantasy fans if they could stomach the limited interactivity . Having never played a Chrono game prior , the reviewer stated , " I was still able to follow the story and be drawn into the world of colorful characters . " While praising the replay value afforded by the extra scenarios , the critic derided the random battles of Radical Dreamers , writing that " RPG @-@ style random combat doesn 't translate well to [ a ] text @-@ only medium . " The website awarded Dreamers " Top Dog " status , and the game maintains a voter score of 8 @.@ 95 out of 10 . 
 Radical Dreamers preceded Chrono Cross , a full role @-@ playing video game sequel to Chrono Trigger . Masato Kato cited the desire to " redo Radical Dreamers properly " as the genesis of Cross , attributing the latter 's serious atmosphere to the influence of Dreamers . Kato 's desire to finish the story of the characters Kid and Serge principally shaped the plot of Cross . Chrono Cross borrowed certain thematic elements , story points , characters , music , and objects introduced in Radical Dreamers — including the infiltration of Viper Manor , the Frozen Flame , the name Radical Dreamers for Kid 's thievery , and the characters of Kid , Lynx , and Serge ( who became a non @-@ speaking protagonist ) . Though these characters and items were not presented in the same context , their general traits survived the transition . Gil , confirmed by Kato to be Magus , was also going to be featured in Chrono Cross . This idea was scrapped due to difficulties in representing the story of Magus among the game 's numerous other characters ; the unrelated , enigmatic magician Guile was created instead . Since the release of Chrono Cross , Radical Dreamers is considered an alternate continuity of the Chrono series . Chrono Cross addressed this through an easter egg hinting that Radical Dreamers took place in a different dimension . In the English version of Chrono Cross , this easter egg refers to Gil as " Magil " . Kato intended Dreamers and Cross to prompt players to pursue their personal dreams in life . 
 = Ruth Martin ( Lassie ) = 
 Not to be confused with Ruth Martin ( Neighbours ) , or Ruth Martin ( All My Children ) 
 Ruth Martin is a fictional character on the long @-@ running television series Lassie ( 1954 – 1973 ) . She was briefly played by Cloris Leachman before June Lockhart stepped into the role . The character makes her first appearance mid @-@ fourth season ( 1957 ) and her last in the first episode of the eleventh season ( 1964 ) ; she appears in 208 episodes in total . 
 Ruth is married to Paul Martin , an agricultural school graduate and a farmer . The couple buys a small farm and adopt Timmy , a foster child living on the farm . Ruth is portrayed as a practical , competent woman , a loving wife and mother , and an active community member . 
 In 1957 , Cloris Leachman joined the cast as Ruth but eventually her feuds with co @-@ stars , her unwillingness to sign a contract , and other troubles forced show producer Jack Wrather to fire her at the close of the season 's filming . June Lockhart replaced her at the top of the 1958 season and remained in the role until the cancellation of her character in the first episode of the 1964 season . 
 Lockhart appeared as Ruth Martin in Campbell 's Soup commercials , a feature film edited from a multi @-@ part episode of the television show , and show @-@ related merchandise such as Whitman novels and Dell comic books . The actress received an Emmy nomination for her performance in the role in 1959 . 
 = = Role = = 
 Ruth Martin is the wife of Paul Martin , a young agriculture college graduate and farmer . At the start of the series , the couple buys a small weatherbeaten farm on the outskirts of fictional Calverton from war @-@ widowed Ellen Miller . The two adopt Timmy , a foster child living on the farm ; and his companion , a rough collie called Lassie . 
 Throughout the series , Ruth performs <unk> chores such as cooking meals , ironing and mending , hanging laundry and baking cakes . She milks the cow , gathers eggs , drives about the county in the pickup truck , and participates in Sunday school carnivals , community square dances , and her son 's cub scout troop . When her husband is out of the county on business , Ruth manages the farm with the occasional help of neighbor Cully Wilson . 
 Ruth 's housekeeping is sometimes interrupted by Timmy 's adventures . She helps him rescue a child trapped in a culvert rapidly filling with flood water , assists him in his 4 @-@ H projects , pitches a tent for their overnight accommodation at a Coon Dog Race , and flies into the Canadian wilderness when Timmy and Lassie are swept away in a hot air balloon . Marital affection between Ruth and her husband is only represented through brief kisses and hugs . The role ends when Ruth and Paul emigrate to Australia where Paul will teach agriculture , leaving Lassie with neighbor Cully Wilson . Timmy was reclaimed by the County and eventually adopted by a family named McCullough and began using his middle name , Steven . Ruth and Timmy ( Steven ) are reunited 25 years later in the seventh episode of the first season of the syndicated television show The New Lassie , entitled " Roots " . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 Ruth Martin portrayer June Lockhart joked with co @-@ star Hugh Reilly that she had been married to him longer than to any of her real husbands and commented after leaving the show , " In six sexless years of playing a country wife and mother , I was hardly ever allowed to kiss Hugh Reilly on the cheek . " 
 In a conversation with John Barron of the New York Times in 2004 , Lockhart was asked what Lassie was all about and why it remains something of a magical memory for those who were children in the 1950s and 1960s . She responded , " This was a fairy tale about people on a farm in which the dog solves all the problems in 22 minutes , in time for the last commercial . Often , if the scene had gone well , and maybe we hadn 't gotten the dialogue quite right , if the dog was right , they 'd print it . " 
 = = Production details = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Lassie debuted September 1954 in the Sunday 7 : 00 P.M. time slot . Former Broadway star Jan Clayton portrayed Ellen Miller , a war @-@ widow living on a farm with her young son Jeff ( Tommy Rettig ) , and her father @-@ in @-@ law ( George Cleveland ) . The show was an instant hit , winning the Best Children 's program Emmy in 1955 and receiving a host of additional honors . 
 As the 1957 season approached , Rettig wanted to leave the show and Clayton considered returning to her roots in musical theater . Producers planned to ease their characters out of the show while introducing new ones . Six @-@ year @-@ old Jon Provost was hired to play Timmy , a foster child living on the farm . Rettig hoped the plot would be restructured to allow his departure , but producers were content with the status quo , the show was more popular than ever , and it was hoped Rettig and Clayton would reconsider . 
 Producers were forced to overhaul the show when actor George Cleveland died suddenly on July 17 , 1957 . The plot was revised with new characters Ruth and Paul Martin buying the Miller farm , and becoming foster parents to Timmy and Lassie . Ellen and Jeff were written out of the show . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 = = = = Cloris Leachman = = = = 
 With the new storyline ready , Cloris Leachman was quickly hired to play Ruth Martin . As the season 's filming progressed , Leachman tired of playing a farm woman . She wouldn 't sign a contract , and refused to do PR for the show 's sponsor , Campbell 's Soup , telling the company , " I make my own soup . I don 't eat yours . " Audiences found Leachman and co @-@ star Jon Shepodd as Paul Martin " too stiff " . The two worked adult glances and touches such as holding hands , hugs , pecks on the lips into their on @-@ screen performances in order to give their characters more depth . Toward the end of the season , George Chandler was hired to play a grandfatherly character and to bring some warmth to the show , but Leachman was soon feuding with him ; their disagreements appeared in the gossip columns . With ratings plummeting and public resentment aroused , show owner Jack Wrather summarily fired Leachman and Shepodd in February 1958 when filming for the 1957 – 1958 season was completed . 
 = = = = June Lockhart = = = = 
 Wanting to protect his $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 investment , Wrather began a search at once for two new stars to fill the roles of Ruth and Paul Martin . Casting Paul involved a good deal of effort , but Hugh Reilly , a Broadway actor with a reputation for being a solid and cooperative performer , was signed . Actress June Lockhart , who had appeared in the second of MGM 's popular Lassie films ( Son of Lassie ) , had been considered for the role of Ruth Martin before Leachman was signed . Lockhart however was working in New York at the time and declined the role . Eight months later , she had moved back to California and was working on both coasts . Once again , she was offered the role , but , stipulating she only would be interested in a one year commitment , producers were forced to decline . Then she reconsidered : 
 ... I thought about what I had been offered and I said to myself , " What am I being so damn grand about ? I have two children to support , the part they want me to play has a lot of dignity , the show is already on the air , I wouldn 't have to film a pilot , and they have a sponsor . This is really a great gift that has been offered me . I 'd be stupid not to at least look into it . " 
 Lockhart was finally hired to play Ruth Martin and debuted with Reilly in the opener of the fifth season , " The Storm " ( 1958 ) . No explanation was offered the audience regarding the new faces on the show . In order to protect the All @-@ American perception of the show and its sponsor , Campbell 's Soup , the producers wrote long clauses into cast contracts <unk> them from appearing in anything that would damage their wholesome image . 
 In 1963 , the multi @-@ part episode " The Journey " was filmed in the High Sierra and later edited into a feature film called Lassie 's Great Adventure . The plot follows Timmy and Lassie as they are swept away in a carnival hot air balloon . Ruth and Paul fly into the wilderness to be at hand when Timmy is found . The episode was the only episode filmed in color during the Ruth Martin seasons . Ratings skyrocketed . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 As filming for the 1964 season approached , fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Jon Provost chose not renew his contract . Stars Lockhart and Reilly were fired . With only Provost and the producers knowing the real reason for the changes , the press was told the show had done all the " boy and his dog " stories possible , but Lockhart speculated that Provost 's mother wanted too much <unk> and Reilly later stated that the producers ' decision was based upon trading four advanced salaries for future star Robert Bray 's starting salary . Lockhart loved her role as " Lassie 's mother " , but accepted her fate , telling columnist Bob Thomas : 
 It was an actor 's dream -- steady work , excellent pay , a wonderful cast and crew , and a chance to do a good scene now and then ... Now I 'm ready to go back playing all those tramps and neurotic and alcoholic women . They 're good fun , but motherhood pays off better in the long run . 
 In " The Wayfarers " , the first @-@ part of the three @-@ part 1964 season opener , producers shipped Ruth and her family off to Australia where Paul would teach agriculture . Lassie was forced to remain in the States due to Australia 's strict quarantine regulations and would become the companion animal of Corey Stuart , a forestry service worker . Lockhart commented , " We were supposed to go over there so that Paul could show the Australians how to grow things . We hadn 't had a successful bean crop in six seasons . What could they possibly learn from us ? " 
 The actress later recalled : 
 Back then I didn 't realize the power of my character . I didn 't realize the image I had created and what it meant to so many people . Ruth was so underwritten , so what I was able to bring to it was what made it special to me . The looks , the affection , the pats on the head , the tone and inflection . I got to bring that to her character , and that was all I thought there was . I didn 't know what was being received on the other side of the screen . 
 Lockhart joked with Reilly that she had been married to him longer than to any of her real husbands and commented after leaving the show , " In six sexless years of playing a country wife and mother , I was hardly ever allowed to kiss Hugh Reilly on the cheek . " 
 According to one writer , " the character who really held the series and the family together was the mother " . In commenting on her Ruth Martin character , Lockhart said , " Without a doubt it was the mother who ran the farm . Mother was the strong one . She was certainly a liberated woman who didn 't take any guff off anyone . " 
 = = = Reprise = = = 
 Lockhart and Provost reprised their Lassie roles in " Roots " , the seventh episode of the syndicated television show , The New Lassie . After the episode , Ruth disappeared and was never mentioned again . In " Roots " , the viewer learns Ruth and Paul never properly adopted Timmy , and he was forced to remain in the States while his parents emigrated to Australia . Timmy was then adopted by a family called the <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Adventure Books , Golden Books , coloring books , puzzles , Halloween costumes , and other items were all manufactured around the show . Ruth Martin appeared in several Lassie Dell comic books as well as in Whitman novels , and a Whitman punch out book . Ruth Martin appeared in television ads for Campbell 's Soup . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its seventeen @-@ year run on CBS , Lassie placed first in its Sunday 7 : 00 p.m. EST time slot . The highest rankings in the Nielsen ratings for Lassie were the Martin family years : # 24 in 1957 , # 22 in 1958 , # 15 in 1959 , # 15 in 1961 , # 21 in 1962 , # 13 in 1963 , and # 17 in 1964 . The only year the show did not climb into the top twenty @-@ five was 1960 , when it ran opposite Walt Disney Presents on ABC and Shirley Temple Theatre on NBC . With the departure of the Martin family in the eleventh season , the show began a steady decline in ratings . 
 = = = Nominations and honors = = = 
 June Lockhart received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard for her television work . The actress also received a 1959 Emmy Award nomination for Best Actress in a Leading Role ( Continuing Character ) in a Dramatic Series for Lassie . 
 = High @-@ pressure area = 
 A high @-@ pressure area , high or anticyclone is a region where the atmospheric pressure at the surface of the planet is greater than its surrounding environment . 
 Winds within high @-@ pressure areas flow outward from the higher pressure areas near their centers towards the lower pressure areas further from their centers . Gravity adds to the forces causing this general movement , because the higher pressure compresses the column of air near the center of the area into greater density – and so greater weight compared to lower pressure , lower density , and lower weight of the air outside the center . 
 However , because the planet is rotating underneath the atmosphere , and frictional forces arise as the planetary surface drags some atmosphere with it , the air flow from center to periphery is not direct , but is twisted due to the Coriolis effect , or the merely apparent force that arise when the observer is in a rotating frame of reference . Viewed from above this twist in wind direction is in the same direction as the rotation of the planet . 
 The strongest high @-@ pressure areas are associated with cold air masses which push away out of polar regions during the winter when there is less sun to warm neighboring regions . These Highs change character and weaken once they move further over relatively warmer water bodies . 
 Somewhat weaker but more common are high @-@ pressure areas caused by atmospheric subsidence , that is , areas where large masses of cooler drier air descend from an elevation of 8 to 15 km after the lower temperatures have precipitated out the lighter water vapor . ( H2O is about half of the molecular weight of the other two main constituents of the atmosphere — Oxygen , O2 , and Nitrogen , N2 . ) 
 Many of the features of Highs may be understood in context of middle- or meso @-@ scale and relatively enduring dynamics of a planet 's atmospheric circulation . For example , massive atmospheric <unk> occur as part of the descending branches of Ferrel cells and Hadley cells . Hadley cells help form the subtropical ridge , steer tropical waves and tropical cyclones across the ocean and is strongest during the summer . The subtropical ridge also helps form most of the world 's deserts . 
 On English @-@ language weather maps , high @-@ pressure centers are identified by the letter H. Weather maps in other languages may use different letters or symbols . 
 = = Wind circulation in the northern and southern hemispheres = = 
 The direction of wind flow around an atmospheric high @-@ pressure area and a low @-@ pressure area , as seen from above , depends on the hemisphere . 
 The scientific terms in English used to describe the weather systems generated by highs and lows were introduced in the mid @-@ 1800s , mostly by the British . The scientific theories which explain the general phenomena originated about two centuries earlier . 
 The term Cyclone was coined by Henry Piddington of the British East India Company to describe an especially destructive storm in Mauritius , during February 1845 . A cyclone forms around a low @-@ pressure area . <unk> , the term for the kind of weather around a high @-@ pressure area , was coined in 1877 by Francis Galton to indicate an area whose winds revolved in the opposite direction of a cyclone . In British English , the opposite direction of clockwise is referred to as anticlockwise , making the label anticyclones a logical extension . 
 A simple rule of thumb is that for high @-@ pressure areas , where generally air flows from the center outward , the coriolis force given by the earth 's rotation to the air circulation is in the opposite direction of earth 's apparent rotation if viewed from above the hemisphere 's pole . So , both the earth and winds around a low @-@ pressure area rotate counter @-@ clockwise in the northern hemisphere , and clockwise in the southern . The opposite to these two cases occurs in the case of a high . These results derive from the Coriolis effect ; that article explains in detail the physics , and provides an animation of a model to aid understanding . 
 = = Formation = = 
 High @-@ pressure systems form due to downward motion through the troposphere , the atmospheric layer where weather occurs . Preferred areas within a synoptic flow pattern in higher levels of the troposphere are beneath the western side of troughs . 
 On weather maps , these areas show converging winds ( isotachs ) , also known as confluence , or converging height lines near or above the level of non @-@ divergence , which is near the 500 hPa pressure surface about midway up through the troposphere , and about half the atmospheric pressure at the surface . 
 High @-@ pressure systems are alternatively referred to as anticyclones . On English @-@ language weather maps , high @-@ pressure centers are identified by the letter H in English , within the isobar with the highest pressure value . On constant pressure upper level charts , it is located within the highest height line contour . 
 = = Typical conditions = = 
 Highs are frequently associated with light winds at the surface and subsidence through the lower portion of the troposphere . In general , subsidence will dry out an air mass by adiabatic , or compressional , heating . Thus , high pressure typically brings clear skies . During the day , since no clouds are present to reflect sunlight , there is more incoming shortwave solar radiation and temperatures rise . At night , the absence of clouds means that outgoing longwave radiation ( i.e. heat energy from the surface ) is not absorbed , giving cooler diurnal low temperatures in all seasons . When surface winds become light , the subsidence produced directly under a high @-@ pressure system can lead to a buildup of particulates in urban areas under the ridge , leading to widespread haze . If the low level relative humidity rises towards 100 percent overnight , fog can form . 
 Strong , vertically shallow high @-@ pressure systems moving from higher latitudes to lower latitudes in the northern hemisphere are associated with continental arctic air masses . Once arctic air moves over an unfrozen ocean , the air mass modifies greatly over the warmer water and takes on the character of a maritime air mass , which reduces the strength of the high @-@ pressure system . When extremely cold air moves over relatively warm oceans , polar lows can develop . However , warm and moist ( or maritime tropical ) air masses that move poleward from tropical sources are slower to modify than arctic air masses . 
 = = In climatology = = 
 In terms of climatology , high pressure forms at the horse latitudes , or torrid zone , between the latitudes of 20 and 40 degrees from the equator , as a result of air that has been uplifted at the equator . As the hot air rises it cools , losing moisture ; it is then transported poleward where it descends , creating the high @-@ pressure area . This is part of the Hadley cell circulation and is known as the subtropical ridge or subtropical high , and is strongest in the summer . The subtropical ridge is a warm core high @-@ pressure system , meaning it strengthens with height . Many of the world 's deserts are caused by these climatological high @-@ pressure systems . 
 Some climatological high @-@ pressure areas acquire regionally based names . The land @-@ based Siberian High often remains quasi @-@ stationary for more than a month during the most frigid time of the year , making it unique in that regard . It is also a bit larger and more persistent than its counterpart in North America . Surface winds accelerating down valleys down the western Pacific ocean coastline , causing the winter monsoon . Arctic high @-@ pressure systems such as the Siberian High are cold core , meaning that they weaken with height . The influence of the Azores High , also known as the Bermuda High , brings fair weather over much of the North Atlantic Ocean and mid to late summer heat waves in western Europe . Along its southerly periphery , the clockwise circulation often impels easterly waves , and tropical cyclones that develop from them , across the ocean towards landmasses in the western portion of ocean basins during the hurricane season . The highest barometric pressure ever recorded on Earth was 1 @,@ 085 @.@ 7 hectopascals ( 32 @.@ 06 inHg ) measured in <unk> , Mongolia on 19 December 2001 . 
 = = Connection to wind = = 
 Wind flows from areas of high pressure to areas of low pressure . This is due to density differences between the two air masses . Since stronger high @-@ pressure systems contain cooler or drier air , the air mass is more dense and flows towards areas that are warm or moist , which are in the vicinity of low pressure areas in advance of their associated cold fronts . The stronger the pressure difference , or pressure gradient , between a high @-@ pressure system and a low @-@ pressure system , the stronger the wind . The coriolis force caused by the Earth 's rotation is what gives winds within high @-@ pressure systems their clockwise circulation in the northern hemisphere ( as the wind moves outward and is deflected right from the center of high pressure ) and counterclockwise circulation in the southern hemisphere ( as the wind moves outward and is deflected left from the center of high pressure ) . Friction with land slows down the wind flowing out of high @-@ pressure systems and causes wind to flow more outward than would be the case in the absence of friction . This is known as a geostrophic wind . 
 = The Angels Take Manhattan = 
 " The Angels Take Manhattan " is the fifth episode of the seventh series of the revived British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which was first broadcast on BBC One on 29 September 2012 . It is the last in the first block of episodes in the seventh series , followed by the 2012 Christmas special " The Snowmen " . The episode was written by head writer Steven Moffat and directed by Nick Hurran . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) takes his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and her husband Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) to Central Park in New York City . There , recurring monsters the Weeping Angels send Rory back to the 1930s , where he is reunited with River Song ( Alex Kingston ) , Amy and Rory 's daughter . Amy and the Doctor attempt to rescue Rory , but the Doctor realises along the way that this adventure will be his last with Amy and Rory . Actors Gillan and Darvill both departed the series with this episode . 
 Amy 's departure from the series was a compromise between Gillan and Moffat . Moffat wrote several endings and situations for the couple , eventually deciding to incorporate the Weeping Angels . Despite being Amy and Rory 's last episode , it was not the last episode Gillan and Darvill filmed . Production took place in April 2012 , with location filming in Wales and a small crew filming in the United States in Central Park . " The Angels Take Manhattan " was watched by 7 @.@ 82 million viewers in the UK and received mostly positive reviews , though critics noted some plot holes and other logical issues . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor , Amy , and Rory enjoy a picnic in New York 's Central Park in 2012 , with the Doctor reading from a pulp novel about a 1930s detective named Melody Malone . Despite Amy 's insistence , the Doctor refuses to read ahead to reveal spoilers and tears out the last page of the book . Meanwhile , Rory goes to get coffee and is sent back to the 1930s by a cherub Weeping Angel . There , he meets River Song , who is playing the part of Melody Malone . In the present , the Doctor and Amy are shocked to find Rory written into the book . Amy insists on reading ahead , but the Doctor warns her that anything she reads will be destined to happen . Instead , they attempt to take the TARDIS back to the 1930s , finding the time machine struggling to make the journey . 
 Rory and River are captured by Mr. <unk> , who has a weakened Weeping Angel in his possession . Mr. <unk> orders Rory locked in the cellar with a number of the cherub angels , while he has the Angel grab River by the wrist while he interrogates her . River is able to use her vortex manipulator to set a beacon for the TARDIS , allowing the Doctor and Amy to arrive . Amy , aware of River having written the book to help guide them , uses the table of contents of the book to look for Rory . The Doctor is dismayed when he reads about River 's wrist being broken and the title of the last chapter , " Amelia 's Last Farewell " . He refuses to help River escape , hoping that the future can be changed . However , River breaks her own wrist to free herself , and the Doctor uses his regeneration energy to heal her . Amy finds the cellar empty and the Doctor is able to use River 's vortex manipulator to locate Rory at the nearby Winter Quay apartment building . 
 Inside , Rory finds himself drawn to an apartment with his name on it . Just as the Doctor and the others arrive , Rory finds an elderly version of himself in the bedroom . The Doctor warns that Rory 's fate is now sealed — he will die in that room , without having seen Amy for a very long time beforehand . He deduces that the Angels have been using the Quay as a battery farm , sending the victims to their past while feeding off their time energy . Rory and Amy refuse to accept their fate , and as the Angels converge , they flee to the roof , where the Statue of Liberty , revealed to be a Weeping Angel , waits for them . Rory surmises that if he kills himself by jumping off the roof , he 'll create a paradox that will destroy the building and the Angels , resetting the future . Refusing to allow him to die alone , Amy joins him and the two jump off the roof . 
 The Doctor , River , Amy , and Rory suddenly find themselves near the TARDIS in a New York graveyard back in 2012 , Rory 's plan having worked . As the four prepare to depart , Rory catches sight of a tombstone with his name on it . He is then touched by a surviving , albeit weakened , Angel and sent into the past . The Doctor is unable to take the TARDIS back to get him , due to the paradox Rory and Amy created . Amy refuses to be parted from Rory and willingly allows herself to be touched by the same Angel in the hopes of being sent back to the same time as he was . Her name then appears along with Rory 's on the tombstone . The Doctor is distraught , but River reminds him that while their fates are now sealed , Amy likely published the Melody Malone book in the past and may have left him a message . The Doctor races back to where they had their picnic and recovers the final page , finding the afterword written by Amy to him . Amy explains that she and Rory lived out a good and happy life for themselves , and asks the Doctor to visit her childhood self to assure her that he will come back for her to take her on amazing journeys . The episode ends with a young Amelia Pond sitting in her back garden , then looking up and smiling as the TARDIS engines are heard . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Images from " The Eleventh Hour " of a young Amelia Pond going to the garden and awaiting the Doctor are shown at the episode 's conclusion . Amy 's afterword contains several references to her adventures with the Doctor : fighting pirates ( " The Curse of the Black Spot " ) ; falling in love with " a man who will wait two thousand years to keep her safe " ( " The Big Bang " ) ; giving hope to " the greatest painter who ever lived " ( " Vincent and the Doctor " ) ; and saving " a whale in outer space . " ( " The Beast Below " ) 
 = = Production = = 
 In December 2011 , Doctor Who showrunner Steven Moffat announced that Amy and Rory would leave in the seventh series in " heartbreaking " circumstances . Amy 's exit was a mutual decision between Moffat and Gillan . Gillan stated that she wanted to go " on a high when the character was at her prime " and to " go with everything that she wants " . She wanted her character to have a final ending , and ruled out returning to the show in the future as she felt it would take away from the impact of her final scene . Moffat stated he felt " tremendous pressure " writing Amy and Rory 's ending . He later revealed that he " completely changed " the ending as he was writing it , feeling the emphasis was wrong . During rewrites Moffat went back and forth deciding whether or not Amy and Rory should live or die . He eventually decided that death would complement the storyline involving the " old , sentimental " and " dangerous " characterisation of the Doctor . At one point he considered making the story that involved the Daleks , but felt the Weeping Angels were a " better fit " . Moffat was also interested in coming up with a new form for the Angels , and so he introduced the cherubs . He also said that since the Angels had debuted in " Blink " , fans had suggested that the Statue of Liberty could be a Weeping Angel . 
 Gillan refused to read the script for a few weeks after she received it because she " didn 't want to make it real " . She said in an interview , " I literally couldn 't read it without crying . It was the most highly @-@ charged read @-@ through I 've ever experienced . But I couldn 't have asked for a better exit . I don 't think it 'll be what people expect . " A scene written by Chris Chibnall showing how Rory 's father Brian ( Mark Williams ) became aware of Amy and Rory 's fate did not make it into production . However , on 12 October 2012 , the BBC released an animated storyboard entitled " P.S. " that depicted the scene with narration by Darvill . It takes place one week later in Brian 's timeline after " The Power of Three " when a man named Anthony delivers him a letter from Rory , telling him that they will never return and that Anthony is their son they adopted in 1946 . The scene was written to be a DVD extra , and was not filmed due to time constraints . 
 The read @-@ through for " The Angels Take Manhattan " took place in the Upper Boat Studios on 23 March 2012 , alongside that for the episode " Asylum of the Daleks " . The final episode Gillan and Darvill actually shot as Amy and Rory was actually the previous episode , " The Power of Three " . Nevertheless , Gillan and Smith got very emotional filming the final graveyard scene . Amy and Rory 's scene on the rooftop was filmed in a car park in Cardiff , Wales , with a greenscreen standing in for the New York skyline . To create the effect of the two plunging down , Gillan and Darvill were suspended upside @-@ down by wires and raised and lowered . Much of the episode was filmed in Central Park in New York City in April 2012 . The filming was attended by thousands of American fans , which surprised the cast and crew . Other scenes were shot at night in the city , as well as by the East River in front of the Brooklyn Bridge and in the Tudor City apartment complex . Moffat was in New York City when he came up with the story , and thought it was appropriate for the Weeping Angels . He described the city as " a different backdrop " to shoot a Doctor Who story in , and made use of its architecture . Fellow executive producer Caroline Skinner felt that the location " has such scale and romance " which " [ gave ] the episode a real atmosphere and a very different tone for Doctor Who " . The week spent filming in the city was done by a " small unit by American standards " according to producer Marcus Wilson . They did not take any props of Angels or the TARDIS , which were instead added in post @-@ production . Filming for the episode also occurred at a cemetery in Llanelli . During post @-@ production , the New York skyline was inserted into the cemetery scenes . Gillan insisted on reading Amy 's afterword to Smith when his reaction was filmed . They were not expecting it to be in front of a crowd in Central Park , and Smith said he had to " treat this like a play " . Because the content was so secret , Gillan had to read very quietly and Smith could not hold the real page because a spectator might take a picture of it . Gillan found that she only had one page of the script , and had to improvise the rest . 
 The Doctor Who logo in the title sequence featured a texture showing the Statue of Liberty 's crown , in keeping with the varied " blockbuster " themes for each of the opening five episodes of the series . The beginning of the episode features the song " Englishman in New York " by Sting . On 4 October 2012 , BBC Books released the ebook The Angel 's Kiss : A Melody Malone Mystery , a prequel to the story that the Doctor was reading in the episode . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Angels Take Manhattan " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on 29 September 2012 on BBC One , and on the same date in the United States on BBC America . Overnight ratings showed that it was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million viewers live , an increase of 400 @,@ 000 from the previous week . The final consolidated rating rose to 7 @.@ 82 million viewers , making it the thirteenth most @-@ watched programme of the week on British television . The episode also received 0 @.@ 92 million requests on BBC 's online iPlayer , placing it seventh for the month on the site despite only being available for a few days . It also received an Appreciation Index of 88 , the second highest of the series behind " Asylum of the Daleks " ( 89 ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews . Dan Martin of The Guardian gave a positive review , writing , " This was a fitting end to a golden era , and bravo to Steven Moffat for telling such an involving , emotional story with such style " . He also praised the concept of the cherubs and the Angels in New York . However , he noted that he was " flummoxed " as to where in River 's timeline the episode took place . The Daily Telegraph reviewer Gavin Fuller gave it five out of five stars , concluding " ' The Angels Take Manhattan ' brought this mini @-@ run of the series to a close with easily the best episode of the five : a powerful , taut , compelling , filmic , emotionally punchy affair which re @-@ established the Angels as one of the standout monsters of the series and gave Amy Pond a fine send off " . While he praised the four actors he felt Gillan was the star , and noted that Rory did not " get any sort of send @-@ off " . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave " The Angels Take Manhattan " a grade of A , attributing its success to " the way it does double duty as a twist adventure and a highly emotional story of farewells " . 
 Sam Wollaston , also writing for The Guardian , wrote positively of the scare factor in the episode , as well as the sadness . Neela Debnath of The Independent described it as a " wonderful swansong to the duo " and particularly praised the " stylish " cinematography and sense of danger . However , she considered the " only flaw " to be " the rule that time cannot be changed if one knows what is going to happen ... though it is probably best not to question the timey wimey side of things and just accept it and enjoy the adventure " . IGN 's Matt Risley rated the episode 9 out of 10 , writing that it " stood strong as a heartfelt , emotional end for the TARDIS ' longest serving companions ( since the show 's noughties ' return at least ) , and the best episode of the season thus far " . Risley also praised the three leads , though he did admit the episode " left a few <unk> questions " . 
 Digital Spy reviewer Morgan Jeffery gave " The Angels Take Manhattan " five out of five stars , despite noting " plotholes ... and slightly @-@ too @-@ convenient plot contrivances " and that Rory did not get a heroic exit . Jeffery particularly praised the build @-@ up to Amy and Rory 's departure as well as the " superb production design " . Dave Golder of SFX awarded the episode four out of five stars , believing that the " bittersweet exit " of the Ponds distracted the viewer from various narrative problems , such as the Statue of Liberty . He felt that Gillan and Darvill " were on top form " as well as Smith 's " brilliant performance " and a " less over @-@ the @-@ top River " , and also wrote positively about the noir theme and the Angels using the Winter Quay as a battery farm . The Huffington Post writer Maureen Ryan was more critical of the episode , worrying that the BBC 's international promotion of the show was to the detriment of the quality of the writing . She felt that Amy deserved a better exit and " was crowded out by the distracting presence of River Song and by the fact that Rory was the one to make the essential choices first " . She also personally disliked the " timey @-@ wimey " devices , and commented that the " big and operatic tone the director was clearly going for clashed with the mood of film noir " and that the Angels " felt less menacing " and the " pace was a little too frantic " . 
 The episode was nominated for the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , alongside " Asylum of the Daleks " and " The Snowmen " . 
 = Zersenay Tadese = 
 Zersenay Tadese ( <unk> : <unk> <unk> ; born 8 February 1982 ) is an Eritrean long @-@ distance track , and road running athlete . He currently holds the men 's half marathon world record . His bronze medal in the 10 @,@ 000 metres at the 2004 Athens Olympics made him the first ever Eritrean Olympic medallist , and his 20 km title at the 2006 IAAF World Road Running Championships also made him the country 's first athlete to win at a world championship event . He does not use a sprint finish to win races : his strategy relies upon a combination of efficient running and fast pace setting . 
 Zersenay ( ' Tadese ' is his father 's name ) has found most of his success over the half marathon distance , with four consecutive victories in the World Half Marathon Championships from 2006 to 2009 , a fifth title in 2012 , and a world record at the Lisbon Half Marathon in 2010 . He has also excelled in cross country running , winning a gold , one silver , and two bronze medals in the long distance race over five IAAF World Cross Country Championships . He is a three @-@ time Olympian ( 2004 , 2008 and 2012 ) . 
 In 2009 Zersenay became only the second man ( after Paul <unk> ) to win three World Championship medals over three different surfaces in the same year : winning World Cross Country bronze , 10 @,@ 000 metres World Championship silver on the track , and gold in road running at the World Half Marathon Championships . He is a popular public figure in his home country ; 2500 guests attended his wedding to <unk> Solomon , which was broadcast live on Eritrean television . His brother , Kidane Tadese , is also a professional distance runner . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Zersenay Tadese was born in Adi Bana , Eritrea , and had a peaceful , rural upbringing with his six siblings , largely avoiding the troubles of the Eritrean War of Independence . He became interested in cycling in his teenage years and , after winning a number of races , he set his sights upon becoming a professional cyclist in Europe . However , the races of 30 – 50 km fell short of the distances needed to compete on the European circuit and he was ill @-@ prepared for a transition to top @-@ level cycling . 
 He was a relative late @-@ comer to competitive running : in his late teens , scouts from a local athletics club suggested that his cycling stamina might translate to running and invited him to compete . He won the race and was spurred on by the victory to start taking the sport seriously and focus on running . Zersenay was adamant that his early years in cycling had given him a firm foundation for endurance running . 
 His first foray into the international athletics circuit came in 2002 , when he attended the 2002 IAAF World Cross Country Championships in Dublin . Although he was wearing ill @-@ fitting shoes and was somewhat puzzled at hearing a starting gun for the first time , he managed to finish in 30th place with a time of 36 minutes and 37 seconds . However , he remained some distance off the winner Kenenisa Bekele . He competed at his first IAAF World Half Marathon Championships in May of that year , finishing just outside the top twenty runners with a time of 1 : 03 : 05 . He competed on the track at the African Athletics Championships , taking sixth place in the 10 @,@ 000 metres race in <unk> , Tunisia , rounding off a modest debut year . 
 The 2003 season saw Zersenay establish himself as an emerging force in cross country : he broke into the top ten at the 2003 IAAF World Cross Country Championships , and finished in the top three in all of his six races in Europe that winter . A 5000 metres win at the KBC Night of Athletics brought Zersenay an Eritrean record of 13 : 11 @.@ 07 , and a place at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics . At the 2003 World Championships , he improved his record further to 13 : 05 @.@ 57 and finished in eighth place in the 5000 metres final . More improvements came at the World Half Marathon Championships in Vilamoura , Portugal , where he recorded a personal best of 1 : 01 : 26 to finish in seventh position . 
 = = = Olympic medallist = = = 
 The 2004 season represented a breakthrough for Zersenay and he established himself as a serious contender in distance running . He signed a contract with Adidas Spain and brought the team victory at the European Clubs ' Cross Country Cup in February . The following month he bettered his previous showings at the World Cross Country Championships with a sixth @-@ place finish . With the help of team mates <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , among others , he took Eritrea to third position in the team competition – the first time the country had reached the podium at a world cross country event . Two months later he finished second in the 10 km Great Manchester Run ; his time of 27 : 59 was five seconds behind winner Craig Mottram . He took to the track in June at a meeting in <unk> , Spain , and recorded another national record , this time in the 10 @,@ 000 m with a time of 27 : 32 @.@ 61 . 
 The peak of his season came at the 2004 Athens Olympics , where he became the first person in Eritrean sporting history to win an Olympic medal . Zersenay took the bronze in the 10 @,@ 000 metres at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece behind Kenenisa Bekele , and <unk> <unk> . His performance of 27 : 22 @.@ 57 represented a dramatic improvement as he had beaten his previous best by ten seconds , despite unfavourably hot conditions . Zersenay refused to politicise his medal win behind his Ethiopian counterparts , stating : " we have always been friends with the Ethiopians . Now we are a nation ... I can say I am very happy . " The Eritrean @-@ born runner <unk> Keflezighi , representing the United States , won silver in the marathon a few days later , highlighting the country 's improving standards . Zersenay finished his first Olympics by reaching another event final : he took seventh place in the men 's 5000 metres race , confirming his position as a world @-@ class runner . 
 He opened 2005 with a second win in the European Clubs ' Cross Country Cup . He won his first World Cross Country Championship medal soon after , finishing second to Bekele to take silver at the 2005 edition . On the track , he recorded a 5000 m personal best of at the Qatar Grand Prix in Doha , and qualified to compete at the World Championships in both the 5000 and 10 @,@ 000 m . At the 2005 World Championships , he broke the national record in the 10 @,@ 000 m final , but his time of 27 : 12 @.@ 82 was only enough for sixth . The 5000 m final held little reprieve for the Eritrean as he finished in second last position . He ended the season on a positive note , however , improving his 10 @,@ 000 m best to 27 : 04 @.@ 70 at the Memorial Van Damme , and winning the Great North Run with a world best time of 59 : 05 – which was only his second outing over the half marathon distance . 
 = = = Road and cross country world champion = = = 
 Zersenay failed to make the podium for a second time at the 2006 World Cross Country Championships , but his fourth @-@ place finish headed the Eritrean team towards silver medal in the team competition . The following month , Zersenay overcame both Fabiano Joseph and Boniface Kiprop to win the Great Manchester Run . He sprinted to the line with a finishing time of 27 : 36 ; an Eritrean record and the second fastest that year . In August that year , he significantly improved his 10 @,@ 000 m best at Memorial Van Damme ; his time of 26 : 37 @.@ 25 knocked almost thirty seconds off his previous mark , but he still finished behind the emerging Micah Kogo who ran the tenth fastest ever time . A new best of 59 : 16 by Zersenay at the Rotterdam Half Marathon equalled Samuel Wanjiru 's course record and boded well for the upcoming championship race . 
 He scored a striking victory at the 2006 IAAF World Road Running Championships in Debrecen , Hungary , finishing the 20 km race in 56 : 01 – a time which was second only to Haile Gebrselassie 's world record and was forty seconds faster than the silver medallist Robert <unk> . It was first time that an Eritrean had won a major world title in sport . As Zersenay did not possess a strong sprint finish ( crucial for success on the track ) commentators suggested that a move to the marathon distance seemed an obvious career progression , but he downplayed the idea , stating that he would not change distances in the near future . He closed the season with a run at the New Year 's Eve 10 km road race : the San Silvestre <unk> in Madrid . Zersenay and Eliud Kipchoge were awarded the same time of 26 : 54 , but Kipchoge was announced as the race winner . Although this was faster than Haile Gebrselassie 's world record of 27 : 02 at the time , it was not <unk> as the runners benefited from the race 's downhill circuit . 
 The 2007 season brought Zersenay his greatest medal haul , as he succeeded on grass , track and road . For the first time in his career he overcame all opposition , including five @-@ time champion Kenenisa Bekele , to become the 2007 World Cross Country Champion . The hot conditions in Mombasa forced a number of runners out of the race , but Zersenay maintained his pace to finish over twenty seconds ahead of the next runner . At the Cáceres Half Marathon , he stated his intention to try for the world record and , although he won the race , poor pacing left him some distance from a record time . He returned to the Great Manchester Run and again improved his best , recording 27 : 24 , but this was not enough to beat Micah Kogo who won in a UK all @-@ comers record time . He competed at the Prefontaine Classic for the first time , and set a two miles best of 8 : 19 @.@ 34 , although he was some distance behind winner Craig Mottram . 
 The 2007 All @-@ Africa Games represented a double landmark victory for Zersenay : he became the first Eritrean medallist in the competition 's history , and won his first ever gold medal on the track , sealing victory in the 10 @,@ 000 m final with a Games record time of 27 : 00 @.@ 30 . The following month he competed at the 2007 World Championships in Athletics , and he edged closer to a podium finish – he led the 10 @,@ 000 m race up to the 8 km mark , setting a fast pace , but ultimately ended up in fourth position . Preparing for the road championships that year , he ran the 10 @-@ mile Dam tot <unk> race in September and won in 45 : 51 ( the world 's fastest that season ) , finishing some distance ahead of runners up Bernard <unk> and James <unk> . Zersenay emphasised his position as one of the world 's most dominant half marathon runners with a second victory at the 2007 IAAF World Road Running Championships in Udine , Italy . Although he was close to world record pace at the 15 km point , he slowed behind the leading pack of <unk> <unk> , Evans Kiprop <unk> and <unk> <unk> . In the final kilometre , he burst away to take the lead and the gold medal , setting a national and championship record time of 58 : 59 in the process . Following these achievements , a medical team did a study of his running economy and found him to be one of the most efficient runners ever to be tested . 
 = = = World Half Marathon champion = = = 
 Bekele was keen to regain his cross country title from Zersenay and the 2008 cross country season was a competitive one . At the Great Edinburgh International Cross Country race , Zersenay was pipped by the Ethiopian at the line , finishing just one second behind . The following month , Zersenay beat Eliud Kipchoge to win the Cinque <unk> race in the buildup to the 2008 IAAF World Cross Country Championships . On the day of the Championship race in Edinburgh , Scotland , Zersenay took the lead early on and set a strong pace at the mid @-@ race point . However , near the finish Bekele and Kenyan Leonard <unk> surged ahead to leave Zersenay as the bronze medallist . 
 A win at the World 10K Bangalore , where he beat Moses <unk> in 27 : 51 , was the highlight of a low @-@ key build up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics . In August , Zersenay was among some forty runners competing for the medals in the 10 @,@ 000 metres Olympic final . Zersenay 's brother , Kidane , was also competing and he led for most of first half of what was a quick race . Zersenay Tadese had the lead at the 7 – 8000 m mark but Bekele and <unk> sprinted into first and second . Although Zersenay 's time almost equalled the previous Olympic record for the event , he ended up one second behind Kenyans Moses Masai and Micah Kogo , taking fifth place overall . 
 After the Olympics , Zersenay returned to Eritrea and trained for one month to prepare for the 2008 World Half Marathon Championships in Rio de Janeiro . He won his third consecutive title over the half marathon distance with ease , taking the lead early on and beating the second @-@ placed Patrick <unk> <unk> by almost two minutes . His success caused much celebration in his home country , so much so that the President of Eritrea greeted him at the airport upon his return . With a strong history in the half marathon , Zersenay announced he would try the full marathon distance the following season . 
 Zersenay took third place at the 2009 IAAF World Cross Country Championships in a closely contested race , finishing just behind a resurgent <unk> <unk> and Ugandan runner Moses <unk> . He competed in his first ever full @-@ length marathon in April , signing up for the London Marathon . His first appearance over the distance was much anticipated following his cross country and track success , but he could not finish the race , pulling out around the 35 km mark . 
 He rebounded , however , taking silver in the 10 @,@ 000 metres at the 2009 World Championships in Athletics , finishing behind Kenenisa Bekele . Zersenay had led for a large part of the race , setting a fast pace , but he was beaten to the gold by Bekele 's sprint finish . Following this , he won his third World Half Marathon title , setting a Championship record of 59 : 35 and also winning a silver medal with Eritrea in the team competition . The gold medal over the half marathon distance made him the second runner ever to win a World Championship medal in cross country , track and road racing all in the same year , a feat achieved previously by only Paul <unk> . 
 = = = Half marathon world record = = = 
 Zersenay 's first road race of 2010 was the Lisbon Half Marathon . The organisers had modified the course and assembled a field of fast runners in order to facilitate a quick race . Despite the top five athletes all running personal best times , Zersenay was alone at the very front from 10 km onwards . He fell four seconds short of the 15 km world record , but significantly revised Haile Gebrselassie 's four @-@ year @-@ old 20 km world mark to 55 : 21 , beating it by almost half a minute . Samuel Wanjiru 's half marathon world record was next to fall as Zersenay crossed the line at 58 : 23 minutes , a clear ten seconds ahead of the previous mark . 
 He managed to finish his first full @-@ marathon at the 2010 London Marathon , although his time of 2 : 12 : 03 for seventh place was not as strong a transition as expected . He made his first appearance at the Giro di <unk> in Sicily in July and , although he described the course as " very hard " , he won the race ahead of Samuel Wanjiru . He attempted for yet another title at the 2010 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships , but Wilson Kiprop brought an end to his four @-@ year reign – the Eritrean took the silver medal , labouring towards the end and pulling up in injured at the line . He was still suffering from the injury at the San Silvestre <unk> some two months later , although he managed to beat Ayad <unk> to win the race . 
 He was at full strength at the 2011 Lisbon Half Marathon : he missed his world record mark but ran the second fastest of all @-@ time ( 58 : 30 minutes ) . In the outdoor track season he ran 26 : 51 @.@ 09 minutes for the 10 @,@ 000 m at the Prefontaine Classic and came close to a personal best with a win at the Barcelona Meeting with a time of 12 : 59 @.@ 32 minutes . Making his fourth consecutive appearance in the event , he took fourth place in the men 's 10 @,@ 000 m at the 2011 World Championships in Athletics . He ended the year with road wins at the Porto Half Marathon and the São Silvestre de Luanda , setting course records of 59 : 30 minutes and 27 : 44 minutes , respectively . 
 At the 2012 World 's Best 10K he came third , beaten by Sammy Kitwara and Vincent <unk> . He won the Lisbon Half Marathon for the third straight year , but was slower than previous times ( 59 : 34 ) due to warm conditions and having the flu . A run at the 2012 London Marathon saw him perform better than he did in 2010 , but he lost touch with the leading pack after the half @-@ way point and came fourteenth with a time of 2 : 10 : 41 hours . He was chosen as Eritrea 's flag bearer at the 2012 London Olympics and ran in the 10 @,@ 000 metres final . He set the pace early on in the race but was defeated in the sprint finish , finishing in sixth place some three seconds behind the winner Mo Farah . After the Olympics he ran at the 2012 World Half Marathon Championships . He dominated the race from just beyond the 5 km point , and won it convincingly in a time of 1 : 00 : 19 hours , 32 seconds ahead of the runner @-@ up , <unk> <unk> . Only two weeks later he entered the Great Birmingham Run , but he appeared tired and finished third in a race where the top three all dipped under Haile Gebrselassie 's course record . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 seasons = = = 
 Zersenay managed only seventh at the World 's Best 10K in February but returned to the top of the podium in his speciality at the Prague Half Marathon , edging out his training partner <unk> <unk> with a time of 60 : 10 . He clocked another win over the distance at the Gifu <unk> Half Marathon , beating the defending champion Martin <unk> and setting a course record of 60 : 31 minutes . In October , he attempted to run the Chicago Marathon , but dropped out shortly after the halfway point . He did not compete again until February 2014 , when he won at the small Cáceres cross country in Spain . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 A quietly spoken athlete , he frequently states that his victories are a tribute to his country . Eritrea is one of Africa 's newest and least populous countries , and Zersenay 's achievements on the world athletics stage have made him one of the country 's most identifiable sportsmen . He is a popular public figure in his home country ; 2500 guests attended his wedding to <unk> Solomon , which was broadcast live on Eritrean television . His brother , Kidane Tadese , is also a professional distance runner who has competed at the World Cross Country Championships and the 2008 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal bests = = 
 All information taken from IAAF profile . 
 = = Major competition record = = 
 = Teesside EfW plant = 
 Teesside Energy from Waste plant ( also known as Teesside <unk> power station or Haverton Hill incinerator ) is a municipal waste incinerator and waste @-@ to @-@ energy power station , which provides 29 @.@ 2 megawatts ( MW ) of electricity for the National Grid by burning 390 @,@ 000 tonnes of household and commercial waste a year . It is located on the River Tees at Haverton Hill , east of Billingham in North East England . Operated by SITA UK since its conception , the plant replaced the Portrack Incinerator and opened in 1998 . 
 The station is one of the most modern incinerators operating in England ; it is noted for its innovative operation . In 2009 , an extension was completed at the station , with the construction of an extra furnace line and a rail head . This increased the capacities of the plant from 19 @.@ 2 MW and 250 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste per year to its current levels . The plant initially burned only waste from Teesside , but this was extended to include Northumberland with the 2009 extension . A second plant , the North East Energy Recovery Centre ( NEERC ) , has planning permission to be built on land adjacent to the current plant . If built , this will extend the plant 's catchment to include waste from south Tyne and Wear . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Replacement for Portrack = = = 
 See also Portrack Incinerator 
 Between 1975 and 1996 , the Portrack Incinerator on the River Tees burned 200 @,@ 000 tonnes of Teesside 's waste every year , generating 20 megawatts of electricity in doing so . In November 1996 , the plant was closed down after it failed to meet emission regulations ; it was then demolished in stages between 1998 and 2000 . Following the closure of the Portrack plant , a new facility to burn Teesside 's refuse was constructed . Teesside Energy from Waste plant was opened in May 1998 as a collaboration between SITA UK ( the station 's operator ) and the local authorities of Stockton @-@ on @-@ Tees , Middlesbrough , Hartlepool and Redcar & Cleveland . 
 = = = Third incineration line = = = 
 In December 2006 , SITA UK signed a 28 @-@ year private finance initiative contract worth £ 70 million with Northumberland County Council , to provide them with waste management services and to reduce the county 's reliance upon landfill . This included the construction of an extra incineration line at the Teesside plant . Civil construction of the extension began in April 2007 , with heavy erection beginning that November . Von Roll was the general contractor for the entire extension . In May 2009 , the third line , which cost £ 70 million to build , was brought into operation . It was officially opened on 8 October 2009 by former MP Hilary Armstrong , SITA UK Chief Executive David Palmer @-@ Jones , and Northumberland County Councillor Jeff Reid . At various times , between 60 and 100 people were employed in building the third line , and an additional 20 full @-@ time jobs were created for its operation once open . Built on time and within budget , the extension surpassed expectations in its first year of operation . A year after the opening of the third line , only a fifth of the amount of waste that was being sent to landfill in Northumberland prior to its opening was still being sent there . 
 = = Design and specification = = 
 The plant is a large metal @-@ clad building . The metal is finished in the colour ' <unk> Grey ' , accented in ' Solent Blue ' and ' Petra Red ' . The plant 's clean , clear lines and colours are said to " contrast favourably " with the nearby industrial buildings . 
 Until 2009 , the station had two operating furnace lines , which together were capable of burning a total of 250 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste per year , and generated 20 MW of electricity . However , in May 2009 a third line was brought into operation . The plant currently burns 360 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste a year and generates 29 @.@ 2 MW of electricity . This is enough electricity to power 60 @,@ 000 homes . 
 The original plant uses Babcock & Wilcox <unk> boilers to provide steam for a single Ansaldo turbo generator rated at 19 @.@ 2 MW . The third line uses a Von Roll Inova reciprocating grate to burn the waste , and generates electricity using a single Von Roll Inova three @-@ pass steam generator , rated at 10 MW . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The station operates constantly , burning municipal household waste from the local councils of Stockton @-@ on @-@ Tees , Hartlepool , Middlesbrough , Redcar & Cleveland , North Tyneside and Northumberland . When there is a shortfall in household waste , non @-@ hazardous industrial and commercial waste are used to make up capacity . The station burns only residual waste , which is material left over after recycling . The incinerator operates 24 hours a day , seven days a week . 
 Waste is delivered to the station by road , using up to 100 waste collection vehicles . Up to 2 @,@ 800 tonnes of waste a week or as much as 1 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste a day , can be delivered at the plant . A rail head was also built on the railway sidings adjacent to the site in 2009 . This allows for waste to be delivered to the plant by rail , rather than just by road . This is more sustainable as it reduces the amount of traffic on local roads . In December 2011 , it was announced that the rail head would be used to receive up 500 @,@ 000 tonnes of residual waste per year from Merseyside via a rail waste transfer facility at <unk> Industrial Park , Kirby , in a contract worth £ 400 million . 
 Waste arriving at the plant is checked in and weighed , before being delivered to the plant 's reception hall . The large reception hall allows the vehicles to dump their waste safely . Air for the combustion of the waste later in the plant is drawn from the reception hall so that odour and dust doesn 't pollute the building 's surroundings . From the hall waste is tipped into a large concrete bunker . Here the feedstock is <unk> by a crane operator , who mixes and removes unsuitable waste . A grab crane then manoeuvers waste from the bunker to the hoppers that feed the furnace . This crane is operated from a control room . This room also monitors the equipment in the plant , the combustion gases and maximises the efficiency of the plant . 
 From the hoppers , the waste falls onto the furnace @-@ charging chute and from there onto the incinerating grate . Here it is burned at a temperature in excess of 1 @,@ 200 ° C. This heat is then converted into super heated steam through the plant 's boilers . This in turn powers steam turbines , much in the same way as a conventional thermal power station . Electricity is generated at 11 kilovolts . After exiting the turbines , the steam is condensed back to water . For the original two incinerating lines use river water from the Tees as a cooling medium , whereas in the third line , water is condensed through air cooled condenser . The cooled water is treated and reused in the boilers . 
 Gases from the furnace are cleaned using selective non @-@ catalytic reduction ( <unk> ) , spray absorbers and active carbon injection . These processes remove nitrogen oxides , acidic gasses , dioxins and heavy metals from the plants emissions . The remaining gases are passed through fine @-@ fabric bag filters to remove and solid particles , before it is released from the chimney . Each incineration line has its own independent stack in the chimney , and the flue gases are continuously monitored before being released . This information is relayed to the control room . The remaining fly ash from the filters contains particles from the incineration , lime from the spray absorbers , salt and carbon dust , and so is stored in a sealed silo until it is taken from the site for disposal . Incinerator bottom ash left on the incineration grate after the burning is moved by <unk> to a bunker . Whilst on the conveyor , a magnet removes ferrous metal from the ash for recycling . The remaining ash is then used as an aggregate in the construction industry . 
 A recycling centre operates next to the plant , which opened in December 2001 . In 2006 a composting facility was opened . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 Waste to energy plants are strictly monitored , and the plant has achieved various ISO external certificates . The plant is seen to be at the forefront of sustainable energy production and waste disposal . The plant not only reduces the amount of waste sent to landfill , but displaces the burning of depleting fossil fuels , and makes significant contributions to meeting the North East region 's waste recovery and recycling targets . 
 = = The future : North East Energy Recovery Centre = = 
 In 2008 , it was announced SITA had plans to build another EfW plant adjacent to the current one , named the North East Energy Recovery Centre ( NEERC ) . SITA UK began consulting key partners , stakeholders and local residents on these plans in April 2008 , before submitting a formal planning application that summer . Permission for the plant 's construction was granted on 15 October 2008 . On 17 September 2010 , it was announced that SITA had signed a contract with the South Tyne and Wear Waste Management Partnership for their waste to be burned at NEERC once the plant was completed . Construction is expected to begin in early 2011 , in time for a 2013 completion date . 
 NEERC is expected to be capable of handling up to 190 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste per year . This waste will be burned to generate electricity for the National Grid and <unk> to provide heat for local industries in the form of steam . NEERC will have two processing lines , capable of generating 21 MW of electricity , enough to provide for 37 @,@ 500 homes . This means that over the two facilities , 640 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste will be burned annually , and over 50 MW of electricity generated . This would make Teesside the largest operational EfW centre in the UK outside London . The plant will be a mirror image of the current one , and will create 160 jobs ; 25 in South Tyne and Wear , 100 in the construction of the plant , and the rest once the plant is operational . 
 In August 2010 , SITA teamed up with <unk> UK to build another waste @-@ to @-@ energy facility in the Teesside region . Wilton 11 on the Wilton International complex is to burn a further 400 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste in the region whilst generating 35 MW of electricity . The plant is expected to be operational by 2015 . 
 = Secret trusts in English law = 
 In English law , secret trusts are a class of trust defined as an arrangement between a testator and a trustee , made to come into force after death , that aims to benefit a person without having been written in a formal will . The property is given to the trustee in the will , and he would then be expected to pass it on to the real beneficiary . For these to be valid , the person seeking to enforce the trust must prove that the testator intended to form a trust , that this intention was communicated to the trustee , and that the trustee accepted his office . There are two types of secret trust — fully secret and half @-@ secret . A fully secret trust is one with no mention in the will whatsoever . In the case of a half @-@ secret trust , the face of the will names the trustee as trustee , but does not give the trust 's terms , including the beneficiary . The most important difference lies in communication of the trust : the terms of a half @-@ secret trust must be communicated to the trustee before the execution of the will , whereas in the case of a fully secret trust the terms may be communicated after the execution of the will , as long as this is before the testator 's death . 
 Secret trusts do not comply with the formality requirements ( such as witnessing ) laid down in the Wills Act 1837 . Despite this , the courts have chosen to uphold them as valid . Although various justifications have been given for this , they are generally categorised as either based on preventing fraud , or as regarding secret trusts as outside ( dehors ) the operation of the Wills Act . The first is considered the traditional approach – if the courts do not recognise secret trusts , the trustee given the property in the will would be able to keep it for himself , committing fraud . The fraud theory utilises the equitable maxim that " equity will not allow a statute to be used as a cloak for fraud " . A more modern view is that secret trusts exist outside the will altogether , and thus do not have to comply with it . Accepting this theory would undermine the operation of the Wills Act , since the Wills Act is designed to cover all testamentary dispositions . To avoid this problem , one approach has been to reclassify the secret trust as inter vivos ( " between the living " ) but this creates other problems . There have also been attempts to conclude that half @-@ secret trusts rest on a different basis to fully secret trusts , although this has been disapproved by the House of Lords , primarily on practical grounds . 
 This debate is also of importance when classifying the trust as either constructive or express , a matter of considerable debate . On one view , if the traditional theory is correct , secret trusts are created by the courts , and are thus constructive ; if the more modern view is correct , the trusts exist without the court 's permission , and are express trusts . However , a secret trust does not have to obey the separate formalities of the Law of Property Act 1925 , even when it concerns land and one solution to this problem is to consider them constructive . Some commentators believe that half @-@ secret trusts may fall into a different category to fully secret trusts in this regard . 
 = = Definition = = 
 A secret trust is an arrangement between a testator and a trustee to benefit a person without having to specify that person in a will . The trustee is transferred property under the terms of the will which he or she then holds on trust for others . 
 The courts recognise two forms of secret trust . Fully secret trusts are trusts not referred to at all on the face of the will . Instead , an agreement made between the testator and trustees elsewhere . The trustee will instead be named only a beneficiary . In the case of a half @-@ secret trust , the fact that the beneficiary holds as trustee only is declared on the face of the will , but not the other terms of the trust . 
 Alastair Hudson , Professor of Equity and Law at Queen Mary , University of London , suggests the potential for a third class of secret trust . This is where the dying person is encouraged not to make a will so that his property passes to the next @-@ of @-@ kin , on the agreement that the next @-@ of @-@ kin give effect to his wishes via a secret trust . If this is the case , the next @-@ of @-@ kin would be obliged to hold the property on trust and fulfil the dying person 's wishes . 
 A secret trust must be contrasted with merely placing a moral obligation upon the beneficiary to deal with the legacy in particular way ( as in Re Snowden ) and must impose a binding obligation , without discretion to act within its terms or not . 
 = = Justification = = 
 The secret trust has proved difficult to reconcile these trusts with Section 9 of the Wills Act 1837 , which provides that a will is only valid when : 
 ( a ) it is in writing , and signed by the testator , or by some other person in his presence and by his direction ; and 
 ( b ) it appears that the testator intended by his signature to give effect to the will ; and 
 ( c ) the signature is made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses present at the same time ; and 
 ( d ) each witness either - 
 ( i ) attests and signs the will ; or 
 ( ii ) acknowledges his signature , in the presence of the testator ( but not necessarily in the presence of any other witnesses ) . 
 As such , such trusts are not enforceable because they are invalid . Equity has been willing to accept their validity in the common law to prevent the trustee committing fraud and keeping the property ; justifications for this acceptance are debated . 
 In practical terms , there are several reasons why admitting the language of fraud to justify a fully secret trust , but not a half @-@ secret trust , would be sub @-@ optimal . This is considered one principal reason why the court in Blackwell v Blackwell established that both types of secret trust shared a single justification . A half @-@ secret trust appears closer to fulfilling the formality requirements as laid down in the Wills Act , so the conclusion that it is less likely to be enforced seems contradictory . Also , such a rule would encourage fully secret trusts , with a wider possibility for fraud . It would also spark considerable litigation on whether a particular clause resulted in a fully secret or half @-@ secret trust . Thus it may be argued that despite the difficulties , a half @-@ secret trust should be enforced if fully secret trusts are . 
 = = = Fraud theory = = = 
 The secret trust was originally conceived to prevent fraud enabled by statute or the common law , in line with the equitable maxim that " equity will not allow a statute to be used as a cloak for fraud " . The " fraud " referred to is the denial of the existence of the trust by the intended trustee of the will , thus allowing him to apply it for his own purposes . Thus in McCormick v Grogan , Lord Westbury justified secret trusts , saying : 
 the court has , from a very early period , decided that even an Act of Parliament shall not be used as an instrument as fraud ; and that equity will fasten on the individual who gets a title under that Act , and impose upon him a personal obligation , because he applies the Act as an instrument for accomplishing a fraud . In this way , a court of equity has dealt with the Statute of Frauds , and in this manner , also , it deals with the Statute of Wills . 
 There have been two grounds on which this rule has been based . The narrower ground is that the trustee should be debarred from denying the existence of the trust because of his wrongful conduct at the time he made the undertaking , as identified by Lord Westbury in McCormick v Grogan . The wider ground extends to attempting to renege on the promise made during the testator 's lifetime , even when his intention at the time of making the promise may have been to fulfill the testator 's wishes . The wider ground appears to have been adopted by the Court of Appeal in Bannister v Bannister . D. R. Hodge has argued that " acceptance of the narrower view would not only impose upon a person seeking to establish a secret trust the heavy onus of showing at what point of time the secret trustee decided to <unk> from his promise , but would also make the validity of the secret trust dependent upon what is in fact an irrelevant consideration " . 
 Since allowing the trustee of the will to retain the property is at the heart of the " fraud " , it is not clear why courts have considered the appropriate remedy to recognise a trust on behalf of others , rather than a resulting trust in favour of the estate ( the residuary legatee ) . To this it has been argued that , since the testator is dead , a resulting trust is often fatal to the beneficiary 's claims since the testator is not in a position to attempt again . Having admitted external evidence to establish the trust exists , any claim that the formality requirement is further weakened by enforcing the trust is not strong . A resulting trust would be a result not party intended . The enforcement of the secret trust as a response to perceived fraud also opens the door to a further form of deceit , whereby the trustee funnels the trust monies to the wrong beneficiary . If considered significant , this might , however , be countered with a higher evidential burden when establishing the identity of the secret beneficiary . 
 Two further problems are apparent when considering the fraud theory in the context of half @-@ secret trusts . Since the will mentions the trust , it is impossible for the trustee to deny the existence of the trust . Whether or not the intended beneficiaries can be ascertained , the trustee cannot benefit personally and his possibility for fraud ( under any meaning ) seems small . Indeed , it appears to create an alternative route : the trustee may bring false oral testimony in favour of a third party who was not the intended beneficiary , a party that cannot benefit if the law did not uphold half @-@ secret trusts . Secondly , a half @-@ secret trust ought to fail for uncertainty , being a trust with no terms , with a resulting trust to the residuary legatee . Those in favour of its enforcement must therefore displace this resulting trust , and the " fraud " theory seems insufficient to do so , since there is not potential for fraud and no conduct on the part of the trustee to warrant it . The deceased 's intended disposition remains imperfectly constituted and the intended beneficiary 's claim is thus weaker than the residuary legatee 's . Whilst one response has been to suggest that whether a resulting trust or enforcement of the secret trust is most appropriate remedy is a question for the courts , subsequent cases have typically defined the automatic resulting trust , as in this case , as operating as a matter of law and not a question for the courts . 
 Alastair Hudson has also argued that the fraud argument is significantly flawed . The theory suggests that liability for the property comes about from fraud ; in fact , liability comes about as soon as the trustee accepts the property to hold on trust , and so the fraud theory is not necessary to bind the trustee 's hands . 
 Based on the fraud theory , secret trusts are sometimes classified as constructive trusts ; the reason they do not have to follow the Wills Act 1837 is because they are created by the courts . 
 = = = " Outside ( dehors ) the will " theory = = = 
 A more modern argument is that secret trusts are independent and operate outside the will . This would mean that the trust is not testamentary in nature but falls within the ordinary equitable jurisdiction of the court . The trust was created by the donor and trustee during the donor 's life , and simply not constituted until his death ; it does not have to follow the Wills Act , because it was not created by a will . This view was expressed by Megarry VC in Re Snowden , where he said " The whole basis of secret trusts ... is that they operate outside the will , changing nothing that is written in it , and allowing it to operate according to its tenor , but then fastening a trust on to the property in the hands of the recipient " . This suggests that secret trusts are not constructive trusts but rather express trusts . 
 It has been suggested that the dehors theory is based on a misunderstanding of the operation of the Wills Act . In particular , whilst the term " will " is commonly used to refer to a specific document , the <unk> Act is designed to cover all documents that are to take effect after the testator 's death . Indeed , the formality requirements of the Wills Act created the need for a single document , like the one commonly referred to . Therefore to refer to an arrangement as outside the Wills Act because it is not in the single document commonly referred to is incorrect . The response has been to view the secret trust as a disposition inter vivos ( " between the living " ) rather than testamentary in nature . Although the testator is unlikely to consider the trust having come into existence at the time of the execution of the will , whether a disposition is inter vivos is a question for the courts . However , other types of inter vivos trust are incapable of binding after @-@ acquired property or operating so as to automatically bind such property as and when it is received . No separate declaration of trust is required in the case of property acquired after the execution of a will for it to form part of a secret trust . Looking at the definition of a " testamentary disposition " as applied in other sorts of cases is inconclusive . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Whether secret trusts are express or constructive trusts is unclear . Snell 's Equity includes them in its section on express trusts , as does Underhill and Hayton , although both opine that they are better classified as constructive . 
 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Law of Property Act 1925 requires that " a declaration of trust respecting any land or any interest therein must be manifested and proved by some writing signed by some person who is able to declare such trust or by his will " . Constructive trusts are removed from the operation of this section by section 53 ( 2 ) . Two cases , Re Baillie and Ottaway v Norman , have concerned secret trusts over land . In neither case were the formality requirements of 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) met , but neither judgment considered why 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) did not apply . This has been used to support the theory that secret trusts are constructive . However , an express trust may still be exempted from the requirements of 53 ( 1 ) ( b ) by a separate application of the maxim " equity will not allow a statute to be used as a cloak for fraud " – the fraud would be for the trustee to deny the existence of the secret trust , but this time the statute concerned would be the Law of Property Act , a line of reasoning dependent upon the case of Rochefoucauld v Boustead . 
 Some authors place fully secret and half @-@ secret trusts in different categories , including Alastair Hudson and Lionel Astor Sheridan . To this it has been argued that , if the " outside the will " theory is the true basis for the secret trust , whether the mention of the existence of the trust on the face of the will should affect its nature . In Hudson 's opinion , fully secret trusts are constructive trusts , because they exist to prevent fraud . Half @-@ secret trusts are not , because their mention in wills makes fraud unlikely ; they are instead express trusts . The House of Lords in Blackwell v Blackwell , however , considered the half @-@ secret trust to have the same basis as the fully secret trust . 
 = = Fully secret trusts = = 
 Fully secret trusts are awkward because of the lack of evidence pertaining to their existence and terms . In Ottaway v Norman , Brightman J set out the test for proving the existence of a fully secret trust . This is : 
 It will be convenient to call the person on whom such a trust is imposed the ' primary donee ' , and the beneficiary under that trust the ' secondary donee ' . The essential elements which must be proved to exist are : ( i ) the intention of the testator to subject the primary donee to an obligation in favour of the secondary donee ; ( ii ) communication of that intention to the primary donee ; and ( iii ) the acceptance of that obligation by the primary donee either expressly or by acquiescence . It is immaterial whether these elements precede or succeed the will of the donor . 
 For a fully secret trust to be valid , therefore , it must be proved that there was intention , that this was communicated to the trustee , and that the trustee accepted his obligations . Intention is one of the three certainties , and applies to fully secret trusts in the same way as it does to other express trusts . 
 The second requirement is that both the secret trust and its terms are communicated to the trustee . This may be done after the writing of the will , as long as it is prior to death ; without it , the secret trust is void . Exactly what must be communicated depends on the nature of the property and trust ; if there are multiple beneficiaries for example , this will need to be communicated . In Re Boyes , Kay J came to the conclusion that communication requires allowing the trustee the chance to refuse his office ; as such , it cannot be done after death . Lastly , the office of trustee must be accepted by the trustee . The two ways this can be done were laid out by Wood VC in <unk> v Tebbs , when he said : 
 Where a person , knowing that a testator is making a disposition in his favour intends it to be applied for purposes other than his own benefit , either expressly promises , or by silence implies , that he will carry on the testator 's intention into effect , and the property is left to him upon the faith of that promise or understanding , it is in effect a case of trust " . 
