 Acceptance , therefore , can be communicated in one of two ways ; either by the trustee directly stating his acceptance , or by implying it through not declining . 
 If a secret trust cannot be established , the beneficiary will hold outright . If a secret trust can be shown , but not its terms ( or communication post @-@ dated the testator 's death ) , then the would @-@ be trustee will hold on resulting trust for the testator 's estate . 
 = = Half @-@ secret trusts = = 
 With a half @-@ secret trust , the fact that the beneficiary of the will holds as trustee only is declared on the face of the will , but not the other terms of the trust . This must go further than the mere " hope " that the beneficiary ( again I believe this should read " trustee " - the beneficiary is the passive party to a trust ) of the will will act in accordance with its terms . The requirements for a half @-@ secret trust to be valid are similar to those for fully secret trusts , and were laid out in Blackwell v Blackwell , where a testator gave five trustees pieces of property , instructing them ( in the will ) to hold on to this property as they had been asked . Prior to the testator 's death , the trustees had all been told what to do with the property . Lord Sumner said that : 
 The necessary elements [ to create a half @-@ secret trust ] , on which the question turns , are intention , communication and acquiescence . The testator intends his absolute gift to be employed as he and not as the donee desires ; he tells the proposed donee of this intention and , either by express promise or by the tacit promise , which is satisfied by acquiescence , the proposed donee encourages him to bequeath the money on the faith that his intention will be carried out . 
 The most important distinction between half @-@ secret and fully secret trusts concerns the communication of the terms of the trust . Communication must be either at or before the execution of the will , in contrast to fully secret trusts , when it may postdate the will so long as it predates the death of the testator . In Blackwell , Viscount Sumner said that : " [ a ] testator cannot reserve to himself a power of making future unwitnessed dispositions by merely naming a trustee and leaving the purposes of the trust to be supplied afterwards " , a passage given its traditional interpretation in cases such as Re Keen , becoming a " cornerstone " of the what has become known as the ' prior acceptance rule ' . Although that interpretation has been confirmed as the law in further cases , it has been argued by Professor John Mee that Viscount Sumner was instead merely reconfirming the general principle that acceptance by the trustee ( whether of a half @-@ secret or fully secret trust ) must take place within the testator 's lifetime . Mee favours the law in Ireland , that no prior acceptance rule exists and therefore the law regarding acceptance is the same between half @-@ secret and fully secret trusts . Acceptance of the half @-@ secret trust is again similar to fully secret trusts ; it can be communicated either directly , or tacitly . 
 The failure of a half @-@ secret trust , such as where the beneficiaries of the trust cannot be shown , or communication is not at or before the execution of the will . 
 = = Practice = = 
 There are a variety of practical rules in these trusts ' use , which span both fully secret and half @-@ secret trusts . If a testator alters the terms of the trust or the trust property , he must inform the intended trustee ; if not , as in Re Colin Cooper , the trustee will be permitted to keep the newly added property . Where the trustees are co @-@ owners of the property , informing them of the trust 's terms or amendments becomes complicated . If they hold the property as tenants @-@ in @-@ common , only those tenants who were informed of the trust are bound to follow it . Where they hold the property as joint tenants , they are all bound by the trust if even one tenant accepts it before the execution of the will . Where they hold the property as joint tenants and some accept it , but only after the execution of the will , only those who accepted it are bound . This area has been called " rather illogical " . 
 The result of the emergence of the " outside the will " theory has been seen with respect to witnesses to the will . Section 15 of the Wills Act states that any person " [ attesting ] the execution of any will to whom or to whose wife or husband any beneficial [ legacy ] ... shall be thereby given or made , such [ legacy ] ... shall , so far only as concerns such person attesting the execution of such will , or the wife or husband of such person , or any person claiming under such person or wife or husband , be utterly null and void " . In Re Young , an attesting witness was the beneficiary of a secret trust . The court decided that " the Wills Act 1837 had nothing to do with it " and the secret trust valid . The effect of the Wills Act 1968 has been to allow the trustee of a half @-@ secret trust to attest the will and this may also apply to the fully secret trust . 
 Where a beneficiary under a secret trust predeceases the testator , his or her personal representative will inherit instead , as in Re Gardner . If the gift had been made directly as part of testator 's will it would have lapsed and formed part of his or her residuary estate by the beneficiary 's death , but since he or she inherits as a result of a separate secret trust that rule does not apply . Where the trustee of a secret trust predeceases the testator , or renounces his trusteeship before the death of the testator , the position of the secret trust in unclear . In the case of a half @-@ secret trust , the trust ought to be good on the basis that " equity will not allow a trust to fail for want of a trustee " . Of a fully secret trust , it was indicated by Lord Buckmaster in Blackwell v Blackwell that such a trust might not fail : " the [ <unk> ] legatee might defeat the whole purpose by renouncing the legacy ... I entertain no doubt that the Court , having once admitted the evidence of the trust , would interfere to prevent its defeat . " Against this , it has been argued that the arrangement is the result of a personal obligation as thus fails if renounced or if the trustee predeceases the testator . 
 Evidential issues also exist . Because secret trusts are by definition secret , they are difficult to prove in court . The parol evidence rule states that where there is written evidence , oral testimony cannot be introduced to the court if it contradicts that evidence . Since secret trusts are oral and normally exist outside of the will ( a written document ) this causes problems . In Re Keen , the issue came up , and the Court of Appeal decided that the parol evidence rule extended to secret trusts , and such trusts could not be enforced if they contradicted written documents . More generally , the problem is proving that the testator intended to create a trust . As in <unk> v Grogan , the standard is high ; the person trying to enforce the trust must show " most clearly and distinctly " that it exists . 
 = Willie Nelson = 
 Willie Hugh Nelson ( born April 29 , 1933 ) is an American musician , singer , songwriter , author , poet , actor , and activist . The critical success of the album Shotgun Willie ( 1973 ) , combined with the critical and commercial success of Red Headed Stranger ( 1975 ) and Stardust ( 1978 ) , made Nelson one of the most recognized artists in country music . He was one of the main figures of outlaw country , a subgenre of country music that developed in the late 1960s as a reaction to the conservative restrictions of the Nashville sound . Nelson has acted in over 30 films , co @-@ authored several books , and has been involved in activism for the use of biofuels and the legalization of marijuana . 
 Born during the Great Depression , and raised by his grandparents , Nelson wrote his first song at age seven and joined his first band at ten . During high school , he toured locally with the Bohemian Polka as their lead singer and guitar player . After graduating from high school in 1950 , he joined the Air Force but was later discharged due to back problems . After his return , Nelson attended Baylor University for two years but dropped out because he was succeeding in music . During this time , he worked as a disc jockey in Texas radio stations and a singer in Honky @-@ tonks . Nelson moved to Vancouver , Washington , where he wrote " Family Bible " and recorded the song " Lumberjack " in 1956 . In 1958 , he moved to Houston , Texas after signing a contract with D Records . He sang at the Esquire Ballroom weekly and he worked as a disk jockey . During that time , he wrote songs that would become country standards , including " Funny How Time Slips Away " , " Hello Walls " , " Pretty Paper " , and " Crazy " . In 1960 he moved to Nashville , Tennessee , and later signed a publishing contract with Pamper Music which allowed him to join Ray Price 's band as a bassist . In 1962 , he recorded his first album , ... And Then I Wrote . Due to this success , Nelson signed in 1964 with RCA Victor and joined the Grand Ole Opry the following year . After mid @-@ chart hits in the late 1960s and the early 1970s , Nelson retired in 1972 and moved to Austin , Texas . The ongoing music scene of Austin motivated Nelson to return from retirement , performing frequently at the Armadillo World Headquarters . 
 In 1973 , after signing with Atlantic Records , Nelson turned to outlaw country , including albums such as Shotgun Willie and Phases and Stages . In 1975 , he switched to Columbia Records , where he recorded the critically acclaimed album , Red Headed Stranger . The same year , he recorded another outlaw country album , Wanted ! The Outlaws , along with Waylon Jennings , Jessi Colter , and Tompall Glaser . During the mid @-@ 1980s , while creating hit albums like Honeysuckle Rose and recording hit songs like " On the Road Again " , " To All the Girls I 've Loved Before " , and " Pancho and Lefty " , he joined the country supergroup The Highwaymen , along with fellow singers Johnny Cash , Waylon Jennings , and Kris Kristofferson . 
 In 1990 , Nelson 's assets were seized by the Internal Revenue Service , which claimed that he owed US $ 32 million . The difficulty of paying his outstanding debt was aggravated by weak investments he had made during the 1980s . In 1992 , Nelson released The IRS Tapes : Who 'll Buy My Memories ? , the profits of the double album , destined to the IRS , and the auction of Nelson 's assets cleared his debt . During the 1990s and 2000s , Nelson continued touring extensively , and released albums every year . Reviews ranged from positive to mixed . He explored genres such as reggae , blues , jazz , and folk . Nelson made his first movie appearance in the 1979 film The Electric Horseman , followed by other appearances in movies and on television . Nelson is a major liberal activist and the co @-@ chair of the advisory board of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , which is in favor of marijuana legalization . On the environmental front , Nelson owns the bio @-@ diesel brand Willie Nelson Biodiesel , which is made from vegetable oil . Nelson is also the honorary chairman of the Advisory Board of the Texas Music Project , the official music charity of the state of Texas . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willie Nelson was born in Abbott , Texas on April 29 , 1933 , during the Great Depression , to <unk> Marie ( née <unk> ) and Ira Doyle Nelson . He was born on April 29 , but his birth was recorded by doctor F. D. Sims on April 30 . He was named Willie by his cousin Mildred , who also chose Hugh as his middle name , in honor of her recently deceased younger brother . Nelson 's ancestry includes Cherokee , English , and Irish . His parents moved from Arkansas in 1929 , to look for work . Nelson 's grandfather , William , worked as a blacksmith , while his father worked as a mechanic . 
 His mother left soon after he was born , and his father remarried and also moved away , leaving Willie and his sister Bobbie to be raised by their grandparents . The Nelsons , who taught singing back in Arkansas , started their grandchildren in music . Nelson 's grandfather bought him a guitar when he was six , and taught him a few chords , and with his sister Bobbie , he sang gospel songs in the local church . He wrote his first song at age seven , and when he was nine , played guitar for the local band Bohemian Polka . During the summer , the family picked cotton along with other citizens of Abbott . Nelson disliked picking cotton , so he earned money by singing in dance halls , taverns , and honky tonks from age 13 , and continuing through high school . Nelson 's musical influences were Hank Williams , Bob Wills , Lefty Frizzell , Ray Price , Ernest Tubb , Hank Snow , Django Reinhardt , Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong . 
 Nelson attended Abbott High School , where he was a halfback on the football team , guard on the basketball team and shortstop in baseball . He also raised pigs for the Future Farmers of America organization . While still at school he sang and played guitar in The Texans , a band formed by his sister 's husband , Bud Fletcher . The band played in honky tonks , and also had a Sunday morning spot at <unk> in Hillsboro , Texas . Meanwhile , Nelson had a short stint as a relief phone operator in Abbott , followed by a job as a tree trimmer for the local electrical company , as well as pawn shop employee . After leaving school , in 1950 , he joined the United States Air Force for eight to nine months . 
 Upon his return , in 1952 , he married Martha Matthews , and from 1954 to 1956 studied agriculture at Baylor University . Nelson joined the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity , but dropped out to pursue a career in music . He worked as a bouncer for a nightclub , as a <unk> in an <unk> , saddle maker , tree trimmer again and as an oilfield worker . He later joined Johnny Bush 's band . Nelson moved with his family to Pleasanton , Texas , where he auditioned for a disc jockey job in <unk> . The owner of the station , Dr. Ben Parker , gave Nelson the job despite his lack of experience working on radio . With the equipment of the station , Nelson made his first two recordings in 1955 : " The Storm Has Just Begun " and " When I 've Sung My Last Hillbilly Song " . He recorded the tracks on used tapes , and sent the demos to the local label <unk> Records . <unk> rejected the recordings . 
 Nelson then had stints working for <unk> in Denton , Texas , <unk> and KCNC in Fort Worth , Texas , where he hosted The Western Express , taught Sunday school and he played in nightclubs . He then decided to move to San Diego . He was unable to find a job , and decided to go to Portland , Oregon , where his mother lived . Nelson tried to hitchhike , but after nobody picked him up , he slept in a ditch . He then found a nearby railroad yard and boarded a freight train that left him in Eugene . A truck driver then drove Nelson to a bus station and loaned him US $ 10 for a ticket to reach Portland . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = Beginnings ( 1956 – 1971 ) = = = 
 Nelson was hired by <unk> in Vancouver , Washington and appeared frequently on a television show . He made his first record in 1956 , " No Place For Me " , that included Leon Payne 's " Lumberjack " on the B @-@ side . The recording failed . Nelson continued working as a radio announcer and singing in Vancouver clubs . He made several appearances in a Colorado nightclub , later moving to Springfield , Missouri . After failing to land a spot on the Ozark Jubilee , he started to work as a dishwasher . Unhappy with his job , he moved back to Texas . After a short time in Waco , he settled in Fort Worth , and quit the music business for a year . He sold bibles and vacuum cleaners door @-@ to @-@ door , and eventually became a sales manager for the Encyclopedia Americana . 
 After his son Billy was born in 1958 , the family moved to Houston , Texas . On the way , Nelson stopped by the Esquire Ballroom to sell his original songs to house band singer Larry Butler . Butler refused to purchase the song " Mr. Record Man " for US $ 10 , instead giving Nelson a US $ 50 loan to rent an apartment and a six @-@ night job singing in the club . Nelson rented the apartment near Houston in Pasadena , Texas , where he also worked at the radio station as the sign @-@ on disc jockey . During this time , he recorded two singles for Pappy Daily on D Records " Man With the Blues " / " The Storm Has Just Begun " and " What a Way to Live " / " Misery Mansion " . Nelson then was hired by guitar instructor Paul Buskirk to work as an instructor in his school . He sold " Family Bible " to Buskirk for US $ 50 and " Night Life " for US $ 150 . " Family Bible " turned into a hit for Claude Gray in 1960 . 
 Nelson moved to Nashville , Tennessee in 1960 , but was unable to find a label to sign him . During this period he often spent time at Tootsie 's Orchid Lounge , a bar near the Grand Ole Opry frequented by the show 's stars and other singers and songwriters . There Nelson met Hank Cochran , a songwriter who worked for the publishing company Pamper Music , owned by Ray Price and Hal Smith . Cochran heard Nelson during a jam session with Buddy Emmons and Jimmy Day . Cochran had just earned a raise of US $ 50 a week , but convinced Smith to pay Nelson the money instead to sign him to Pamper Music . On hearing Nelson sing " Hello Walls " at Tootsie 's , Faron Young decided to record it . After Ray Price recorded Nelson 's " Night Life " , and his previous bassist Johnny Paycheck quit , Nelson joined Price 's touring band as a bass player . While playing with Price and the Cherokee Cowboys , his songs became hits for other artists , including " Funny How Time Slips Away " ( Billy Walker ) , " Pretty Paper " ( Roy Orbison ) , and , most famously , " Crazy " by Patsy Cline . Nelson and Cochran also met Cline 's husband , Charlie Dick at Tootsie 's . Dick liked a song of Nelson 's he heard on the bar 's jukebox . Nelson played him a demo tape of " Crazy . " Later that night Dick played the tape for Cline , who decided to record it . " Crazy " became the biggest jukebox hit of all time . 
 Nelson signed with Liberty Records and was recording by August 1961 at Quonset Hut Studio . His first two successful singles as an artist were released by the next year , including " Willingly " ( a duet with his soon @-@ to @-@ be second wife , Shirley Collie , which became his first charting single and first Top Ten at No. 10 ) and " Touch Me " ( his second Top Ten , stalling at No. 7 ) . Nelson 's tenure at Liberty yielded his first album entitled ... And Then I Wrote , released in September 1962 . In 1963 Collie and Nelson were married in Las Vegas . He then worked on the west coast offices of Pamper Records , in Pico Rivera , California . Since the job did not allow him the time to play music of his own , he left it and bought a ranch in Ridgetop , Tennessee , outside of Nashville . Fred Foster of Monument Records signed Nelson in early 1964 , but only one single was released : " I Never <unk> For You " . 
 By the fall of 1964 , Nelson had moved to RCA Victor at the behest of Chet Atkins , signing a contract for US $ 10 @,@ 000 per year . Country Willie – His Own Songs became Nelson 's first RCA Victor album , recorded in April 1965 . That same year he joined the Grand Ole Opry , and he met and became friends with Waylon Jennings after watching one of his shows in Phoenix , Arizona . In 1967 , he formed his backing band " The Record Men " , featuring Johnny Bush , Jimmy Day , Paul English and David <unk> . During his first few years on RCA Victor , Nelson had no significant hits , but from November 1966 through March 1969 , his singles reached the Top 25 in a consistent manner . " One in a Row " ( # 19 , 1966 ) , " The Party 's Over " ( # 24 during a 16 @-@ week chart run in 1967 ) , and his cover of Morecambe & Wise 's " Bring Me Sunshine " ( # 13 , March 1969 ) were Nelson 's best @-@ selling records during his time with RCA . 
 By 1970 , most of his songwriting royalties were invested in tours that did not produce significant profits . In addition to the problems in his career , Nelson divorced Shirley Collie in 1970 . In December , his ranch in Ridgetop , Tennessee burned down . He interpreted the incident as a signal for a change . He moved to a ranch near Bandera , Texas , and married Connie Koepke . In early 1971 his single " I 'm a Memory " reached the top 30 . After recording his final RCA single – " Mountain Dew " ( backed with " Phases , Stages , Circles , Cycles and Scenes " ) in late April 1972 , RCA requested that Nelson renew his contract ahead of schedule , with the implication that RCA would not release his latest recordings if he did not . Due to the failure of his albums , and particularly frustrated by the reception of Yesterday 's Wine , although his contract was not over , Nelson decided to retire from music . 
 = = = Outlaw country and success ( 1972 – 1989 ) = = = 
 Nelson moved to Austin , Texas , where the burgeoning hippie music scene ( see Armadillo World Headquarters ) rejuvenated the singer . His popularity in Austin soared as he played his own brand of country music marked by country , folk and jazz influences . In March , he performed on the final day of the Dripping Springs Reunion , a three @-@ day country music festival aimed by its producers to be an annual event . Despite the failure to reach the expected attendance , the concept of the festival inspired Nelson to create the Fourth of July Picnic , his own annual event , starting the following year . 
 Nelson decided to return to the recording business , he signed Neil Reshen as his manager to negotiate with RCA , who got the label to agree to end his contract upon repayment of US $ 14 @,@ 000 . Reshen eventually signed Nelson to Atlantic Records for US $ 25 @,@ 000 per year , where he became the label 's first country artist . He formed his backing band , The Family , and by February 1973 , he was recording his acclaimed Shotgun Willie at Atlantic Studios in New York City . 
 Shotgun Willie , released in May 1973 , earned excellent reviews but did not sell well . The album led Nelson to a new style , later stating that Shotgun Willie had " cleared his throat " . His next release , Phases and Stages , released in 1974 , was a concept album about a couple 's divorce , inspired by his own experience . Side one of the record is from the viewpoint of the woman , and side two is from the viewpoint of the man . The album included the hit single " Bloody Mary Morning . " The same year , he produced and starred in the pilot episode of PBS ' Austin City Limits . 
 Nelson then moved to Columbia Records , where he signed a contract that gave him complete creative control , made possible by the critical and commercial success of his previous albums . The result was the critically acclaimed , and massively popular 1975 concept album Red Headed Stranger . Although Columbia was reluctant to release an album with primarily a guitar and piano for accompaniment , Nelson and Waylon Jennings insisted . The album included a cover of Fred Rose 's 1945 song " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , that had been released as a single previous to the album , and became Nelson 's first number one hit as a singer . Throughout his 1975 tour , Nelson raised funds for PBS @-@ affiliated stations across the south promoting Austin City Limits . The pilot was aired first on those stations , later being released nationwide . The positive reception of the show prompted PBS to order ten episodes for 1976 , formally launching the show . 
 As Jennings was also achieving success in country music in the early 1970s , the pair were combined into a genre called outlaw country , since it did not conform to Nashville standards . The album Wanted ! The Outlaws in 1976 with Jessi Colter and Tompall Glaser cemented the pair 's outlaw image and became country music 's first platinum album . Later that year Nelson released The Sound in Your Mind ( certified gold in 1978 and platinum in 2001 ) and his first gospel album Troublemaker ( certified gold in 1986 ) . 
 In the summer of 1977 , Nelson discovered that Reshen had been filing tax extensions and not paying the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) since he took over as his manager . In June , a package containing cocaine was sent from Reshen 's office in New York to Jennings in Nashville . The package was followed by the DEA , and Jennings was arrested . The charges were later dropped , since Reshen 's assistant , Mark Rothbaum stepped in and took the charges . Rothbaum was <unk> to serve time in jail . Impressed by his attitude , Nelson fired Reshen and hired Rothbaum as his manager . In 1978 , Nelson released two more platinum albums . One , Waylon & Willie , was a collaboration with Jennings that included " Mammas Don 't Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys " , a hit single written and performed by Ed Bruce . Though observers predicted that Stardust would ruin his career , it went platinum the same year . Nelson continued to top the charts with hit songs during the late 1970s , including " Good Hearted Woman " , " Remember Me " , " If You 've Got the Money I 've Got the Time " , and " <unk> Day " . 
 During the 1980s , Nelson recorded a series of hit singles including " Midnight Rider " , a 1980 cover of the Allman Brothers song which Nelson recorded for The Electric Horseman , the soundtrack " On the Road Again " from the movie Honeysuckle Rose , and a duet with Julio Iglesias titled " To All the Girls I 've Loved Before " . 
 In 1982 , Pancho & Lefty , a duet album with Merle Haggard produced by Chips Moman was released . During the recording sessions of Pancho and Lefty , session guitarist Johnny Christopher and co @-@ writer of " Always on My Mind " , tried to pitch the song to an uninterested Haggard . Nelson , who was unaware of Elvis Presley 's version of the song asked him to record it . Produced by Moman , the single of the song was released , as well as the album of the same name . The single topped Billboard 's Hot Country Singles , while it reached number five on the Billboard Hot 100 . The release won three awards during the 25th Annual Grammy Awards : Song of the Year , Best Country Song and Best Male Country Vocal Performance . The single was certified platinum ; while the album was certified quadruple @-@ platinum , and later inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2008 . 
 Meanwhile , two collaborations with Waylon Jennings were released ; WWII in 1982 , and Take it to the Limit , another collaboration with Waylon Jennings was released in 1983 . In the mid @-@ 1980s , Nelson , Jennings , Kristofferson , and Johnny Cash formed The Highwaymen , who achieved platinum record sales and toured the world . Meanwhile , he became more involved with charity work , such as singing on We are the World in 1984 . In 1985 , Nelson had another success with Half Nelson , a compilation album of duets with a range of artists such as Ray Charles and Neil Young . In 1980 , Nelson performed on the south lawn of the White House . The concert of September 13 featured First Lady Rosalynn Carter and Nelson in a duet of Ray Wylie Hubbard 's " Up Against the Wall Redneck Mother " . Nelson frequently visited the White House , where according to the biography by Joe Nick Patoski , Willie Nelson : An Epic Life , he smoked marijuana on the White House roof . 
 = = = IRS and later career ( 1990 – present ) = = = 
 In 1990 , the IRS seized most of Nelson 's assets , claiming that he owed US $ 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . In addition to the unpaid taxes , Nelson 's situation was worsened by the weak investments he had made during the early 1980s . In 1978 , after he fired Reshen , Nelson was introduced by Dallas lawyer Terry Bray to the accounting firm Price Waterhouse . To repay the debt Reshen had created with the IRS , Nelson was recommended to invest in tax shelters that ultimately flopped . While the IRS disallowed his deductions for 1980 , 1981 and 1982 ( at a time that Nelson 's income multiplied ) , due to penalties and interests , the debt increased by the end of the decade . 
 His lawyer , Jay Goldberg , negotiated the sum to be lowered to US $ 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Later , Nelson 's attorney renegotiated a settlement with the IRS in which he paid US $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , although Nelson did not comply with the agreement . Nelson released The IRS Tapes : Who 'll Buy My Memories ? as a double album , with all profits destined for the IRS . Many of his assets were auctioned and purchased by friends , who donated or rented his possessions to him for a nominal fee . He sued Price Waterhouse , contending that they put his money in illegal tax shelters . The lawsuit was settled for an undisclosed amount and Nelson cleared his debts by 1993 . 
 During the 1990s and 2000s , Nelson toured continuously , recording several albums including 1998 's critically acclaimed Teatro , and performed and recorded with other acts including Phish , Johnny Cash , and Toby Keith . His duet with Keith , " Beer for My Horses " , was released as a single and topped the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts for six consecutive weeks in 2003 , while the accompanying video won an award for " Best Video " at the 2004 Academy of Country Music Awards . A USA Network television special celebrated Nelson 's 70th birthday , and Nelson released The Essential Willie Nelson as part of the celebration . Nelson also appeared on Ringo Starr 's 2003 album , Ringo Rama , as a guest vocal on " Write One for Me " . 
 Nelson headlined the 2005 Tsunami Relief Austin to Asia concert to benefit the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , which raised an estimated US $ 75 @,@ 000 for UNICEF . Also in 2005 , a live performance of the Johnny Cash song " Busted " with Ray Charles was released on Charles ' duets album Genius & Friends . Nelson 's 2007 performance with jazz trumpeter Wynton Marsalis at the Lincoln Center , was released as the live album Two Men with the Blues in 2008 ; reaching number one in Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums and number twenty on the Billboard 200 . The same year , Nelson recorded his first album with Buddy Cannon as the producer , Moment of Forever . Cannon acquainted Nelson earlier , during the production of his collaboration with Kenny Chesney on the duet " That Lucky Old Sun " , for Chesney 's album of the same name . In 2009 Nelson and Marsalis joined with Norah Jones in a tribute concert to Ray Charles , which resulted in the Here We Go Again : Celebrating the Genius of Ray Charles album , released in 2011 . 
 In 2010 , Nelson released Country Music , a compilation of standards produced by T @-@ Bone Burnett . The album peaked number four in Billboard 's Top Country Albums , and twenty on the Billboard 200 . It was nominated for Best Americana Album at the 2011 Grammy Awards . In 2011 Nelson participated in the concert <unk> For Japan , a fund raising event for the victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan which raised US $ 1 @.@ 6 million . 
 In February 2012 , Legacy Recordings signed a deal with Nelson that included the release of new material , as well as past releases that would be selected and complemented with outtakes and other material selected by him . With the new deal , Buddy Cannon returned to produce the recordings of Nelson . After selecting the material and the sound of the tunes with the singer , Cannon 's work method consisted in the recording of the tracks with studio musicians , with the takes later completed on a separate session by Nelson with his guitar . Cannon 's association to Nelson also extended to songwriting , with singer and producer composing the lyrics by exchanging text messages . 
 Nelson 's first release for the Legacy Recordings was Heroes , that included guest appearances by his sons Lukas and Micah of the band Insects vs Robots , Ray Price , Merle Haggard , Snoop Dogg , Kris Kristofferson , Jamey Johnson , Billy Joe Shaver and Sheryl Crow . The album reached number four on Billboard 's Top Country Albums . His 2013 release To All the Girls ... , a collection of duets with all female partners , featured among others Dolly Parton , Loretta Lynn , Rosanne Cash , Sheryl Crow , Mavis Staples , Norah Jones , Emmylou Harris , Carrie Underwood and Miranda Lambert . The album entered Billboard 's Top Country Albums at number two , marking his highest position on the chart since the release of his 1989 A Horse Called Music , and extending his record to a total of forty @-@ six top ten albums on the country charts . Nelson scored as well his second top ten album on the Billboard 200 , with the release entering at number nine . 
 His following release was Band of Brothers , in 2014 , the first Nelson album to feature the most newly self @-@ penned songs since 1996 's Spirit . Upon its release , it topped Billboard 's Top Country albums chart , the first time since 1986 's The Promiseland , the last Nelson album to top it . The release reached number five on the Billboard 200 , Nelson 's highest position on the chart since 1982 's Always on My Mind . In December 2014 , a duet with Rhonda Vincent , " Only Me " , topped Bluegrass Unlimited 's National Airplay chart . In June 2015 , his collaboration with Haggard Django and Jimmie topped Billboard 's Top Country albums chart and reached number seven on the Billboard 200 . 
 His two sons Lukas and Micah with the band Promise of the Real have backed Neil Young on his single " A Rock Star Bucks A Coffee Shop " which is from Young 's concept album The Monsanto Years which was set for release at the end of June <unk> song is aimed at Starbucks , Monsanto , and genetically modified food . By the end of May 2015 , the song was Video of the week on the Food Consumer website . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 Nelson 's acting debut was in the 1979 film , The Electric Horseman , followed by appearances in Honeysuckle Rose , Thief , and Barbarosa . He played the role of Red Loon in Coming Out of the Ice in 1982 and starred in Songwriter two years later . He portrayed the lead role in the 1986 film version of his album Red Headed Stranger . Other movies that Nelson acted in include Wag the Dog , Gone <unk> ' ( as Billy ' Catch ' <unk> ) , the 1986 television movie Stagecoach ( with Johnny Cash ) , Half Baked , <unk> , The Dukes of Hazzard , Surfer , Dude and Swing <unk> has also made guest appearances on Miami Vice ( 1986 's " El Viejo " episode ) , Delta , Nash Bridges , The Simpsons , Monk , Adventures in Wonderland , Dr. Quinn , Medicine Woman , King of the Hill , The Colbert Report , Swing Vote and Space Ghost Coast to Coast . 
 In 1988 his first book , Willie : An Autobiography , was published . The Facts of Life : And Other Dirty Jokes , a personal recollection of tour and musical stories from his career , combined with song lyrics , followed in 2002 . In 2005 he co @-@ authored Farm Aid : A Song for America , a commemorative book about the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of Farm Aid . His third book , co @-@ authored with long @-@ time friend Turk Pipkin , The Tao of Willie : A Guide to the Happiness in Your Heart , was published in 2006 . In 2007 a book advocating the use of bio @-@ diesel and the reduction of gas emissions , On The Clean Road Again : Biodiesel and The Future of the Family Farm , was published . His next book , A Tale Out of Luck , published in 2008 and co @-@ authored by Mike Blakely , was Nelson 's first fictional book . In 2012 , it was announced the release of a new autobiography by Nelson , Roll Me Up and Smoke Me When I Die : Musings from the Road . Released on November 13 , it was named after the song from his album Heroes . The book contained further biographical details , as well as family pictures and stories about Nelson 's political views , as well as his advocation for marijuana . The artwork of the book was designed by Nelson 's son , Micah , and the foreword written by Kinky Friedman . In 2015 , the publication of a second Nelson autobiography entitled It 's a Long Story : My Life was announced . Co @-@ authored with David Ritz , the book was published on May 5 , 2015 . 
 In 2002 , Nelson became the official spokesman of the Texas Roadhouse , a chain of steakhouses . Nelson heavily promoted the chain and appeared on a special on Food Network . The chain installed Willie 's Corner , a section dedicated to him and decked out with Willie memorabilia , at several locations . 
 In 2008 , Nelson reopened Willie 's Place , a truck stop in Carl 's Corner , Texas . The U.S. Bankruptcy Court allowed Nelson to invest in it . The establishment had about 80 employees and was used as a concert hall with a bar and a 1 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 m2 ) dance floor . It closed in 2011 after defaulting on a loan , leading to foreclosure and bankruptcy . In 2010 , Nelson founded with the collaboration of producers and filmmakers Luck Films , a company dedicated to produce feature films , documentaries and concerts . The next year , he created Willie 's Roadhouse , aired on channel 56 of SiriusXM radio . The channel was a result of the merger of his two other channels The Roadhouse and Willie 's Place . 
 In November 2014 , it was announced that Nelson would be the host of the television series Inside <unk> , shot at <unk> Studio in Austin , Texas . The thirteen @-@ episode first season would feature artists being interviewed by Nelson and Dan Rather , followed by a performance . The series concept received attention from cable channels that requested to see the pilot episode . 
 Following the legalization of marijuana in different states , Nelson announced in 2015 through spokesman Michael Bowman the establishment of his own marijuana brand , Willie 's Reserve . Plans to open chain stores in the states were marijuana was legalized were announced , to be expanded state @-@ to @-@ state if marijuana legalization is further expanded . Bowman called the brand " a culmination of ( Nelson 's ) vision , and his whole life " . 
 = = Music style = = 
 Nelson uses a variety of music styles to create his own distinctive blend of country music , a hybrid of jazz , pop , blues , rock and folk . His " unique sound " , which uses a " relaxed , behind @-@ the @-@ beat singing style and gut @-@ string guitar " and his " nasal voice and jazzy , off @-@ center phrasing " , has been responsible for his wide appeal , and has made him a " vital icon in country music " , influencing the " new country , new traditionalist , and alternative country movements of the ' 80s and ' 90s " . 
 = = = Guitars = = = 
 In 1969 , the Baldwin company gave Nelson an amplifier and a three @-@ cord pickup electric guitar . During a show in <unk> , Texas , Nelson left the guitar on the floor of the stage , and it was later stepped on by a drunk man . He sent it to be repaired in Nashville by Shot Jackson , who told Nelson that the damage was too great . Jackson offered him a Martin N @-@ 20 Classical guitar , and , at Nelson 's request , moved the pickup to the Martin . Nelson purchased the guitar unseen for US $ 750 and named it after Roy Rogers ' horse " Trigger " . The next year Nelson rescued the guitar from his burning ranch . 
 Constant strumming with a guitar pick over the decades has worn a large sweeping hole into the guitar 's body near the sound hole — the N @-@ 20 has no pick @-@ guard since classical guitars are meant to be played fingerstyle instead of with picks . Its soundboard has been signed by over a hundred of Nelson 's friends and associates , ranging from fellow musicians to lawyers and football <unk> first signature on the guitar was Leon Russell 's , who asked Nelson initially to sign his guitar . When Nelson was about to sign it with a marker , Russell requested him to scratch it instead , explaining that the guitar would be more valuable in the future . Interested in the concept , Nelson requested Russell to also sign his guitar . In 1991 , during his process with the IRS , Nelson was worried that Trigger could be auctioned off , stating : " When Trigger goes , I 'll quit " . He asked his daughter , Lana , to take the guitar from the studio before any IRS agent got there , and bring it to him on Maui . Nelson then hid the guitar in his manager 's house until his debt was paid in 1993 . 
 = = Activism = = 
 Nelson is active in a number of issues . Along with Neil Young and John Mellencamp , he set up Farm Aid in 1985 to assist and increase awareness of the importance of family farms , after Bob Dylan 's comments during the Live Aid concert that he hoped some of the money would help American farmers in danger of losing their farms through mortgage debt . The first concert included Bob Dylan , Billy Joel , B.B. King , Roy Orbison , and Neil Young among many others , and raised over $ 9 million for America 's family farmers . Besides organizing and performing in the annual concerts , Nelson is the president of the board of Farm Aid . 
 Nelson is a co @-@ chair of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws ( NORML ) advisory board . He has worked with NORML for years , fighting for marijuana legalization . In 2005 Nelson and his family hosted the first annual " Willie Nelson & NORML Benefit Golf Tournament " , leading to a cover appearance and inside interview in the January 2008 issue of High Times magazine . After his arrest for possession of marijuana in 2010 , Nelson created the <unk> party under the motto " Tax it , regulate it and legalize it ! " . 
 In 2001 , following the September 11 attacks , he participated in the benefit telethon America : A Tribute to Heroes , leading the rest of the celebrities singing the song " America the Beautiful " . In 2010 , during an interview with Larry King , Nelson expressed his doubts with regards to the attacks and the official story . Nelson explained that he could not believe that the buildings could collapse due to the planes , attributing instead the result to an implosion . 
 Nelson supported Dennis Kucinich 's campaign in the 2004 Democratic presidential primaries . He raised money , appeared at events , and composed the song " Whatever Happened to Peace on Earth ? " , criticizing the war in Iraq . He recorded a radio advertisement asking for support to put musician / author Kinky Friedman on the ballot as an independent candidate for the 2006 Texas gubernatorial election . Friedman promised Nelson a job in Austin as the head of a new Texas Energy Commission due to his support of bio @-@ fuels . In January 2008 , Nelson filed a suit against the Texas Democratic Party , alleging that the party violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution by refusing to allow co @-@ plaintiff Kucinich to appear on the primary ballot because he had scratched out part of the loyalty oath on his application . 
 In 2004 , he and his wife Annie became partners with Bob and Kelly King in the building of two Pacific Bio @-@ diesel plants , one in Salem , Oregon , and the other at Carl 's Corner , Texas ( the Texas plant was founded by Carl Cornelius , a longtime Nelson friend and the namesake for Carl 's Corner ) . In 2005 , Nelson and several other business partners formed Willie Nelson Biodiesel ( " Bio @-@ Willie " ) , a company that is marketing bio @-@ diesel bio @-@ fuel to truck stops . The fuel is made from vegetable oil ( mainly soybean oil ) , and can be burned without modification in diesel engines . 
 Nelson is an advocate for better treatment for horses and has been campaigning for the passage of the American Horse Slaughter Prevention Act ( H.R. 503 / S. 311 ) alongside the Animal Welfare Institute . He is on its board of directors and has adopted a number of horses from Habitat for Horses . In 2008 , Nelson signed on to warn consumers about the cruel and illegal living conditions for calves raised to produce milk for dairy products . He wrote letters to Land O <unk> and Challenge Dairy , two of the major corporations that use milk from calves raised at California 's Mendes Calf Ranch , which employs an intensive confinement practice that was the subject of a lawsuit and campaign brought by the Animal Legal Defense Fund . 
 A supporter of the LGBT movement , Nelson published in 2006 through iTunes a version of Ned Sublette 's " Cowboys Are Frequently , Secretly Fond of Each Other " , that met instant success . During an interview with Texas Monthly in 2013 , regarding the Defense of Marriage Act and Same @-@ sex marriage in the United States , Nelson responded to a comparison the interviewer made with the Civil Rights Movement , stating : " We 'll look back and say it was crazy that we ever even argued about this " . He also presented two logos with the pink equal sign , symbol of the <unk> movement . The first one , featured the sign represented with two long braids ; while the second one , featured the sign represented with two marijuana cigarettes . The use of the logos became viral instantly in social networking sites such as Twitter and Facebook . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nelson lives in Maui , Hawaii , in a largely self @-@ sustaining community where all the homes use only solar power . Neighbors include Kris Kristofferson , Woody Harrelson , and Owen Wilson . Nelson also owns a ranch near Austin , Texas . 
 Willie Nelson has married four times and fathered seven children . His first marriage was to Martha Matthews ; it lasted from 1952 to 1962 . The couple had three children : Lana , Susie and Willie " Billy " Hugh , Jr . Billy died by suicide in 1991 . The marriage was marked by violence , with Matthews assaulting Nelson several times , including one incident when she sewed him up in a bed sheet and then beat him with a broomstick . Nelson 's next marriage was to Shirley Collie in 1963 . The couple divorced in 1971 , after Collie found a bill from the maternity ward of a Houston hospital charged to Nelson and Connie Koepke for the birth of Paula Carlene Nelson . Koepke and Nelson married the same year and had two daughters , Paula Carlene and Amy Lee . Following a divorce in 1988 , he married his current wife , Annie D 'Angelo , in 1991 . They have two sons , Lukas Autry and Jacob Micah . Nelson traces his genealogy to the American Revolutionary War , in which his ancestor John Nelson served as a major . 
 While swimming in Hawaii in 1981 , Nelson 's lung collapsed . He was taken to the Maui Memorial Hospital and his scheduled concerts were canceled . Nelson temporarily stopped smoking cigarettes each time his lungs became congested , and resumed when the congestion ended . He was then smoking between two and three packages per day . After suffering from pneumonia several times , he decided to quit either marijuana or tobacco . He chose to quit tobacco . In 2008 he started to smoke marijuana with a carbon @-@ free system to avoid the effects of smoke . In 2004 Nelson underwent surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome , as he had damaged his wrists by continuously playing the guitar . On the recommendation of his doctor , he canceled his scheduled concerts and only wrote songs during his recovery . In 2012 he canceled a fund @-@ raising appearance in the Denver area . He suffered from breathing problems due to high altitude and emphysema and was taken to a local hospital . His publicist Elaine Schock confirmed soon after that Nelson 's health was good and that he was heading to his next scheduled concert in Dallas , Texas . After repeated instances of pneumonia and emphysema through the years , Nelson underwent stem @-@ cell therapy in 2015 to improve the state of his lungs . 
 During his childhood , Nelson grew interested in martial arts . He ordered self @-@ defense manuals on jujitsu and judo that he saw advertised in Batman and Superman comic books . Nelson started to formally practice kung fu after he moved to Nashville , in the 1960s . During the 1980s , Nelson began training in tae kwon do and now holds a second @-@ degree black belt in that discipline . During the 1990s , Nelson started to practice the Korean martial art <unk> <unk> . In 2014 , after twenty years in the discipline , his Grand Master Sam Um presented him with a fifth @-@ degree black belt in a ceremony held in Austin , Texas . A 2014 Tae Kwon Do Times magazine interview revealed that Nelson had developed an unorthodox manner of training during the lengthy periods of time he was on tour . Nelson would conduct his martial arts training on his tour bus " The Honeysuckle Rose " and send videos to his supervising Master for review and critique . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 Nelson has been arrested several times for marijuana possession . The first occasion was in 1974 in Dallas , Texas . In 1977 after a tour with Hank Cochran , Nelson traveled to The Bahamas . Nelson and Cochran arrived late to the airport and boarded the flight without luggage . The bags were later sent to them . As Nelson and Cochran claimed their luggage in the Bahamas , a customs officer questioned Nelson after marijuana was found in a pair of his jeans . Nelson was arrested and jailed . As Cochran made arrangements to pay the bail , he took Nelson a six @-@ pack of beer to his cell . Nelson was released a few hours later . Inebriated , he fell after he jumped celebrating and was taken to the emergency room . He then appeared before the judge , who dropped the charges but ordered Nelson to never return to the country . 
 In 1994 , highway patrolmen found marijuana in his car near Waco , Texas . His requirement to appear in court prevented him attending the Grammy awards that year . While traveling to Ann W. Richards ' funeral in 2006 , Nelson , along with his manager and his sister , Bobbi , were arrested in St. Martin Parish , Louisiana and charged with possession of marijuana and hallucinogenic mushrooms . Nelson received six months probation . 
 On November 26 , 2010 , Nelson was arrested in Sierra Blanca , Texas , for possession of six ounces of marijuana found in his tour bus while traveling from Los Angeles back to Texas . He was released after paying bail of US $ 2 @,@ 500 . Prosecutor Kit Bramblett supported not sentencing Nelson to jail due to the small amount of marijuana involved , but suggested instead a US $ 100 fine and told Nelson that he would have him sing " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " for the court . Judge Becky Dean @-@ Walker said that Nelson would have to pay the fine but not to perform the song , explaining that the prosecutor was joking . Nelson 's lawyer Joe Turner reached an agreement with the prosecutor . Nelson was set to pay a US $ 500 fine to avoid a two @-@ year jail sentence with a 30 @-@ day review period , which in case of another incident would end the agreement . The judge later rejected the agreement , claiming that Nelson was receiving preferential treatment for his celebrity status ; the offense normally carried a one @-@ year jail sentence . Bramblett declared that the case would remain open until it was either dismissed or the judge changed her opinion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nelson is widely recognized as an American icon . He was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1993 , and he received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1998 . In 2011 , Nelson was inducted to the National Agricultural Hall of Fame , for his labor in Farm Aid and other fund risers to benefit farmers . In 2015 Nelson won the Gershwin Prize , the lifetime award of the Library of Congress . He was included by Rolling Stone on its 100 Greatest Singers and 100 Greatest Guitarists lists . 
 In 2003 , Texas Governor Perry signed bill No. <unk> , introduced by State Representative Elizabeth Ames Jones and Senator Jeff Wentworth , which funded the Texas Music Project , the state 's official music charity . Nelson was named Honorary Chairman of the Advisory Board of the project . In 2005 , Democratic Texas Senator Gonzalo Barrientos introduced a bill to name 49 miles ( 79 km ) of the Travis County section of State Highway 130 after Nelson , and at one point 23 of the 31 state Senators were co @-@ sponsors of the bill . The legislation was dropped after two Republican senators , Florence Shapiro and Wentworth , objected , citing Nelson 's lack of connection to the highway , his fund raisers for Democrats , his drinking , and his marijuana advocacy . 
 An important collection of Willie Nelson materials ( 1975 – 1994 ) became part of the Wittliff collections of Southwestern Writers , Texas State University , San Marcos , Texas . The collection contains lyrics , screenplays , letters , concert programs , tour itineraries , posters , articles , clippings , personal effects , promotional items , souvenirs , and documents . It documents Nelson 's IRS troubles and how Farm Aid contributions were used . Most of the material was collected by Nelson 's friend Bill Wittliff , who wrote or co @-@ wrote Honeysuckle Rose , Barbarosa and Red Headed Stranger . In 2014 , Nelson donated his personal collection to the Dolph Briscoe Center for American History . The items include photographs , correspondence , song manuscripts , posters , certificate records , awards , signed books , screenplays , personal items and gifts and tributes from Nelson 's fans . 
 In April 2010 , Nelson received the " Feed the Peace " award from The <unk> Project for his extensive work with Farm Aid and overall contributions to world peace . On June 23 , 2010 he was inducted into the Library of Congress 's National Recording Registry . Nelson is an honorary trustee of the Dayton International Peace Museum . In 2010 , Austin , Texas renamed Second Street to Willie Nelson Boulevard . The city also unveiled a life @-@ size statue to honor him , placed at the entrance of Austin City Limits ' new studio . The non @-@ profit organization Capital Area Statues commissioned sculptor Clete Shields to execute the project . The statue was unveiled on April 20 , 2012 . The date selected by the city of Austin unintentionally coincided with the number 4 / 20 , associated with cannabis culture . In spite of the coincidence and Nelson 's advocacy for the legalization of marijuana , the ceremony was scheduled also for 4 : 20 pm . During the ceremony , Nelson performed the song " Roll Me Up and Smoke Me When I Die " . The same year , Nelson was honored during the 46th Annual Country Music Association Awards as the first recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award , which was also named after him . In 2013 , he received an honorary doctorate from the Berklee College of Music . The following year , he was part of the inaugural class inducted into the Austin City Limits Hall of Fame . Also included among the first inductees was his friend Darrell Royal , whose jamming parties that Nelson participated in were the source of inspiration for the show . 
 For many years , Nelson 's image was marked by his red hair , often divided into two long braids partially concealed under a bandanna . In the April 2007 issue of Stuff Magazine Nelson was interviewed about his long locks . " I started braiding my hair when it started getting too long , and that was , I don 't know , probably in the 70 's . " On May 26 , 2010 , the Associated Press reported that Nelson had cut his hair , and Nashville music journalist Jimmy Carter published a photograph of the pigtail @-@ free Nelson on his website . Nelson wanted a more maintainable hairstyle , as well helping him stay cool more easily at his Maui home . In October 2014 , the braids of Nelson were sold for US $ 37 @,@ 000 at an auction of the Waylon Jennings State . In 1983 , Nelson cut his braids and gave them to Jennings as a gift during a party celebrating Jennings ' sobriety . 
 Nelson 's touring and recording group , the Family , is full of longstanding members . The original lineup included his sister Bobbie Nelson , drummer Paul English , harmonicist Mickey Raphael , bassist Bee Spears , Billy English ( Paul 's younger brother ) , and Jody Payne . The current lineup includes all the members but Jody Payne , who retired , and Bee Spears , who died in 2011 . Willie & Family tours North America in the bio @-@ diesel bus Honeysuckle Rose , which is fueled by Bio @-@ Willie . Nelson 's tour buses were customized by Florida Coach since 1979 . The company built the Honeysuckle Rose I in 1983 , which was replaced after a collision in Nova Scotia , Canada , in 1990 . The interior was salvaged and reused for the second version of the bus the same year . Nelson changed his tour bus in 1996 , 2005 and 2013 , currently touring on the Honeysuckle Rose V. 
 = = Discography and other works = = 
 As well as recording over sixty studio albums , Nelson has appeared in over thirty films and TV shows . His acting debut was in the 1979 film , The Electric Horseman , followed by appearances in Honeysuckle Rose , Thief , and Barbarosa . 
 Recordings 
 Films 
 Books 
 Willie : An Autobiography , Simon & Schuster , 1988 , with Bud <unk> 
 The Facts of Life and Other Dirty Jokes , Random House , 2002 
 Farm Aid : A Song for America , Rodale Books , foreword by Willie Nelson , 2005 
 The Tao of Willie : A Guide to the Happiness in Your Heart , Gotham , 2006 , with Turk Pipkin 
 On The Clean Road Again : Biodiesel and The Future of the Family Farm , Fulcrum Publishing , 2007 
 A Tale Out of Luck ( a novel ) , Center Street , 2008 , with Mike Blakely 
 Roll Me Up and Smoke Me When I Die : Musings From the Road , William Morrow , foreword by Kinky Friedman , 2012 
 It 's a Long Story : My Life , Little , Brown and Company , 2015 with David Ritz 
 = Smells Like Nirvana = 
 " Smells Like Nirvana " is a parody of Nirvana 's song " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , written and performed by " Weird Al " Yankovic ; it was released both as a single and as part of Yankovic 's Off the Deep End album in April 1992 . " Smells Like Nirvana " was written during a three @-@ year career low for Yankovic after the financial failure of his film UHF , but captured the quickly @-@ rising popularity of the grunge style and Nirvana 's success . The song was written to poke fun at the fact that many people had a hard time understanding Nirvana singer Kurt Cobain 's lyrics in the original song . After being unable to contact Nirvana by conventional means , Yankovic called Cobain while the band was on the set of Saturday Night Live , where Cobain quickly gave permission to record the parody . 
 Recording the song was a change for Yankovic and his band . Usually , the group were forced to record several overdubs . However , " Smells Like Nirvana " was relatively straightforward in terms of the musical composition . To promote the single , Yankovic created an associated video for the song that parodied the " Smells like Teen Spirit " video . The parody video closely mirrored the original ; Yankovic even went so far as to hire several of the same actors and use the same set . 
 " Smells Like Nirvana " was met with critical praise and helped to re @-@ energize Yankovic 's career . Cobain considered the parody as a sign that they had " made it " as a band . The song is one of Yankovic 's most successful singles , reaching number 35 on both the Billboard Hot 100 and the US Mainstream Rock Tracks . The song 's video was nominated for a 1992 MTV Video Music Award for Best Male Video . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to writing " Smells Like Nirvana " , Yankovic 's music career had suffered from the poor financial performance of his 1989 feature film , UHF and the associated soundtrack . Yankovic called that " the beginning of three years where it was kind of hard for me to recover " . He started work on a new studio album around 1990 . To revitalize his career , he considered creating a parody of a Michael Jackson song , which had proven successful twice before with " Eat It " and " Fat " . He had composed a parody of Jackson 's " Black or White " , entitled " Snack All Night " , but Jackson said he was uncomfortable with the parody , given that the original song was intended to be a political statement . Yankovic would later believe that Jackson 's refusal was , in the long run , a blessing ; he felt that " Snack All Night " was not one of his better works . While he had compiled other original songs for a new album , he feared the lack of a good parody song would doom the album to failure , and held off from releasing anything until an idea presented itself . 
 At that time , the band Nirvana started to become a name in the music scene , creating " big , seismic shifts in pop culture " according to Yankovic . Yankovic felt that the band 's 1991 album Nevermind , which featured " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , was " really great " , but feared that at its release , the band was not popular enough to warrant a parody . By early 1992 , Nevermind had reached platinum certification and led the Billboard charts , which led Yankovic to start working on a parody . Yankovic noted that much of the publicity around Nevermind dealt with the inability to comprehend the songs ' lyrics — both in their phrasing and the manner in which they were sung by the lead vocalist Kurt Cobain ; Yankovic decided to use this as the basis for his parody . Yankovic noted , " I try not to go the obvious route all the time , but sometimes the most obvious is actually the best . " Yankovic had initial difficulty getting permission for the parody , as his manager claimed he was unable to get through to the group numerous times . When Yankovic learned that Nirvana would be performing on the January 11 , 1992 show of Saturday Night Live , he called his UHF co @-@ star , Victoria Jackson , at the time a regular cast member of the show . Jackson got Cobain on the phone so that Yankovic could make his request . Cobain agreed , though initially he inquired if the song would be about food , a common theme in many of Yankovic 's songs . Yankovic explained that the song would be about Cobain 's incomprehensible lyrics , to which Cobain replied , according to Yankovic , " Oh , sure , of course , that 's funny . " 
 = = Recording and lyrics = = 
 The song was recorded around January 27 , 1992 at Santa Monica Sound Records , in Santa Monica , California . It was the final song recorded for the album , as Yankovic generally records the songs that he thinks will be released as singles last ; in this case , he knew that " Smells Like Nirvana " would be the lead @-@ off single for the new album . Recording took between three and four days . The band worked at trying to match the same tempos that were in the original " Smells Like Teen Spirit " song ; Jon Schwartz , Yankovic 's drummer , noted that " the [ drum ] part was pretty loose . [ ... ] Tempos were up and down . We adjusted the tempos on our song to meet the Nirvana version . It 's by no means steady . " Compared to previous parodies , where upwards of 20 @-@ some instruments had to be mixed together , the simpler composition of " Teen Spirit " made it much easier for the band to complete the song . 
 Yankovic later noted that recording the song 's vocals was particularly difficult , because he was singing " for eight to 12 hours a day " , which caused strain on his vocal cords . For the verse where Yankovic mumbles the lyrics to the song , he placed several cookies in his mouth to achieve the garbled effect . During the parody 's musical interlude , Yankovic gargled water to the tune of the original 's guitar solo . The solo also features kazoos and a tuba , with the latter being played by Tommy Johnson . 
 Lyrically , " Smells Like Nirvana " pokes fun at the original song 's difficult @-@ to @-@ understand words . The opening verse begins " What is this song / All about ? / Can 't figure any lyrics out " . At one point , Yankovic purposely <unk> the lyrics : " It 's hard to <unk> <unk> <unk> [ sic ] / With all these marbles in my mouth " . He admitted in an interview that he woke up " in the middle of the night " and wrote down the phrase " <unk> <unk> <unk> " , thinking that it would " be important someday . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , directed by Yankovic 's manager Jay Levey , is a near shot @-@ for @-@ shot parody of the original video for " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , which depicts the band playing at a high school concert while it descends into riot . Yankovic is present on guitar and vocals as Kurt Cobain , with Steve Jay on bass as Krist Novoselic , and Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums as Dave Grohl . All three wear clothing and long @-@ haired wigs to imitate the look of Nirvana in " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Yankovic 's video uses many of the same props , actors and camera angles ; in particular , the video was shot in the same Culver City , California sound stage as Nirvana 's video , several of the cheerleaders and audience members were from the original video , and Tony De La Rosa reprises his role as the janitor . Levey stated that they were able to recreate much of the same setting with help of the producers of the original Nirvana video once they were aware that the song had Cobain 's blessing . Yankovic had a brief conversation with Samuel Bayer , the original director of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " in preparation for the video shoot . Although Yankovic noted that " he was certainly going along with it " , he felt that Bayer was " the least enthused " because " he was a true artiste " and was reluctant to see his work parodied . 
 The video includes actor Dick Van Patten in a guest role . Van Patten , being one of the few celebrities that could be reached through immediate contacts , was a last @-@ minute addition by Yankovic . Professional skateboarder Tony Hawk also appears as one of the many extras as a result of the <unk> Skateboards team providing " skater / punks " for the video , although Yankovic was not aware of this until a 2009 Twitter post by Hawk . Schwartz attempted to recreate Grohl 's wild headbanging during filming , leaving him with a stiff neck several days afterward . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The single for " Smells Like Nirvana " was released on April 2 , 1992 , while the album containing it , Off the Deep End , saw its release on April 14 , 1992 . The single charted on several Billboard charts , making it Yankovic 's most successful single since his single " Eat It " , which charted in 1984 . The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 on April 25 , 1992 . It peaked at number 35 and remained on the chart for two weeks . The single also charted on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks , also peaking at number 35 and remaining for two weeks . The single was also popular in the other countries . In Canada , the single charted at number 48 . In the United Kingdom , the single entered the charts on April 7 , 1992 , and peaked at number 58 , spending only one week on the charts . In Australia , " Smells Like Nirvana " was released on June 14 , 1992 , and spent six weeks on the charts . It peaked at number 24 . 
 After its release , " Smells Like Nirvana " was considered , at the time , the largest comeback in Yankovic 's career . The song was well @-@ received by the media . AllMusic reviewer Barry Weber wrote that the song illustrated " the kind of brilliant writing Yankovic was still capable of doing " . Anthony Violanti , a reporter for The Buffalo News , called the song " the high point " of one of Yankovic 's concerts . Nirvana itself was also pleased with the parody . Cobain is claimed to have considered that Nirvana had " made it " with the success of Yankovic 's parody . In his personal journals that were later published , he calls Yankovic " America 's modern pop @-@ rock <unk> [ sic ] " . Grohl is also reported to have realized his band was truly successful when Yankovic asked for permission to record the parody . Yankovic stated that an executive for DGC Records , the label for Nirvana at the time , claimed that the popularity of " Smells like Nirvana " helped sell an additional million copies of Nevermind . The video was nominated for the 1992 MTV Video Awards for " Best Male Video " , although it did not win . At the awards ceremony , Nirvana was initially asked to perform , but they declined . The offer was then extended to Yankovic , before Nirvana relented . Yankovic later joked that " I might 've been a bargaining chip " . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 During live performances , Yankovic dons clothing similar to what Cobain wore in the video for " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . This includes an electric left @-@ handed guitar , a shirt similar to Cobain 's , and a blonde wig . The costuming for the performance is critical ; Schwartz explained that " if anything 's missing , Al won 't do it " . The rest of Al 's band also participates . Steve Jay , who plays bass , uses two bass straps to emulate and exaggerate " Novoselic 's low @-@ hanging bass " . He explained that he positions his instrument " to where I can just barely touch the strings " . The members of the band also mock @-@ mosh . Jim West , the band 's guitarist , noted that moshing is usually tame , but that there " were a few collisions where people got hurt , but not the audience , just the band . " Sometimes during the third verse , after Yankovic sings " And I forgot the next verse , " he drops out for the next few lines , pretending to actually forget the lyrics . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After Cobain committed suicide in 1994 , Yankovic and his band were hesitant to play the extremely popular " Smells Like Nirvana " during live shows . For several months after Cobain 's death , Yankovic would first perform a somber tribute to Cobain prior to playing the song itself . Shortly after Cobain 's death , Yankovic was scheduled to play a show in Seattle , where Nirvana first became famous . Due to this connection , Yankovic was worried about how the audience would react to the parody . He was told by journalists that the song would be " cathartic " for the area . Yankovic noted that the subsequent performance " went over extremely well " . Yankovic continues to play " Smells Like Nirvana " live , stating that " Kurt was a fan of the song " and " he would have wanted it that way . " 
 In The Simpsons episode " That ' 90s Show " , set primarily in flashback to the 1990s , Homer Simpson is shown creating one of the first grunge bands while trying to cope with Marge 's infidelity ; the band , called " <unk> " , becomes highly popular . At one point , Homer writes a new song called " Shave Me " — itself a loose parody of Nirvana 's real single " Rape Me " — which is later parodied as " <unk> " in both song and video by " Weird Al " Yankovic , who voiced himself . Homer takes Yankovic 's parody as a sign that his band has become successful , but his depressed state after breaking up with Marge leaves him unable to enjoy the song 's humor and he gloomily notes " He who is tired of Weird Al , is tired of life " . The situation in the short is said to mirror much of the history of " Smells Like Nirvana " , including Kurt Cobain 's reaction to the parody . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 U.S. pressing 
 " Smells Like Nirvana " – 3 : 42 
 " Trigger Happy " – 3 : 46 
 " Waffle King " – 4 : 26 
 U.S. cassette single 
 " Smells Like Nirvana " – 3 : 42 
 " Waffle King " – 4 : 26 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " Weird " Al Yankovic – vocals , background vocals , production , arrangement 
 Jim West – guitar 
 Steve Jay – bass guitar 
 Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz – drums 
 Tommy Johnson – tuba 
 Tony Papa – engineering 
 = Déjà Vu ( 2006 film ) = 
 Déjà Vu ( stylised onscreen without accents ) is a 2006 American science fiction action film starring Denzel Washington and directed by Tony Scott . The film co @-@ stars Paula Patton , Jim Caviezel , Val Kilmer , Adam Goldberg and Bruce Greenwood . Déjà Vu involves ATF agent Douglas Carlin , who travels back in time in attempts to prevent a domestic terrorist attack that takes place in New Orleans and to save a woman with whom he falls in love , Claire Kuchever . Filming took place in New Orleans before and after Hurricane Katrina . 
 The film was premiered in New York City on November 20 , 2006 , and released widely in the United States and Canada two days later on November 24 , 2006 . It received mixed reviews from critics , and earning $ 64 million in the United States and $ 180 million worldwide . It was the 23rd most successful film worldwide for 2006 . The film was nominated for five awards , and also won the Golden Reel Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On Mardi Gras in New Orleans , the ferry Sen. Alvin T. Stumpf is carrying hundreds of the U.S. Navy sailors and their families across the Mississippi River from their base to the city . Suddenly , the ferry explodes and sinks , killing 543 passengers and crew members . Special Agent Douglas Carlin ( Denzel Washington ) from the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( BATF ) is sent to investigate and discovers evidence of a bomb planted by a domestic terrorist . Arriving at the scene he hears his unique ring tone coming from a nearby body bag . He then meets with local investigators and FBI Special Agent Paul Pryzwarra ( Val Kilmer ) , and informs them of his findings . He learns about a charred body pulled from the river , identified as Claire Kuchever ( Paula Patton ) . Unlike the other bodies from the ferry , though , this one appears to have been killed before the explosion . 
 Pryzwarra is impressed with Doug 's detective expertise , and asks him to join a newly formed governmental detective unit whose first case is to investigate the bombing . Led by Dr. Alexander Denny ( Adam Goldberg ) , they investigate the events before the explosion by using a program called " Snow White " , which enables them to look into the past ( 4 days , 6 hours , 3 minutes , 45 seconds , 14 @.@ 5 nanoseconds ) in detail by using several satellites to form a triangulated image of events . The system is limited in that they can only see past events once ; there is no fast forwarding or rewinding , although they can record everything in the process . Convinced that Claire is a vital link , Doug persuades them to focus on her . While investigating Claire 's past through " Snow White " , the bomber calls her to buy the SUV that she has for sale so he can use it for the bomb . Although he doesn 't buy her car , the " Snow White " team now knows exactly where and when the terrorist was during the call . 
 Doug finds out " Snow White " is actually a time window , and can send inanimate objects into the past . Despite Denny 's protests against tampering with the past , Doug has the team send a note back to his past self with the time and place to stop the ferry bomber . Instead , his partner Larry Minuti gets the note and while following up on it he is shot by the terrorist , and setting up his death in the present . The team attempts to follow the terrorist , who takes Minuti with him , but he moves outside of " Snow White " ' s range . However , Doug is able to follow him in the present using a " Snow White " like helmet that increases the machine 's range , and able to track him to the terrorist 's home . In the past time , Minuti regains consciousness , but is killed and burned by the terrorist . Still needing a vehicle big enough to hold the bomb ( and is not riddled with bullet holes ) the terrorist goes to Claire 's address , kidnaps her and takes her car . 
 Using face recognition technology the ferry bomber is identified and taken into custody . He turns out to be Carroll Oerstadt , angry at the military after being turned down by both Marines and Army , because their psychological profiling showed he was psychologically unstable . Considering the case now closed , the government shuts down the " Snow White " investigation . Despite the killer having been caught , Claire and the ferry victims remain dead , which unsettles Doug since he is convinced that the " Snow White " team can actually alter history . Doug convinces Denny to do one last experiment , that is : send Doug to the past to save Claire and stop the bombing ; a risky procedure , since no human has ever been sent back . Doug survives the trip , especially because he was sent back to a hospital emergency room , where they were able to revive him . He subsequently stops Claire from being murdered by Oerstadt in his very house . 
 However , Doug goes to the ferry where , with Claire 's help , he kills Oerstadt , but is unable to disarm the bomb . To save everyone , Doug and Claire purposely drive the bomb SUV off the end of the ferry before it explodes . Claire escapes but Doug , unable to get out of the vehicle , dies in the underwater explosion . As Claire mourns Doug 's death , she is approached by an identical Doug Carlin , the one from her present who consoles her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Denzel Washington as ATF Special Agent Douglas Carlin 
 Paula Patton as Claire Kuchever 
 Jim Caviezel as Carroll Oerstadt 
 Val Kilmer as FBI Special Agent Paul Pryzwarra 
 Adam Goldberg as Dr. Alexander Denny 
 Bruce Greenwood as FBI Special Agent @-@ in @-@ Charge Jack McCready 
 Matt Craven as ATF Special Agent Larry Minuti 
 Enrique Castillo as Claire 's father 
 Elden Henson as <unk> 
 Erika Alexander as Shanti 
 Julia <unk> as Eyewitness / Survivor 
 = = Background and production = = 
 The idea of a time travel thriller film originated between screenwriters Bill Marsilii and Terry Rossio , who communicated via email in attempts to develop the plot due to communication difficulties . However , the creation of Déjà Vu 's progenitor was set aside by the September 11 , 2001 attacks that disrupted New York @-@ native Marsilii , and the advent of the 2003 film Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl , which occupied Los Angeles @-@ native Rossio . However , by 2006 , the two screenwriters had completed the concept . Brian Greene from Columbia University was brought in as a consultant to help create a scientifically plausible feel to the script . Greene stated " the way I try to explain wormholes in terms of bending paper and connecting the corners , that 's there in the film and it was fun to see that that made it in . " The screenwriters submitted their work to Jerry Bruckheimer , who with Tony Scott were searching for new ideas for a feature film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography in New Orleans , Louisiana , was delayed following Hurricane Katrina because of the devastation caused by the storm and the collapse of the levees . Many of the exteriors were set to be shot in New Orleans , including a key sequence involving the Canal Street Ferry across the Mississippi River . After the city was reopened , the cast and crew returned to New Orleans to continue filming . Some scenes of the post @-@ Katrina devastation were worked into the plot , including those in the Lower 9th Ward ; additionally , evidence of Katrina 's impact on the city was worked into the script . The filming crew spent two weeks filming a scene at the Four Mile Bayou in Morgan City , Louisiana . 
 According to director Tony Scott , Déjà Vu was written to take place on Long Island , but after a visit to New Orleans Scott felt that it would be a far better venue . Jerry Bruckheimer reportedly said that Denzel Washington was " adamant about returning to New Orleans to film after Hurricane Katrina devastated the region " , but Washington recalled to be neutral on the subject , while agreeing that it was " a good thing to spend money there and put people to work there " . 
 To create a sense of realism , Scott and Washington interviewed numerous men and women whose real @-@ life occupations pertained to positions in the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ; Washington has noted that he and Scott conducted similar research during the productions of Man on Fire and Crimson Tide . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Visual effects editor Marc <unk> , who had previously collaborated with director Scott on the 2005 film Domino , worked again with Scott to develop Déjà Vu into a fully @-@ fledged work . In total , approximately 400 visual effects scenes were shot during the production of Déjà Vu . They had acquired a LIDAR device , which incorporated lasers to scatter light with the intent of mapping out a small region , during the production of Domino ; Scott and <unk> decided to use the apparatus again during the production of Déjà Vu . Additionally , the two utilized the Panavision Genesis high definition camera to film the shots that would encompass the past that the Snow White team would peer at throughout the film , as well as the various night scenes . The LIDAR apparatus , which was operated by a hired Texan company devoted to the device , performed scans of Claire Kuchever 's apartment , the ferry , the ATF office , and actress Paula Patton , among others . Effects editor Zachary Tucker combined the elements created by the Texan LIDAR company with computer @-@ generated graphics to make possible the scenes of time @-@ travel experienced in the film . 
 The explosion of the Stumpf was filmed using an actual New Orleans ferry in a portion of the Mississippi River sectioned off especially for the event ; the occurrence took over four hours to prepare . Under the supervision of pyrotechnics expert John Frazier , the ferry was coated entirely with fire retardant and rigged with fifty gasoline bombs including black dirt and diesel , each one set to detonate within a five @-@ second range . People and cars were added in later as elements of computer @-@ generated graphics . Chris <unk> was largely responsible for moving clips from each of the sixteen cameras in place to create the sensation of an extended explosion sequence . The spectacular explosion actually caused no significant structural damage to the ferry ; after a bout of sandblasting and repainting , the ferry was very similar to its previous state . The ferry was returned into service four days after the production of the film 's scene concluded . During filming of the underwater car scenes , actual cars were dropped into the water ; computer @-@ generated effects were later added , simulating the entities ' explosions . Compositing was done on the Autodesk Inferno special effects program . 
 = = = Similarities between Timothy McVeigh and Carroll Oerstadt = = = 
 Jim Caviezel 's character , Carroll Oerstadt , seemed to mirror in several ways the story of Timothy McVeigh , a domestic terrorist who destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City with a bomb in 1995 . Caviezel and Scott did not deny this , and both admitted that the Oerstadt character was at least partly based on McVeigh . Ross Johnson of The New York Times also compared the ferry bombing at the film 's beginning to the Oklahoma City bombing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film @-@ critics aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports 55 % positive reviews based on 156 reviews and a weighted average score of 5 @.@ 9 out of 10 . The consensus states , " Tony Scott tries to combine action , science fiction , romance , and explosions into one movie , but the time travel conceit might be too preposterous and the action falls apart under scrutiny . " At the review aggregator Metacritic , the film has a normalized score of 59 out of 100 , based on 32 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Joel Siegel of ABC News called the film technically " well @-@ made , " but criticized its attempt to describe a supposedly scientific basis for time travel as both silly and dull , as did Manohla Dargis of The New York Times , who additionally found the depiction of parishes decimated by Hurricane Katrina " vulgar " . Todd Gilchrist from IGN rated the film eight out of ten , calling it a " bravura set piece " , despite an ending that " feels inappropriate given the urgency ( and seeming inevitability ) of the story 's dénouement . " Likewise , Michael Wilmington of the Orlando Sentinel rated the film three out of four stars , citing the " good cast , Tony Scott 's swift direction , and unyielding professionalism " as rationale for his rating . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described the film 's exploration of the nature of time and the implications of time travel as having been a " sci @-@ fi staple for generations " . 
 = = = Film writers and director = = = 
 Both Terry Rossio and Bill Marsilii have acknowledged that the film was not shot the way they had wanted it to be , shifting the blame to director Tony Scott and his goal to focus more on the action aspect of the film than on the more meaningful plot the screenplay had called for . Marsilii , although " quite critical of the mistakes made , " said he was proud of the finished product . Rossio , however , was so put off during filming that he , as of May 2008 , had not seen the film . Rossio complained that Scott had ignored the inclusion of important plot details from the screenplay whenever " there was something he wanted to do " instead . In the DVD commentary , Scott admits that he thought he did a mediocre job shooting [ the chase scene ] . 
 Rossio and Marsilii believe that many of the negative reviews of Déjà Vu are a direct result of Scott 's direction of the film , and have stated that " Tony Scott added nothing to Déjà Vu and made several hundred small mistakes and about eight or nine deadly mistakes " , which makes the film seem like it has many unforgivable plot holes , when it should not have had any . " [ T ] here are no plot holes at all , and scrutiny reveals the plot to be air tight . " says Rossio . " We had years to think of all this and work it out . " It was felt there were many misunderstandings that Scott 's take on the plot introduced into the film . In his own defense , Scott cited in an interview with Iain Blair of BNET that only nineteen weeks were provided for the production of the film , which " isn 't a lot for a film like Déjà Vu . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Déjà Vu premiered in New York City on November 20 , 2006 , two days before its wide release in all of the United States and Canada . Alongside Mexico , the three countries were the sole nations to open the film in November . The United Kingdom opened the film on December 15 , 2006 , and was followed shortly thereafter by New Zealand on December 22 . Australia was the last English @-@ speaking country where the film premiered , on January 18 , 2007 . 
 The film opened in the # 3 spot with $ 20 @.@ 5 million in 3 @,@ 108 theaters , an average of $ 6 @,@ 619 per theater . Déjà Vu ran for fourteen weeks , staying in the top ten for its first three weeks . The U.S. domestic box office earnings for the film were $ 64 @,@ 038 @,@ 616 , and the total worldwide box office earnings were $ 180 @,@ 557 @,@ 550 . These earnings made Déjà Vu the 23rd most successful film of 2006 worldwide . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Although reviews from critics were mixed , Déjà Vu was nominated for six different awards , winning one . 
 Déjà Vu was nominated for the Saturn Award in the category " Best Science Fiction Film " , but lost to Children of Men . 
 Paula Patton , who played Claire Kuchever , was nominated for " Best Breakthrough Performance " for the Black Reel Awards . The award was won by Brandon T. Jackson for his performance in the film Roll Bounce . 
 Harry Gregson @-@ Williams , the composer of the film 's soundtrack , was nominated for the " Film Composer of the Year " division of the World Soundtrack Academy Awards ( the award was won by Alexandre Desplat for his score with The Queen ) . 
 Déjà Vu received two nominations pertaining to the " Best Fire Stunt " and the " Best Work with a Vehicle " , while it won the International Gold Reel Award at the Nielsen EDI Gold Reel Awards ceremonies . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Déjà Vu was released on DVD and home video approximately five months after its release in American theaters , on April 24 , 2007 . In the two weeks succeeding the day of the DVD 's release , the film was the second most purchased DVD in the United States . It was second only to Night at the Museum during this period in time . 
 Special features on the disc include an audio commentary from director Tony Scott for both the film and its deleted scenes . The DVD cover also includes a " Surveillance Window " feature , which includes featurettes on the film 's production in New Orleans . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The track listing for Déjà Vu largely borrows music not originally produced for the film ; three of the songs that make an appearance in Déjà Vu uphold elements of soul and gospel . " Don 't Worry Baby " by The Beach Boys simulated the actual concept of déjà vu , as detailed in the plot . 
 Songwriters such as Harry Gregson @-@ Williams contributed music to the film ; artists like Charmaine Neville and Macy Grey performed music especially for the film . 
 The music featured in the film 's trailer was titled " Hello Zepp " , the main theme for Saw . 
 The soundtrack was released by Hollywood Records . 
 = Hurricane Gloria = 
 Hurricane Gloria was the first significant system to strike the northeastern United States since Hurricane Agnes in 1972 and the first major storm to affect New York and Long Island directly since Hurricane Donna in 1960 . It was a powerful Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that formed during the 1985 Atlantic hurricane season , originating from a tropical wave on September 16 in the eastern Atlantic Ocean . After remaining a weak tropical cyclone for several days , Gloria intensified into a hurricane on September 22 north of the Lesser Antilles . During that time , the storm had moved generally westward , although it turned to the northwest due to a weakening of the ridge . Gloria quickly intensified on September 24 , and the next day reached peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . The hurricane weakened before striking the Outer Banks of North Carolina on September 27 . Later that day , Gloria made two subsequent landfalls on Long Island and later western Connecticut , before becoming extratropical on September 28 over New England . The remnants moved through Atlantic Canada , eventually dissipating on October 2 . 
 Before Gloria made landfall , the National Hurricane Center issued hurricane warnings at some point for the East Coast of the United States from South Carolina to Maine . Hundreds of thousands of people evacuated , and the hurricane was described as the " storm of the century " . In general , Gloria 's strongest winds remained east of the center , which largely spared locations from North Carolina to New Jersey , and the passage at low tide reduced storm surge . Hurricane @-@ force winds and gusts affected much of the path , which knocked down trees and power lines . This left over 4 million people without power , including the worst power outage in Connecticut history related to a natural disaster . The extended power outage on Long Island , affecting 1 @.@ 5 million people at some point , caused the Long Island Lighting Company to be shut down and be replaced with a public company . Fallen trees caused six of the storm 's fourteen deaths . 
 In North Carolina , high waves damaged many homes along the Outer Banks and caused heavy beach erosion . High waves also damaged piers , boats , and docks throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Flooding forced several highways to close , and in Pennsylvania , thousands were forced to evacuate their homes . The storm surge destroyed 48 homes on Long Island , while the winds damaged the roofs of many more . Widespread crop damage occurred , amounting to about $ 20 million ( 1985 USD ) . Overall damage in the United States was estimated at $ 900 million , which was less than expected . In neighboring Canada , the remnants of Gloria caused minor power outages in New Brunswick , although confusion related to the storm 's arrival led to the creation of the Canadian Hurricane Centre . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa on September 15 . Based on data from satellite imagery , it is estimated that a tropical depression formed on September 16 near Cape Verde , with an associated low @-@ level circulation . The next day , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Gloria , but there was no further intensification . On September 18 , Gloria weakened back to tropical depression status , but re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on September 20 . During this time , it moved generally westward due to a strong ridge to the north . On September 21 , the Hurricane Hunters began flying into Gloria to measure the storm 's intensity , and the next day , a flight observed winds of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) at a height of 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 460 m ) . As a result , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) upgraded Gloria to a hurricane about 465 mi ( 750 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Lesser Antilles . 
 After having moved generally to the west , Gloria turned more to the west @-@ northwest on September 22 . This occurred after tropical storms Fabian and Henri weakened the ridge . On September 23 , Gloria passed about 155 miles ( 250 km ) to the north of Anegada , the northernmost island in the Lesser Antilles . It initially remained a minimal hurricane until September 24 when it began quickly intensifying . That day , it became a major hurricane while passing northeast of the Bahamas . Gloria developed a 10 mi ( 16 km ) wide eye , surrounded by an eyewall , and was producing the stadium effect . At 0120 UTC on September 25 , Hurricane Hunters extrapolated a barometric pressure of 919 mbar ( 27 @.@ 1 inHg ) , and reported flight @-@ level winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . At the time , this was the lowest pressure measured by reconnaissance aircraft over the northern Atlantic ocean . Because there was little difference in the flight @-@ level winds and the surface winds , this was estimated to have been Gloria 's peak intensity , making it a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . However , a preliminary reanalysis released in 2008 suggested peak winds of 155 mph ( 249 km / h ) . At peak intensity , the hurricane was located about 930 mi ( 1500 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras in North Carolina , and had an eye diameter of only 8 mi ( 13 km ) . 
 After peak intensity , Gloria weakened while turning to the north , moving around the western end of the ridge , toward a cold front . By September 26 , the winds had decreased to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) , just 30 hours after its peak intensity . Later that day , a buoy about 60 mi ( 100 km ) east of the center recorded a wave height of 46 @.@ 9 ft ( 14 @.@ 3 m ) , which at the time was the highest buoy wave recording in an Atlantic hurricane . While accelerating toward North Carolina , Gloria re @-@ intensified slightly to winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane . At 0530 UTC on September 27 , the hurricane struck southern Hatteras Island in the Outer Banks . After weakening further , Gloria passed just east of the Delmarva Peninsula and New Jersey and interacted with a cold front . Its strongest winds remained on the eastern edge of the circulation , and the storm was gradually losing tropical characteristics . At 1600 UTC on September 27 , the hurricane made landfall with a broad and poorly defined center between John F. Kennedy International Airport and Islip , New York , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on western Long Island . This was only about three days after Henri struck the same general area as a much weaker tropical storm . 
 About an hour after striking Long Island , Gloria made its final landfall in western Connecticut near Westport , and proceeded to move through New England while weakening . The NHC estimated that Gloria became extratropical over Maine early by 0000 UTC on September 28 . The storm continued to the northeast through Atlantic Canada passing south of Greenland on September 30 . The extratropical circulation of Gloria was last noted on October 2 , although the remnants later affected Europe . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Early in Gloria 's duration , it threatened the northern Lesser Antilles , prompting a hurricane watch and later warning for the area . Gloria also threatened the Bahamas , prompting that government to issue hurricane watches and warnings . 
 While Gloria was off the east coast of Florida , the NHC issued a hurricane watch from Edisto Beach , South Carolina to Cape Henry , Virginia , which was upgraded to a hurricane warning at 1000 UTC on September 26 , or 19 @.@ 5 hours before landfall . By later that day , a hurricane watch was issued for the rest of the eastern United States to Eastport , Maine . By two hours before Gloria 's landfall on Long Island , a hurricane warning was in effect for the same area , after warnings were gradually extended further north . Officials anticipated higher winds and storm surge than what occurred , due to the hurricane weakening as it approached landfall . 
 Officials in Delaware and Maryland declared a state of emergency before the storm struck , and thousands of people from coastal communities evacuated to shelters . Schools closed in Delaware , and non @-@ emergency workers were sent home . Along Long Island in New York , hundreds of thousands of people evacuated their homes , and a state of emergency was declared for several counties . In Connecticut , about 20 @,@ 000 people evacuated along the coast , and 7 @,@ 300 evacuated from neighboring Rhode Island . Residents also evacuated portions of Cape Cod . 
 As Gloria approached the East Coast of the United States , National Hurricane Center director Neil Frank called it the " Storm of the Century " , due to its intensity and potential track over the densely populated region of New England . Such a track gathered the attention of many people , and led to the evacuation of 380 @,@ 000 people along the coast from North Carolina to Connecticut . In Maryland , officials implemented lane reversing to expedite the evacuation process , a policy many other coastal states use . 
 Officials advised 95 @,@ 000 citizens along the New Jersey coastline , an area that rarely experiences hurricanes , to evacuate . Cape May County — the most vulnerable part of the state and among the most susceptible in the entire country — would require 36 hours in 2005 to evacuate the 100 @,@ 000 citizens and 900 @,@ 000 tourists that were commonly present during busy summer weekends . 
 Offices and classes of Harvard University closed only for the third time in the 20th century , the previous cases being the New England Hurricane of 1938 and the Blizzard of ' 78 . Although Gloria 's winds downed numerous trees and caused tens of thousands in damage in the area , overall effects were much less than expected . 
 At the same time Gloria was making landfall on Long Island , a storm warning was issued for western New Brunswick and Nova Scotia . Across Atlantic Canada , the threat of Hurricane Gloria caused many citizens to rely on American media for storm coverage . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Gloria was a large hurricane that affected much of the northeastern United States . Gloria brought strong wind gusts , which downed trees and left hundreds of thousands without power . Overall damage was estimated at $ 900 million , and there were eight deaths . Gloria was the first significant hurricane to affect New England since Hurricane Donna in 1960 . 
 = = = Carolinas and Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 While offshore the eastern United States , the hurricane 's strongest winds were on the eastern periphery , which reduced the winds over land . In North Carolina , where Gloria made its first landfall , the strongest winds were 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) at a station near Buxton at the Cape Hatteras National Weather Service office ; a gust of 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) was also observed there . At Diamond Shoal Light , located offshore , sustained winds reached 98 mph ( 158 km / h ) , with gusts to 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . A peak storm surge of 5 @.@ 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) was estimated at the Neuse River . A minimal surge of around 1 @.@ 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 4 ft ) occurred in neighboring South Carolina , where winds were below tropical storm force . The highest rainfall related to Gloria was 9 @.@ 7 in ( 250 mm ) , recorded in Edenton , North Carolina . High waves and storm surge resulted in heavy coastal flooding and beach erosion along the Outer Banks , and several new inlets were created . Coastal flooding damaged several homes in the Outer Banks . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 8 @.@ 1 million , including $ 2 @.@ 4 million in crop damage . There was one death in North Carolina when a man was struck by a fallen tree . 
 Throughout much of the Mid @-@ Atlantic , the winds remained generally below hurricane force ; however , winds reached 92 mph ( 147 km / h ) along the Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel in Virginia and gusts to 89 mph ( 144 km / h ) in Ocean City , Maryland . The strongest winds in the region occurred after the center passed the area . Due to Gloria 's fast motion , there was minimal coastal flooding because the highest storm surge occurred during low tide , generally less than 4 @.@ 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . Beach erosion was reported in both Maryland and Delaware . The heaviest rainfall was west of the center . Statewide peaks included 9 @.@ 17 in ( 233 mm ) at Valley Forge National Historical Park in Pennsylvania , 8 @.@ 6 in ( 220 mm ) in Holland , Virginia , and 7 @.@ 19 in ( 183 mm ) in Annapolis , Maryland . Rainfall spread as far inland as West Virginia . 
 High waves washed away 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) of a fishing pier in Virginia Beach , Virginia . The rainfall caused minor flooding , and high tides flooded coastal portions of the Hampton Roads region . There was minor damage to trees , roofs , and signs in southeastern Virginia . The center of Gloria passed about 30 mi ( 48 km ) offshore eastern Maryland . In Ocean City , waves of 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) severely damaged the boardwalk , washing sand and debris a block inland . Downed trees left about 150 @,@ 000 people in Maryland . High winds forced the Chesapeake Bay Bridge to close , and there was little damage outside of eastern Maryland . High waves in Delaware eroded beaches , wrecked dunes , and damaged oceanfront buildings and boardwalks . Storm flooding closed several highways , including Delaware Route 1 . Damage was heaviest in Sussex County , although the storm damaged corn and soybean crops in northern Delaware . Monetary damage totaled over $ 500 @,@ 000 in the state . In neighboring Pennsylvania , wind gusts reached 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) in Allentown , which knocked down many trees and left thousands without power . Heavy rainfall flooded many streams , which closed or damaged several highways , bridges , and rail lines . About 3 @,@ 000 houses were flooded , forcing thousands to evacuate . 
 While just off the New Jersey coast , Gloria produced strong winds , peaking at 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Ocean City , where a gust of 101 mph ( 162 km / h ) was also reported . In the town , an F0 tornado was reported damaging a house . Rainfall in the state reached 6 @.@ 00 in ( 152 mm ) at the <unk> Reservoir near West Milford . Heavy beach erosion occurred along the coast , and several coastal towns sustained damage to boardwalks . Strong winds downed trees and power lines , which damaged homes and cars . One person was killed in Long Branch after touching a downed power line . 
 Though Gloria moved quickly through the region , it dropped moderate rainfall in locations , including 6 @.@ 04 inches ( 153 mm ) at Baltimore – Washington International Airport . In addition , some unofficial reports in southeastern Virginia indicated amounts of up to 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of rain . Because much of the Mid @-@ Atlantic experienced the western , weaker side of this hurricane , damage was relatively light . High winds downed numerous trees throughout the area , leaving hundreds of thousands without power , including 237 @,@ 000 in New Jersey , 124 @,@ 000 in Maryland , and 56 @,@ 000 in Virginia . Extreme rainfall in Virginia resulted in $ 5 @.@ 5 million ( 1985 USD ) in damage . Intense flood waters split Long Beach Island in half for a period of time . 
 = = = Long Island and New York = = = 
 While making its second landfall , Gloria was accompanied by a storm surge of 6 @.@ 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) at Battery Park , the highest along its path . The highest wind report was a gust of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) at Islip . Central Park reported a gust of 51 mph ( 83 km / h ) . Rainfall in the state reached 8 @.@ 04 in ( 204 mm ) at Unadilla , although was much less near the coast , reaching 3 @.@ 48 in ( 88 @.@ 4 mm ) in Central Park . 
 Along Long Island , the high storm surge flooded hundreds of streets and caused heavy beach erosion . High winds downed thousands of trees and damaged hundreds of homes , causing widespread power outages . About 1 @.@ 5 million people in the state lost power , including two @-@ thirds of the Long Island Lighting Company customers , making it one of the worst power outages in the state . There were four deaths on Long Island , two of whom related to heart attacks and the other two related to fallen trees . There were also 14 injuries in the region , many of them due to downed tree branches . In the New York mainland , heavy rainfall flooded rivers and alleviated drought conditions . Rough waves damaged boats and docks along the Hudson River . Unsettled weather contributed to a traffic fatality and an airplane crash that killed one in the New York mainland . 
 It is believed peak gusts reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) in eastern Long Island . Weather forecasters believe that damage across parts of Long Island indicated winds in the Category Three range , as evidence of the damage received at MacArthur Airport . Gloria 's high winds caused significant damage across Long Island and southeastern New York . The area hit the worst was eastern Long Island , where high wind gusts blew thousands of trees into buildings and across roads . The broadcast tower of <unk> @-@ FM toppled on Bald Hill in <unk> . In addition , the winds ripped roofs off of many buildings , including hangars at the MacArthur Airport , a hangar at the Bayport Aerodrome and the roof of the Islip Police Station . Prolonged exposure to high winds and waves led to moderate beach erosion , washing away several piers and docks . The storm surge , though relatively weak , destroyed 48 houses on the ocean side of the island . Gloria 's high winds left 683 @,@ 000 people in New York without power , with some lacking electricity for over eleven days . 
 = = = New England and Canada = = = 
 While moving across New England , Gloria was a weakened hurricane that passed quickly through the area . Though still a large hurricane , Gloria hit at low tide , resulting in low to moderate storm surges of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in Groton , Connecticut , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in New Bedford , Massachusetts , and 3 feet ( 1 m ) in Portland , Maine . The high waves caused heavy beach erosion in Connecticut and Rhode Island . The highest sustained winds were reports of 83 mph ( 135 km / h ) in Waterbury , Connecticut and Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory in Massachusetts , although neither locations were at sea level . Gusts peaked at 110 mph ( 176 km / h ) in Chatham , Massachusetts , and widespread areas across New England reported hurricane @-@ force gusts . It is estimated that hurricane @-@ force winds occurred in Connecticut , Massachusetts , and New Hampshire . Rainfall in the region peaked at 6 @.@ 90 in ( 175 mm ) at Borden Brook Reservoir in Springfield , Massachusetts . 
 In Connecticut , Gloria crossed from Westport along the Long Island Sound , passed near Hartford , and exited into Massachusetts . Wind gusts peaked at 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) in Bridgeport , and also reached 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) in Hartford . The winds downed thousands of trees , many of which knocked down power lines . This left about 727 @,@ 000 residents without power , setting a record for the state related to a weather event . High waves damaged or sunk hundreds of boats along the coast , and several beachfront homes and docks were damaged . Light rainfall caused some minor flooding , mostly in northwestern Connecticut . Statewide there was about $ 6 million in crop damage . Damage was heaviest near Hartford , and overall storm damage was estimated at $ 91 million . Fallen trees contributed to two of the three deaths in the state , as well as several other injuries . 
 Hurricane @-@ force gusts affected Rhode Island , peaking at 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) in Westerly . The winds uprooted thousands of trees and caused widespread roof damage . About 300 @,@ 000 people statewide lost power , the greatest since the Northeast blackout of 1965 . Coastal flooding was minimized due to the storm striking at low tide , although were high enough in Narragansett Bay to damage docks and hundreds of boats . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 20 million , including the cost for restoring the power outages . There were two deaths in Rhode Island ; one was related to a fallen tree , and one occurred when a man was trying to secure his boat . 
 In Massachusetts , the hurricane moved from Connecticut through the Springfield area . There was a small F1 tornado in Middlesex County that damaged trees . High winds knocked over thousands of trees , and about 500 @,@ 000 people statewide lost power . Heavy rainfall caused stream flooding , although the heaviest damage was from the winds . The hurricane destroyed a radio tower in Framingham and damaged hundreds of homes in the eastern portion of the state . Along the coast , the storm tide caused minor coastal flooding and damaged hundreds of boats . Across Massachusetts , damage was estimated at $ 61 million , including $ 6 million from crop damage . 
 By the time Gloria reached New Hampshire , it had weakened and was becoming extratropical , although hurricane @-@ force wind gusts were reported across the state . On the top of Mount Washington , wind gusts reached 127 mph ( 204 km / h ) . The winds were strong enough to knock down large trees , many over 50 years old and 50 ft ( 15 m ) . Downed trees cut power lines , which left 97 @,@ 116 people without power , mostly along the coast . Fallen trees also damaged 16 homes and several vehicles . High rainfall damaged portions of North Woodstock , although water damage was generally minor . There was one death in the state , when an elderly woman was knocked over by the strong winds and died two weeks later . There was about $ 2 @.@ 5 million in crop damage , mostly to the apple crop . In neighboring Maine , about 600 @,@ 000 people lost power due to the storm , the most since the passage of hurricanes Carol and Edna in 1954 . Winds in Maine reached 86 mph ( 138 km / h ) , and the storm knocked down about 100 power poles in addition to the downed lines . Downed trees blocked roads and damaged houses and cars . The winds damaged roofs , including the 127 ‑ year ‑ old spire of a church in <unk> . Crop damage to the apple crop was estimated at $ 3 million . High waves along the coast damaged lobster traps and dozens of boats , many of which were driven ashore . 
 Gloria 's high winds downed numerous trees across New England , causing minor to moderate damage . In the region , Connecticut received the worst of the hurricane , where tree and structural damage was greatest . Along the coastline , storm surge and strong waves washed away several fishing piers , and some roadways were underwater during the storm 's passage . New Hampshire was affected only slightly from the hurricane , and was limited to minor wind damage and localized flooding . In Maine , damage was more severe , where strong wind gusts ripped off roofs and uprooted hundreds of trees . High winds across New England resulted in significant power outages , leaving 250 @,@ 000 in Maine . In all , seven deaths occurred in New England , many of which occurred from falling tree limbs . 
 While the remnants of Gloria were moving through Atlantic Canada , they produced rainfall to the north of the track , reaching as high as 4 @.@ 53 in ( 115 mm ) in Quebec . The highest winds in the country were 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , peaking in the Bay of Fundy and to the northeast of Newfoundland . The remnants of Gloria caused wind and wave damage in Nova Scotia . Wind gusts of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) in Fredericton , New Brunswick knocked down power lines , affecting more than 1 @,@ 800 people . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On Long Island , thousands were left without power for over a week , until the last outages were restored two weeks after the storm on October 8 . The long duration without electricity forced hundreds of schools to close , extended train times by six hours due to lack of powered crossings , and price gouging on food , ice , and generators . The lack of power led to a general disdain for the Long Island Lighting Company ( LILCO ) , which increased further when the company left the $ 40 million ( 1985 USD ) repair bill to the ratepayers , citing the company 's lack of hurricane insurance . Citizens quickly protested LILCO 's decision , and within years the publicly owned Long Island Power Authority was formed . 
 Residents in both Massachusetts and Connecticut were also without power for up to one week , which caused many food products to spoil due to lack of refrigeration . The states brought in workers from other states , although the delay in restoring the widespread outages caused many schools to remain closed . In Connecticut , one man was electrocuted while repairing downed power lines . About 477 @,@ 000 Connecticut Light & Power customers in the state lost power , a record that was surpassed by the 754 @,@ 000 who lost power during Hurricane Irene in 2011 . Later in 2011 , a nor 'easter in October left over 830 @,@ 000 people statewide without power , also breaking the record set by Gloria . In New Hampshire , most power outages were quickly restored , and all were restored within six days . In Maine , all power outages were restored in 11 days . 
 In Maine , most citizens remained indoors during the passage of the hurricane . One police officer noted that even the criminals stayed home . In the Lewiston area , restaurants experienced a great surge in business . During the power outage after the storm , several businesses stored frozen goods for houses without a generator . 
 After the storm , President Ronald Reagan declared several counties in New Jersey , Pennsylvania , New York , Rhode Island , Connecticut , and Massachusetts as federal disaster areas . This declaration allowed those counties to apply for disaster assistance . 
 In Canada , the damage was less than expected , but confusion related to the storm threat prompted Environment Canada to research the need for a dedicated hurricane centre in 1986 . The following year , the Canadian Hurricane Centre was established with offices on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts . 
 Due to its impact , the name Gloria was retired from the Atlantic tropical storm naming list . It will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced with Grace in the 1991 season . 
 = Government in early modern Scotland = 
 Government in early modern Scotland included all forms of administration , from the crown , through national institutions , to systems of local government and the law , between the early sixteenth century and the mid @-@ eighteenth century . It roughly corresponds to the early modern era in Europe , beginning with the Renaissance and Reformation and ending with the last Jacobite risings and the beginnings of the industrial revolution . Monarchs of this period were the Stuarts : James IV , James V , Mary Queen of Scots , James VI , Charles I , Charles II , James VII , William II and Mary II , Anne , and the Hanoverians : George I and George II . 
 The crown remained the most important element of government throughout the period and , despite the many royal minorities , it saw many of the aspects of aggrandisement associated with " new monarchy " elsewhere in Europe . Theories of limited monarchy and resistance were articulated by Scots , particularly George Buchanan , in the sixteenth century , but James VI advanced the theory of the divine right of kings , and these debates were restated in subsequent reigns and crises . The court remained at the centre of political life , and in the sixteenth century emerged as a major centre of display and artistic patronage . The Privy Council and the great offices of state , remained central to the administration of the government , even after the departure of the Stuart monarchs to rule in England from 1603 , but they were often sidelined and was abolished after the Act of Union of 1707 , with rule direct from London . Parliament was also vital to the running of the country , providing laws and taxation , but it had fluctuating fortunes and never achieved the centrality the national life of its counterpart in England before it was disbanded in 1707 . 
 Revenue remained a continual problem for Scottish government , even after the introduction of regular taxation from the 1580s , with receipts insufficient for the business of government and , after 1603 , much of the costs being paid out of English revenues . In local government , attempts were made increase its effectiveness , with the creation of Justices of Peace and Commissioners of Supply . The continued existence of courts baron and introduction of kirk sessions helped consolidate the power of local lairds . In law there was an expansion of central institutions and professionalisation of lawyers as a group . Scottish law was maintained as a separate system after the union in 1707 and from 1747 the central courts gained a clear authority over local institutions . 
 = = Crown = = 
 James V was the first Scottish monarch to wear the closed imperial crown , in place of the open circlet of medieval kings , suggesting a claim to absolute authority within the kingdom . His diadem was reworked to include arches in 1532 , which were re @-@ added when it was reconstructed in 1540 in what remains the Crown of Scotland . The idea of imperial monarchy emphasised the dignity of the crown and included its role as a unifying national force , defending national borders and interests , royal supremacy over the law and a distinctive national church within the Catholic communion . New monarchy can also be seen in the reliance of the crown on " new men " rather than the great magnates , the use of the clergy as a form of civil service , developing standing armed forces and a navy . 
 Major intellectual figures in the Reformation included George Buchanan ( 1506 – 82 ) , whose works De Jure Regni apud Scotos ( 1579 ) and Rerum Scoticarum Historia ( 1582 ) were among the major texts outlining the case for resistance to tyrants . Buchanan was one of the young James VI 's tutors and although they succeeded in producing a highly educated Protestant prince , who would publish works on subjects including government , poetry and witchcraft , they failed to intellectually convince him of their ideas about limited monarchy and he would debate with Buchanan and others over the status of the crown and kirk . James asserted the concept of " Divine right " , by which a king was appointed by God and thus gained a degree of sanctity . These ideas he passed on to Charles I , whose ability to compromise may have been undermined by them , helping to lead to his political difficulties . When he was executed in 1649 , the Scottish Covenanters objected , but avoided advancing the sanctity of kings as a reason . In 1689 , when the Scottish Estates had to find a justification for deposing James VII they turned to Buchanan 's argument on the contractual nature of monarchy in the Claim of Right . 
 = = Court = = 
 The royal court consisted of leading nobles , office holders , ambassadors and supplicants who surrounded the king or queen . At its centre was the monarch and members of the Privy Chamber . Gentleman of the chamber were usually leading nobles or individuals with kinship links to the leading noble families . They had direct access to the monarch , with the implication of being to exert influence , and were usually resident at the court . Although increasingly based at the royal palace of Holyrood in Edinburgh , the monarch and the court were often itinerant , spending time at one of the royal palaces , such as Linlithgow , Sterling and Falkland , or undertaking a royal progress to a part of the kingdom to ensure that the rule of law , royal authority or smooth government was maintained . 
 In the sixteenth century , the court was central to the patronage and dissemination of Renaissance works and ideas . It was also central to the staging of lavish display that portrayed the political and religious role of the monarchy . This display was often tied up with ideas of chivalry , which was evolving in this period from a practical military ethos into a more ornamental and honorific cult . Tournaments provided one focus of display and were also pursued enthusiastically by James V , proud of his membership of international orders of knighthood . During her brief personal rule Mary , Queen of Scots brought many of the elaborate court activities that she had grown up with at the French court , with balls , masques and celebrations , designed to illustrate the resurgence of the monarchy and to facilitate national unity . Under James VI the court returned to being a centre of culture and learning and he cultivated the image of a philosopher king , evoking the models of David , Solomon and Constantine . After James VI inherited the English throne in 1603 the Scottish court effectively ceased to exist , ending its role as a centre of artistic patronage , political display and intrigue . 
 = = Officers of state = = 
 The Chancellor was effectively the first minister of the kingdom . His department , the chancery , was responsible for the Great Seal , which was needed to process the inheritance of land titles and the confirmation of land transfers . His key responsibility was to preside at meetings of the privy council , and on those rare occasions he attended , at meetings of the court of session . The second most prestigious office was the Secretary , who was responsible for the records of the Privy council and for foreign policy , including the borders , despite which the post retained its importance after the Union of Crowns in 1603 . The Treasurer was the last of the major posts and , with the Comptroller , dealt with the royal finances until the Comptroller 's office was merged into the Treasurer 's from 1610 . 
 The Lord President of the Court of Session , often known simply as the Lord President , acted as a link between the Privy Council and the Court . The king 's advocate acted as the legal council . The post emerged in the 1490s to deal with the king 's patrimonial land rights and from 1555 there were usually two king 's councillors , indicating the increase in the level of work . From 1579 they increasingly became a public prosecutor . After the union most of the offices remained , but political power was increasingly centred in London . John Ker , 1st Duke of Roxburghe , became the first Secretary of State for Scotland until the post was abolished in 1746 after the Jacobite Rising of 1745 . 
 = = Privy council = = 
 The Privy Council developed out of the theoretically larger king 's or queen 's council of leading nobles and office holders in the sixteenth century . " Secret Councils " had been maintained during the many regencies of the later medieval era , but the origins of the Privy Council were in 1543 , during the minority of Mary , Queen of Scots . After her majority it was not disbanded , but continued to sit and became an accepted part of government . Until 1707 , while in session in Edinburgh , the Privy Council met in what is now the West Drawing Room at the Palace of Holyroodhouse . When the monarch was at one of the royal palaces or visiting a region of the kingdom on official business , the council would normally go with them and as a result of being away from its servants , records and members , its output tended to decrease . While the monarch was away on a holiday or hunting trip , the council usually stayed in session in Edinburgh and continued to run the government . 
 The Privy Council 's primary function was judicial , but it also acted as a body of advisers to the king and as a result its secondary function was as an executive in the absence or minority of the monarchy . Although the monarch might often attend the council , their presence was not necessary for the council to act with royal authority . Like parliament , it had the power to issue acts that could have the force of law . After James VI 's departure to England in 1603 , it functioned as a subservient executive carrying out his instructions from London . Although the theoretical membership of the council was relatively large , at around 30 persons , most of the business was carried out by an informal inner group , consisting mainly of the officers of state . Before 1610 the council was presided over by the Lord Chancellor , but in 1610 James VI decreed that the President of the College of Justice should preside in the Chancellor 's absence , and by 1619 the additional title of President of the Privy Council had been added . The two presidencies were separated in 1626 as part of Charles I 's reorganisation of the Privy Council and Court of Session . The Lord President of the Council was accorded precedence as one of the King 's chief officers in 1661 . After the Restoration , Charles II nominated his own privy councillors and set up a council in London through which he directed affairs in Edinburgh , a situation that continued after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 – 9 . The council was abolished after the Act of Union on 1 May 1708 . 
 = = Parliament = = 
 In the sixteenth century , parliament usually met in Stirling Castle or the Old Tolbooth , Edinburgh , which was rebuilt on the orders of Mary Queen of Scots from 1561 . King Charles I ordered the construction of Parliament Hall , at the expense of the Edinburgh burgesses , which was built between 1633 and 1639 and remained the parliament 's home until it was dissolved in 1707 . By the end of the Middle Ages the Parliament had evolved from the King 's Council of Bishops and Earls into a ' colloquium ' with a political and judicial role . The attendance of knights and freeholders had become important , and burgh commissioners joined them to form the Three Estates . It acquired significant powers over particular issues , including consent for taxation , but it also had a strong influence over justice , foreign policy , war , and other legislation , whether political , ecclesiastical , social or economic . Much of the legislative business of the Scottish parliament was carried out by a parliamentary committee known as the Lords of the Articles , chosen by the three estates to draft legislation which was then presented to the full assembly to be confirmed . Like many continental assemblies the Scottish Parliament was being called less frequently by the early sixteenth century and might have been dispensed with by the crown had it not been for the series of minorities and regencies that dominated from 1513 . The crown was also able to call a Convention of Estates , which was quicker to assemble and could issue laws like parliament , making them invaluable in a crisis , but they could only deal with a specific issue and were more resistant to the giving of taxation rights to the crown . 
 Parliament played a major part in the Reformation crisis of the mid @-@ sixteenth century . It had been used by James V to uphold Catholic orthodoxy and asserted its right to determine the nature of religion in the country , disregarding royal authority in 1560 . The 1560 parliament included 100 lairds , who were predominantly Protestant , and who claimed a right to sit in the Parliament under the provision of a failed shire election act of 1428 . Their position in the parliament remained uncertain and their presence fluctuated until the 1428 act was revived in 1587 and provision made for the annual election of two commissioners from each shire ( except Kinross and Clackmannan , which had one each ) . The property qualification for voters was for freeholders who held land from the crown of the value of 40s of auld extent . This excluded the growing class of <unk> , who would not gain these rights until 1661 . The clerical estate was marginalised in Parliament by the Reformation , with the laymen who had acquired the monasteries sitting as ' abbots ' and ' priors ' . Catholic clergy were excluded after 1567 , but a small number of Protestant bishops continued as the clerical estate . James VI attempted to revive the role of the bishops from about 1600 . They were abolished by the Covenanters in 1638 , when Parliament became an entirely lay assembly . A further group appeared in the Parliament from the minority of James IV in the 1560s , with members of the Privy Council representing the king 's interests , until they were excluded in 1641 . James VI continued to manage parliament though the Lords of the Articles , who deliberated legislation before it reached the full parliament . He controlled the committee by filling it with royal officers as non @-@ elected members , but was forced to limit this to eight from 1617 . 
 Having been officially suspended at the end of the Cromwellian regime , parliament returned after the Restoration of Charles II in 1661 . This parliament , known disparagingly as the ' Drunken Parliament ' , revoked most of the Presbyterian gains of the last thirty years . Subsequently Charles ' absence from Scotland and use of commissioners to rule his northern kingdom undermined the authority of the body . James VII 's parliament supported him against rivals and attempted rebellions , but after his escape to exile in 1689 William 's first parliament was dominated by his supporters and , in contrast to the situation in England , effectively deposed James under the Claim of Right , which offered the crown to William and Mary , placing important limitations on royal power , including the abolition of the Lords of the Articles . Rosalind Mitchison argues that the parliament became a focus of national political life , but it never reached the position of a true centre of national identity attained by its English counterpart . The new Williamite parliament would subsequently bring about its own demise by the Act of Union in 1707 . The English and Scottish parliaments were replaced by a combined Parliament of Great Britain , but it sat in Westminster and largely continued English traditions without interruption . Forty @-@ five Scots were added to the 513 members of the House of Commons and 16 Scots to the 190 members of the House of Lords . 
 = = Taxation and revenue = = 
 For the early part of the era , the authority of the crown was limited by the large number of minorities it had seen since the early fifteenth century , with every monarch coming to the throne as a minor between 1406 and 1625 . This tended to decrease the level of royal revenues , as regents , lacking the royal authority to create support , often alienated land and revenues , with Margaret Tudor reducing royal income from about £ 30 @,@ 000 Scots to £ 13 @,@ 000 in the minority of James V. James V was able to extract the heaviest taxation every levied on the Scottish church in exchange for his continued loyalty to the papacy , taking £ 72 @,@ 000 in four years . Regular taxation was adopted from 1581 and afterwards was called on with increasing frequency and scale until a demand of £ 240 @,@ 000 in 1612 resulted in serious opposition . A new tax on annual rents amounting to five per cent on all interest on loans , mainly directed at the merchants of the burghs was introduced in 1621 , but the 1621 levy was still being collected over a decade later . Under Charles I the annual income from all sources in Scotland was under £ 16 @,@ 000 sterling and inadequate for the normal costs of government , with the court in London now being financed out of English revenues . The sum of £ 10 @,@ 000 a month from the county assessment was demanded by the Cromwellian regime , which Scotland failed to fully supply , but it did contribute £ 35 @,@ 000 in excise a year . Although Parliament made a formal grant of £ 40 @,@ 000 a year to Charles II , the rising costs of civilian government and war meant that this was inadequate to support Scottish government . Under William I and after the Union , engagement in continental and colonial wars led to heavier existing taxes and new taxes , including the Poll and Hearth Taxes . 
 = = Local government = = 
 From the sixteenth century , the central government became increasingly involved in local affairs . The feud was limited and regulated , local taxation became much more intrusive and from 1607 regular , local commissions of Justices of the Peace on the English model were established to deal with petty crimes and infractions . Greater control was exerted over the lawless Borders through a joint commission with the English , set up in 1587 . James VI was much more hostile to the culture and particularism of the Highlands than his predecessors . He sent colonists from Fife to parts of the region and forced the Highland chiefs to accept Lowland language and culture through the Statues of Iona of 1609 . From the seventeenth century the responsibilities of shires expanded from judicial functions into wider local administration . In 1667 Commissioners of Supply were appointed in each sheriffdom or shire to collect the cess land tax . 
 The parish also became an important unit of local government after three major pieces of legislation , in 1574 , 1579 and 1592 , established what would become known as " the Old Poor Law " . Pressured by Justices , the parish became responsible for taking care of the destitute in periods of famine , to prevent the impoverished from taking to the roads and causing general disorder . By the mid @-@ seventeenth century the system had largely been rolled out across the Lowlands , but was limited in the Highlands . It was able to cope with the general level of poverty and minor crises , helping the old and infirm to survive and provide life support in periods of downturn at relatively low cost , but was overwhelmed in major subsistence crisis like that of the " seven ill years " of the 1690s . Behaviour could be regulated through kirk sessions , composed of local church elders , which replaced the church courts of the Middle Ages , and which dealt with moral and religious conduct . The local court baron remained important in regulating minor interpersonal and property offences . They were held at the behest of the local baron when there was a backlog of cases and could appoint <unk> , usually senior tenants , who would resolve disputes and issues . The combination of kirk sessions and courts baron gave considerable power to local lairds to control the behaviour of the populations of their communities . 
 = = Law = = 
 In the late Middle Ages , justice in Scotland was a mixture of the royal and local , which was often unsystematic with overlapping jurisdictions , undertaken by clerical lawyers , laymen , amateurs and local leaders . Under James IV the legal functions of the council were rationalised , with a royal Court of Session meeting daily in Edinburgh to deal with civil cases . In 1514 the office of justice @-@ general was created for the earl of Argyll ( and held by his family until 1628 ) . The study of law was popular in Scotland from the Middle Ages and many students travelled to Continental Europe to study canon law and civil law . In 1532 the Royal College of Justice was founded , leading to the training and professionalisation of an emerging group of career lawyers . The Court of Session placed increasing emphasis on its independence from influence , including from the king , and superior jurisdiction over local justice . Its judges were increasingly able to control entry to their own ranks . In 1605 the professionalisation of the bench led to entry requirements in Latin , law and a property qualification of £ 2 @,@ 000 , designed to limit the danger of bribery , helping to create an exclusive , wealthy , powerful and professional caste , who also now dominated government posts in a way that the clergy had done in the Middle Ages . In 1672 the High Court of Justiciary was founded from the College of Justice as a supreme court of appeal . The Act of Union in 1707 largely persevered the distinct Scottish legal system and its courts , separate from English jurisdiction . The major reform to Scottish law came as a result of the Heritable Jurisdictions Act 1747 , which was part of the government reaction to the Jacobite rising of 1745 and which limited the powers of burgh courts , abolished hereditary offices and made the barony and regality courts obsolete , strengthening the reach of the central judicial courts . 
 This period also saw widespread attempts to codify and comment on the Scottish legal system . The first substantive account of Scottish law was the <unk> of Bishop John Sinclair ( d . 1566 ) , senator of the College of Justice . This was followed by James Balfour 's ( c . 1525 – 83 ) <unk> , who with Sir John Skene of <unk> ( c . 1543 – 1617 ) , was a major figure in the move to codification . Skene produced an edition of the Acts of Parliament and a legal dictionary , De <unk> <unk> and edited <unk> <unk> , a history of the Scottish law , which attributed much of its creation to David I. Thomas Craig of Riccarton ( c . 1538 – 1608 ) produced two large works , Jus <unk> , which examined feudal law , and De Unione <unk> Britanniae , which explored the possibilities of unifying the English and Scottish legal systems . Often seen as the beginning of modern Scottish legal study is James Dalrymple , 1st Viscount of Stair 's ( 1619 – 95 ) The Institutions of the Law of Scotland ( 1681 ) . 
 = Superman : Krypton Coaster = 
 Superman : Krypton Coaster is a Bolliger & Mabillard Floorless Coaster at the Six Flags Fiesta Texas amusement park in San Antonio , Texas , USA . Opened in 2000 , Superman : Krypton Coaster was one of the first floorless roller coasters in the world . The well @-@ received ride held the title for the world 's tallest vertical loop ( 145 feet ) from its opening until 2013 . It is also known as for being the world 's tallest and fastest floorless coaster at 168 ft ( 51 m ) high and a top speed of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Six Flags describes the coaster Thrill Level at MAXIMUM . Six Flags has announced plans to add Virtual Reality to Superman : Krypton Coaster to <unk> the experience . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1999 , Six Flags Great Adventure spent $ 42 million on new attractions including a prototype Floorless Coaster by Bolliger & Mabillard , Medusa ( later Bizarro ) . The immediate popularity of the ride , led to Six Flags Fiesta Texas and three other amusement parks to announce plans to install Floorless Coasters in 2000 ; aside from the announcement of Superman : Krypton Coaster on November 1 , 1999 , Six Flags Discovery Kingdom announced Medusa , Geauga Lake announced Dominator , and SeaWorld Orlando announced Kraken . The $ 20 million Superman : Krypton Coaster was announced as part of a wider multimillion @-@ dollar expansion of Six Flags Fiesta Texas . 
 At the time of the ride 's announcement , construction had already begun on unused land bordered by quarry walls and an irrigation pond . The initial plans for the ride specified it would have seven inversions including a 114 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 35 m ) vertical loop and a 96 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 29 m ) dive loop . Following the ride 's announcement , the design was altered to remove the dive loop and increase the size of the vertical loop to 145 feet ( 44 m ) . This saw Superman : Krypton Coaster obtain the record for the world 's tallest vertical loop when it officially opened to the public on March 11 , 2000 . 
 On March 6 , 2010 , Six Flags Fiesta Texas offered exclusive ride time on Superman : Krypton Coaster to help celebrate the ride 's 10th anniversary . On June 22 , 2013 , Superman : Krypton Coaster lost the title of having the world 's tallest vertical loop since Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia , California opened Full Throttle which features a 160 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 49 m ) vertical loop , 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) taller than the loop on Superman : Krypton Coaster . 
 On March 3 , 2016 , Six Flags announced that the ride would be one of several rides at various Six Flags parks to feature a VR system . Riders have the option of wearing a Samsung Gear VR headset , powered by Oculus to create a 360 @-@ degree , 3D experience while riding . It is themed to Superman saving a city from Lex Luthor 's Lex <unk> who are causing chaos with an anti @-@ gravity ray . This theming will also come to the Superman : The Ride at Six Flags New England and Superman - Ride of Steel at Six Flags America . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 The 4 @,@ 025 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 227 m ) Superman : Krypton Coaster stands 168 feet ( 51 m ) tall . With a top speed of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) , the ride will tie with Iron Rattler as the fastest roller coaster at Six Flags Fiesta Texas . The ride features six inversions including a 145 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 44 m ) vertical loop , a zero @-@ g roll , a 78 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 24 m ) cobra roll and two corkscrews . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Superman : Krypton Coaster operates with three floorless trains . Each train seats 32 riders in eight rows of four . This gives the ride a theoretical hourly capacity of 1600 riders per hour . The open @-@ air trains feature seats which leave riders ' legs dangling above the track . Riders are restrainted with over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints ( <unk> ) . As the trains are floorless , the station has a retractable floor for safe boarding . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After riders have boarded and the station floor is retracted , Superman : Krypton Coaster departs with a left turn out of the station . This leads directly to the 168 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 51 m ) chain lift hill . At the top , the train crests the lift hill and follows a fairly level 180 degree turn to the right above the quarry wall . This leads into a 168 @-@ foot ( 51 m ) drop off the quarry wall directly into the 145 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 44 m ) vertical loop . With the quarry wall on the track 's right , the train inclines to the top of the wall where it performs a helix to the right . After dropping from the quarry wall again , the train enters the zero @-@ g roll where riders experience a feeling of weightlessness . This is followed by the 78 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 24 m ) cobra roll and a mid @-@ course brake run . The exit from the mid @-@ course brake run banks down to the right into the two interlocking corkscrews . This leads to a final turn before the final brake run and return to the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Prior to launch , General Manager of Six Flags Fiesta Texas John Odum stated Superman : Krypton Coaster was " the big @-@ league ride we have really needed " . He stated the design of the ride , which interacts with the quarry wall , would make a thrilling ride : " being that close to the wall there is a good sense of speed " . In May 2000 , two months after Superman : Krypton Coaster opened , it was reported that the park was " off to a flying start " for the season . Six Flags Fiesta Texas officials stated the ride proved popular in its first year of operation . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Superman : Krypton Coaster was ranked in the top 50 steel roller coasters numerous times since its opening . It peaked at position 24 in 2002 , before it dropped to 50 in 2008 and rose again to 38 in 2011 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Superman : Krypton Coaster entered at position 20 in 2001 and peaked at 17 in 2004 . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = Sanctuary ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the Canadian science fiction – fantasy television series Sanctuary premiered on the Sci Fi Channel in the United States on October 3 , 2008 , and concluded on ITV4 in the United Kingdom on January 5 , 2009 , after 13 episodes . It follows the actions of a secret organization known as the Sanctuary , who track down a series of creatures known as abnormals , and then bring them to the Sanctuary for refuge . The main story arc of the season involves the Sanctuary working against the Cabal , an organization who seek to control all abnormals for their own gain . Amanda Tapping , Robin Dunne , Emilie Ullerup , and Christopher Heyerdahl are billed in the opening credits as the main cast . 
 Initially an eight @-@ part web series , Sanctuary was successful enough for Sci Fi to commission a television series . Series creator and head writer Damian Kindler hired Sam Egan , and the two wrote all the episodes and composed the season @-@ long storyline . Many episodes had been written throughout the 2007 Christmas season before the season was green @-@ lit . Principal photography started in May 2008 . It was the first instance in North American television where RED cameras were used . Most of the season was filmed using green screen in a warehouse in Burnaby , British Columbia , though there are instances throughout that were filmed on location , including the Riverview Hospital in Coquitlam and the North Shore Mountains outside Vancouver . Anthem Visual Effects produced the season 's visual effects . The virtual sets meant that they produced around 400 visual effects per episode . Other forms of special effects , including prosthetics , were used to present the abnormals . The first season was budgeted at an estimated $ 21 million . 
 Sanctuary 's first season aired in over 50 countries worldwide . The season premiere drew the largest audience with 2 @.@ 7 million viewers , the highest rated Sci Fi premiere since Eureka in July 2006 . Including time @-@ shifted viewing , the season was seen by an average of 2 @.@ 35 million viewers per episode ; the ratings success allowed Sci Fi to renew Sanctuary for a second season . Critical reactions of the season were mixed . Some reviewers noted that , although the first six episodes were " hit and miss " , they liked the later episodes . In total , it won five awards : one Gemini and four Leos . The first season was released on a four @-@ disc set on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 9 , 2009 , in Region 4 , September 15 in Region 1 , and October 15 in Region 2 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In this table , the number in the first column refers to the episode 's number within the entire series , whereas the number in the second column indicates the episode 's number within this particular season . " U.S. viewers in millions " refers to how many Americans watched the episode live or on the day of broadcast . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Regular cast = = = 
 The first season consists of four principal cast members . Amanda Tapping plays series protagonist Helen Magnus , a 157 @-@ year @-@ old English scientist who runs the Sanctuary network . Tapping darkened her hair color for the role . Robin Dunne plays Will Zimmerman , a former forensic psychiatrist and then Magnus ' protégé since the pilot . Damian Kindler noted that Dunne 's portrayal as Zimmerman differed vastly between the webisodes and the first season , often joking that Zimmerman was played by two different Dunnes . Emilie Ullerup plays Ashley , Magnus ' daughter . Ullerup enjoyed working with the cast during the first season . She felt that Tapping was " such a teacher " to her , and that it had been " such a treat " working with Tapping as a young and new actress . 
 Christopher Heyerdahl plays two characters : Bigfoot , an abnormal who works in the Sanctuary , and John Druitt , Magnus ' former fiancé and father to Ashley . As Bigfoot , Heyerdahl had to wear prosthetics . Tapping believed that Heyerdahl " has this incredible gift wearing prosthetics and acting through them and creating real humanity , and he does it with Bigfoot . " Ullerup also felt nervous , yet excited playing every scene with Heyerdahl when he plays Druitt . 
 = = = Recurring cast and guest appearances = = = 
 Ryan Robbins plays Henry Foss , who runs the Sanctuary 's computer and security systems . The producers wanted Henry to set a lighter tone to the series and add " goofy and fun " humor , including in somewhat dire situations . The producers cast Robbins , and were pleased with his performance . Chuck Campbell plays " two @-@ faced guy " , a character with another face at the back of his head . The back face was accomplished using visual effects . <unk> plays <unk> , an associate of Ashley 's . The character was originally named Ernie and was played by director Peter DeLuise in the webisodes , but he was unavailable to reshoot his scenes for the season premiere . Jonathon Young stars as Nikola Tesla . Heyerdahl suggested Young to the producers , who ended up being highly impressed by his performance . Young also played Tesla in a one @-@ man show before appearing in the series . Whilst filming the second part of " Revelations " , Young 's scenes in the underground city were filmed first , as he was scheduled for another play while the episode was shot . 
 At the time of filming " The Five " , the actors who played Watson and Griffin had not been cast yet . The producers would later cast Peter Wingfield as Watson . According to Amanda Tapping , casting Wingfield was " so easy " as " he has this sensibility about him , much like [ Christopher Heyerdahl ] does . " While filming his scenes , Wingfield did not want his exoskeleton prop to be removed between takes , as he wanted to stay in character . When the producers conceived Clara Griffin , the granddaughter of Nigel Griffin , they were looking for a young local actress to play the part who would look like a potential love interest to Will Zimmerman . Christine Chatelain would later play the part after she was recommended by Dunne , as they had worked together before . 
 When Adrien Dorval auditioned for his part on " Kush " , Kindler did not like his performance , but Wood did , as he believed the actor 's performance was perfect for a character who was stranded on a plane . For the same episode , Sarah Strange and Thai @-@ Hoa Lee had to learn how to speak Standard Tibetan phonetically a week in advance of filming . Katharine Isabelle guest starred in " Nubbins " as Sophie . While filming her scenes , Isabelle complained of a dry eye problem , which kept making her almost tear up . However , it ended up being beneficial for her portrayal of her character . Canadian actor Daryl Shuttleworth guest stars as a fight promoter in " Warriors " . During a <unk> of the script , Shuttleworth decided his character should speak with a British accent like in the film Lock , Stock and Two Smoking Barrels . The producers wanted to cast Rekha Sharma in " Instinct " as she appeared in several other Vancouver @-@ based productions , including Battlestar Galactica . The producers felt she " rocked " her audition , as she brought a lot of energy to her character . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Series creator Damian Kindler conceived the pilot in 2001 . When he became a Stargate SG @-@ 1 writer , he later asked Martin Wood , a director from the same show , if there was potential for a series , which Wood believed there was . A few years later , Kindler asked Amanda Tapping to take part in the project , and she accepted . Sanctuary originally started as an eight @-@ part bi @-@ weekly web series in 2007 , produced by Vancouver @-@ based Stage 3 Media . The producers of the series were looking to expand the series on other mediums , including television . Due to the success of the web series , in January 2008 , the Sci Fi Channel announced the commissioning of a first season of 13 episodes . The move to television has allowed the producers to widen the scope for the season . According to actress and executive producer Amanda Tapping , the season " is very different from what you 've seen on the Web " . However , her character , Helen Magnus , would still be a " crazy character ; [ ... ] very eccentric and very sexy and very unapologetic " . The season was given an estimated budget of $ 21 million . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 All episodes of the first season were written by Sam Egan and Kindler ; Kindler hired Egan to assist in writing the first season , as he believed Egan to be creative , passionate , and talented . Several episodes of the first season were written throughout the Christmas season in 2007 . After the series was given the green @-@ light , they were rewritten to establish a season @-@ long storyline . Some of the episodes finished their writing stage as little as two and a half weeks before filming commenced . At times after the scripts were written , Sci Fi executive Mark Stern fed back to the writers , asking for certain elements to be explained so the audience could understand . 
 Kindler wrote both parts of " Sanctuary for All " , as well " Fata Morgana " , " Kush " , " The Five " , " Requiem " , " Instinct " , and the second part of " Revelations " . He penned his scripts quickly , with " Kush " being written in three and a half days . Wood contributed to the story of " Fata Morgana " by bringing up the idea of incorporating the Morrígan from Irish mythology , which would start giving the season an ancient and mythological feel . " Kush " introduces a series of episodes involving the working relationship between Will and Magnus . " The Five " became a significant part of the series mythology , revealing the Five , which Magnus is a part of , how Magnus got her longevity , and that Henry Foss is actually part werewolf . Tapping believed that introducing the Five was a " cool concept " . Kindler introduced vampires in the episode , and felt it would be best to introduce them as a dead species . He also felt that including real @-@ life historic figures such as Tesla was a " very ballsy thing " . In " Requiem " , Kindler wanted a scenario in which Will has to make a difficult decision to deal with Magnus when she becomes the threat of the episode . Though Kindler at first believed it was not a good episode , it ended up as a highlight of the season according to the producers . In writing " Instinct " , Kindler , inspired by Cloverfield , wanted to show the audience the protagonists hunting an abnormal in real @-@ time , where it does not always go according to plan . 
 Egan meanwhile , wrote " Folding Man " , " Nubbins " , " Edward " , " Warriors " , and the first part of " Revelations " . He also co @-@ wrote " Sanctuary for All " with Kindler . Egan liked to include the Rashomon effect in some of his scripts , a plot device which interprets scenes from different points of view . After writing " Folding Man " , Egan realized that he inadvertently based it on an episode of The X @-@ Files . " Nubbins " was inspired by the Star Trek original series episode " The Trouble With Tribbles " . " Edward " was inspired by Egan hearing of a young English man with savant syndrome , who flew over a city he had not visited before , and was able to accurately draw the city on a mural some 20 feet wide . Because the episode involved an abnormal , Egan wanted the boy to draw much faster . In writing " Warriors " , Egan wanted to reintroduce Magnus ' father Gregory Magnus from the webisodes ; there were plans to introduce him in " Fata Morgana " , but the idea did not make it to the final episode . Gregory was written not to have the longevity of his daughter . Egan decided not to include a full explanation of how he survived a hundred years without aging , but wanted to hint to the audience that he was in fact cryogenically frozen by the Cabal . The intention behind " Revelations " was to tie some of the previous episodes together , particularly involving the Cabal , and then set them up for the second season . The main issue with writing the finale was showing Ashley being interrogated , where in fact she was experimented on to turn her to the Cabal . Because Kindler wrote his script quickly , he believed that the misdirect did not turn out the way he hoped . 
 = = = Differences from the webisodes = = = 
 Differences were made between the original webisodes and the first episodes of the season . One example is the introduction of Druitt . In the webisodes , Druitt murders a prostitute after arriving in Old City , but in the pilot , writer Damian Kindler included dialogue between the two characters before Druitt murders her , as a way of proving to the audience how evil he is . Another is the ending of " Fata Morgana " , where the Morrígan leave the Sanctuary with the Cabal mercenaries ; in the webisodes , the sisters escape . Druitt directly tells Ashley in one of the first webisodes that he is her father . In the first season , the producers decided that she would not be aware of this until midway through , and even then , they did not want Druitt to tell her directly , but rather hint it to her , so that Ashley can pick up the pieces herself . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Initial photography started in May 2008 , and took place mostly in a warehouse in Burnaby , British Columbia . Each episode took around seven days to film , though some were completed in as little as five and a half . The first three episodes of the season were reshot from the original eight webisodes ; the two @-@ part premiere " Sanctuary for All " was reshot from the first four webisodes , while the third episode , " Fata Morgana " , was reshot from the final four . Eighteen months passed between shooting the web series and the first three episodes . Difficulties with this included the fact that <unk> Wiebe , who portrays Alexi , grew taller , and the actors consciously played the characters to be more open to each other . It was filmed using Red One cameras , the first series in North America to use them . The Red camera system does away with tape and film and records straight to a hard drive , allowing Anthem Visual Effects and the series ' post production team immediate access to the day 's footage , and is capable of recording at 4K resolution — four times the resolution of current high @-@ definition . 
 The season was filmed using five directors . Wood directed eight of the thirteen episodes ; he spent 17 days preparing to film the premiere . He found that " Requiem " was his favorite episode to direct , while " The Five " was his least favorite , as he had to keep reorganizing six styrofoam sets . Among the remaining five episodes , James Head directed " Folding Man " , Peter DeLuise directed " Nubbins " , Brenton Spencer directed " Edward " and " Warriors " , and Steven A. Adelson directed " Instinct " ; Adelson filmed the episode with 40 long takes to accomplish a real @-@ time perspective . DeLuise was approached by Wood to direct " Nubbins " as it was considered a lighter episode , which DeLuise preferred over a dramatic episode . In the past DeLuise would make cameo appearances in his works , but broke tradition in directing this episode . 
 According to Head , about 70 % of the season was filmed using green screen in the Burnaby warehouse . Unlike many other shows , elaborate sets were not built for the scenes to be filmed ; instead , they are created using CGI technology . Because of the virtual sets , the actors had to visualise what the rooms they were in looked like . To aid them , practical props were placed . The production crew also used rain and wind machines to film scenes set outdoors . However , practical sets were also used throughout the season . The first 20 minutes of " Sanctuary for All " was filmed at the partially decommissioned Riverview Hospital , described by Kindler as a " Swiss Army knife of locations " . Elsewhere , the studio parking lot and alleyways of The Bridge Studios provided a surrogate for several different types of locations , like city streets . A Volvo warehouse provided the filming location for " Instinct " . The final filming days were spent on the North Shore Mountains outside Vancouver . 
 The fifth episode , " Kush " , was filmed on a damaged fuselage set , which was built by production designer Bridget McGuire . The episode 's cast disliked the episode the most because they had to act as if they were in freezing temperatures , where in fact it was around 40 degrees Celsius . Because it was an expensive set , the producers wanted to reuse it . It was later redesigned to look like the inside of a submarine for " Requiem " . It was redressed again for " Revelations " . Although released third , " Fata Morgana " was filmed as the fourth episode , and was considered to be aired after " Folding Man " . However , Tapping felt strongly that it would make a great stand alone episode after " Sanctuary for All " , and the characters appeared more comfortable with each other in " Folding Man " . Swapping the episodes caused a major continuity issue , in which Ashley appears to show scratches on her neck from " Sanctuary for All " in " Folding Man " , but not in between . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The season 's visual effects were produced by Anthem Visual Effects , with the company 's Lee Wilson serving as co @-@ producer and visual effects supervisor . Because it was filmed in green screen , each episode contains an estimated 400 visual effect shots . In contrast , an average episode of Stargate SG @-@ 1 , which Tapping starred in , contained only 12 . One of the larger visual effects sequences was the opening sequence of the premiere , which took three months to produce . Each visual effect produced in the original webisodes was remastered . Among the characters , the movement of two @-@ faced guy 's rear face were made with Computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) , though it was a difficult effect to produce . A prosthetic application was added to the back of Campbell 's head when the second face is not talking . The mermaid character , Sally , was entirely a visual effect , with the face of Mandy May , wife of director Steven A. Adelson , rendered onto it . Creating the eponymous abnormals in " Nubbins " and their predator was what Sam Egan described as " a proper budget @-@ driven issue " because rendering several CGI creatures at once and having them move would be difficult . It was decided to have them camouflaged in an attempt to make work easier for the visual effects team , but it did not work out as well as the producers hoped . To achieve <unk> interaction with the cast , guide versions , nicknamed Oompa @-@ Loompas , were made for them to carry . In designing Tesla 's transition to a vampire , the producers , realizing vampires were included in several other works in the past , wanted to make them look unique . Wilson based the vampire look to the 2007 film 30 Days of Night . 
 Because of the hard work by Anthem , the producers made " Kush " and " Requiem " into bottle episodes , to give the visual effects team a break . Instead , other forms of special effects were used . To create the Himalayan feel of " Kush " , the production crew used wind machines and paper snow . However , the fake snow became a problem for the cast , as they suffered from bloodshot eyes and scratchy throats when exposed to it . Aquariums were placed outside each port hole of the set in " Requiem " . To complete the effects where Druitt teleports , Heyerdahl would walk out of the shot while every other cast member has to stay still , until the directors signal them to react ; the shot of Heyerdahl walking out of frame would later be cut . Another effect involving Heyerdahl is a scene between both his characters , Bigfoot and Druitt , in " Revelations " . To complete the shot , Heyerdahl had to film two different shots : one with him as Druitt talking to nothing , and another with him as Bigfoot talking to nothing . When both characters can be seen walking together , a stand @-@ in would replace Heyerdahl as Bigfoot . 
 Another form of special effects are prosthetics used to create abnormals . They were composed by a team of make @-@ up artists . Todd Masters stated that his team tried to make them interesting and unique every week . The abnormal shown at the end of " Kush " was a stand @-@ in who wore a full prosthetic suit ; the costume took a long time to apply . Among the prosthetics used in " Warriors " , Dunne wore a muscle suit that was previously worn by Vinnie Jones during the 2006 film X @-@ Men : The Last Stand . 
 The corpses used in the beginning of " Sanctuary for All " were mannequins the props department had in their possession , with holes added in the foreheads . Using mannequins was easier than using actors . The drawings in " Edward " were produced by Sanctuary 's art department . The season 's stunts were coordinated by Marshall Virtue . To develop the Fight Club scenes in " Warriors " , fight coordinator Rob Hader helped with choreographing the stunts . While filming the scenes , Hader played one of the fighters . He replaced an actor who broke a knee after filming for six seconds . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Originally airing on the Sci Fi Channel in the United States , the first season was broadcast in over 50 countries worldwide . Tapping believed the channel was a " good home base " , because she had worked with the network for several years before , adding " they understand the genre . They understand the fans . " The season commenced with both parts of " Sanctuary for All " on October 3 , 2008 . The following episodes aired almost every Friday during the 10 to 11 pm time slot from October 10 , 2008 , until January 9 , 2009 . In Canada , it aired on Movie Channel One of The Movie Network . In the United Kingdom , the season was picked up for broadcast by ITV4 . The first episode was broadcast on October 6 , 2008 , only three days after the release on the Sci Fi Channel . In Australia , the season debuted on ABC2 on March 1 , 2010 . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Sanctuary for All " started off the season with over 2 @.@ 7 million viewers and a household rating of 2 @.@ 2 after its original broadcast . It became Sci Fi Channel 's highest rated series premiere since the pilot episode of Eureka in July 2006 . It was the number one prime time cable entertainment program among adults aged 25 through 54 years , and fourth among adults aged 18 through 49 years . Because of the high ratings , views of Sci Fi 's Sanctuary page rose to 1 @.@ 2 million , as well as 287 @,@ 000 video streams the day it was broadcast . Viewing figures for the following episodes were somewhat under 2 million , but the finale drew its biggest audience since the premiere ; " Revelations ( Part 2 ) " was seen by 2 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 6 household rating . Including timeshifted viewings , the first season averaged 2 @.@ 35 million viewers , and a 1 @.@ 8 rating . The first season of Sanctuary beat the fifth season of its lead in Stargate Atlantis by two tenths of a point . Because of the success , Sci Fi ordered a second season on November 2008 . In the United Kingdom , the first part of " Sanctuary for All " was seen by 565 @,@ 000 viewers . The second part received 608 @,@ 000 viewers the following week . Since then , ratings have steadily declined to 398 @,@ 000 by the season finale . The penultimate episode received the lowest ratings of the season , with only 279 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The season received generally mixed reviews from critics . Metacritic gave the season a normalized rating of 56 out of 100 based on seven reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . Linda Stasi of the New York Post stated " the monsters are first rate , the virtual sets are very cool , the acting is excellent . Why I was fighting fatigue while watching , I can 't say . It was either the martinis from Steve Dunleavy 's farewell party – or the plot . " Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune felt the pace was " a little on the stately side " , and was unclear why Tapping " speaks with an iffy English accent " , but believed the " low @-@ key , low @-@ budget but well @-@ intentioned sci @-@ fi / action hybrid might be of interest to fans of Tapping 's earlier work as Samantha Carter on Stargate SG @-@ 1 " . Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times felt that " much of it feels dreadfully slow , not so much moody as stretched for time . Hard @-@ to @-@ sell dialogue such as ' Such imperfect children are often adopted by well @-@ meaning immigrant families ' doesn 't make it flow any faster " , but still stated " it looks great " . 
 Brian Lowry of Variety called the first two episodes " competent but uninspiring " , and said it " suffers by comparison with any number of similarly themed dramas , most recently BBC America 's fun @-@ loving Torchwood " . Lowry also believes that " it 's hard to imagine this series doing much more than satisfying some of the odd humanoids still pining for ( and emailing on behalf of ) Stargate " . Mike Hale of The New York Times felt that Sanctuary " sits at about the same level of writing and performance as the Stargate shows , which means it doesn 't have the narrative force of Battlestar Galactica or the wit and creativity of Sci Fi 's best original series , Eureka " , adding that " it 's not an embarrassment for the channel , but it doesn 't raise the stakes either " . Hale also noted that there is a connection with Stargate , which is " in its 12th year and still going strong " . 
 David Blackwell of Enterline Media thought that Sanctuary was an " interesting concept " , but felt the first six episodes were " hit @-@ or @-@ miss " . Of the series ' use of green screen for sets , Blackwell stated " sometimes it really works and sometimes the CGI sets could use improvement " . He also felt that Amanda Tapping was convincing as a British scientist . In conclusion , Blackwell stated " Sanctuary does take a while to kick in , but it is a very good series once the writers actually write something with depth . " Alex Walker of Den of Geek rated the first season three stars out of five , stating " the acting and scripting is good , but Sanctuary lacks the wit and charm of the genre 's top shows like Doctor Who and Battlestar Galactica . Also , the way some episodes alternate between fighting and exposition gives the impression of watching someone else play a videogame . " Walker also dubbed it a " poor man 's Buffy The Vampire Slayer , but said that it " makes for " agreeable early @-@ evening viewing " . Walker also believed that the DVD of the first season should really be for " die @-@ hard fans only " . 
 Paul Simpson of Total Sci @-@ Fi rated the season 7 out of 10 , and summed it up as " although frequently predictable , Sanctuary usually provides an entertaining hour . " John Sinnott of DVD Talk , being a fan of Tapping 's earlier work of Stargate SG @-@ 1 , believes the first season is " highly recommended " . Sinnott also noticed that while " the first six shows are so @-@ so [ ... ] the last seven are great " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The season won a total of five awards . The pilot episode " Sanctuary for All " won a 2009 Gemini Award for Best Visual Effects . The other four were Leo Awards . " Warriors " won " Best Make @-@ Up in a Dramatic Series " . Actor Ryan Robbins won " Best Guest Performance by a Male in a Dramatic Series " for his role as Henry Foss in " Edward " , beating co @-@ star Jonathan Young . Gabrielle Rose won " Best Guest Performance by a Female in a Dramatic Series " for the same episode . Amanda Tapping won " Best Lead Performance by a Female in a Dramatic Series " for her role as Helen Magnus in " Requiem " . The most prestigious nomination for the season was for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for " Sanctuary for All " , but it lost the award to Heroes . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 A DVD box set of the first season , published by E1 Entertainment , was first released in Region 1 on September 15 , 2009 , in Region 2 on October 12 , 2009 , and in Region 4 on September 9 , 2009 . The season was later released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in the United States on June 15 , 2010 , and in Australia on June 9 , 2010 . The four @-@ disc set consists of all 13 episodes , each with audio commentaries from cast and crew , as well as the original webisodes in two installments . The set also includes three behind the scenes featurettes : Welcome to the Sanctuary , The Sanctuary Residents , and Sanctuary Visual Effects , as well as a blooper reel , photo gallery , and sneak preview of season two . John Sinnott of DVD Talk reacted positively to the number of extras , rating it four and a half stars out of five ; Sinnott was also " very pleased " to see the original webisodes included in the set . 
 = Fox @-@ y Lady = 
 " Fox @-@ y Lady " ( stylized as " FOX @-@ y Lady " ) is the tenth episode of the seventh season of the animated television series Family Guy . It premiered on Fox in the United States on March 22 , 2009 . The episode is centered on housewife Lois Griffin 's employment at Fox News Channel , despite the warnings of anthropomorphic dog Brian . On her first day on the job , she is assigned to do a report on Michael Moore 's perceived homosexuality , but it is rejected when the exposé involves conservative Republican Rush Limbaugh . Meanwhile , husband Peter and son Chris decide to create their own animated sitcom . The pilot episode is a success with the CEO , but Peter decides not to air it when it is suggested that it be edited . 
 The episode was written by Matt <unk> and directed by Pete Michels . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 7 @.@ 45 million viewers in its original airing in the United States . The episode featured guest performances by Seth Rogen , Meredith Baxter , Peter Chernin , Fred Savage , Daniel Stern , Ed Helms , Sharon Tay , John Moschitta , Jr. and Mark DeCarlo . " Fox @-@ y Lady " , along with the six remaining episodes from Family Guy 's seventh season and the first eight episodes from the eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rhonda Latimer , an aging reporter for Fox News Channel who is idolized by viewers because of her good looks , is dismissed when the network 's first high @-@ definition broadcast exposes her wrinkles , leaving a job opportunity open . Lois auditions for the part , ignoring Brian 's warnings that Fox News is a heavily biased network , and she is chosen as the new reporter . On her first day reporting , she is assigned to do an exposé on Michael Moore to prove that he is a homosexual . When she spies on him outside his house , she sees Rush Limbaugh coming out , leading her to conclude that Limbaugh and Moore are in a gay relationship . However , Fox News refuses to allow any material against fellow conservative Limbaugh to be broadcast , leading Lois to realize that Brian was right about them . The two decide to take the story into their own hands and confront who they expect to be Moore and a naked Limbaugh in the same bedroom , only to discover that the both of them are portrayed by Fred Savage , who has created bodysuits of them in order to continue his acting career . A flabbergasted Lois ultimately decides to report his story instead . 
 Meanwhile , Peter , with help from his children Chris and Meg , decides to create his own animated series about a trio of handicapped ducks entitled <unk> @-@ <unk> . All of Meg 's reasonable and sometimes rational suggestions are shot down by Peter and Chris in favor of their more unusual and nonsensical ideas . Peter eventually fires Meg . He and Chris then decide on a joke involving a wood stove and a house of cards , and invite Cleveland , Quagmire and Joe to voice the characters . Although it is suggested that the crudely animated and developed pilot episode will likely fail , CEO Peter Chernin ( appearing as himself ) enjoys it and agrees to air the show , but Peter becomes angered when he suggests that the character <unk> Tomato Nose 's nose be a plum instead of a tomato . Peter 's passion about his work impresses Chernin into allowing him to air the episode unedited , but he decides not to let the episode be aired at all , which he later regrets . 
 At the end of the episode , Lois is revealed to no longer work as a reporter . She does not bother to reveal how or why , since no one really cares . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fox @-@ y Lady " is the tenth episode of Family Guy 's seventh season . The episode was written by former iCarly writer Matt <unk> and directed by former supervising director Pete Michels . 
 " Fox @-@ y Lady " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season and seven from the seventh season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The DVDs included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane , and various crew and cast members from several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature that discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and a mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . The set also includes a reprint of the script for the episode . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Seth Rogen cameoed as himself , this being his second appearance on the show after " Family Gay " . Then @-@ Fox Entertainment Group CEO Peter Chernin and The Wonder Years star Fred Savage also guest @-@ starred , along with Daniel Stern as that series ' narrator , and Ed Helms , Sharon Tay , John Moschitta , Jr. and Mark DeCarlo appeared as well . Recurring voice actors Jackson Douglas , Jennifer Tilly , and Kim Parks , and writers Kirker Butler , Steve Callaghan , Mark Hentemann , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener made cameo appearances in the episode as well . Actress Meredith Baxter @-@ Birney voices herself in a cutaway . Actors Adam West and Patrick Warburton appeared in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Lois is given her contract after getting a job at Fox News , she happily runs home in a way reminiscent of Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory when that film 's protagonist , Charlie Bucket , runs home after receiving his golden ticket . She then falls and starts moaning , much like Peter did after he won a tour of the Pawtucket brewery in " Wasted Talent " , but instead of grabbing her kneecap as Peter did , she grabs her right breast . Later on at the studio , Stewie 's broadcast on Fox News is a parody of a viral video clip of an angry Bill O 'Reilly during a teleprompter malfunction . When Fred Savage is proven to be Rush Limbaugh and Michael Moore , he also reveals himself to be Tony Danza , Camryn Manheim , Malcolm @-@ Jamal Warner , Kevin Nealon , John Forsythe , and Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich . After Savage confesses to his multiple identities , the voice @-@ over from The Wonder Years is heard and Fred shouts at him , " I don 't need you anymore ! " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing in the United States , " Fox @-@ y Lady " was watched by 7 @.@ 45 million viewers , surpassing the other shows in the " Animation Domination " block . It gained a 3 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing second in its timeslot . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews from television sources and critics . Alex Rocha of TV Guide called it a " pretty dull episode , but with some bright humorous spots [ ... ] The episode looked like it had potential , but definitely did not perform to its best . " Ahsan Haque of IGN called it " far from perfect " but " definitely a lot better than the terrible O.J. Simpson episode from last week . " He called the <unk> @-@ <unk> scenes " fantastic " and called the episode overall " definitely a step in the right direction . " Robin Pierson of The TV Critic said : " More purpose in the plot and more jokes related to the story than usual " and gave the episode 40 out of 100 . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club wrote that " tonight 's Family Guy was the best it 's been in a <unk> time " . He stated that in both plotlines " the game is established early [ ... ] and the show escalates nicely " , and graded the episode a B. 
 = Rock Show ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Rock Show " is the sixth episode and season finale of the first season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 14 , 2009 . It was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Michael Schur . In the episode , Andy gets the casts removed from his legs , and Ann starts reevaluating their relationship when she learns he kept them on longer than necessary so she would keep pampering him . An intoxicated Mark flirts with Leslie , who feels conflicted about whether she wants to move forward when he is drunk . 
 The episode generated positive reviews . Several commentators claimed " Rock Show " represented a turning point in the series , in which the show found its own tone and broke away from similarities to The Office . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 4 @.@ 25 million viewers in its original airing , the lowest viewership for the season . " Rock Show " , along with an " Extended Producer 's Cut " of the episode , was included on the Parks and Recreation Season One DVD , which was released in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The parks and recreation department have cake to celebrate Andy ( Chris Pratt ) having his leg casts removed , and Ann ( Rashida Jones ) invites everybody to a local bar to hear Andy 's first rock concert since he broke his leg . Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) is disappointed she cannot go , because her mother ( Pamela Reed ) has set up a business meeting with a local town manager . Later at the hospital , Ann learns from Dr. Harris ( Cooper Thornton ) that Andy could have had his casts removed two weeks earlier , but that he postponed it because he wanted Ann to keep pampering him . Angry , Ann begins reevaluating her relationship with Andy . Later that evening , Leslie realizes the dinner with 62 @-@ year @-@ old George <unk> ( Ron Perkins ) is actually a blind date set up by her mother . George , who tells the documentary camera crew he is getting " very positive signals " , agrees to go with Leslie to the rock show . 
 Mark ( Paul Schneider ) feels lonely because he is the only one at the concert without a date : Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) is with his attractive surgeon wife Wendy Haverford ( Jama Williamson ) , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) is dating his ex @-@ wife 's sister Beth ( Stephanie Erb ) and April ( Aubrey Plaza ) is with , " like the gayest person I 've ever met , but I make out with him when I 'm drunk sometimes . " Noticing Ann is angry with Andy , Mark makes a pass at her , but Ann angrily rejects him . Leslie and George show up and are mocked by Tom . After the concert ends , Andy tries to stay as long as possible to avoid a fight with Ann , but she insists they leave . George goes home because he was falling asleep and Leslie starts to leave , but an intoxicated Mark asks her to stay and have a beer with him . 
 When Leslie notes to the camera crew that they seem to be getting along just like when they made love five years earlier , she realizes he was drunk then too . When the bar closes , the two decide to keep drinking alongside the pit outside Ann 's house , which Leslie plans to turn into a park . When Leslie asks whether he thinks the park will ever be made , a pragmatic Mark says it will be a difficult process with a lot of red tape , but she remains optimistic . During a fight , Andy admits to Ann that he postponed having the casts removed , but explains it was because , " I really , really like it when you serve me food . " Ann throws him out , and Andy sees Mark kiss Leslie . Leslie stops his advances because she does not want to move forward when he is drunk . As Mark starts to leave , he falls into the pit . An amused Andy tells Ann , who rushes out to help him while Andy goes back inside and watches television . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Rock Show " , the first season finale of Parks and Recreation was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by series co @-@ founder Michael Schur . Schur said he felt " Rock Show " marked a change in tone for the series and struck a better balance between personal and professional stories than any of the other episodes from the season . Schur said : " We treated that whole six @-@ episode season like a pilot . If you go back and watch those episodes now , you can see us making changes . The sixth episode is different in tone than the first . And we made some character tweaks , like every show ever does " . Amy Poehler said she believed " Rock Show " would end what she described as the inevitable comparisons between Parks and Recreation and The Office , which is also produced by Parks creators Schur and Greg Daniels . Poehler said , " I think it was something we had to work through in the beginning , and I ’ m kind of hoping we ’ re on the other side of that and people will start to judge the show on its own , for what it is and realize it ’ s just a completely different world in a similar style . ” Schur made his directorial debut with " Rock Show " , and had only one day of preparation before directing the episode . While preparing to direct the episode , Schur was asked to make an appearance on The Office as Mose Schrute , the cousin of Dwight Schrute and a popular minor character , in the fifth season finale episode , " Company Picnic " . Schur regretfully declined because he needed the time to work on " Rock Show " , leading Office episode writers Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta to create the character Rolf , Dwight 's friend played by James Urbaniak , as an alternative . 
 Andy 's bandmates during the rock show scene were played by Mark Rivers ( drums ) , Andrew Burlinson ( guitar ) and Alan Yang ( bass ) . All four actors performed their own instruments live during the filming . Originally , they planned to pre @-@ record the songs and pantomime them for the episode , but after practicing a few times around the extras , they decided to shoot it live . The band performed each song twice , and Schur said he tried to shoot and direct it as if it were a music video . Yang is a writer with Parks and Recreation , and wrote the previous first season episode , " Boys ' Club " . Rivers is a composer who has worked on the sketch comedy show Human Giant , which starred Parks star Aziz Ansari . Rivers wrote the songs performed in " Rock Show " , which Pratt said took him only " about fifteen minutes " . Hiscock wrote the lyrics for " The Pit " in the initial outline for the episode and they were handed to Rivers who then fleshed them out . The songs were designed to resemble the music of the American rock band Hootie & the Blowfish . The only song not written by Rivers was " Ann " , a romantic ballad Andy played for Ann , which was written by Pratt himself . " Ann " first appeared in " Boys ' Club " . 
 Like most episodes of Parks and Recreation , a great deal of the scenes in " Rock Show " were improvised by the actors . Paul Schneider made up his own dialogue during the scene in which he and Poehler sit next to the pit and he talks about it as if it is already a park . Poehler 's laughter at his jokes in this scene is her genuine reaction . Pratt also improvised much of his own dialogue , including his rationale to Ann for why he lied about his leg casts : " I really , really like it when you serve me food . " Pratt also changed the reaction his character had to Mark falling into the pit . The script originally called for Andy to be serious and concerned , but Pratt changed it so his character thought the fall was funny . Pratt also improvised the songs he sang during an early scene in the episode , in which Andy makes up songs about random items in Ann 's living room out of boredom from wearing the casts for so long . One of the songs he sings is about a lamp , and included the lyrics , " I wish you were a lamp that would light up when you get touched . " Pratt thought of the song because he had recently gotten such a lamp as a gift from a friend . 
 During a scene when Andy describes his style of music , April responds that she completely understands him , although the other characters seemingly do not . That line was improvised by Aubrey Plaza , and later helped inspire the writing staff to place the April and Andy characters into a romantic relationship . Schur said of this , " At the time , it was this little nothing , throwaway thing , but when we watched it , we thought there might be something there . " The scene with Mark making a pass at Ann at the rock show , and Ann 's angry reaction to the attempt , were a last @-@ minute addition to the episode . Although Mark and Ann would develop a romantic relationship in the second season , the Parks and Recreation writers had not decided what would happen between the developing romantic plotlines between Leslie and Mark , or Leslie and Ann , at time " Rock Show " aired . In the original pilot script , Mark helped Leslie solely because he was attracted to Ann and felt that green @-@ lighting Leslie 's project would give him an excuse to spend more time with her ; the shooting version was retooled to make Leslie less pathetic and Mark less unlikable , by having him won over by Leslie 's determination to fight against the odds . Immediately after " Rock Show " was originally broadcast , NBC set up an official website for " Scarecrow Boat " , Andy 's band featured in the episode . The site , at <unk> , included ringtones , band posters , songs for download and photos . 
 George <unk> was played by Ron Perkins , the husband of Parks and Recreation casting director Nancy Perkins . Aubrey Plaza conceived the idea of her character dating a gay man who she occasionally makes out with . Her " gay boyfriend " would become a major part of April 's character in the second season . The scenes about Mark 's efforts to have a speed bump lowered were inspired by Scott Albright , a California city planner who works as a consultant on the show . Albright said it would only be realistic for a city planner to lower a speed bump if a large number of residents complained about it . The hospital scenes in " Rock Show " were filmed on @-@ location in an actual California hospital . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Andy describes the style of his band 's music as a mix between Matchbox Twenty and The Fray . George says his favorite rock band is The Everly Brothers , a country @-@ influenced rock band from the 1950s and 60s . Andy finds Ann 's lost iPod , a portable music player by Apple Inc . , inside his leg cast after it is removed . When Andy starts watching television while Ann rushes off to help Mark at the end of the episode , he is watching the reality series The Real Housewives of Atlanta . 
 The scene between Mark and Leslie at the pit was mirrored in the second season finale " Freddy Spaghetti " , which aired in May 2010 and was Mark 's final appearance as a regular cast member . During that scene , the two overlook what was once the pit , but was now a filled @-@ in lot , and Mark gives her construction plans for a park before kissing her goodbye on the cheek and leaving . Schur said of the scene , " It 's great because Leslie and Mark , it was such a disastrous moment last time ( at the pit ) and he didn 't really respect her , and a lot 's happened in a year . " Goor said of using that setting , " I liked the symmetry of having it play a critical , and opposite role in this finale . Last year , they sat on the bench and kissed , and it seemed like they might be getting back together . This year , they sat on the bench and Mark kissed Leslie goodbye . " 
 During one scene , Andy goes through a list of previous names his band has had . Pratt said about half the band names featured in the episode came directly from the script , but after he made up one on the spot , the directors encouraged him to keep improvising . Pratt said he went through about 200 fake band names during the take . The various names of Andy 's rock band include : 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 14 , 2009 , " Rock Show " was watched by 4 @.@ 25 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , marking the lowest viewership for the season . Although the rating was almost the same as the previous week 's episode , " The Banquet " , Bill Gorman of TV By the Numbers still called the rating " pitiful . " The episode received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 share among viewers between 18 and 49 . 
 " Rock Show " received generally positive reviews , with many critics claiming it to be the best episode of the series up to that point . The scene in which Leslie rejects Mark 's kiss in the pit was considered by some reviewers to be a critical turning point both for the show and for the development of Leslie Knope 's character . Kona Gallagher of TV Squad wrote in a 2010 article , " Leslie finally realized that she can move on from Mark and the show realized that it could actually make her a real character " . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said after six episodes , he felt " Rock Show " was the episode where the Parks and Recreation found the right tone for the series and Leslie Knope character . Sepinwall said all the characters were very likable , the jokes seemed natural and the awkwardness of the show was turned down enough to work properly . The Hollywood Reporter writer Tim Goodman said while the first five episodes of the season had been disappointing , " Rock Show " marked an improvement in which " the characters were more defined , their quirks and rhythms understood " . Matt Fowler of IGN said he did not find the episode especially funny but that it did a good job of fleshing out the characters . He said Chris Pratt was especially funny , and that his band 's song " The Pit " was stuck in his head after the episode . The A.V. Club writer Keith Phipps , who had mixed feelings about Parks and Recreation throughout the season , said " Rock Show " was very funny and restored his faith in the potential of the series . Phipps said he believed the show would become very popular in the second season , and that people would later claim to like the first season more than they did the first time they saw it . In October 2009 , while reviewing the second season episode " Sister City " , A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce said he believed Parks and Recreation showed a streak of vast improvement that started with " Rock Show " and continued into the second season . 
 Jeremy Medina of Entertainment Weekly said the episode was " solid all @-@ around " and especially liked Leslie 's blind date with the elderly man and Chris Pratt , especially his listing of all his previous band names . Medina said , " Parks and Recreation is only six episodes in , and it 's already better than I anticipated . It has its own tone , a talented cast , and a plot that 's advancing toward something , at least as fast as governmental red tape will allow it to . " Richard Lawson of Gawker said the episode was the best of the season and that he liked the wistful pacing and Poehler 's performance . Lawson said , " Anyone who dismissed this show after its first sorta underwhelming episode made a mistake . The show has only gotten tighter and sharper , culminating in last night 's funny / sad finale . " Time television reviewer James Poniewozik said the episode was the best yet for developing Poehler into a " more multi @-@ <unk> , less risible character " . He also said the supporting staff played " flawlessly " off each other in the rock show scene , and thinks there is " huge potential " in the dynamic between Leslie and her undermining mother . Not all reviews of the episode were positive . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune said the Leslie Knope character was unappealing in " Rock Show " and throughout the first season , which she said surpassed the Friends spin @-@ off Joey as " the worst example of NBC 's tendency to extend its franchises well beyond what is desirable or logical . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Rock Show " , along with the five other first season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a one @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . The disc also included an " Producer 's Extended Cut " of " Rock Show " , which incorporated scenes that were cut from the originally broadcast episode . Many of the deleted scenes were improvised dialogue from the actors in brief extensions of episodes already included in the originally broadcast episode . In one of the cut scenes , Marlene Knope tells the audience that Leslie 's business meeting is actually a date . The producers decided to cut the moment , so the audience would find out at the same time Leslie learns it . In another cut scene , Andy tries to convince Ann that the doctor lied to her about Andy requesting more time with the leg casts because the doctor wanted more money . One of the longest cut scenes from the extended edition was a conversation between Leslie and Mark at the bar , in which Mark explains his ideals about city planning when he attended college are much different than the practical , technical aspects of his job . Although the scene was cut , Michael Schur said the monologue did a great deal to help develop Mark 's character . 
 = John Clough Holmes = 
 John Clough Holmes ( September 25 , 1809 – December 16 , 1887 ) was responsible for the establishment of Michigan State University . As the co @-@ founder of the Michigan State Agricultural Society , John Clough Holmes spearheaded the movement to build an agriculture college in Michigan . Holmes Hall , the home of the Lyman Briggs College , is named in his honor . 
 After moving to Detroit at age 26 , Holmes married into a merchant family . He later got involved in both the Detroit Horticultural Society and the Board of Education . In 1849 , his background in horticulture and education led him to co @-@ found the Michigan State Agricultural Society , a group dedicated to establishing a state @-@ funded agricultural college in Michigan . Holmes spent the next six years drafting legislation and gaining support for his cause , and in 1855 , the Michigan state governor signed a bill establishing the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan . 
 Holmes was keenly involved with the details of the Agricultural College , influencing everything from the purchase of land for the campus , layout of the buildings , and even the placement of the chairs and tables . Once the College opened , he assumed the role of treasurer and later Professor of Horticulture . By 1861 , Holmes had fallen out of favor with the other College administrators , and retired to his home in Detroit . Nevertheless , he continued to support and visit the college until his death in 1887 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Born in Salem , Massachusetts , John Clough Holmes moved to Michigan in 1835 , and gained employment in a Detroit merchant store . Within five years he had married his boss 's daughter , and soon became a partner in the family business . Holmes served as president of the Detroit Horticultural Society in 1847 . The following two years he was a member of the Board of Education of Detroit . Then in 1849 he co @-@ founded the Michigan State Agricultural Society . 
 The Michigan State Agricultural Society immediately assumed a lofty goal to foster the establishment of a state @-@ funded agricultural college in Michigan . Holmes , who served as secretary of the Agricultural Society from 1849 to 1857 , was also the college 's most tenacious proponent . In conference with his fellow society members , he drafted a bill that would create the college . Significantly , Holmes ( among others ) vehemently admonished that this college be independent of both the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and the Normal School in Ypsilanti , for he " feared that agricultural studies would not receive the attention needed to survive and thrive " at those schools . 
 Holmes spent the next five years gathering supporters for his grassroots movement , traveling at his own expense to gather petition signatures from across the state . On January 14 , 1855 , Holmes went to the state capital of Lansing to lobby the legislature for an agricultural college . He spent the next four weeks championing the bill he wrote and cementing support in both the House of Representatives and the Senate . Though many legislators supported the basic concept of a state @-@ funded agricultural college , there was strong opposition from University of Michigan president Henry Tappan , who wanted the agriculture program to be part of his school . Nevertheless , Holmes prevailed . On February 12 , 1855 , Michigan Governor Kinsley S. Bingham signed Act 130 , establishing the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan , the school that would become Michigan State University . The final draft of the bill held only two significant differences from the one that Holmes presented : that the purchase price not exceed US $ 15 per acre , rather than the $ 25 Holmes desired ; and that the site must be within ten miles ( 16 km ) of Lansing , a provision added to silence the various factions that wanted the new college built in their own backyards . 
 Holmes ' work had only begun : Act 130 put the Agricultural Society wholly in charge of selecting the site for the Agricultural College . In June 1855 , Holmes and the society 's executive committee visited nine sites of offered land , including some near the present towns of Holt , Millett , DeWitt , and Haslett . As a result of the low stipulated price of $ 15 per acre , all of the sites were uncleared land , and many were quite untenable for a campus . Eventually , Holmes wrote the proposal to purchase the 677 acres ( 274 ha ) Burr farm , located three miles due east of the capitol . He also included a second proposal , outlining both the college 's organization and " specific appointments for a staff . " 
 The State Board of Education approved the site purchase in July 1855 , but months later had proven unable to make any progress in deciding on basics for the college — including what buildings it might require . The Board turned to Holmes , who had continued to acquaint himself with the site by making some preliminary surveys . After some consideration , he reported back to the Board that the school required two main buildings : a combination classroom and office building , and a dormitory . Thus , John C. Holmes is the man responsible for the design of both College Hall and the original dormitory , now known as Saints ' Rest . In addition , although Professor Harold W. Lautner ( who , as the official Director of Campus Planning from 1945 to 1969 , was a direct successor to Holmes ) makes a point of noting that " who proposed the sites for these first buildings is not answered in any record , " he concurs that Holmes ' ubiquitous hand makes it unlikely that anyone else made that decision . 
 The buildings were completed , and the first classes commenced in May 1857 . As the College began operations , Holmes was appointed its treasurer . Showing that no decision was small enough to escape his view , he is said to have " supervised the placing of chairs and tables in College Hall . " The college 's 200 @-@ volume library was donated by the Michigan State Agricultural Society — curiously , this meant that Holmes ( as secretary of the society ) had conveyed the library to himself ( as treasurer of the college ) . 
 In addition to treasurer , Holmes was appointed as the school 's first superintendent of horticulture , responsible for campus planning and planting . This title was used alternately with Professor for a short period . On February 2 , 1858 , the Horticulture Professorship was suspended , ostensibly for financial reasons ( as well as the fact that the wild condition of the land hardly warranted a full @-@ time horticulturalist as yet ) . Even so , Holmes was allowed to continue residing in one of the original on @-@ campus Faculty Row houses until the end of the term . 
 Then , on March 8 , 1859 , Holmes was asked to resign as treasurer , and he complied . Some time in that year or the one following , he was appointed once again as Superintendent of Horticulture , guiding students in planting the College gardens and improving the grounds . Through 1861 he continued to be listed in the college catalog under various titles including Professor of Horticulture , Secretary , and Treasurer . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1861 , a major reorganization of the College transferred control from the Board of Education to the newly formed Board of Agriculture . Holmes was " not retained despite the urging of his colleagues and the unquestioned spiritual debt which the College owed him . " Holmes returned to the Detroit area , lived another twenty @-@ six years , and remained active in his community . Although he continued to be , as President T. C. Abbot wrote circa 1883 , " a not infrequent and always welcome visitor at the college , and one of its warmest friends , " Holmes never again held any official position at the College . There is no known explanation for this change of fortune , but as Lautner wrote , " clearly there were troubles here other than financial ones that are not suggested in the minutes . " 
 Professor Lautner contrasts Holmes ' legacy with that of John Harvard , whose donation of a modest library and four hundred British pounds led to a major university that bears his name , implying that MSU 's debt to Holmes is far greater . Professor William J. Beal called him " the most important agent " of the school , while President Abbot said , " To no one man is the College so much indebted as John Clough Holmes . " One hundred years after the founding , Madison Kuhn 's high regard for Holmes was clear , using as the frontispiece of his book a painting clearly meant to signify the exact moment of the Agricultural College 's genesis with an almost mythological glow . Finally in 1965 , MSU named a new six story modernist residence hall after Holmes . The building still stands to this day , and is home to the Lyman Briggs College . 
 = Lonely Among Us = 
 " Lonely Among Us " is the seventh episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation that originally aired on November 2 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication in the United States . It was written by D. C. Fontana , based on a story by Michael Halperin . It was the first episode of The Next Generation to be directed by Cliff Bole . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , as the ship is en route to an interplanetary conference with delegates from the Selay and Antican races on board , a non @-@ corporeal alien entity takes possession of various Enterprise crew members , including Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) . 
 This episode marked the first appearance of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine recurring cast member Marc Alaimo in a Star Trek series , as well as the second appearance of Colm Meaney who would later play The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine character Miles O 'Brien . The Antican and Selay make @-@ up were created by Michael Westmore from designs by Andrew Probert . Following the airing of the episode , fans wrote in to complain about a scene referencing cannibalism . Reviews were mostly negative , with criticism directed at the writing in particular . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise is en route to the planet " Parliament " with delegates from two warring planets in the Beta Renner system , the reptilian Selay and the canine Antican , when the ship encounters a strange energy cloud . Unseen by the crew , Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) is hit with a strange energy discharge as the ship passes the cloud , causing him to become violent . Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) sedates Worf and brings him to the sickbay , but is also infused with the energy as she examines his body . Crusher begins to act oddly to those around her and goes to the bridge , asking questions about the ship 's navigational functions . When she questions Lt. Cdr . Data ( Brent Spiner ) at one of the science stations , the energy sparks between her and the console , leaving her confused as to why she is on the bridge . 
 The ship suddenly begins to malfunction and Captain Picard sends Assistant Engineer Singh ( Kavi Raz ) to investigate the cause . Singh is later found dead near a computer link , and Picard orders a murder investigation , considering the alien delegates to be prime suspects . Data investigates the murder in the manner of fictional detective Sherlock Holmes , and determines that the delegates were not responsible . Meanwhile , Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) uses hypnosis on both Worf and Crusher , finding that both recall being invaded by some entity during their blackouts . The ship suddenly drops again out of warp , and as Picard investigates the readouts at a bridge console , the strange energy transfers into him . The bridge crew becomes suspicious of Picard 's actions after noting that all Enterprise systems are back to normal and that Picard has ordered them to return to the cloud . 
 The senior officers attempt to plead with Picard to undergo a medical examination and to step down from command , but he refuses . When they return to the cloud , Picard announces that they had picked up an entity previously when they passed the cloud , and now Picard and the entity are one . Under its influence , Picard plans to transport themselves back into the cloud , and he shoots energy at the bridge crew when they try to stop him . The crew are unable to prevent Picard from beaming off the ship . The crew spend hours trying to locate Picard to no avail , so they are forced to accept he is beyond recovery and prepare to leave . However , Troi senses the Captain 's essence nearby , and Picard manages to signal the crew through the ship 's computers . Data is able to reverse the transport , reconstituting Picard without the entity . After determining that Picard is himself again , lacking the memories since he was taken over by the entity , the Enterprise continues onto Parliament . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 The original story by Michael Halperin contained a different subplot involving a problem with the dilithium in the warp drive of the Enterprise . The diplomatic conference was added by D.C. Fontana when it was developed into a teleplay . Fontana had previously worked on Star Trek : The Original Series , including the episode " Journey to Babel " . " Lonely Among Us " was subsequently compared to " Journey to Babel " , which Fontana denied , saying , " I wrote ' Journey to Babel ' and I wrote this too , and I feel there is a difference . There 's a definite delineation and separation here , both in intent and content . " Director Cliff Bole did not recall much of the episode later , but did not think much of the script , saying " The subject matter affects the end product . There 's some better written shows , obviously . " It was the first episode of The Next Generation to be directed by Bole , who had previously worked on shows such as V and The Six Million Dollar Man . 
 Colm Meaney made his second appearance in The Next Generation after he originally appeared in the pilot , " Encounter at Farpoint " , as a conn ensign on the bridge . In this episode he played a security ensign , as it was not until season two that he began to play the recurring character of Miles O 'Brien , which would later become a series regular on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Another Deep Space Nine actor who made his first Trek appearance in this episode was Marc Alaimo , who played an Antican who was unnamed on screen , but referred to in the script as <unk> N <unk> . Alaimo went on to play several other roles in The Next Generation including as the Cardassian Gul Macet in " The Wounded " , before being cast as Gul Dukat in DS9 . John Durbin appeared as the Selay leader , and would also go on to appear as a Cardassian later in the series , as Gul <unk> in " Chain of Command " . Kavi Raz played Assistant Engineer Singh , although as he was unavailable for a re @-@ shoot , in one scene he was replaced by a wig on a chair . 
 = = = Make @-@ up and costuming = = = 
 The Selay and the Anticans were nicknamed the " snakes and the dogs " by the production staff . The designs were created by Andrew Probert , who had previously been responsible for the design of the Enterprise @-@ D. The make @-@ up used on them were created by supervisor Michael Westmore , which involved full head pieces and hands for two Anticans and five <unk> . Because of the limited space available , the Anticans were made internally in the Paramount make @-@ up studio while the <unk> were outsourced to a different studio to sculpt the head . Once completed , a mold was made of the Selay head and the unpainted pieces were cast in latex and sent to Westmore to complete . It was intended to cast them out of lightweight polyurethane , but the first batch of Selay heads came out really heavy . 
 Westmore had time to re @-@ cast two of the heads from a soft foam rubber , but as each took five hours to make , there wasn 't enough time to re @-@ make all five . The heavier versions of the Selay heads were worn by actors in the background of the scenes , although Westmore described them as being " very uncomfortable " . The Antican mask didn 't allow for any movement at all with the exception of the actors being able to poke their tongues through the mouth opening . Although this is the only major appearance of either the Anticans or the Selay , they continued to be used as background extras in other episodes of The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine . Westmore repainted the Selay masks prior to reusing them in order to give the scales more of a three @-@ dimensional look . 
 This was the first appearance of The Next Generation era Starfleet dress uniforms . They were based on those used by the Royal Navy in the 18th century , but would be slightly altered when they re @-@ appeared during season two . One piece of a costume introduced in this episode which never returned was the surgical cap and eyepiece worn by Doctor Crusher . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Lonely Among Us " originally aired in broadcast syndication on November 2 , 1987 . It received a 12 @.@ 1 rating , meaning that it was seen by 12 @.@ 1 percent of all households . This was an increase from the previous week 's " Where No One Has Gone Before " which received a rating of 10 @.@ 5 . 
 Following the broadcast , the producers received a significant amount of mail from fans criticising the apparent cannibalism on the part of the Anticans in this episode . Several reviewers rewatched the episode following the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed " Lonely Among Us " for Tor.com in May 2011 . He gave it a score of three out of ten and was disinterested in the episode , finding the alien delegation subplot to be " mostly just silly " , and the majority of the episode was a " weak @-@ beer mystery that 's mostly an excuse for Gates McFadden and Sir Patrick Stewart to act weird and for Brent Spiner to be a silly Sherlock " . James Hunt thought that Spiner 's Sherlock impression was " completely brilliant " , in his review for the website Den of Geek in October 2012 . He thought that the episode shared some similarities with the third season of The Original Series , saying " By which I mean it looks cheap and appears to have been written by a child , in yellow crayon . " 
 Cast member Wil Wheaton rewatched the episode for AOL TV in November 2006 . He criticised the writing of Fontana in this episode , saying that around this time she appeared on a panel at a convention about how to solve " The Wesley Problem " , but when rewatching the episode he thought that " maybe instead of sitting on this panel and trashing me , D.C Fontana could have written intelligent dialogue for me and helped solve the " Wesley problem " herself . I don 't know , maybe she tried to do that and didn 't get a lot of support from the rest of the producers and writing staff , but even I know of Dr. Channing 's theory of not writing cliched dialogue for kids in science fiction , and then blaming the actor who is forced to deliver it . " Overall he criticised the " very stiff " dialogue throughout the episode , and called the set @-@ up " incredibly forced " . He did highlight that Data acting out as Sherlock Holmes laid the foundation of future episodes which would expand on this . 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in April 2010 . He too thought that the alien delegation subplot was poorly executed in a comedic fashion , and said that this " combined with the slow pace and a number of dialog scenes that can be charitably described as ' character development ' ( or more accurately as ' padding ' ) , this is an unmemorable episode that shows a series still unsure of its greatest strengths . " He gave the episode a grade of C- . 
 The first home media release of " Lonely Among Us " was on VHS cassette , appearing on April 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . The most recent release was as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Ima Hogg = 
 Ima Hogg ( July 10 , 1882 – August 19 , 1975 ) , known as " The First Lady of Texas " , was an American philanthropist , patron and collector of the arts , and one of the most respected women in Texas during the 20th century . Hogg was an avid art collector , and owned works by Picasso , Klee , and Matisse , among others . Hogg donated hundreds of pieces of artwork to Houston 's Museum of Fine Arts and served on a committee to plan the Kennedy Center in Washington , D.C. An enthusiastic collector of early American antiques , she also served on a committee tasked with locating historical furniture for the White House . She restored and refurbished several properties , including the Varner plantation and Bayou Bend , which she later donated to Texas arts and historical institutions who maintain the facilities and their collections today . Hogg received numerous awards and honors , including the Louise E. du Pont Crowninshield Award from the National Trust for Historic Preservation , the Santa Rita Award from the University of Texas System , and an honorary doctorate in fine arts from Southwestern University . 
 Hogg was the daughter of Sarah Ann " Sallie " Stinson and James Stephen " Big Jim " Hogg , later Attorney General of Texas and Governor of the state . Ima Hogg 's first name was taken from The Fate of Marvin , an epic poem written by her uncle Thomas Hogg . She endeavored to downplay her unusual name by signing her first name <unk> and having her stationery printed with " I. Hogg " or " Miss Hogg " . Although it was rumored that Hogg had a sister named " Ura Hogg " , she had only brothers . Hogg 's father left public office in 1895 , and soon after , her mother was diagnosed with tuberculosis . When Sarah died later that year , Jim Hogg 's widowed elder sister moved to Austin to care for the Hogg children . Between 1899 and 1901 , Hogg attended the University of Texas at Austin ; she then moved to New York City to study piano and music theory for two years . After her father 's death in 1906 , she traveled to Europe and spent two years studying music under Xaver Scharwenka in Vienna . When she returned to Texas , she established and managed the Houston Symphony Orchestra and served as president of the Symphony Society . 
 The discovery of oil on her family 's plantation made Hogg very wealthy , and she used this income to benefit the people of Texas . In 1929 , she founded the Houston Child Guidance Center , which provides counseling for children with mental health problems or diagnoses and their families . Through her brother 's will , she established the Hogg Foundation for Mental Health at the University of Texas at Austin in 1940 . Hogg successfully ran for a seat on the Houston School Board in 1943 , where she worked to remove gender and race as criteria for determining pay and established art education programs for black students . Hogg never married , and died in 1975 . The Ima Hogg Foundation was the major beneficiary of her will , and carries on her philanthropic work today . Several annual awards have been established in her name , honoring her efforts to preserve cultural heritage in Texas . 
 = = Name = = 
 After the birth of his only daughter , Jim Hogg wrote to his brother , " Our cup of joy is now overflowing ! We have a daughter of as fine proportions and of as angelic mien as ever gracious nature favor a man with , and her name is Ima ! " Ima Hogg had no middle name , which was unusual for the time . Her first name was taken from her uncle Thomas Hogg 's epic Civil War poem The Fate of Marvin , which featured two young women named Ima and Leila . According to Virginia Bernhard 's biography of Ima Hogg , " there are some who believe that James Stephen Hogg … named his only daughter Ima Hogg to attract the attention of Texas voters " in a year when he was running in a close race for district attorney of the Seventh District in Texas , which he won . Alternatively , correspondence from Jim Hogg indicates he may not have been conscious of the combined effect of his daughter 's first and last names . 
 Ima Hogg later recounted that " my grandfather Stinson lived fifteen miles [ 24 km ] from Mineola and news traveled slowly . When he learned of his granddaughter 's name he came trotting to town as fast as he could to protest but it was too late . The christening had taken place , and Ima I was to remain . " During her childhood , Hogg 's elder brother William often came home from school with a bloody nose , the result of defending , as she later recalled , " my good name " . Throughout her adult years , Hogg signed her name in a scrawl that left her first name illegible . Her personal stationery was usually printed " Miss Hogg " or " I. Hogg " , and she often had her stationery order placed in her secretary 's name to avoid questions . Hogg did not use a nickname until several months before her death , when she began calling herself " Imogene " . Her last passport was issued to " Ima Imogene Hogg " . 
 Contrary to popular belief , Ima did not have a sister named Ura . Texas legend insists that when Jim Hogg ran for re @-@ election as Texas governor in 1892 he often travelled with Ima and a friend of hers and introduced them as his daughters Ima and Ura . Ima Hogg maintained throughout her life that this never happened . She was frequently forced to dispel the myth ; hundreds of people wrote her letters inquiring whether her name was real and if she really had a sister named Ura . The Kansas City Star even invented another sister , <unk> . 
 In the early 1930s , Hogg worked on a collection of her father 's papers and speeches with his biographer , historian Robert C. <unk> ; she became a guardian of his place in history , often writing to clarify or refute articles published about her father . According to Bernhard , " the very fact that Ima had been burdened with a name that made a lifetime of explanations necessary also made her anxious to defend her father from all detractors . By doing so , she defended herself as well , and she did so with considerable skill and unfailing politeness . " 
 Ima Hogg has been the source of " unfortunate name " or " worst baby name " jokes , lists , and contests , including the incorrect lore that Jim Hogg had named his two daughters " Ima Hogg " and " Ura Hogg " . Similar unfortunate baby names according to United States Census records include Ima <unk> , Ima Muskrat , Ima Nut , Ima Hooker , Ima Weiner , Ima Reck , Ima Pain and Ima Butt . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Ima Hogg was born in Mineola , Texas in 1882 to Jim Hogg and Sarah Ann " Sallie " Stinson . She was the second of four children , including brothers William Clifford Hogg ( 1875 – 1930 ) , Michael Hogg ( 1885 – 1941 ) , and Thomas Elisha Hogg ( 1887 – 1949 ) . The Hogg family had long been active in public service . Her great @-@ grandfather , Thomas Hogg , served in the state legislatures of Georgia , Alabama , and Mississippi . Her grandfather , Joseph Lewis Hogg , served in the Congress of the Republic of Texas and helped to write the Texas State Constitution . At the time of her birth , Hogg 's father was the district attorney of the Seventh District in Texas . His term expired in 1884 , and the family moved to Tyler , where he practiced law . Two years later , Jim Hogg was elected Texas Attorney General and the Hogg family moved to the state capital , Austin , where Ima began attending kindergarten . When Jim Hogg was elected the first native @-@ born Governor of Texas four years later , Ima accompanied her mother and elder brother to the swearing @-@ in ceremony and inauguration ball in January 1891 , thus witnessing the first inauguration in the newly erected Texas State Capitol . The family moved into the Governor 's Mansion . Built in 1855 , the building was in poor condition , with cracked walls and dilapidated furnishings . Ima and her siblings were expected to help renovate the building to a liveable state — she was required , among other things , to pry chewing gum from the furniture and door moldings . 
 Hogg and her younger brothers were rambunctious . She recalled that they particularly enjoyed sliding down the banisters in the Governor 's Mansion . Hogg 's parents allowed this to continue until Thomas cut his chin , after which Jim Hogg nailed tacks along the center of the railing to curb the activity through fear of bloodied posteriors ; the holes from the tacks remained visible in the banister for many decades after the Hogg family moved from the home . Hogg 's mother attempted to teach her ladylike skills such as needlework , but Hogg claimed that she " never had the patience to succeed " . Her mother also encouraged Hogg to learn German . Hogg and her siblings were frequently taken to the Millet Opera House in Austin to enjoy the performances . 
 The children liked animals , and their menagerie included dogs , cats , birds , raccoons , opossums , rabbits , a Shetland pony and a parrot . The children once used their animals to conduct a circus on the grounds of the Governor 's Mansion . Hogg charged each visitor five cents , but was forced to return the money when her father discovered the scheme . In later years , the family added a bear , a horse , a fawn , cockatoos , and two ostriches named Jack and Jill to their collection of animals . In response to a challenge from her brothers , Hogg once mounted one of the ostriches , but was thrown from its back after one of the boys hit it with a slingshot . Ima and her ostriches later became the protagonists of a picture book , Ima & the Great Texas Ostrich Race , by Margaret Olivia McManis and Bruce Dupree . 
 Her mother never regained her strength after Thomas 's birth , and for the remainder of her life was a semi @-@ invalid . Ima accompanied her to several health spas during their years in Austin . In 1895 , Sarah was diagnosed with tuberculosis , and on the recommendation of her doctor , she and Ima moved to Colorado , where they lived with Jim Hogg 's elder sister , Martha Francis Davis . Sarah Hogg died in Colorado on September 25 , 1895 . 
 Davis accompanied the family to Austin and spent several months caring for Hogg and her brothers . Davis , who had lost her husband to tuberculosis and watched her son fight the disease , believed that Hogg must have contracted the disease from her mother . Davis instructed Ima to never marry so as not to pass on the illness . By the end of 1895 , the children had been enrolled in a boarding school in San Marcos . The following year , they returned to Austin to live with their father . Although the family employed a housekeeper , Hogg was considered the lady of the house and supervised the housecleaning as well as the education of her younger brothers . In 1898 , Hogg accompanied her father to Hawaii , where they met Hawaiian Queen Liliuokalani and watched the ceremony that delivered Hawaii to the United States . The two were scheduled to sail to Seattle , but Hogg refused to board the ship . Sobbing , she begged her father to make other arrangements because she " had an awful feeling " . He relented and they instead sailed to California , where they learned that their original ship had been lost at sea with no survivors . 
 = = Education and musical interests = = 
 Music was always present at the Hogg household , and Ima began learning to play the piano at age three . Although her younger brothers attended public school , Ima was enrolled at a private school and received private music lessons . In 1899 , she entered the University of Texas at Austin ( UT ) , where her favorite courses were German , Old English , and psychology . She later remarked that " No freshman was ever more immature , more unprepared , more frightened than I. " She joined the female social club known as the Valentine Club , and helped to inaugurate the first sorority on the UT campus , Pi Beta Phi . After two years at the university , she moved to New York City to study piano and music theory at the National Conservatory of Music . 
 Near the turn of the 20th century , Hogg 's father began speculating in oil . He purchased 4 @,@ 100 acres ( 17 km2 ) of land near West Columbia in 1901 , land that had been part of the Varner plantation . After two years of study in New York City , Ima Hogg returned to Texas , dividing her time between the plantation and Houston , where her father had a law practice . Under her supervision , the house was later remodeled and a portico was added to what had been the back of the house ; she made this the new front entrance , orienting the house away from Varner Creek . 
 On January 26 , 1905 , Jim Hogg suffered an injury in a train accident . For the next year Ima nursed him as he struggled to regain his health , but on March 3 , 1906 , she discovered her father dead in his bed . Ima was devastated ; to quell her grief , her brother William took her to New York City . During her stay she immersed herself in concerts and museums . 
 In 1907 , she vacationed in Germany , and enjoyed her time so much that she chose to remain in Europe to continue her piano studies . For the next two years she studied music in Vienna under Franz Xaver Scharwenka , pianist to the court of Francis Joseph I of Austria , and in Berlin under Martin Krause . After returning from Europe , Hogg settled in Houston with her brother William . Although the city had a population of about 100 @,@ 000 , it had no museums or parks and no professional theater , music , or ballet groups . Hogg chose to teach music and continued in this vocation for the next nine years . One of her first pupils was Jacques Abram , who later became a concert pianist . By 1913 , Hogg had become president of the Girls ' Musical Society and was on the entertainment committee of the College Women 's Club , which organized a small theater group known as the Green Mask Players . That year , she organized the Houston Symphony Orchestra . Hogg served as the vice @-@ president of the Symphony Society when the first session of the Board of Directors convened . In 1917 the Board of Directors requested that she serve as president ; she went on to serve 12 terms . 
 = = Philanthropist and community leader = = 
 Hogg was affectionately known as " Miss Ima " by those who knew her , and widely considered to be " The First Lady of Texas " . When John B. Connally was Governor of Texas , his wife Nellie declared , " The Governor 's wife is usually called the First Lady of the State , but Ima always has been and always will be the First Lady of Texas . " In 1957 , The New York Times featured prominent Texans in a series about high society , stating : " But one social figure celebrated throughout the state and even beyond its border is Miss Ima Hogg . She is now about 80 but still a civic beacon of Houston . " 
 After their father 's death in 1906 , Hogg and her brothers tried to sell the Varner plantation , but a provision in his will specified that the land be kept for 15 years . On January 15 , 1918 , oil was found on the Varner plantation . A second strike the following year provided oil income amounting to $ 225 @,@ 000 a month shared among the four siblings . According to Hogg biographer Gwendolyn Cone Neely , the Hoggs did not believe that the oil money was rightfully theirs , as it had come from the land and not hard work , and they were determined to use it for the good of Texas . 
 Hogg founded the Houston Child Guidance Center in 1929 to provide counseling for disturbed children and their families . Hogg was convinced that if children 's emotional and mental problems were treated , more serious illness could be prevented in adults . Her interest in mental health came from her father , who had read widely on mental health issues ; during his terms as governor , Ima had often accompanied him on visits to state institutions , including charity hospitals and asylums for the mentally ill . She furthered her knowledge of the field while she was a student at UT , taking several courses in psychology . Ima was convinced that her youngest brother , Tom , would have benefited from similar intervention , as he had reacted badly after their mother 's death and as an adult was " restless , impulsive , and alarmingly careless with money " . Although her ideas on mental health would be considered mainstream today , in 1929 they were pioneering . In 1972 , she told the Houston Chronicle that , of all her activities , she had derived most pleasure from her role in establishing the Houston Child Guidance Center . 
 Hogg had previously suffered from mental health problems . In late 1918 , she fell ill , probably from severe depression . She consulted with Dr. Francis Xavier <unk> , a specialist in the treatment of nervous and mental diseases , who treated her for the next three years . She was hospitalized for more than a year , and spent a further three years convalescing , primarily in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . By the summer of 1923 Hogg was fully recovered , but she permanently discarded her dream of being a concert pianist , ostensibly because of weakness after her illness . 
 Hogg joined her elder brother William on a vacation in Germany in 1930 . During their visit , he suffered a gallbladder attack and died on September 12 , 1930 after emergency surgery . Ima brought her brother 's body back to the United States . His will bequeathed $ 2 @.@ 5 million to UT ; his desire was that it be used alongside money donated by his sister for " far @-@ reaching benefit to the people of Texas " . Legal challenges tied up the grant until 1939 , when the University received $ 1 @.@ 8 million . In 1940 , after discussion with her brother Michael — the executor of the will — Hogg used the money to establish the Hogg Foundation for Mental Health at the University of Texas at Austin . 
 The San Antonio Express reported in 1939 that the funds granted to the Hogg Foundation for Mental Health would be used to establish mental hygiene clinics and conduct lectures and teacher training courses across Texas , for mental health research , and to survey mental hygiene conditions in Texas . On the entry of the United States into World War II , the Foundation researched methods to prevent mentally unsuitable candidates from enlisting in the military , and provided counseling to those traumatized by the war . After the war , the Foundation expanded its educational and philanthropic focus , providing mental health care to the poor and the aged . The Foundation continues to award five $ 5 @,@ 000 annual scholarships to individuals pursuing a Master 's degree in Social Work . 
 In 1943 , Hogg decided to run for a seat on the Houston School Board so that the board would include two female members . Hogg won with 4 @,@ 350 votes , more than 1 @,@ 000 ahead of the runner @-@ up . During her term , she worked to remove gender and race as criteria for determining pay . She championed a visiting teacher program for children with emotional problems and began art education programs in the schools for black students . Hogg declined to run for a second term . 
 = = = Furniture and art collector = = = 
 Hogg and her brothers were avid art collectors ; she owned a large collection , including Native American art and works by Picasso , Chagall , Matisse and Modigliani . Her interest in collecting began during her convalescence in Philadelphia . Her first purchase , in 1922 , was a Spanish foot chair or Queen Anne maple chair with carved feet . She researched the early American furniture market extensively , personally visiting Luke Vincent Lockwood , the author of the standard work on the topic , for more information . At the time , Hogg was one of a small number of people who believed that American antiques had value — by contrast , most collectors concentrated on furniture built in Europe . Other collectors soon saw the value in early American pieces . Hogg remained one of the few collectors not located on the East Coast . As her collection grew , she was often asked to loan pieces for exhibit in New England ; Hogg always refused , stating " they 've got plenty of these things up there " . 
 In the 1920s , Hogg 's brothers began to develop a new elite neighborhood , which they called River Oaks , which at that time was on the outskirts of Houston . For their home , the Hoggs chose the largest lot , 14 @.@ 5 acres ( 5 @.@ 9 ha ) . Ima worked closely with architect John Staub to design a house that would show off the art the family had purchased . William and Ima moved into the house , which she christened Bayou Bend , in 1928 . In 1939 , when she restored her estate along American lines , she donated more than 100 works on paper to Houston 's Museum of Fine Arts ( MFAH ) , including works by Cézanne , Sargent , Picasso , and Klee . Following the death of her brother Michael in 1941 , she donated his collection of Frederic Remington works to the museum . Consisting of 53 oil paintings , 10 watercolors , and one bronze , it is known as the Hogg Brothers Collection , and is " one of the most important groupings of Western paintings on display in an American museum " , according to Hogg biographer Neely . Hogg donated her collection of Native American art to MFAH in 1944 , including 168 pieces of pottery , 95 pieces of jewelry , and 81 paintings . 
 In 1960 , she was appointed by President Eisenhower to serve on a committee to plan the National Cultural Center , now called the Kennedy Center , in Washington , D.C. In 1961 , Jacqueline Kennedy named Hogg to the 18 @-@ member advisory committee to work with the Fine Arts Committee in seeking historical furniture for the White House . 
 = = = Restorations = = = 
 Although Hogg spent little time at the Varner plantation after Bayou Bend was constructed , she continued to purchase art and antique furniture on its behalf . In the 1950s , she restored the plantation , and each room was given a different theme from Texas history : colonial times , the Confederacy , Napoleonic times ( 1818 ) , and the Mexican – American War . One room was dedicated to her father , and contained his desk and chair as well as his collection of walking sticks . She donated the property to the state , and it was dedicated as the Varner – Hogg Plantation State Historical Site in 1958 , the 107th anniversary of Jim Hogg 's birth . 
 As the Varner – Hogg restoration wound to a halt , Hogg refocused her attention on her Houston home , Bayou Bend , which housed some of her personal collection of antiques and artwork . The New York Times described her " superb Early American furniture " collection in 1953 , and she had a large collection of Americana and colonial Mexican decorative arts , some of which are still in the house . In the late 1950s she said : " I had been collecting American furniture . I collected , and collected , and collected , until I had so much of it I didn 't know what to do with it . I decided to give it to a museum . " She collaborated with the original architect John Staub on structural changes that would prepare the home to be a museum . She denuded the home of personal items and items that did not meet her concept ; the only piece of non @-@ American furniture in the home was her English dining table , which had too many memories for her to remove it . 
 Several residents of River Oaks sued to prevent Bayou Bend becoming a museum , but Hogg prevailed in court . To alleviate the residents ' concerns over increased traffic , she asked the city of Houston to build a footbridge over Buffalo Bayou so that visitors could reach the house without having to drive through River Oaks . In the fall of 1965 , Hogg moved out of her home , telling the docents that " When you love something enough it 's easy to give it up in order to see it go on . " The MFAH opened the new museum to the public in 1966 as MFAH 's Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens . At its dedication , Charles Montgomery , a Senior Research Fellow at the Henry Francis DuPont Winterthur Museum , called Bayou Bend " the largest , finest collection this side of Winterthur " . 
 In 1963 , Hogg purchased property near Round Top , hoping to move its historic building to Bayou Bend . When that plan proved impractical , she decided to restore it in place and temporarily moved to Round Top . After personally supervising the restoration of the Winedale Inn , a stagecoach inn near Round Top , Hogg donated the property to the University of Texas at Austin . Known as the Winedale Historical Center , it is used primarily as an outdoor museum and music center , and annually hosts Shakespeare at Winedale . In 1969 , she restored her parents ' house in Quitman ; the town renamed it the Ima Hogg Museum in her honor . The museum holds items from the history of Wood County and northeast Texas . She later restored the home of her maternal grandfather and had it moved to the park . 
 = = Description and disposition = = 
 David Warren , the first curator of Bayou Bend , said Hogg was " small and dainty and feminine — and smart and sharp and knowledgeable — all rolled into one " . Her biographer Bernhard described her as " elegantly and stylishly dressed " , 5 feet 2 inches ( 157 cm ) tall and of fair complexion , " independent and self @-@ possessed " and noted that she could " sugarcoat her single @-@ mindedness with layers of charm " . At the age of 81 , she was described by The New York Times as a " blue @-@ eyed strawberry blonde " . 
 One morning in 1914 , Hogg was awakened by a burglar in her bedroom . She confronted the man , who was attempting to steal her jewelry , and not only convinced him to return the jewelry , but " wrote down a name and address , handed it to him and told him to go there that very day to get a job " . When asked why she did that , Hogg responded , " He didn 't look like a bad man . " Later that year , she sailed to Germany , alone . While she was en route , Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated , and the day before she arrived , Britain declared war on Germany . The United States was still neutral , however , so Hogg continued her tour of Europe , not leaving until several months later . 
 Though Bernard describes Hogg as a woman of " unfailing politeness " , the biographer suggests the philanthropist was not without adversaries . For instance , at a concert arranged by the Houston Symphony for her 90th birthday featuring the elderly pianist Arthur Rubinstein , he characterized her as a " tiresome old woman " . Hogg , in turn , regarded the musician as " a pompous old man " . By contrast , Hogg said of Vladimir Horowitz , whom she met backstage at a 1975 concert in Houston , " Such a nice man . Not at all like that Mr. Rubinstein . " 
 Hogg was a generous benefactor , and believed that " inherited money was a public trust " . She was described by the University of Houston as " compassionate by nature " , " progressive in outlook " , " concerned with the welfare of all Texans " , a " zealous proponent of mental health care " and " committed to public education " . Hogg was a lifelong Democrat . 
 = = Death = = 
 Hogg died on August 19 , 1975 , at the age of 93 , from a heart attack resulting from <unk> . She had been vacationing in London at the time , but fell as she was getting into a taxi , and died a few days later in a London hospital . An autopsy report revealed that her death was not related to the earlier fall . On receiving news of her death , the University of Texas declared two days of mourning and flew the flag at half @-@ staff . 
 At the time of her death , Hogg had employed her personal maid , Gertrude Vaughn , for 56 years , and her butler @-@ chauffeur , Lucious Broadnax , for over 40 years . She is buried next to her family in the Oakwood Cemetery in Austin . Hogg 's work lives on through the Ima Hogg Foundation , which she founded in 1964 and which was the major beneficiary of her will . Hogg never married ; her biographer Bernhard reports that she told a friend " she had gotten over 30 proposals of marriage but ' wouldn 't have any of them ' " . 
 = = Awards , recognition and legacy = = 
 Hogg received many awards for her contributions to the community . The Garden Club of America honored her in 1959 with the Amy Angell Colliers Montague Model for Civic Achievement . In 1966 , she was honored at the 20th annual awards banquet of the National Trust for Historic Preservation . She received the seventh annual Louise du Pont Crowninshield Award — the highest award given by the National Trust for Historic Preservation — for " superlative achievement in the preservation , restoration and interpretation of sites , buildings , architecture , districts , and objects of national historical or cultural significance " in Texas . 
 In 1968 , Hogg became the first recipient of the Santa Rita Award — the highest award given by the University of Texas System — for contributions to higher education . She was presented with an honorary doctorate in fine arts from Southwestern University in 1971 . In 1969 , she became the third woman ( after Lady Bird Johnson and <unk> Culp Hobby ) invited to become a member of the Academy of Texas , a society which recognized efforts to " enrich , enlarge or enlighten " knowledge in any field . She also became the first female president in the 110 @-@ year history of the Philosophical Society of Texas . 
 Her restoration work was recognized by many organizations . The National Society of Interior Designers named her to their International Honors List in 1965 and in 1972 presented her with their Thomas Jefferson Award for her contributions to cultural heritage . The Texas State Historical Survey Committee recognized Hogg in 1967 for her " meritorious service in historic preservation " and the American Association of State and Local History gave her an award of merit in 1969 . 
 The Houston Symphony established a scholarship in Hogg 's name , honored her on her 90th birthday with a special concert , and holds an annual Ima Hogg Young Artist Competition for musicians between the ages of 13 and 30 who perform on orchestral instruments or the piano . The Center for American History at the University of Texas at Austin presents an annual Ima Hogg Award for Historical Achievement . She was a National Patroness of Delta Omicron , an international professional music fraternity . The Mental Health Association of Greater Houston presents an annual Ima Hogg Award " to an individual or couple who have advanced mental health causes " . 
 In 1963 , former Governor of Texas Allan Shivers — when presenting Hogg with the Distinguished Alumnus Award of the University of Texas Ex @-@ Students Association ( the first woman so honored ) — said of " Miss Ima " : 
 = Craig Kieswetter = 
 Craig Kieswetter ( born 28 November 1987 ) is a English former cricketer who appeared in 71 matches for England between 2010 and 2013 . A wicket @-@ keeper batsman , born and raised in South Africa , Kieswetter moved to England to complete his education , and began playing county cricket for Somerset in 2007 . Three years later , only two weeks after qualifying for the England cricket team , he made his international debut in a One Day International ( ODI ) against Bangladesh . He was considered a one @-@ day specialist , and all his international appearances came in ODIs or Twenty20 Internationals . He retired from professional cricket in June 2015 , aged 27 , due to an eye injury suffered while batting in 2014 . 
 Kieswetter played junior cricket for Western Province until the age of 18 , but a lack of progression led him to seek an alternative route in England . He studied at Millfield , where he was spotted by Somerset . The county 's lack of a strong wicket @-@ keeper gave Kieswetter his opportunity , and he made his debut for the team early in the 2007 season . He was qualified to play county cricket as his mother was Scottish , and his performances soon generated discussion about his potential to play for England . The captain of South Africa , Graeme Smith , made overtures to Kieswetter , inviting him to return to play in South Africa ; Kieswetter , however , affirmed his desire to qualify and play for England . 
 In early 2010 , Kieswetter achieved his target ; some strong performances for the England Lions , especially in a match against the senior England team , won him a place in the squad to face Bangladesh . His selection , along with the presence of other South African @-@ born players in the England team , was criticised , with some suggesting that there should be fewer foreign @-@ born players in the team . He scored his first — and only — international century in his third match , and a couple of months later he was named as the man of the match as England won the final of the 2010 ICC World Twenty20 . After a promising start for England , he was inconsistent and was dropped before the end of 2010 . He returned to the team the following year , but his place in the team was always at risk , and in 2013 he was replaced by Jos Buttler , his team @-@ mate at Somerset . 
 Kieswetter 's career was cut short due to an injury sustained while batting for Somerset in July 2014 : a ball penetrated the gap between his helmet 's grille and visor and struck him in the face , damaging his vision . There was initially some hope of a full recovery and he was even named in a provisional England squad for the 2015 Cricket World Cup , however he continued to experience difficulties with his vision and , in June 2015 , announced his retirement from professional cricket . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Kieswetter was born in Johannesburg to an Afrikaner father , Wayne , and Scottish mother , Belinda . He grew up in South Africa , studying at Diocesan College in Cape Town , and played cricket for Western Province junior teams between the ages of 13 to 18 . Kieswetter was disappointed with the way he was treated by the provincial team , who had asked him to play two or three years of club cricket before returning to them , so he decided to pursue his cricket career in England . He studied for a year at Millfield , where he gained his A @-@ levels . Mark Davis , a former Somerset bowler , spotted him at Millfield , and he was quickly signed by the county . He represented South Africa in the 2006 Under @-@ 19s World Cup in Sri Lanka , and won a Man of the Match award in the game against the United States for his innings of 80 off just 66 balls . 
 Kieswetter made his first appearance for Somerset 's second team in May 2006 , taking over from Sam Spurway as wicket @-@ keeper midway through a match when the latter was injured . He scored 94 not out in his first innings of that match against Glamorgan , and by the end of the season he had scored 245 runs at an average of over 40 . His performances were so strong that Somerset chose to release Spurway at the start of the 2007 season , and named Kieswetter alongside Carl Gazzard as their two wicket @-@ keepers . In early April that year , he made his one @-@ day debut for Somerset against Glamorgan ; he made 69 not out off 58 deliveries and took a catch described as " world class " by Somerset 's director of cricket , Brian Rose . He made his first @-@ class debut the following month , keeping wicket while Derbyshire made 801 for 8 declared and scored 63 in the Somerset reply . 
 He continued to perform well during 2007 and 2008 , and was awarded the NBC Denis Compton Award , as the " most promising young player " , for Somerset in both seasons , scoring regular fifties in both first @-@ class and one @-@ day cricket . Notable among these innings was the 93 he scored against Glamorgan while batting at number eight . Kieswetter came in after two wickets had been lost in an over , with the score at 250 for 6 . His innings , which included a partnership of 130 with Andrew Caddick , helped Somerset to reach 402 and eventually win the match . Towards the end of the 2008 season , during a 40 @-@ over match against Gloucestershire , Kieswetter scored his first century for Somerset , scoring 121 runs from 107 deliveries , and sharing a competition @-@ record 302 @-@ run partnership with Marcus Trescothick . 
 In 2009 , Kieswetter passed 1 @,@ 000 first @-@ class runs in a season for the only time during his career . He scored his maiden first @-@ class century early in the year , accumulating an unbeaten 150 in a high @-@ scoring draw against Warwickshire . A few weeks later , he repeated the feat , scoring 106 runs against Durham to help his county avoid defeat . In his report for ESPNcricinfo , Andrew McGlashan described Kieswetter as " another likely South African to make the transition to England colours " . Kieswetter scored two further first @-@ class centuries during the year , both at Taunton , against Sussex and Lancashire ; he averaged just under 60 for his 1 @,@ 242 first @-@ class runs in the year . In one @-@ day cricket , Kieswetter opened the batting alongside Trescothick , and averaged 65 @.@ 83 , scoring an unbeaten 138 off just 131 balls in the opening group match against Warwickshire . In the quarter @-@ final of the 2009 Friends Provident Trophy , Kieswetter scored his second one @-@ day century of the season , but Somerset were defeated by six wickets and knocked out of the competition . His 248 runs in the 2009 Twenty20 Cup helped Somerset reach the final of that competition , where they were again beaten by Sussex . He was awarded his county cap during the final game of the 2009 County Championship against Worcestershire . 
 = = International cricketer = = 
 = = = International selection = = = 
 Following his strong performances for Somerset , Kieswetter was part of the England Performance Programme squad that spent eight weeks of the English winter training in Loughborough and Pretoria . The South African national cricket captain , Graeme Smith , said that he wanted Kieswetter to return to play cricket in South Africa ; rather than directly inviting him to play for the South Africa national cricket team , however , he was careful to state that " the challenge is to get him back into our franchise system first , but he is certainly someone we have seen and would like to get back into the system " . Kieswetter repeated his desire to play international cricket for England and , in January 2010 , he was named as part of the England Lions squad to tour the United Arab Emirates for a series against Pakistan A. The England head coach , Andy Flower , described Kieswetter 's performances during that tour as " a really good start " , and described the Twenty20 warm @-@ up match between the England Lions and the England senior team that followed the tour as " a chance for him to impress " . During that match , which was played on the day that he qualified for England , Kieswetter scored 81 runs to help the Lions beat the senior team . Kieswetter qualified to play for England on the basis of having a British passport , via his Scottish mother , and his residency in England . He had to wait until four years after his last appearance for South Africa , which was on 16 February 2006 during the Under @-@ 19s World Cup . 
 After England 's drawn T20I series with Pakistan , Kieswetter was added to the senior England squad for the ODI series against Bangladesh . He was immediately included in the team , playing as a specialist batsman alongside wicket @-@ keeper Matt Prior , in the first warm @-@ up match on 23 February against the " Bangladesh Cricket Board XI " . He scored 143 , his career @-@ best List A score , from 123 balls . These performances led to Kieswetter 's selection for the first ODI against Bangladesh on 28 February . Opening the innings alongside captain Alastair Cook , Kieswetter struggled in his first over , edging a chance that was missed by wicket @-@ keeper Mushfiqur Rahim , and surviving a leg before wicket appeal two balls later . He made 19 runs in an innings described by ESPNcricinfo 's Andrew Miller as " tinged with nerves " and " chancy " . In the next match , two days later , Kieswetter was dropped by Mushfiqur Rahim off a thick edge that went for four on first ball he faced ; he was then caught at first @-@ slip off a similar thick edge to first @-@ slip on the next delivery . In the third match , however , he scored his first international century – 107 runs – which helped England to 284 for five and a 45 @-@ run victory . England won the series 3 – 0 . In contrast to the " hard @-@ hitting batting " which Geoff Miller , the England selector , had cited as one of the reasons for his inclusion , Kieswetter 's century was patiently built after a nervous start . 
 When the England squad was announced for the 2010 ICC World Twenty20 , Kieswetter was named as the only wicket @-@ keeper in the squad , replacing Prior . Kieswetter opened the innings with Michael Lumb throughout the tournament , and ESPNcricinfo 's Andrew McGlashan identified their performances as one of the reasons that England reached the final . During the final , Kieswetter was England 's top @-@ scorer , hitting 63 runs from 49 deliveries , and was named as the man of the match as England won their first ICC global title . During the tournament , Kieswetter scored 222 runs , the fourth @-@ most of any player , at an average of 31 @.@ 71 and a strike rate of 116 @.@ 84 . 
 = = = Dropped and recalled by England = = = 
 After returning to England , Kieswetter 's form dipped , and he scored 121 runs from eight ODIs against Australia and Bangladesh . As a result , when England played five ODIs against Pakistan in September , Kieswetter was omitted and Worcestershire 's Steven Davies was preferred , although Kieswetter was included in the T20I squad . Kieswetter opened the innings alongside Davies , who was playing as wicket @-@ keeper , in the two T20Is , but only made scores of six and sixteen . Although he was named in the T20I squad for the tour of Australia , he was not selected to play , and instead took part in the England Performance Programme XI tour , before joining up with the England Lions to take part in the Regional Four Day Competition in the West Indies . During the competition , Kieswetter scored two centuries , against the Leeward Islands and the Combined Campuses and Colleges . 
 Kieswetter began the 2011 season strongly for Somerset , scoring 308 runs in his first four one @-@ day matches , including two centuries . Another century , in the County Championship prompted Jeremy James of ESPNcricinfo to ask " whether Craig Kieswetter will regain his place in England 's one @-@ day side before Jos Buttler assumes it ahead of him " . His form earned him a recall to England 's one @-@ day squads for the series against Sri Lanka , with Geoff Miller saying " [ Kieswetter ] will offer some real fire power with the bat along with his ability with the gloves " . In his first match back for England , the Twenty20 match , Kieswetter only scored four runs , but he was England 's top @-@ scorer in the first ODI match , with 61 runs , and was described as " England 's most impressive batsman " . He struck another half @-@ century in the fourth match of the series : he scored 72 not out as England won by ten wickets . A week later , playing for Somerset against Nottinghamshire , he scored the highest score of his first @-@ class career , accumulating 164 runs as part of a 290 @-@ run partnership with James Hildreth . 
 Kieswetter remained England wicket @-@ keeper for the T20I and ODI matches against India late in the season . In the T20I , Jos Buttler , his fellow Somerset wicket @-@ keeper , made his debut , albeit as a specialist batsman ; Jonny Bairstow , the Yorkshire wicket @-@ keeper , made his debut in the final ODI in a similar role . In that series , Kieswetter struggled against the moving ball in English conditions ; he was praised , however , for his attacking batting , including 46 runs from 25 balls in the second match . Based on the number of appearances that he made for England , Kieswetter was awarded an incremental contract by the England and Wales Cricket Board ( ECB ) in September 2011 . During England 's subsequent 5 – 0 ODI series loss in India , described by the Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack 's Stephen <unk> as " a tour too far for England " , Kieswetter was the only England batsman to maintain a strike rate above 100 . He scored one half @-@ century during the tour , and was included in the England Lions squad that toured Sri Lanka three months later . 
 = = = End of international career = = = 
 Playing for the Lions , Kieswetter moved into the middle @-@ order , rather than opening the batting ; this was intended to prepare him for a similar switch with the senior England team to allow Kevin Pietersen to open . He scored a century and a half @-@ century to help England win the series 3 – 2 , though he was outperformed by Buttler . In early 2012 , playing against Pakistan in the United Arab Emirates , Kieswetter only batted twice in the ODI series , and was praised for his 43 @-@ run contribution in the fourth match , though George Dobell of ESPNcricinfo identified his wicket @-@ keeping as " still not as polished as he would like " . Although Kieswetter dropped down the order in ODIs , he retained his place opening the batting in T20Is . In contrast to the 2010 World Twenty20 , when the England players were told to attack bat selflessly , in 2012 the team was instructed to avoid losing early wickets , and Kieswetter struggled to adapt his game to score low @-@ risk singles and rotate the strike . During the 2012 ICC World Twenty20 , he lost his place in England 's T20I team after a match against New Zealand in which he scored four runs from fourteen balls . That was the final international Twenty20 match of his career . In his 25 matches , he scored 526 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 91 and a strike rate of 111 @.@ 91 . Despite his struggles in international cricket , Kieswetter had a successful season with Somerset ; he scored 848 first @-@ class runs at an average of just over 60 , including a century against Warwickshire and one for the Lions against Australia A. 
 The following year , Kieswetter retained his place in the ODI team for the tour of India , although ESPNcricinfo 's Alex Winter suggested that it might be due to " England 's desire to protect the workload of their players ahead of back @-@ to @-@ back Ashes series . " Winter 's colleague , Dobell , described the England ODI wicket @-@ keeper position as one of England 's key areas requiring resolution , citing both Bairstow and Buttler as candidates to take over , as well as the possibility of Matt Prior , the England Test wicket @-@ keeper , reclaiming the role . Kieswetter played the first three ODIs of the series , scoring 24 not out , 18 and 0 before he was dropped and replaced by Buttler . Dobell described Kieswetter as " perhaps ... a little unfortunate " , but cited his inability to adjust his game and the number of balls he blocked as the reasons for his removal . He played 46 ODIs , scoring 1 @,@ 054 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 11 . 
 = = Later domestic career = = 
 The competition between Kieswetter and Buttler for England 's one @-@ day wicket @-@ keeping role also caused conflict at Somerset for the 2013 season : both players wanted to fulfil the role for the county . Kieswetter began the season as the wicket @-@ keeper in the County Championship , but broke his thumb during the third match of the season , which kept him out of action for six weeks . Kieswetter had a particularly strong Twenty20 season , finishing as the leading run @-@ scorer in the 2013 Friends Life <unk> with 517 runs , including five half @-@ centuries . He scored a late @-@ season century against Warwickshire in the County Championship , but in a season in which Somerset struggled against relegation , he scored a relatively modest 606 first @-@ class runs at an average of 31 @.@ 89 . At the end of the season , Buttler , whose contract with Somerset had expired , announced that he was joining Lancashire , leaving Kieswetter as the clear first @-@ choice wicket @-@ keeper at Somerset . 
 Kieswetter signed with the Brisbane Heat for the 2013 – 14 Big Bash League , During the tournament , he scored 192 runs from eight matches including two half @-@ centuries . He entered the 2014 Indian Premier League auction , but remained unsold , to the relief of the director of cricket at Somerset , David <unk> . He was called up as a late replacement for the injured Luke Wright for England 's squad in the 2014 ICC World Twenty20 , but was not selected to play . He began the 2014 season positively for Somerset , particularly in the Twenty20 competition , in which he scored six half @-@ centuries in ten innings , averaging just under 50 . 
 = = Injury and retirement = = 
 On 12 July 2014 , Kieswetter suffered a broken nose and fractured cheek bone while batting for Somerset against Northamptonshire in a County Championship match . The bowler , David Willey , delivered a short @-@ pitched bouncer which went through the gap between the grille and the visor on Kieswetter 's helmet and struck him in the face . The injuries were initially described by Somerset 's chairman , Andy Nash , as " serious but non @-@ career threatening " . He underwent facial surgery , and suffered from double vision for a while after . He returned to the Somerset side before the end of the 2014 season and scored a half @-@ century in his first match back , against Middlesex , though he admitted that his vision was still not fully recovered . Kieswetter signed for the South African franchise Warriors as their overseas player to play in the Ram Slam T20 Challenge for the 2014 – 15 season . He played all ten matches for the Warriors , scoring 199 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 11 , including two half @-@ centuries . 
 On 10 December 2014 , despite having been named in England 's 30 @-@ man provisional 2015 Cricket World Cup squad , Kieswetter revealed that he was still suffering vision problems . He announced that he would not play in the 2015 season and would seek further treatment . The following June , he announced his retirement from professional cricket , saying that , although he was still capable of playing , he could not play to the standard he wanted ; " In the end I just thought , there are too many mediocre players in county cricket – and good luck to them – but I don 't want to be another one . " He finished his career with similar statistics in first @-@ class and List A cricket ; in both he averaged just under 40 and had scored eleven centuries . In Twenty20 cricket , his highest score was 89 not out , and he averaged just over 30 . In an interview with ESPNcricinfo shortly after his retirement , Kieswetter said that he would be interested in working in the media , perhaps as part of a commentary team for Twenty20 matches . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Kieswetter 's confident and attacking batting style was compared to that of Kevin Pietersen , another England batsman of South African origin . Although Kieswetter favoured the off @-@ side , he was also strong behind square on both sides , and stood with a typical South African stance , his bat held high . He was generally more highly regarded for his batting than his wicket @-@ keeping , often drawing criticism for the quality of his glovework . For a couple of matches during 2012 , he was used as an off spin bowler by Somerset , collecting three wickets . 
 Somerset experimented with Kieswetter throughout the order , trying to find the most effective place for him . He began as a middle @-@ order batsman , but by the end of the 2007 season , although he remained in the middle @-@ order in first @-@ class cricket , Kieswetter regularly found himself opening the batting alongside Marcus Trescothick in one @-@ day cricket , a role he would also take up in opening six matches of the 2009 Twenty20 Cup , although he later dropped back into the middle order to improve the balance of the side . On his international call @-@ up , England chose to utilise Kieswetter as an opening batsman . He was selected " because of his proven ability to pierce the field in the Powerplay overs , particularly with his booming drives up and over the covers . " He later moved down the order for England to accommodate Kevin Pietersen as opener . 
 = John Nutter = 
 John Robert William Nutter ( born 13 June 1982 ) is a former professional footballer who played for Wycombe Wanderers , Aldershot Town , Grays Athletic , Stevenage Borough , Gillingham , Lincoln City and Woking as a defender . 
 Nutter began his career at Blackburn Rovers ' youth academy in 1998 , spending two years on the books with the club before being released . In early 2001 , he joined Wycombe Wanderers , and later signed for Aldershot Town in May 2001 . He enjoyed a promotion with Aldershot during the 2002 – 03 campaign , helping the club secure the Isthmian League Premier Division title . During his time at Aldershot , Nutter spent time out on loan at St Albans City and Gravesend & Northfleet respectively . 
 Nutter then enjoyed a fruitful two @-@ year spell at Grays Athletic , and was part of the side that won the Conference South title , as well as two FA Trophy successes . In May 2006 , he signed for Stevenage Borough , and again tasted FA Trophy success during the 2006 – 07 season . Nutter moved back into the Football League in November 2007 , signing for Gillingham . He spent three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons there , with the club moving between League One and League Two during his tenure . He was released when his contract expired at the end of the 2010 – 11 campaign , subsequently signing for Lincoln City of the Conference National in July 2011 . He was loaned out to Woking in November 2012 , a move that was later made permanent in January 2013 . 
 Nutter decided to retire from playing football at the end of the 2014 – 15 season so he could focus on his career as a teacher of Physical Education at a school . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Nutter began his career on the books at Blackburn Rovers ' youth academy , joining the club 's <unk> programme in 1998 at the age of 16 , before later becoming a first @-@ year scholar . During his time at Blackburn , he was part of the side that won the Under 17s Academy Cup as they beat Manchester City in the final . He was released by Blackburn in 2000 , and was subsequently signed by Wycombe Wanderers in the early part of 2001 . Nutter made one first @-@ team appearance for the club , making his Football League debut in the club 's 3 – 2 away defeat to Peterborough United on 24 February 2001 . He was also part of the squad that travelled to the FA Cup semi @-@ final against Liverpool at Villa Park , although did not feature . His time at Wycombe was hampered by an ankle injury , which resulted in " limited opportunities " . He subsequently left Wycombe at the end of the 2000 – 01 season . 
 In May 2001 , Nutter joined Aldershot Town , then of the Isthmian League Premier Division . He made his debut in Aldershot 's 3 – 1 home victory over Enfield on 18 August 2001 , and scored his first goal for the club shortly after in a 2 – 1 away win over Heybridge Swifts . Nutter made 19 appearances for Aldershot during the 2001 – 02 season , scoring twice . He also made eight appearances for divisional rivals St Albans City during a two @-@ month loan spell . Nutter remained at Aldershot the following season , making sporadic appearances throughout the campaign . He spent a month on loan at Conference National side Gravesend & Northfleet in November 2002 , making four appearances . During the campaign , he scored three times in 21 appearances for Aldershot , in a season that saw the club earn promotion to the Conference National after winning the Isthmian League Premier Division . Nutter featured regularly during Aldershot 's return to the highest tier of non @-@ League football , making 28 appearances in all competitions and netting once in a 4 – 2 away victory over Bishop 's Stortford in the FA Trophy in January 2004 . Aldershot narrowly missed out on back @-@ to @-@ back promotions , losing on penalties in the play @-@ off final to Shrewsbury Town . Although Nutter did not play in the final , he did feature in both legs of the semi @-@ final as Aldershot defeated Hereford United on penalties . During his three years at Aldershot , Nutter made 68 appearances in league , FA Cup and FA Trophy fixtures , scoring six times . 
 = = = Grays Athletic = = = 
 Ahead of the 2004 – 05 season , in July 2004 , Nutter signed for Conference South side Grays Athletic , managed by Mark Stimson . He made his Grays debut on the opening day of the season , playing the first 57 minutes in a 1 – 1 away draw against Hayes on 14 August 2004 . Three days later , he scored his only goal of the season as Grays beat Redbridge comfortably at the New Recreation Ground . In Nutter 's first season with Grays , the club secured the Conference South title in comprehensive fashion , winning the division by 23 points . During the same season , Grays also won the FA Trophy , beating Hucknall Town on penalties in the final at Villa Park , with Nutter playing the whole match . As a result of Grays ' promotion , the 2005 – 06 season gave Nutter another opportunity to play in the Conference National . He was almost ever @-@ present during yet another successful season for the Essex club , with Grays finishing third in the league . His only goal of the season came in the Conference play @-@ off semi @-@ final second leg , as Grays eventually lost to Halifax Town 5 – 4 on aggregate . Shortly after the play @-@ off defeat , Nutter was part of the side that secured back @-@ to @-@ back FA Trophy titles courtesy of a 2 – 0 win against Woking at Upton Park . It was to be Nutter 's last game for the club . On securing successive FA Trophy victories with Grays , Nutter stated — " The FA Trophy wins for Grays Athletic were great , a fantastic achievement for the club , we had some terrific players at the time " . 
 = = = Stevenage Borough = = = 
 With his Grays contract expiring in May 2006 , Nutter opted to sign for Conference National side Stevenage Borough at the end of the month . He joined on a free transfer and on a two @-@ year contract . The move reunited him with Stimson , who made Nutter his first signing following his switch from Grays to Stevenage . Nutter revealed that he had rejected the offer of a contract extension at Grays , as well as an offer from Peterborough United . He made his Stevenage debut against Altrincham on 12 August 2006 , playing the whole match in a 2 – 1 away defeat . Nutter scored his first goal for Stevenage in a 3 – 2 home win against Woking on 3 October 2006 , a late penalty to restore parity in the match , before Stevenage went on to score a winner in injury @-@ time . He went on to score further penalties in home victories against Gravesend & Northfleet and Cambridge United , and also scored against Burton Albion with a long @-@ range drive in a 2 – 1 win . He added to his most fruitful season in front of goal by scoring twice in April 2007 , both from the penalty spot , against Forest Green Rovers and Rushden & Diamonds respectively . He was ever @-@ present during his first season with the club , playing in all 46 leagues matches , as well as making a further ten appearances in cup competitions , scoring six times . Nutter was part of the squad that reached the FA Trophy final in May 2007 , the first competitive match at the new Wembley Stadium . He played the whole match in Stevenage 's 3 – 2 win over Kidderminster Harriers , a game in which Stevenage trailed by two goals , meaning he had won the FA Trophy for three successive years . 
 Nutter scored his first goal of the 2007 – 08 season in Stevenage 's 3 – 0 home victory over Weymouth in August 2007 , scoring a free kick that found the top corner of the goal . He was part of the defence that broke a club record and equalled a Conference National record when Stevenage went eight games without conceding a goal , spanning from August to October 2007 . Following the departure of manager Mark Stimson to Gillingham in November 2007 , it was revealed that Stevenage rejected several offers for Nutter from Gillingham . He remained at Stevenage for a further three weeks ; his last game for the club a 3 – 2 home loss to Halifax Town . He scored eight times in 73 appearances for the club in all competitions . 
 = = = Gillingham = = = 
 Later that month , Nutter joined Gillingham , along with Stevenage midfielder Adam Miller , for a combined fee of £ 65 @,@ 000 . The move was initially on loan until January 2008 , when the deal was made permanent . He made his debut for Gillingham in a 1 – 1 home draw with Southend United on 26 December 2007 , playing the whole match . Nutter went on to make 25 appearances for the club during the second half of the 2007 – 08 campaign , a season that witnessed Gillingham suffer relegation to League Two . He scored one goal during the campaign , netting in a 1 – 1 draw against Bristol Rovers at the Memorial Stadium in April 2008 . The 2008 – 09 campaign brought about Nutter 's first full season at Gillingham . He had been joined by former Stevenage players Barry Fuller , Alan Julian , and Stuart Lewis , as well as Dennis Oli , who he played alongside at Grays . Nutter made 54 appearances during the campaign , a season in which Gillingham earned promotion back to League One following a 1 – 0 win over Shrewsbury Town in the play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium in May 2009 . Although he failed to find the scoresheet during the successful campaign , he did provide the assist for eleven goals . The promotion meant that it was the third of Nutter 's career , having also tasted league success at Aldershot and Grays . 
 Nutter started in the club 's first game of the 2009 – 10 season ; as Gillingham marked their return to the third tier of English football with a 5 – 0 victory over Swindon Town at Priestfield . He scored his only goal of the campaign , the second of his Gillingham career , in a 3 – 1 win over bottom @-@ placed Stockport County in December 2009 , marking his 100th appearance for the club with an " angled volley " that beat Owain <unk> Williams in the Stockport goal . Gillingham were relegated at the end of the season , finishing in 21st place . A 3 – 0 away loss to one of Nutter 's former employers , Wycombe Wanderers , cemented their fate . Nutter made 41 appearances during the campaign . Stimson left the club by mutual consent days after the Wycombe match , and was replaced by Andy Hessenthaler . This meant that Nutter would be playing under a manager other than Stimson for the first time in six years ( aside from a three @-@ week spell under Peter Taylor at Stevenage ) . Nutter 's contract was extended for a further year in June 2010 after he had " played sufficient games last season to trigger a new deal " . During the campaign , Nutter received the first red card of his career in a 2 – 0 home defeat to Dover Athletic in the FA Cup , earning the dismissal for a " professional foul " . He made 37 appearances during the 2010 – 11 season , scoring once , as Gillingham narrowly missed out on a play @-@ off position . In May 2011 , Nutter left Gillingham when his contract expired at the end of the month . During his three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year spell with the Kent side , he made 157 appearances and scored three goals . 
 = = = Lincoln City = = = 
 Nutter joined Conference National side Lincoln City on a free transfer in July 2011 . Signing a two @-@ year deal with Lincoln , Nutter stated — " I think it will benefit me to have a fresh start , play in front of new people and show what I can do . I feel I 'm better than this level but I 've got to show that and we have to show that as a team " . His Lincoln debut came on the opening day of the 2011 – 12 season , playing the whole match as Lincoln twice squandered a lead to draw 2 – 2 with Southport at Haig Avenue . He scored his first goal for the club in November 2011 , netting Lincoln 's third with a shot from outside the area in a 3 – 0 home win over Ebbsfleet United . Nutter would add to his goal tally once more during the campaign when he scored a 20 @-@ yard free @-@ kick in an important 2 – 0 win against relegation rivals Newport County on 24 March 2012 . Nutter played in all 51 of Lincoln 's matches during the season , with the club struggling to adapt during their first season back in non @-@ league , finishing just above the relegation places . 
 He was made club captain ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , and continued to play regularly during the early months of the new campaign . He opened his goalscoring account courtesy of free @-@ kick in a 3 – 3 home draw against Stockport County in October 2012 . Shortly after , Nutter admitted that his family struggled relocating to Lincolnshire , and a move down south was a much more suitable location given his personal circumstances . He scored three times in 66 appearances for Lincoln . On his time at Lincoln , Nutter stated — " Lincoln is a really nice , friendly club with very patient and loyal supporters . But with my personal circumstances , it was time to move on – I wish them well " . 
 = = = Woking = = = 
 In November 2012 , he joined fellow Conference National side Woking on a two @-@ month loan deal . He made his first appearance for Woking two days after signing , playing the whole match in a 2 – 1 loss to Alfreton Town at <unk> , and went on to make a further four appearances during the loan agreement . He briefly returned to Lincoln , before it was agreed that he would leave the club by mutual consent at the end of 2012 . Nutter subsequently signed for Woking on a permanent basis on 6 January 2013 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Nutter has played for the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ league level . He has also made several appearances for the England futsal side . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Nutter predominantly played as a left @-@ sided full @-@ back , although he did play on the left wing in the early stages of his career . He was left @-@ footed . Gillingham manager Mark Stimson described him as " an attacking full @-@ back with plenty of technical ability " , and stated that Nutter would " offer plenty of width down the left hand side " , in @-@ turn being " a constant attacking threat " . He expressed a passion to pass the ball along the floor , and always prefers to pass the ball out as opposed to hitting it long . Talking about his time at Stevenage , Nutter stated he would like to be remembered as a player " who tried to play football the right way , passing the ball , technically good to watch and an honest player " . 
 He also provided an attacking outlet from set @-@ pieces . Throughout his career , Nutter scored from several long @-@ range free @-@ kicks , and also regularly took corner kicks . During his time at Stevenage , he was the club 's penalty taker , and scored six out of seven penalties . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nutter is married to Hayley and has two sons , Walter and Benedict . He has a brother and a sister . His brother , Tom , has played football for Burnham and Beaconsfield <unk> , and won a number of awards during a four @-@ year stint in America playing for West Texas A & M University . 
 He has stated that his closest friend in football is Adam Miller , who he played alongside at Stevenage and Gillingham . John is now a teacher at a school in Berkshire , teaching Physical Education to pupils at a Preparatory school . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Isthmian League Premier Division : 2002 – 03 
 FA Trophy : 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2006 – 07 
 Conference South : 2004 – 05 
 League Two play @-@ offs : 2008 – 09 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of matches played 21 March 2015 . 
 = William Goebel = 
 William Justus Goebel ( January 4 , 1856 – February 3 , 1900 ) was an American politician who served as the 34th Governor of Kentucky for four days in 1900 after having been mortally wounded by an assassin the day before he was sworn in . Goebel remains the only state governor in the United States to be assassinated while in office . 
 A skilled politician , Goebel was well able to broker deals with fellow lawmakers , and equally able and willing to break the deals if a better deal came along . His tendency to use the state 's political machinery to advance his personal agenda earned him the nicknames " Boss Bill " , " the Kenton King " , " Kenton Czar " , " King William I " , and " William the Conqueror " . 
 Goebel 's abrasive personality made him many political enemies , but his championing of populist causes , like railroad regulation , also won him many friends . This conflict of opinions came to a head in the Kentucky gubernatorial election of 1899 . Goebel , a Democrat , divided his party with self @-@ serving political tactics at a time when Kentucky Republicans were finally gaining strength , having elected the party 's first governor four years previously . These dynamics led to a close contest between Goebel and William S. Taylor . In the politically chaotic climate that resulted , Goebel was assassinated . Everyone charged in connection with the murder was either acquitted or pardoned , and the identity of his assassin remains uncertain . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wilhelm Justus Goebel was born January 4 , 1856 , in Albany Township , Bradford County , Pennsylvania , the son of Wilhelm and Augusta ( <unk> ) Goebel , immigrants from Hanover , Germany . The first of four children , he was born two months premature and weighed less than three pounds . His father served as a private in Company B , 82nd Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment during the American Civil War , and Goebel 's mother raised her children alone , teaching them much about their German heritage . Wilhelm spoke only German until the age of six , but embraced the culture of his birth country as well , adopting the English spelling of his name . 
 Discharged from the army in 1863 , Goebel 's father moved his family to Covington , Kentucky . William attended school in Covington and was then apprenticed to a jeweler in Cincinnati , Ohio . After a brief time at Hollingsworth Business College , he became an apprentice in the law firm of John W. Stevenson , who had served as governor of Kentucky from 1871 to 1877 . Goebel eventually became Stevenson 's partner and executor of his estate . Goebel graduated from Cincinnati Law School in 1877 , then enrolled at Kenyon College in Gambier , Ohio , but withdrew to support his family on the death of his father . Goebel was in private practice for several years , before partnering with Kentucky state representative John G. Carlisle for five years . He then rejoined Stevenson in Covington as a partner . 
 = = Personal characteristics = = 
 Goebel was never known as a particularly genial person in public . He belonged to few social organizations , and greeted none but his closest friends with a smile or handshake . He was rarely linked romantically with a woman , and is the only governor of Kentucky who never married . His physical features bespoke his taciturn nature . Journalist Irvin S. Cobb remarked that Goebel 's appearance was " reptilian " , while others commented on his contemptuous lips , sharp nose , and humorless eyes . Neither was Goebel a gifted public speaker , eschewing flowery imagery and relying on his deep , powerful voice and forceful delivery to drive home his points . 
 While lacking in the social qualities common to politicians , one characteristic served Goebel well in the political arena – his intellect . Goebel was well @-@ read , and supporters and opponents both conceded that his mental prowess was impressive . Cobb concluded that he had never been more impressed with a man 's intellect than he had been with Goebel 's . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1887 , James W. Bryan vacated his seat in the Kentucky Senate to pursue the office of lieutenant governor . Goebel decided to seek election to the vacant seat representing the Covington area . His platform of railroad regulation and championing labor causes , combined with the influence of Stevenson , his former partner , should have given Goebel an easy victory , but this was not to be . A third political party , the Union Labor party , had risen to power in the area with a platform similar to Goebel 's . However , while Goebel had to stick close to his allies in the Democratic party , the Union Labor party courted the votes of both Democrats and Republicans , and made the election close – decided in Goebel 's favor by a mere fifty @-@ six votes . 
 With only the two years remaining in former senator Bryan 's term to distinguish himself before a re @-@ election bid , Goebel took aim at a large and popular target : the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . A proposal from pro @-@ railroad legislators in the Kentucky House of Representatives to abolish Kentucky 's Railroad Commission was passed and sent to the Senate . Senator Cassius M. Clay responded by proposing a committee to investigate lobbying by the railroad industry . Goebel served on the committee , which uncovered significant violations by the railroad lobby . Goebel also helped defeat the bill to abolish the Railroad Commission in the Senate . These actions made him a hero in his district . He ran for a full term as senator unopposed in 1889 , and won another term in 1893 by a three @-@ to @-@ one margin over his Republican opponent . 
 In 1890 , Goebel was a delegate to Kentucky 's fourth constitutional convention , which produced the current Kentucky Constitution . Despite the high honor of being chosen as a delegate , Goebel showed little interest in participating in the process of creating a new constitution . The convention was in session for 250 days ; Goebel was present for just 100 of them . He did , however , successfully secure the inclusion of the Railroad Commission in the new constitution . As a constitutional entity , the Commission could only be abolished by an amendment ratified by popular vote . This would effectively protect the Commission from ever being unilaterally dismantled by the General Assembly . 
 = = = Duel with John Sanford = = = 
 In 1895 , Goebel engaged in what many observers considered a duel with John Lawrence Sanford . Sanford , a former Confederate general staff officer turned banker , had clashed with Goebel before . Goebel 's successful campaign to remove tolls from some of Kentucky 's turnpikes had cost Sanford a good deal of money . It was widely believed that Sanford later blocked Goebel 's appointment to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , then the highest court in the state . In response to this , Goebel had written an article in a local newspaper referring to Sanford as " <unk> John " . 
 The duel occurred as Goebel and two of his acquaintances went to cash a check in Covington . Goebel suggested they avoid Sanford 's bank , but Sanford , standing outside the bank , engaged the trio in conversation before they could cross the street to another bank . As Sanford greeted Goebel 's friends , he offered his left hand , his right remaining on a pistol in his pocket . Goebel , noticing this and being likewise armed , clutched the revolver in his own pocket . Sanford asked Goebel , " I understand that you assume authorship of that article ? " ; " I do " , replied Goebel . Witnesses agree that both men fired at each other , but none was sure who fired first . Goebel was uninjured , the bullet passing through his coat and ripping his trousers ; Sanford was struck in the head and died five hours later . Goebel was acquitted , pleading self @-@ defense , but the incident would haunt his political career . The acquittal was also significant because of prohibitions against duelling in the Kentucky Constitution . If Goebel had been convicted , he would have been ineligible to hold any public office . 
 = = = Goebel Election Law = = = 
 Democrats , who controlled the General Assembly , felt that county election commissioners had been unjust in selecting local election officials , and that this injustice had contributed to the election of Republican governor William O. Bradley in 1895 and Republican president William McKinley in 1896 . Goebel proposed a bill , known as the " Goebel Election Law " , which passed along sharp party lines and over Governor Bradley 's veto , created a three @-@ member state election commission , appointed by the General Assembly , to select county election commissioners . This system proved to be just as manipulable as the one it replaced , allowing the Democratically controlled General Assembly to appoint fellow Democrats to the election commission . 
 Many voters decried the bill as a self @-@ serving attempt by Goebel to increase his political power , and the election board remained a controversial issue until its abolition in a special session of the legislature in 1900 . Despite rising to the office of President Pro Tempore in 1896 , Goebel became the subject of much opposition from constituencies of both parties in Kentucky after the passage of the law . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election of 1899 = = = 
 Three men sought the Democratic nomination for governor at the 1899 party convention in Louisville – Goebel , Wat Hardin , and William J. Stone . When Hardin appeared to be the front @-@ runner for the nomination , Stone and Goebel agreed to work together against him . Stone 's supporters would back whomever Goebel picked to preside over the convention . In exchange , half the delegates from Louisville , who were pledged to Goebel , would vote to nominate Stone for governor . Goebel would then drop out of the race , but would name many of the other officials on the ticket . As word of the plan spread , Hardin dropped out of the race , believing he would be beaten by the Stone – Goebel alliance . 
 Goebel took a calculated risk by breaking the agreement once his choice was installed as presiding officer . Hardin , seeing that Stone had been betrayed and hoping he might now be able to secure the nomination , re @-@ entered the contest . Several chaotic ballots resulted in no clear majority for anyone , and Goebel 's hand @-@ picked chairman announced the man with the lowest vote total in the next canvass would be dropped . It turned out to be Stone . This put Stone 's backers in a difficult position . They were forced to choose between Hardin , who was seen as a pawn of the railroads , or Goebel , who had turned against their man . Enough of them sided with Goebel to give him the nomination . Goebel 's tactics , while not illegal , were unpopular and divided the party . A disgruntled faction calling themselves the " Honest Election Democrats " held a separate convention in Lexington and nominated John Y. Brown for governor . 
 Republican William S. Taylor defeated both Democratic candidates in the general election , but his margin over Goebel was only 2 @,@ 383 votes . Democrats in the General Assembly began making accusations of voting irregularities in some counties , but in a surprise decision , the Board of Elections created by the Goebel Election Law and manned by three hand @-@ picked Goebel Democrats , ruled 2 – 1 that the disputed ballots should count , saying the law gave them no legal power to reverse the official county results and that under the Kentucky Constitution the power to review the election lay in the General Assembly . The Assembly then invalidated enough Republican ballots to give the election to Goebel . The Assembly 's Republican minority was incensed , as were voters in traditionally Republican districts . For several days , the state hovered on the brink of a possible civil war . 
 = = Assassination and aftermath = = 
 While the election results remained in dispute , Goebel , despite being warned of a rumored assassination plot against him , walked flanked by two bodyguards to the Old State Capitol on the morning of January 30 , 1900 . Reports conflict about what happened , but some five or six shots were fired from the nearby State Building , one striking Goebel in the chest and wounding him seriously . Taylor , serving as governor pending a final decision on the election , called out the militia and ordered the General Assembly into a special session , not in Frankfort , but in London , Kentucky , a Republican area . The Republican minority obeyed the call and went to London . Democrats resisted the move , many going instead to Louisville . Both groups claimed authority , but the Republicans were too few to muster a quorum . 
 The day after being shot , the dying Goebel was sworn in as governor . In his only act , Goebel signed a proclamation to dissolve the militia called up by Taylor , which was ignored by the militia 's Republican commander . Despite the care of 18 physicians , Goebel died the afternoon of February 3 , 1900 . Journalists recalled his last words as " Tell my friends to be brave , fearless , and loyal to the common people . " Skeptic Irvin S. Cobb uncovered another story from some in the room at the time . On having eaten his last meal , the governor supposedly remarked " Doc , that was a damned bad oyster . " In respect of Goebel 's displeasure with the Louisville and Nashville Railroad , the governor 's body was transported not by the L & N direct line , but <unk> from his hometown of Covington north across the Ohio River to Cincinnati , and then south to Frankfort on the Queen and Crescent Railroad . 
 = = = Resolution of the election = = = 
 With Goebel dead , tensions began to ease . The idea of Goebel 's lieutenant governor , J. C. W. Beckham , as governor was more palatable to much of the opposition than civil war in the state , though many of them may have preferred war to a Goebel governorship . After a lengthy meeting , a bipartisan compromise was drafted which would have ended the matter . The terms called for Republican recognition of Goebel 's rightful election ( and Beckham 's subsequent right to govern ) . Republicans would also remove the militia from Frankfort . Democrats would , in turn , extend immunity to any Republican official found to have ties to the assassination , stop contesting elections for other state offices , and work to pass a nonpartisan election reform bill . The agreement needed only Taylor 's signature to become effective . Unwilling to relinquish his office , Taylor balked . 
 Compromise having been exhausted , both sides agreed to litigate the matter . The Kentucky Court of Appeals found that the General Assembly had acted legally in declaring Goebel the winner of the election . That decision was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States . Arguments were presented in the case ( Taylor v. Beckham ) on April 30 , 1900 , and on May 21 , the justices decided 8 – 1 not to hear the case , allowing the Court of Appeals ' decision to stand . The lone dissension was that of Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan , a Kentucky <unk> and member of the Republican Party ( United States ) . 
 = = = Trials and investigations = = = 
 During the ensuing assassination investigation , suspicion naturally focused on deposed governor Taylor , who fled to Indianapolis , Indiana under the looming threat of indictment . The governor of Indiana refused to extradite Taylor , and he was thus never questioned about his knowledge of the plot to kill Goebel . Taylor became a successful lawyer in Indiana , and was pardoned in 1909 by Beckham 's successor , Republican Augustus E. Willson . 
 Sixteen people , including Taylor , were eventually indicted in the assassination of Governor Goebel . Three accepted immunity from prosecution in exchange for testimony . Only five ever went to trial , two of those being acquitted . Convictions were handed down against Taylor 's Secretary of State Caleb Powers , Henry Youtsey , and Jim Howard . The prosecution charged that Powers was the mastermind , having a political opponent killed so that his boss , Governor Taylor , could stay in office . Youtsey was an alleged intermediary , and Howard , who was said to have been in Frankfort to seek a pardon from Taylor for the killing of a man in a family feud , was accused of being the actual assassin . 
 The trials were fraught with irregularities . All three judges were pro @-@ Goebel Democrats , and at one point the juror pool of 368 people was found to have only eight Republicans . Republican appeals courts overturned Powers ' and Howard 's convictions , though Powers was tried three more times , resulting in two convictions and a hung jury and Howard was tried and convicted twice more . Both men were pardoned in 1908 by Governor Augustus E. Willson . 
 Youtsey , who received a life sentence , did not appeal , but after two years in prison , he turned state 's evidence . In Howard 's second trial , Youtsey claimed that ex @-@ governor Taylor had discussed an assassination plot with Youtsey and Howard . He backed the prosecution 's claims that Taylor and Powers worked out the details , he acted as an intermediary , and Howard fired the shot . On cross examination , the defense pointed out contradictions in the details of Youtsey 's story , but Howard was still convicted . Youtsey was paroled in 1916 and was pardoned in 1919 by Democratic governor James D. Black . 
 Most historians agree that the assassin of Governor Goebel will never be conclusively identified . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Goebel Avenue in Elkton , Kentucky and Goebel Park in Covington , Kentucky are named in honor of the late governor . 
 = Octopussy and The Living Daylights = 
 Octopussy and The Living Daylights ( sometimes published as Octopussy ) is the fourteenth and final James Bond book written by Ian Fleming in the Bond series . The book is a collection of short stories published posthumously in the United Kingdom by Jonathan Cape on 23 June 1966 . 
 The book originally contained just two stories , " Octopussy " and " The Living Daylights " , with subsequent editions also carrying firstly " The Property of a Lady " and then " 007 in New York " . The stories were first published in different publications , with " Octopussy " first serialised in the Daily Express in October 1965 . " The Living Daylights " had first appeared in The Sunday Times on 4 February 1962 ; " The Property of a Lady " was published in November 1963 in a Sotheby 's publication , The Ivory Hammer , whilst " 007 in New York " first appeared in the New York Herald Tribune in October 1963 . 
 The two original stories , " Octopussy " and " The Living Daylights " , were both adapted for publication in comic strip format in the Daily Express in 1966 – 1967 . Elements from the stories have also been used in the Eon Productions Bond films . The first , Octopussy , starring Roger Moore as James Bond , was released in 1983 as the thirteenth film in the series and provided the back story for the film Octopussy 's family , while " The Property of a Lady " was more closely adapted for an auction sequence in the film . The Living Daylights , released in 1987 , was the fifteenth Bond film produced by Eon and starred Timothy Dalton in his first appearance as Bond . 
 = = Plots = = 
 = = = " Octopussy " = = = 
 The Secret Service operative James Bond , code name 007 , is assigned to apprehend a hero of the Second World War implicated in a murder involving a cache of Nazi gold . Bond appears briefly in this story , which is told mostly in flashback and from the point of view of Major Dexter Smythe , the villain . Bond chooses not to take Smythe into custody immediately , but Smythe 's guilt drives him to commit suicide by allowing a scorpion fish to sting him and his " pet " Blue @-@ ringed octopus to attack him , bringing on a fatal heart attack . 
 = = = " The Living Daylights " = = = 
 An unusually morose James Bond is assigned sniper duty to help British agent 272 escape from East Berlin . Bond 's duty is to prevent a top KGB assassin codenamed " Trigger " from killing 272 by eliminating the sniper . Bond waits for three nights for the agent to come over no man 's land and notices a female orchestra arriving and leaving for practice each night ; a beautiful , blonde cellist catches his eye while he waits . When he sees the agent start making his way over the broken ground , he sees the Russian sniper take up position and realises it is the cellist : a split second decision sees Bond deciding instead to shoot the butt of her rifle , preventing her from making the kill . The mission , while successful , is also considered a failure due to Bond 's last @-@ second decision , and it ends with Bond hoping that M fires him for it . 
 = = = " The Property of a Lady " = = = 
 Bond investigates a Secret Service employee , Maria <unk> , who is a double agent about to be paid by her Russian keepers by auctioning the " Emerald Sphere " , crafted by Peter Carl Fabergé , at Sotheby 's in her name . The Russians have sent the Resident Director of the KGB in London to attend the auction and underbid for the item to push the price to the necessary value to pay for her services as a double agent . Bond attends the auction in hopes of spotting this man ; after he does so , the man is expelled from London as persona non grata . 
 = = = " 007 in New York " = = = 
 A brief tale in which Bond muses about New York City and his favourite recipe for scrambled eggs , during a quick mission to the titular city to warn a female MI6 employee that her new boyfriend is a KGB agent . It is notable for including a rare humorous conclusion and for its mention of Solange , a young lady of Bond 's intimate acquaintance who works in a shop , Abercrombie 's , " appropriately employed in their Indoor Games Department " . 
 = = Characters and themes = = 
 Author of the " continuation " Bond stories , Raymond Benson , noted that in " The Living Daylights " Bond 's thoughts on killing are examined once again , showing that although 007 did not like doing it , he considered that he must as part of his duty to complete an assignment . Once the mission is completed , with Bond deliberately not killing the assassin , there is an attitude of complacency with Bond shrugging off his colleague 's complaints about the incident . Academic Jeremy Black sees the colleague , the officious Captain Spender , as the antithesis of Bond and an echo of Colonel Schreiber , the head of security at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe ( SHAPE ) , who appeared in " From a View to a Kill " . 
 In the act of not killing the assassin , the theme of disobedience is raised in " The Living Daylights " , with Bond calling what he has to do " murder " and subsequently dismissing his actions by saying " with any luck it will cost me my Double @-@ 0 number " . Raymond Benson considered " Octopussy " to be a morality tale , with greed bringing repercussions years later to the main protagonist , Dexter Smythe . 
 = = Background = = 
 On the morning of 12 August 1964 , Fleming died of a heart attack ; eight months later , The Man with the Golden Gun was published . The rights to Fleming 's works were held by Glidrose Productions ( now Ian Fleming Publications ) and it was decided by the company that two short stories , " Octopussy " and " The Living Daylights " , would be published in 1966 . 
 = = = " Octopussy " = = = 
 The story " Octopussy " was written in early 1962 at Fleming 's Goldeneye estate in Jamaica . The story is told in the manner of " Quantum of Solace " , with Bond as catalyst for story told in flashback , rather than as a main character for action . The topics chosen for Fleming were familiar ground for him to cover , with hidden gold , tropical fish and the wartime exploits of commandos all coming from elements of his past . Also from the past , or from his acquaintance , were other references used in the story and Miscellaneous Objectives Bureau was a fictional version of Fleming 's 30 AU unit . One of Fleming 's neighbours in Jamaica , and later his lover , was Blanche Blackwell , mother of Chris Blackwell of Island Records . Fleming had previously used Blackwell 's name as the guano @-@ collecting ship in Dr. No , calling it Blanche . Blackwell had given Fleming a coracle called Octopussy , the name of which Fleming used for the story . Octopussy was posthumously serialised in the Daily Express newspaper , 4 – 8 October 1965 . 
 = = = " The Living Daylights " = = = 
 Fleming originally titled " The Living Daylights " as " Trigger Finger " , although when it first appeared , in the The Sunday Times colour supplement of 4 February 1962 , it was under the title of " Berlin Escape " . It was also published in June 1962 issue of the American magazine Argosy under the same name . For The Sunday Times , Fleming had commissioned Graham Sutherland to undertake the artwork to accompany the piece , at a cost of 100 guineas , although the artwork wasn 't used in the published edition . 
 As background research to the story , Fleming corresponded with Captain E.K. Le Mesurier , secretary of the National Rifle Association at Bisley for information and to correct some of the more specialist areas of knowledge required for sniper shooting . Part of the background to the plot , of using the noise of the orchestra to cover the crossing over no man 's land , was inspired by Pat Reid 's escape from Colditz prisoner of war camp , with two <unk> having to run across a courtyard under the cover of the noise from an orchestra . The conductor of the Colditz orchestra was Douglas Bader , who played golf with Fleming on a number of occasions . The assassin , Trigger , was partly based on Amaryllis Fleming , Ian 's half @-@ sister , a concert cellist with blonde hair , and Fleming managed to get a passing reference to her in the story , saying : " Of course <unk> had managed to look elegant , as did that girl Amaryllis somebody . " 
 = = = " Property of a Lady " = = = 
 " Property of a Lady " , which was written in early 1963 , was commissioned by Sotheby 's for use in their annual journal , The Ivory Hammer , and was published in November 1963 and later in Playboy ; Sotheby 's chairman Peter Wilson is mentioned by name in the story . Fleming was so unhappy with the final piece he wrote to Wilson and refused payment for something he considered so lacklustre . 
 = = = " 007 in New York " = = = 
 In 1959 Fleming was commissioned by The Sunday Times to write a series of articles based on world cities , material for which later was collected into a book entitled Thrilling Cities ; whilst travelling through New York for material , Fleming wrote " 007 in New York " from Bond 's point of view . " 007 in New York " was originally titled " Reflections in a Carey Cadillac " and it contains a recipe for scrambled eggs which came from May Maxwell , the housekeeper to friend Ivar Bryce who gave her name to Bond 's own housekeeper , May . The story was first published in the New York Herald Tribune in October 1963 as " Agent 007 in New York " , but was subsequently renamed as " 007 in New York " for the 1964 US editions of Thrilling Cities . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Octopussy and The Living Daylights was published in Britain on 23 June 1966 by Jonathan Cape and cost <unk> The hardback edition of the book contained only the two stories mentioned in the title , although when the paperbacks editions were published , " The Property of a Lady " was also included . Once again artist Richard Chopping provided the cover art , although his fee rose once again , to 350 guineas . The book was published in US by New American Library with illustrations from Paul Bacon . By 2002 , " 007 in New York " had been added to the book by Penguin Books . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Philip Larkin wrote in The Spectator that " I am not surprised that Fleming preferred to write novels . James Bond , unlike Sherlock Holmes , does not fit snugly into the short story length : there is something grandiose and intercontinental about his adventures that require elbow room and such examples of the form as we have tend to be eccentric or muted . These are no exception . " The critic for The Times Literary Supplement wrote that the book was " slight and predictable , and usual sex and violence yield to a plausible use of ballistics and marine biology " . Writing in The Listener , Anthony Burgess thought that " in their fascinated poring on things ... remind us that the stuff of the anti @-@ novel needn 't necessarily spring from a thought @-@ out aesthetic " , going on to note that " it is the mastery of the world that gives Fleming his peculiar literary niche " . On a personal note , Burgess added " I admired all the Bond books and I 'm sorry there 'll be no more . A sad farewell to Fleming " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Comic strip adaptation ( 1966 – 1967 ) 
 Two of the short stories were adapted for publication in comic strip format , which were published daily in the Daily Express newspaper and syndicated worldwide . " The Living Daylights " ran from 12 September to 12 November 1966 , adapted by Jim Lawrence and illustrated by Yaroslav Horak ; the same pair also worked on " Octopussy " , which ran from 14 November 1966 to 27 May 1967 . The story lines for the strips were altered from the original Fleming version to ensure that they contained a glamorous reason for being Bond involved and to include Bond in action . The strips were reprinted by Titan Books in 1988 and then again in The James Bond Omnibus Vol . 2 , published in 2011 . 
 Octopussy ( 1983 ) 
 In 1983 Eon Productions loosely adapted elements of two of the stories , " Octopussy " and " The Property of a Lady " for the thirteenth film in their Bond series , starring Roger Moore as Bond . " Octopussy " provided the title of the film and the background for the character Octopussy , the daughter of a character Bond had allowed to commit suicide , rather than face the shame of arrest and imprisonment . The film also used the plot device of auctioning of a Fabergé egg at Sotheby 's from " The Property of a Lady " and , as with the story , the auction item was described as being the same " property of a lady " . 
 The Living Daylights ( 1987 ) 
 In 1987 Eon used the plot of " The Living Daylights " , almost unchanged , for a section of their 1987 film of the same name . The film starred Timothy Dalton in his first role as Bond , whilst the character of Trigger became that of cello player Kara Milovy . 
 Casino Royale ( 2006 ) 
 In 2006 Eon used the plot of Fleming 's first novel , Casino Royale , for its 21st film of the same name . However , a main character was named Solange , after the woman featured in " 007 in New York . " 
 Quantum of Solace ( 2008 ) 
 In 2008 Eon used the basic premise from the short story " 007 in New York " as part of the film Quantum of Solace , in which Bond warns a female intelligence employee that her boyfriend is an enemy agent . 
 Spectre ( 2015 ) 
 In Spectre , Hans Oberhauser , a background character in " Octopussy " is revealed to be the father of Ernst Stavro Blofeld and a former caretaker of Bond in his youth . In the film it is stated that Blofeld killed Oberhauser because he felt that Oberhauser loved Bond more than him , his own son . 
 = The Dragon 's Call = 
 " The Dragon 's Call " is the first episode of the first series of the British fantasy @-@ adventure family television series Merlin . Written by Julian Jones and directed by James Hawes , the episode was first broadcast on BBC One on 20 September 2008 . 
 The episode tells the arrival of Merlin ( Colin Morgan ) as a young man in Camelot , where magic is banned by King Uther Pendragon ( Anthony Head ) . Taken under the wing of Camelot 's physician , Gaius ( Richard Wilson ) , he is warned that he must keep his innate magical ability a secret . In Camelot , he meets Uther 's heir , the arrogant Prince Arthur ( Bradley James ) , as well as Lady Morgana ( Katie McGrath ) and her handmaid , Guinevere ( Angel Coulby ) . As a witch ( Eve Myles ) plans revenge on the King 's heir for the execution of her son , Merlin is informed by a cryptic dragon ( John Hurt ) that his destiny is to protect Arthur . 
 Merlin was conceived by Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps to be an origin story for the characters of the Arthurian legends , with family @-@ centered entertainment . Young actors with little experience were cast as the four lead characters , while better @-@ known actors were cast in supporting roles . Many of the scenes in Camelot were filmed in France , at the Château de Pierrefonds , while the rest was filmed in England and Wales . Special effects were done by The Mill , who had the task of creating the talking dragon . " The Dragon 's Call " was watched by 7 @.@ 15 million viewers in the UK and 6 @.@ 3 million in the US on NBC . Critical reception was mixed , with some feeling the show had promise but lacked imagination , and the actual plot of " The Dragon 's Call " was deemed slight . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Merlin ( Colin Morgan ) , a young sorcerer , arrives in Camelot just in time to witness the execution of Thomas Collins , a man accused of sorcery , by the order of King Uther Pendragon ( Anthony Head ) , who has banned the practice of magic in his kingdom on pain of death . As soon as the man is beheaded , Uther declares to the watching crowd that he shall throw a festival to celebrate twenty years since he wiped out magic and magicians from the kingdom . When he finishes his announcements , a hideous old hag , Thomas ' mother Mary ( Eve Myles ) , swears revenge for the murder of her son , " a son for a son ! " , before vanishing to avoid arrest . The King 's ward , Morgana ( Katie McGrath ) , warns that Uther may be making enemies through his hatred and radical methods of wiping out magic . 
 Merlin reports to Camelot 's physician Gaius ( Richard Wilson ) and saves the old man 's life when he falls from a balcony by magically moving a mattress to cushion his fall . Though initially denying his abilities , Merlin later admits that he has had magical powers since birth , which Gaius warns him to keep secret . Reading a letter from Merlin 's mother , Gaius realises that the boy was sent to Camelot for protection . Meanwhile , in the forest outside Camelot , Mary kills Lady Helen ( Myles ) , a singer who is to perform at Uther 's court , with a poppet . Mary assumes Helen 's appearance using an enchantment , though her true hideous appearance can still be seen in her reflection ( like in mirrors or water ) . 
 Outside , Merlin stands up for a servant who is being bullied by his master , but as the master turns out to be the King 's spoiled son , Arthur ( Bradley James ) , Merlin is imprisoned . For the second night in a row , he hears a voice calling his name . Gaius frees him the next morning , though Merlin has to spend time in the stocks . There he meets Morgana 's handmaiden Guinevere or " Gwen " ( Angel Coulby ) , who commends him for being brave . Merlin confronts Arthur after being released , who tricks him into a fight with maces . Merlin keeps Arthur away using magic , which is met with ridicule by Gaius . Hearing the same voice calling his name that night , Merlin follows it to a cave where a dragon ( John Hurt ) informs him that he is destined to protect Arthur with his powers . 
 Gaius instructs Merlin to deliver elixirs to Morgana and Lady Helen ; in the latter 's room he finds the poppet , but bluffs his way out of discovery . Later , Helen kills a handmaiden who glimpses her true form in a mirror . At the feast , Mary sings an enchantment as Lady Helen , causing all the guests to fall asleep . Merlin , realising what is going on , covers his ears . Mary attempts to kill Arthur , but Merlin drops a chandelier on her with magic before she releases the dagger . As she has stopped singing , the enchantment is lifted and her true appearance is revealed . In a last effort she throws the dagger at Arthur , but Merlin slows time to pull him out of the way . Mary dies from her injuries , having failed in her attempt to avenge her son . Uther rewards Merlin by making him Arthur 's servant , though neither boy is thrilled with the idea . The next day , Gaius gives Merlin a book on magic , under condition that he keep it hidden . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and development = = = 
 Merlin was conceived by Shine Television producers Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps , who had worked together on Hex , a fantasy series produced by Shine for Sky One . The two had enjoyed presenting a " high @-@ concept " show , and wished to do more . The BBC had been interested in broadcasting a drama based on the character of Merlin for some time ; a little over a year before the Shine series was initiated , writer and producer Chris Chibnall had been developing a project aimed at a BBC One Sunday night slot , which was ultimately not commissioned . The programme was intended for family entertainment and designed to appeal to a wide audience . 
 As the Arthurian legends do not reflect genuine historical events , not being set in any one singular period in time , the show 's creators were more interested in conveying a world that felt " real " . Not constrained by historical accuracy , they had many opportunities to build the world in which they set their series ; for example , tomatoes were included despite being absent from Europe in the Medieval era , and there was never a dragon in the earliest texts involving Merlin . The series was intended to have an " epic scale " that would have a wide " cross @-@ generational " appeal ; films such as Raiders of the Lost Ark were cited as inspiration . Despite this , the creators strived to have smaller moments that the audience could relate to and comedy to lighten the darker tone . A fairy @-@ tale aspect was also incorporated - highlighted in " The Dragon 's Call " with the singing and cobwebs - to set the programme apart from others . Beauty and the Beast was an inspiration in this respect . Merlin was also influenced by the US show Smallville , about the early years of Superman ; Murphy and Capps said that Smallville helped provide the idea of a " Camelot that existed before its golden age " . The creators wanted to show Merlin , Arthur , Gwen and Morgana in their youth , " before they were famous " . Murphy and Capps intended for the four young characters and situations to be relatable to young viewers . They also put the characters in unusual positions with respect to their later , well @-@ known roles to make the audience wonder how they would reach those roles ; for example , Guinevere , the future Queen of Camelot and wife of Arthur , is a servant with a romantic interest in Merlin . Looking back at " The Dragon 's Call " , Murphy and Capps felt that it had so much to introduce in terms of world and characters that there was not enough of the main plot of the episode . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The producers were aware that they would be casting young actors with little experience in film and television . Hundreds were seen for the part of Merlin , with the part going to 22 @-@ year @-@ old Colin Morgan , whom Murphy and Capps felt possessed a broad acting range with good comedic timing and wonder , and who they felt would most importantly be likable to the audience . Bradley James was cast as Prince Arthur , whom the producers saw as a " medieval Prince Harry " . They felt that James ' sense of comedy balanced the fact that the character was intended to first appear acting like an " idiot " . Murphy and Capps had previously worked with James on a pilot , and kept him in the " back of [ their ] minds " when casting Arthur . Katie McGrath and Angel Coulby , who play Morgana and Gwen respectively , also had little previous professional acting experience . Despite this , it was noted that all four young actors took to their jobs maturely and with energy . 
 The series also incorporates more experienced and well @-@ known actors . Richard Wilson was cast as Gaius , who was conceived to have a dysfunctional father / son relationship with Merlin . Murphy and Capps had worked with Wilson before and considered him a broad actor with a " warmth " and " humanity " that would fit the character . The voice of the Great Dragon was given to John Hurt ; he was offered the part , though the producers did not expect him to accept . The role of King Uther went to veteran actor Anthony Head , who was best known for his role as Rupert Giles in Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Head had been one of the first choices for the part ; Murphy and Capps felt that he was good with " high @-@ concept " worlds . Murphy and Capps had also previously worked with Caroline Faber , who briefly appears as Merlin 's mother . The two liked her sense of humanity , though her scene — where Gaius reads her letter — was almost cut from " The Dragon 's Call " . Eve Myles guest stars in " The Dragon 's Call " as the villain Mary Collins and her host body Lady Helen . Murphy and Capps remarked that Myles gave a " big " but " truthful " performance , and really " embraced " being a villain . Myles sang during the filming of the climax , though her voice was replaced with a real operatic soprano in post @-@ production . Composer Rob Lane was given little time to complete the song and , though he was given Old English texts , the lyrics do not make actual sense . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Merlin began production in March 2008 ; as many as three episodes were filmed at a time , and not necessarily in the correct order . Many scenes in Camelot were filmed in France at the Château de Pierrefonds , which was hand @-@ picked by the production team . Castles in England had been looked at , but they were often in ruins and would require more computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) effects in post @-@ production . A medieval @-@ era road was built around Pierrefonds for some scenes to give the sense of a town , as the castle was in isolation . The execution scene was one of the first major scenes shot . As the production team had to be able to work with French extras , a bilingual crew was required . The cell Merlin is imprisoned in and the banquet hall at the end were both filmed in English stately homes , with real medieval architecture . Other studio filming took place in Wales . The scene at the camp where Lady Helen stays had to be reshot because the tent was seen as " too Monty Python " and distracting . 
 Myles ' Mary Collins prosthetic took six hours to accomplish , and the shot where she morphs into the younger Lady Helen took seven hours to complete because it required three stages of make @-@ up . Her first performance at the beheading scene was met with applause by the extras ; Head requested that he redo his part of the scene because he felt that it was not good enough . Gaius ' fall from the balcony was done by a stuntman and filmed with a high @-@ speed camera . The mattress that Merlin magically moves across the floor was achieved with rigging it up to hidden wires and pulleys under the set . The knives Arthur throws were actually shot out of a nitrogen gun ; James did throw them in a separate shot , but against a cloth that he still missed . Fake fruit was made for the stocks scene , but it was deemed too fake @-@ looking and was replaced with real tomatoes . The mace fight was originally filmed with plastic maces , but they were not believable as they did not have enough weight . The scene was then shot with real steel maces ; it was one of the most complex and hardest scenes to execute . The climax , where the guests all fall asleep and are covered by cobwebs , took many days to complete . The chandelier falling was also considered difficult . 
 CGI special effects for the series were provided by The Mill . The production team wanted a talking dragon , but they were worried about the lip sync and did not think it would be believable until they saw the first test . The Mill created a software that would read Hurt 's facial muscles and incorporated it into the animation . Another concern was that the eyes would not convey the character , but this was corrected by the final version . Additional sound effects , such as the clanging chain , were added to give the creature weight . The knife Mary throws at Arthur was also completely CGI , though the shot of it hitting the chair was real . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Dragon 's Call " was first broadcast on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 20 September 2008 . Overnight ratings showed that the episode had been <unk> by 6 @.@ 65 million viewers live , a 30 % audience share , placing Merlin second for the night behind ITV 's The X @-@ Factor . The episode received a final rating of 7 @.@ 15 million viewers , the sixth most @-@ watched programme of the week on BBC One . 
 In the United States , " The Dragon 's Call " was aired back @-@ to @-@ back with the following episode " Valiant " on 21 June 2009 on network station NBC , the first time since 1978 's The New Avengers that a British programme was picked up by one of the U.S. ' s four major terrestrial networks , rather than cable . The premiere was watched by an average 5 @.@ 2 million viewers , with an average of 6 @.@ 3 million during the slot for " The Dragon 's Call " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The premiere of Merlin received generally mixed reviews . Sam Wollaston of The Guardian was optimistic towards the programme , despite the violent content . He wrote that " Morgan is a very likable young Merlin " and the show " looks splendid — colourful , exciting , and yes , magic " . Daniel Martin of the same paper felt that the series had potential , though " The Dragon 's Call " had " awful dialogue " and was " a flimsy caper memorable only for centring around the wonderful big @-@ eyed Eve Myles " . The Hollywood Reporter reviewer Randee Dawn felt that it would " hurt [ the ] eyes " of those who were familiar with the Arthurian legends , but " for those new to the legend , this is a fresh , and delightfully color @-@ blind , approach to the tale " . Alessandra Stanley , reviewing for The New York Times , was pleased with the diversity of the cast and the chemistry between Morgan and James , though she felt it " would be better if its creators had taken more liberties and shown more imagination in coloring in the background of their young hero 's world " . 
 Metro gave the episode three out of five stars , writing that " Colin Morgan makes a likeable boy wizard but there ’ s a bit too much formula – and not in the magical sense " . The review described the episode as a " test of patience " due to Merlin 's inability to use magic and the " hideously jaunty , distinctly non @-@ medieval soundtrack " . Tom Shales of The Washington Post criticised the " sluggish pace " of the premiere , noting that the episode was only " brightened " by the dragon , though similar creatures were common in the genre and it " lacks personality as well as panache " . Shales felt that the series took " the stuff of legend and imagination and makes it dry and commonplace " . Den of Geek reviewer Mark Pickavance felt that the episode was " uneven and often very stilted " , and failed at introducing both the characters and telling the story of the first meeting of Arthur and Merlin . He was displeased with the deviation from established mythology and the lapses in logic . The Times 's AA Gill described Merlin as " bland " , writing that it was for " a large untapped audience that yearns for Abercrombie & Fitch drama " . Hermione Eyre of The Independent called it " horrible " , disliking the " modern " feeling , the " awful " make @-@ up , and commented that " Guinevere looks like a supply teacher " . 
 = Hero of the Russian Federation = 
 Hero of the Russian Federation ( Russian : Герой <unk> <unk> ) is the highest honorary title of the Russian Federation . A person that has been <unk> this title also receives a Gold Star medal , an insignia of honor that identifies recipients . 
 The title is awarded to persons for " service to the Russian state and nation , usually connected with a heroic feat of valor " . The title is bestowed by decree of the president of the Russian Federation . Russian citizenship or being in the service of the Russian state is not obligatory . 
 The title was established in 1992 , and has been awarded more than 970 times since then , including more than 440 times posthumously . 
 = = History = = 
 The title " Hero of Russia " is a successor to Hero of the Soviet Union ( Russian : Герой <unk> <unk> ) , which was established by Resolution of the Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Union of May 5 , 1934 . The corresponding Gold Star is derived from the Soviet design , created by architect Miron <unk> and approved by Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of August 1 , 1939 . 
 Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 , Russian Federation under president Boris Yeltsin retained a modified award by Law of the Russian Federation № 2553 @-@ 1 of March 20 , 1992 . Article 71 of the Constitution of Russia permits titles , orders and medals to be presented by the government , and Article 89 gives the Russian president power to create state awards . This is the highest honour that can be presented by the Russian president to a citizen . 
