 = = Statute = = 
 The title of Hero of the Russian Federation can be awarded for a heroic deed in the service of the state . It can be awarded to both civilian and military personnel . The title can also be awarded posthumously if the heroic act costs the recipient his or her life . The President of the Russian Federation is the main conferring authority of the award . 
 The insignia of Hero of the Russian Federation is worn on the left side of the chest above all other medals and decorations . Its medal is always worn in full size , there is no ribbon bar or rosette that can be worn in its lieu . When Soviet titles , such as Hero of the Soviet Union or Hero of Socialist Labour are worn together with the medal of the Russian title , the latter has precedence . 
 = = Description = = 
 The insignia of the title of " Hero of the Russian Federation " is also called the " Gold Star " medal ( Russian : медаль « <unk> <unk> » ) , its design is similar to the Soviet variant . 
 The " Gold Star " medal is a gold five @-@ pointed star with smooth 15mm dihedral rays on the obverse . The otherwise plain reverse bears the prominent relief inscription in 2mm high letters " HERO OF <unk> " ( Russian : " <unk> <unk> " ) at its center , in the upper portion , the award serial number in 1mm high numbers . 
 The insignia is secured to a standard Russian square mount by a ring through the suspension loop . The mount is covered by a silk moiré tricolour ribbon of white , blue and red . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 The majority of the early recipients of the title fell into two categories : participants in the Chechnya conflicts or cosmonauts . On some occasions , the person who was awarded the title was killed while in the course of duty , such as Major Denis <unk> , who was killed early in the 2008 South Ossetia War . This includes those killed in battle as well as assassinated government officials . An example of such a recipient was Akhmad Kadyrov , the former governor of Chechnya . The pro @-@ Moscow leader was killed in a bomb attack during the 2004 Victory Day parade in the Chechen capital of Grozny . Several days after Akhmad was killed , President Vladimir Putin awarded him the title . Some time after the incident , Putin awarded Kadyrov 's son , Ramzan , the same title for his work in Chechnya . 
 All Russian cosmonauts are awarded the title of Hero of the Russian Federation following their voyage into space ; some may already have earned it , for example for long service as a test pilot . Cosmonauts are also awarded the title Pilot @-@ Cosmonaut of the Russian Federation . Some recipients of the title , such as Sergei Krikalev , had also received the Soviet hero title , along with the Order of Lenin . Most of the cosmonaut double heroes were awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union and Hero of Russia titles " for successful realization of flight and the courage and heroism shown . " 
 Outside of those two groups , athletes and other civilian and military officials have also received the title . Notable examples include : 
 Submarine captain Gennady <unk> , of the Kursk , which sank after an explosion in 2000 . Due to his heroism during the explosion and his attempts at preserving the lives of the crew , <unk> was posthumously awarded the title , and the members of his crew were awarded with the Order of Courage . 
 Athlete Larisa <unk> was presented with the title for various medals won at the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano , Japan . 
 Alexander <unk> was awarded for his recognition as the greatest wrestler of all time ( from antiquity to the present day ) . He was a Greco @-@ Roman wrestler in the Olympics , and in his career he won 887 bouts and lost only 2 times . His losses are controversial because commentators believe they were caused by trivial rule changes , not a bona fide athletic defeat . 
 <unk> 2007 expedition members Anatoly <unk> , Yevgeny <unk> and Artur <unk> , who , on January 10 , 2008 , performed the first ever descent to the ocean bottom at the North Pole . Awarded the title " for courage and heroism showed in extremal conditions and successful completion of High @-@ Latitude Arctic Deep @-@ Water Expedition . " 
 Weapons designer Mikhail T. Kalashnikov , designer of the AK @-@ 47 assault rifle and PK machine gun . He received the honor on his 90th birthday , November 10 , 2009 . 
 The medal has been awarded posthumously approximately 340 times , primarily to people involved in the first and second wars in Chechnya . One of the more recent posthumous awards was made by President Dmitry Medvedev to Evgeny <unk> , the chief of the Moscow fire department on March 24 , 2010 . <unk> died March 20 , 2010 saving others ' lives . 
 = Oxford Circus tube station = 
 Oxford Circus is a London Underground station serving Oxford Circus at the junction of Regent Street and Oxford Street , with entrances on all four corners of the intersection . The station is an interchange between the Bakerloo , Central and Victoria lines . It is the busiest station in the United Kingdom , with 98 @.@ 51 million entries and exits in 2014 . On the Central line it is between Bond Street and Tottenham Court Road , on the Bakerloo line it is between Regent 's Park and Piccadilly Circus , and on the Victoria line it is between Green Park and Warren Street . The station is in Travelcard Zone 1 . 
 The Central line station opened on 30 July 1900 , and the Bakerloo line station on 10 March 1906 . Both are Grade II listed . The station was rebuilt in 1912 to relieve congestion . Further congestion led to another reconstruction in 1923 . Numerous improvements were made as part of the New Works Programme and as a flood protection measure . To accommodate additional passengers on the Victoria line , a new ticket hall was built . The Victoria line station opened on 7 March 1969 , including cross @-@ platform interchange with the Bakerloo line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Central line = = = 
 In the 1890s , the Central London Railway ( CLR ) published a notice of a private bill that would be presented to Parliament for the 1890 parliamentary session . The bill planned an underground route between Shepherd 's Bush and Cornhill ( now Bank station ) . These plans were accepted by both Houses of Parliament on 5 August 1891 . 
 The CLR employed the engineers James Henry Greathead , Sir John Fowler , and Sir Benjamin Baker to design the railway . The official opening of the CLR ( now the Central line ) by the Prince of Wales took place on 27 June 1900 ; it was opened to the public on 30 July . Oxford Circus station opened as part of the first section of the line , between Shepherd 's Bush and Bank . As part of the 1935 — 40 New Works Programme , the misaligned tunnels of the central section on the Central line that slowed running speeds were corrected and the platforms lengthened to accommodate longer trains . 
 = = = Bakerloo line = = = 
 In November 1891 , notice was given of a private bill that would be presented to Parliament for the construction of the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR , now the Bakerloo line ) . The railway was planned to run entirely underground from Marylebone to Elephant & Castle via Baker Street and Waterloo . The route was approved in 1900 . Construction commenced in August 1898 under the direction of Sir Benjamin Baker , W.R. Galbraith and R.F. Church . The works were carried out by Perry & Company of <unk> Works , Bow . Oxford Circus was altered below ground following a Board of Trade inspection ; at the end of 1905 , the first test trains began running . The official opening of the BS & WR by Sir Edwin Cornwall took place on 10 March 1906 . The first section of the BS & WR was between Baker Street and Lambeth North . 
 = = = Victoria line = = = 
 A proposal for a new underground railway running from Victoria to Walthamstow was first proposed by a Working Party set up by the British Transport Commission in 1948 , though that largely followed a 1946 plan for an East Croydon to Finsbury Park line . A route was approved in 1955 with future extensions to be decided later , though funding for the construction was not approved by the government until 1962 . Construction began in 1962 on the initial Walthamstow to Victoria section . The Victoria line platforms opened on 7 March 1969 . The station opened as part of a second extension from Warren Street to Victoria . Cross @-@ platform interchange between the Bakerloo and Victoria lines was provided by constructing the Victoria line platforms parallel to the Bakerloo ones . 
 = = = Incidents and accidents = = = 
 On 23 November 1984 , during renovation works , the station suffered a severe fire which burned out the northbound Victoria line platform . It is believed that the fire was caused by smoking materials being pushed through a ventilation grille into a storeroom where they set several materials on fire . This caused the Victoria line between Warren Street and Victoria to be suspended until 18 December the same year . This incident also led to a smoking ban being introduced on trains in July 1984 . 
 On 3 March 1997 , a train derailment caused the northbound Bakerloo line service between Oxford Circus and Piccadilly Circus to be suspended for 12 days . 
 = = Station building = = 
 = = = Bakerloo and Central lines = = = 
 The CLR and <unk> had separate surface buildings and lift shafts . The station buildings , which remain today as exits from the station , were built on very confined plots on either side of Argyll Street on the south side of Oxford Street , just east of the circus itself . The stations as originally built were entirely separate , but connecting passages were soon provided at platform level . The surviving Central London Railway building to the east of Argyll Street is the best surviving example of stations designed by Harry Bell Measures , and the Bakerloo line building to the west is a classic Leslie Green structure . Both are Grade II listed since 20 July 2011 . 
 Almost from the outset , overcrowding has been a constant problem , and there have been numerous improvements to the facilities and below @-@ ground arrangements to deal with this . After much discussion between the then two separate operators , a major reconstruction began in 1912 . This entailed a new ticket hall , serving both lines , being built in the basement of the Bakerloo station , with the Bakerloo lifts removed and new deep @-@ level escalators opened down to the Bakerloo line level . Access to the CLR was by way of existing deep @-@ level subways . The new works came into use on 9 May 1914 with the CLR lifts still available for passengers . By 1923 even this rearrangement was unable to cope , so a second rebuilding began . This involved a second set of escalators being built directly down to the Central line and the CLR station building becoming exit @-@ only . On 2 October 1928 , a third escalator leading to the Bakerloo platforms was opened . Unusually , lifts came back into prominence at an Underground station when , in 1942 , a set of high @-@ speed lifts came into use , largely used as an exit route from the Central line platforms directly to the Argyll Street exit building . 
 The station was closed between 31 August and 20 November 1939 to facilitate flood protection works for the preparation of The Second World War . Although street access was closed , trains still called , and interchange between the Bakerloo and Central lines was still possible within the station . 
 = = = Victoria line = = = 
 To handle the additional Victoria line passenger loads , a new ticket hall was constructed directly under the road junction . To excavate the new ticket hall below the roadway , traffic was diverted for five years ( August 1963 to Easter 1968 ) onto a temporary bridge @-@ like structure known as the " umbrella " covering the Regent Street / Oxford Street intersection . Service tunnels were constructed to carry water mains and telecom cables past the new ticket hall . Construction of the Victoria line station tunnels with their platforms , the new escalator shafts and the linking passages to the Central line platforms was carried out from access shafts sunk from nearby Cavendish Square , Upper Regent Street and Argyll Street . With the additional escalators in place , a new one @-@ way circulation scheme was introduced and the remaining lifts were removed . 
 = = The station today = = 
 In 2007 the station underwent a major modernisation , removing the murals installed on the Central and Bakerloo line platforms in the 1980s and replacing them with plain white tiles , in a style similar to those used when the station opened in 1900 . One 1980s mural remains on one of the platforms . The Central line platform works were substantially complete and a new Station Operations Room at top level opened . This enabled the entire CCTV system to be switched over to new <unk> digital technology . The original motifs designed by Hans Unger on the Victoria line platforms were restored . 
 Oxford Circus station has 14 escalators . Major escalator refurbishment took place in 2010 – 11 . Platform humps were also installed at the station to provide step @-@ free access to trains . The Victoria line humps resemble in form the Harrington Hump . 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 = = = = Bakerloo line = = = = 
 On this line , it is between Regent 's Park and Piccadilly Circus stations . Trains generally run every 4 – 9 minutes between 06 : 17 and 00 : 15 in both directions , a little less frequently than the Central and Victoria lines . 
 = = = = Central line = = = = 
 On this line , the station is between Bond Street and Tottenham Court Road stations . The typical off @-@ peak service in trains per hour ( tph ) is as follows : 
 9tph eastbound to Epping 
 6tph eastbound to Hainault 
 3tph eastbound to Loughton 
 3tph eastbound to Woodford via Hainault 
 3tph eastbound to Newbury Park 
 9tph westbound to West Ruislip 
 9tph westbound to Ealing Broadway 
 3tph westbound to Northolt 
 3tph westbound to White City 
 = = = = Victoria line = = = = 
 On this line , the station is located between Warren Street and Green Park . The typical off @-@ peak service in trains per hour ( tph ) is : 
 12 tph northbound to Seven Sisters 
 9 tph northbound to Walthamstow Central 
 21 tph southbound to Brixton 
 = = = Connections = = = 
 London Bus routes 3 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 23 , 25 , 55 , 73 , 88 , 94 , 98 , 137 , 139 , 159 , 189 , 390 , 453 and C2 , and night routes N3 , N7 , N8 , N13 , <unk> , N55 , N73 , N98 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , N137 and N207 serve the station . Additionally , bus routes 6 , 10 , 12 , 23 , 25 , 88 , 94 , 139 , 159 , 189 , 390 , 453 and C2 provide a 24 @-@ hour bus service . 
 = = Nearby attractions = = 
 All Souls Church , Langham Place 
 BBC Broadcasting House 
 Carnaby Street 
 Langham Hotel 
 London College of Fashion , John Princes Street 
 London Palladium , Argyll Street 
 Oxford Street 
 Regent Street 
 St George 's , Hanover Square 
 = I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer = 
 " I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer " is the eighteenth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the 62nd episode overall . Written by Jonathan Moskin and David Mulei and directed by Nick Marck , the episode premiered on The CW on May 15 , 2007 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , when a Hearst student and former child soldier in Uganda named Apollo ( <unk> Ellis ) publishes a memoir , Veronica receives a phone call from a man claiming to be his father . Meanwhile , Logan ( Jason Dohring ) and Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) plan to go on a surfing vacation in the summer , coming into conflict with several people . In addition , Piz ( Chris Lowell ) must decide between two summer internships . 
 " I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer " incorporates the organization Invisible Children , Inc. into its storyline and includes a public service announcement for the group at the end of the episode . Hansen and Bell are celebrity supporters of the organization , and series creator Rob Thomas was inspired to devote an episode to the subject of child soldiers when Hansen gave him a book about Uganda the previous Christmas . In its original broadcast , the episode received 2 @.@ 10 million viewers and generally positive reviews from television critics , with many praising the character development of Dick and the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Veronica and Piz hang out at her house . Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) tests Veronica on her upcoming private investigator exam , and Piz states that he is interviewing a former child soldier , Apollo , and Hearst student for his radio show . Keith informs his deputies that a robbery wave has been occurring . Piz interviews the student before telling Veronica that he has been offered an internship by Pitchfork Media . Veronica receives a 95 % on the PI exam before being called by a man stating that Apollo is his son . Keith speaks to a suspect in some of the robberies and discovers that he is connected to the Fitzpatricks . Logan meets Parker ’ s ( Julie Gonzalo ) parents , who are very uptight . Veronica speaks to Apollo , posing as a reporter for the school newspaper , finding that Apollo ’ s mother ’ s handwriting is very similar to the letter his father claimed to have from his mother . 
 Logan tells Parker that he will not be seeing her in the summer because he will be on a surfing trip with Dick . Mac ( Tina Majorino ) and Max ( Adam Rose ) spend all their time together . Piz tells Veronica about another internship in Neptune , but she dodges his attempts to ask which one he should take . Keith meets Liam Fitzpatrick ( Rod Rowland ) , who states that the robberies will not stop . Apollo learns that Veronica was not assigned by the school paper , and Veronica tells him the truth , but he refuses a paternity test . Some people begin to grow dissatisfied with Keith ’ s handling of the robberies , while Apollo ’ s father claimant appears in Neptune . Veronica searches for Apollo , learning from his former roommate that Apollo did not actually write the book , and he was never a child soldier . However , Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) urges her not to expose him as a hoax , as his book as actually helping charities that aid child soldiers . 
 Apollo tells Veronica that he actually does want the paternity test . Dick ’ s father , who was involved in a corporate crime , appears and berates him for going on the surfing trip in the summer . Apollo takes the paternity test , but the father doesn ’ t appear . However , Apollo informs Veronica that he actually was a child soldier , enlisting his former roommate to tell her that he wasn ’ t so that he could ensure his father was genuinely loving . The only reason the father did not show up to the paternity test was that he was detained for having the wrong license plates . Apollo and the father meet at the Sheriff ’ s office , where they have an emotional reunion . Dick angrily confronts his father , but the next time he is seen , he calls off his trip with Logan . Logan tells Parker this news , and she is disappointed . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer " was written by Jonathan Moskin and David Mulei and directed by Nick Marck , marking Moskin 's third and final writing credit , Mulei 's second and final writing credit , and Marck 's tenth and final directing credit . The episode contains several references to the charity Invisible Children , Inc . , which aims to increase awareness for the use of child soldiers in the Lord 's Resistance Army in Uganda . The episode also ends with a public service announcement delivered by Jason Dohring , Kristen Bell and Ryan Hansen out @-@ of @-@ character . Bell is an active supporter of the organization , while Hansen is the brother @-@ in @-@ law of founder Jason Russell . 
 Series creator Rob Thomas was initially worried about including the reunion between Apollo and Kizza because he thought that such scenes did not play to his strengths as a storyteller . However , he was pleased with the result because of the two actors ' performances . The two performers had never met each other prior to this scene , and they were filming within four minutes of setup time . One quip by Vinnie ( Ken Marino ) about the office 's secretaries was a callback to a similar joke in " Of Vice and Men " . Thomas was inspired to focus an episode on a former Ugandan child soldier by two incidents . The first was when he was initially informed about the situation by a former student of his mother 's , while at Christmas the previous year , Hansen had given books about Ugandan child soldiers to all the writers . In the episode , Apollo is scheduled to appear on The Oprah Winfrey Show ; Oprah 's Book Club was discussing a book about a child soldier at the time , but this was a coincidence . In the episode , Piz states that he has been given an internship with Pitchfork Media at their headquarters in New York City ; however , the location is incorrect . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer " received 2 @.@ 10 million viewers , ranking 87th of 90 in the weekly rankings . This was an increase in roughly 250 @,@ 000 viewers from the previous episode , " Debasement Tapes " , which earned 1 @.@ 85 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics , many of whom praised the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week and the character development of Dick Casablancas . Eric Goldman of IGN graded the episode an 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . He lauded the episode 's handling of its political subject matter and the return of older storylines . He argued that " I Know What You 'll Do Next Summer " used its political message much better than " Un @-@ American Graffiti " , which aired two weeks prior ; he thought that this episode 's story made its political message more subtle than the previous episode . The reviewer also enjoyed the development of Dick 's character that occurred with the return of his father , stating that the scene in which Dick yelled at his father " an excellent moment that helped bring a lot of new shading to the funny , but usually one @-@ note character . " Keith 's storyline was another center of praise , with the reviewer stating that he thought the Fitzpatricks ' plot line had been too rushed earlier in the season . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly was generally positive as well , noting the romantic uncertainty between Veronica and Piz , Logan and Parker , and Mac and Max , drawing parallels between this aspect of the episode and the series ' uncertain future . In addition , the reviewer thought highly of Dick 's confrontation with his father and the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week . Television Without Pity graded the episode a " B + " . 
 In a review written during the success of the film campaign Kony 2012 on the internet , Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club thought that he found himself frequently comparing the episode 's treatment of child soldiers with the discussion of Invisible Children at the time . " This isn 't a bad thing . It 's a representation of how television , like any art form , can have multiple meanings , which evolve over time . " However , the reviewer knew that Apollo was not going to be a fraud given the cast members ' support of the organization . The reviewer also praised Hansen 's reaction to his father 's return . Kelly West of Cinema Blend wrote that " tonight 's episode of ' Veronica Mars ' was a cornucopia of emotions . " 
 = Live While We 're Young = 
 " Live While We 're Young " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction , released as the lead single from their second studio album , Take Me Home ( 2012 ) . Written by Savan Kotecha and its producers , Rami Yacoub and Carl Falk , the number was released by Syco Records on 28 September 2012 . Falk , Kotecha , and Yacoub had collaboratively helmed One Direction 's previous hits , " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " . The track is an uptempo , upbeat bubblegum pop song which features rock undertones , vocal harmonies , hand claps , prominent electric guitar riffs , and repetitive synthesizers . The chorus of the song is predominantly featured alongside the bridge , and is backed by wordless chants . Its opening guitar riff bears similarities with The Clash 's 1982 single , " Should I Stay or Should I Go " . 
 The track received mostly positive reviews from critics , who centred on its omnipresence and jubilant nature . The only negative feedback the song got was centered on the lyrics , which were interpreted as a thinly veiled euphemism for sexual intercourse . A commercial success , the song became a top ten hit in fifteen countries , while reaching the top of the charts in New Zealand and Ireland . In the United States , " Live While We 're Young " debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , marking the second @-@ highest bow among all UK acts , outpaced only by Elton John 's number one arrival with " Candle in the Wind 1997 " . 
 Following an unauthorized internet leak , the accompanying music video was officially released on 20 September 2012 , four days earlier than the intended release date . Directed by Vaughan Arnell , the clip , which has a camping festival theme , was generally well received by critics , who commended its carefree nature . Upon release , it broke the Vevo record for having the most views in a 24 @-@ hour period with 8 @.@ 24 million , besting the previous record which had been set by Justin Bieber 's " Boyfriend " ( 8 @.@ 00 million ) . Bieber subsequently regained the record with his music video for " Beauty and a Beat " ( 10 @.@ 6 million ) . One Direction performed " Live While We 're Young " on televised programs and during their two major concert tours : Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) and Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) . The track was featured in a Pepsi television commercial for the United States and was performed on an episode of Glee . This song is the first track on Now 45 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Live While We 're Young " was written by Rami Yacoub , Carl Falk , and Savan Kotecha , and was produced by Yacoub and Falk . The trio had collaboratively helmed One Direction 's previous hits , " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " . In early 2012 , the group confirmed a follow @-@ up release for their debut album , Up All Night ( 2011 ) , was in development . " In the summer , we ’ re going to get back and start a new record . We want to bring out a record nearly every year , every year and a half , " member Niall Horan said , revealing they were arranging " meetings and stuff with different writers and producers . " The band began recording the album in May 2012 , in Stockholm , Sweden , at Kinglet Studios — " Live While We 're Young " is a result of those recording sessions . In June 2012 , Horan spoke to MTV News , elaborating that the lead single would probably be released in September 2012 . 
 The band confirmed the single by uploading a video to YouTube on 23 August 2012 . Globally , the song was made available for pre @-@ order at 24 : 00 GMT on 24 August , through the iTunes Store , while excluding , Canada , Japan , and the United States . The artwork was revealed on 14 September . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News described it as portraying " the fivesome enjoying the outdoors during a camping trip , goofing off outside a tent . " On 28 September , Sony Music Entertainment released it digitally in Australia , New Zealand , and most of Europe . It impacted the United Kingdom on 30 September , while in the United States it was released on 1 October . Due to a processing error , the US iTunes Store was selling the track for 99 cents — instead of the general $ 1 @.@ 29 . Label sources indicated the initial price was a mistake , but could not be corrected until midday 1 October . By the afternoon , the price had changed from 99 cents to $ 1 @.@ 29 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Live While We 're Young " is an uptempo , upbeat bubblegum pop song which features rock undertones , vocal harmonies , hand claps , prominent electric guitar riffs , and repetitive synthesizers , reminiscent of the musical structures of their debut album . The opening guitar riff has been noted as similar to that of The Clash song " Should I Stay or Should I Go " ( 1982 ) . According to Alexis Petridis of The Guardian , the guitar is played thrice between the riff with the plectrum stroking the strings , while it is pressed . One note in the chord is changed , which Petridis surmised was probably to avoid paying any royalty to the Clash . Sam Lansky of Idolator noted that the song is musically similar to their breakthrough hit " What Makes You Beautiful " . In contrast to One Direction 's previous singles , the lead vocals are predominantly sung by Zayn Malik . 
 According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , One Direction 's vocal range in the song span from the note of D4 to A5 . Written in the key of D major , the song is set in common time with a fast @-@ paced tempo of 126 beats per minute . The song follows a basic sequence of D – G – D – G – D – A as its chord progression . The chorus of the song is predominantly featured alongside the bridge , is backed by wordless chants , and encompasses the lines : " Let ’ s go crazy , crazy , crazy till we see the sun / I know we only met but let ’ s pretend it ’ s love / And never , never , never stop for anyone / Tonight let ’ s get some , and live while we ’ re young . " Several critics commonly concurred that the song 's lyrics interpret a thinly veiled euphemism for sexual intercourse . Kotecha quipped in a September 2012 interview with <unk> : 
 " The whole idea is that you have that nostalgic night out , so people who are older can listen to it too . None of us are naive enough not to know what kids do . It ’ s important not to patronise the youth of today , we ’ re not gonna be writing about ‘ oh let ’ s just hold hands for a while ’ you know ? They need their music to connect . A lot of songs are about sex and you have to be realistic about it . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave " Live While We 're Young " four out of five stars and wrote , " it 's little different from what we 've heard before — but when you 're the world 's biggest boyband , it 's no bad thing . " Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times summarised it as a " characteristically peppy piece of high @-@ gloss party pop . " Lansky praised its effectiveness and thought it was " perfectly tailored to top the charts . " Andrew Unterberger of Popdust acknowledged that " the song is smart to swipe the guitar @-@ only opening pattern from The Clash 's " Should I Stay or Should I Go ? " — akin to " What Makes You Beautiful " lifting the " Summer Nights " beginning — calling on pop history to get you excited for the song before you even really realise why . " Unterberger further highlighted the small lyrical plays for conveying " an incredible amount of urgency and fun without much clunky <unk> [ sic ] , making singing along something of an inevitability . " A writer for The Huffington Post asserted that the song delivers for fans of their debut album : " a poppy , energetic , happy @-@ go @-@ lucky track . " 
 Sylvie <unk> of Evigshed Magazine gave it a rating of five out of five stars , called it " upbeat , fun and very fresh " , and proclaimed that " radios are going to love it . " Chris Younie of 4Music called it " insanely catchy " , lauding its production for combining a " simple " guitar riff with an " anthemic feel @-@ good chorus " . Alexandra Capotorto of PopCrush rated it four stars out of five , deeming it memorable and " irresistible " for any demographic . Vena opined that the " bit cheeky " song perfectly embodies a " joie de vivre message . " MSN Music 's Tina Hart concluded , " It 's fun , pure unadulterated pop and I like it . " Writing for The Vancouver Sun , Leah Collins quipped that even though the song lifts its main riff from a The Clash song , " this tune is as yummy and bubble @-@ gummy as anything " on One Direction 's debut studio album Up All Night ( 2011 ) . Newsday 's Glenn Gamboa acknowledged that the song is even more omnipresent than the band 's previous hits combined . 
 In a detailed review , HitFix 's Melina Newman denounced its lyrical content : " Even though they never are so blatant about it that booty call subtext can 't go right over their tween audience 's head , there 's no mistaking lines like “ if we get together , don ’ t let the pictures ever leave your phone ” for anyone who 's 13 or up . The lyrics are unwieldy and uncouth . That 's what happens when you 're not a boy , but not yet a man : One Direction can 't go straight from the G @-@ rated sweetness of “ What Makes You Beautiful ” to something akin to Enrique Iglesias 's " Tonight , I ’ m F * * * * * * You , " so instead they ’ re stuck with this in between clumsiness that the not @-@ so @-@ little girls will understand . " Grady Smith of Entertainment Weekly characterised it as " not @-@ so @-@ innocent " and a " party jam " . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard felt that its sexual suggestive lyricism " arrives too soon after the more accomplished puppy @-@ love odes of previous hits " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " to further the conversation . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Live While We 're Young " debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number one on 4 October 2012 , becoming One Direction 's fourth top ten appearance and their second chart @-@ topper in Ireland . In the United Kingdom , the single became One Direction 's fourth UK Singles Chart top ten hit in twelve months , entering at number three on 7 October 2012 . Elsewhere in Europe , the song became a top ten hit in Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) , Czech Republic , Denmark , Hungary , Italy , the Netherlands , Spain , and Switzerland . It was certified gold by both the Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) and IFPI Denmark , denoting collective shipments of 30 @,@ 000 . Additionally , it attained top forty positions in European territories such as Belgium ( Wallonia ) , France , Germany , Sweden , and Slovakia . The single debuted at number two on the Australian Singles Chart dated 14 October 2012 , with first @-@ week sales of 58 @,@ 659 copies . The single marks the group 's highest peaking song in Australia , passing up the number @-@ three peak of " One Thing " , and their third top ten hit . The track was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 140 @,@ 000 copies . The track made its New Zealand Singles Chart debut at number one on 8 October 2012 , marking the group 's first number @-@ one hit , and their second top five charting song in New Zealand . " Live While We 're Young " has received a platinum certification from Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) , indicating sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . After three days of digital availability , the song made its Canadian Hot 100 debut at number 78 on 4 October 2012 . It surged to its peak position of number two the following week , recording the highest number of digital downloads in the tracking week for a song in Canada . 
 In the United States , One Direction made US chart history by achieving the biggest opening one @-@ week sales figure for a song by a non @-@ US artist ever ; the track entered the Digital Songs chart at number one on 10 October 2012 , selling 341 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Additionally , it was the first time since January 2012 , when Adele 's " Set Fire to the Rain " was the top seller that a single by a British act had led that list and its weekly sales is also the highest by a British act since another Adele track " Rolling in the Deep " , sold 353 @,@ 000 units in a week in May 2011 . The single 's opening sales is also the third biggest debut ever for a download by a group , surpassed by the arrivals of Maroon 5 's 2012 single " Payphone " ( 493 @,@ 000 ) , and The Black Eyed Peas ' 2009 single " Boom Boom Pow " ( 465 @,@ 000 ) . " Live While We 're Young " debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , marking the highest bow by a British group and the second @-@ highest debut among all UK acts , outpaced only by Elton John 's number one arrival in 1997 with " Candle in the Wind 1997 " . In addition , that tracking week marked the first time two UK artists have simultaneously started in the Billboard Hot 100 top ten , as Adele 's " Skyfall " debuted at number eight . Billboard correspondent Keith Caufield noted its " huge sales " spurred its high entry on the Billboard Hot 100 , which blends sales , airplay and streaming data . " Live While We 're Young " also became the act 's highest peaking single , passing up the number @-@ four peak of " What Makes You Beautiful " . In the week ending 20 January 2013 , the song topped the one million mark in US sales . Likewise , the song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on 23 January 2013 , and it has sold 1 @,@ 248 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of November 2013 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Live While We 're Young " was directed by Vaughan Arnell . On 24 August 2012 , One Direction announced that an accompanying music video for " Live While We 're Young " was filmed at a " secret place . " Afterwards it was confirmed that this place was Tunbridge Wells , Kent , England . In August 2012 , images of the shoot leaked on to the internet , which featured members of One Direction along with a group of people having a party in a pool . According to a MTV News article published on 14 September 2012 , the video would feature a " summer music festival vibe " with the group " getting wet and wild , acting silly with props and getting soaked by water guns . " The official video was initially due to premier on 24 September 2012 . However , a poor quality version of the music video leaked online on 20 September 2012 : the same day it was officially published on One Direction 's Vevo channel on YouTube . In regard , the group released a statement : " We wanted our fans to see the video and hear the single in the proper way so we 've moved the premiere to tonight . We 're really excited about <unk> , we 've worked really hard on it and we can 't wait for everyone to see and hear it later today ! " 
 The video begins with One Direction waking up in a tent . Outside , Payne starts singing the opening lines , as others are seen playing guitars sitting on hay bales in a camp setting . Subsequent scenes inter cut featuring One Direction performing the song at the camp setting in a circle , on an open field , driving a car , and at a lake where members of the group play in plastic bubbles and boats . As it turns to nighttime , the camp is the main setting ; they conduct a football match and afterwards a pool party . The video ends with One Direction looking at the camera , with Malik singing the last line . Throughout the video , teenage boys and girls are showing with the band . 
 Upon release , the video broke the Vevo record for having the most views in a 24 @-@ hour period with 8 @.@ 24 million views , besting the previous record which had been set by Justin Bieber 's " Boyfriend " ( 8 @.@ 00 million ) . Bieber regained the record with the release of the music video for " Beauty and a Beat " ( 10 @.@ 6 million ) on 12 October 2012 . It received positive reviews from music critics , who generally complimented its carefree , jubilant nature . Smith quipped that it has " notable moments , " which he cited , " <unk> campfire dances , inflatable pool splashing , four wheeler racing , and an unfortunate blonde streak in Zayn [ Malik ] ' s hair . " The Hollywood Reporter writer Sophie A. Schillaci called it " fun @-@ filled " , and concluded that the video perfectly accompanies the track 's lyricism . Lansky called the " high quality " clip " fairly standard 1D fare " , elaborating : " the boys get up to some teenage shenanigans and , well , live while they ’ re young . When their festivities culminate in a pool party that reads more like a wet t @-@ shirt contest than anything else , it 's abundantly clear that 1D knows their audience . " The Huffington Post characterised it as an " epic summer adventure " , assessing : " from a camping trip to the ultimate beach party , complete with a shirtless Niall [ Horan ] and inflatable banana . " Collins described it as featuring the group " doing what they do best — scampering , singing , scampering some more . " ITN 's Lindsay Brown viewed the video as " wholesome " , showing them " having some good old fashioned fun . " Fuse editor Nicole James praised the apparent recurring trend of " how the group isn 't afraid to make fun of themselves . " James elaborated : " If it were any other boy band acting out the Monkees @-@ inspired hijinks in 1D 's new video " Live While We 're Young , " it would likely come off as super cheesy . But for these five guys , their sense of comfortable self @-@ awareness really comes through . " As of May 2016 , the video has over 460 million <unk> music video also looks like similar to Big Time Rush 's song " Windows Down " music video 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 One Direction performed the track along with songs of their debut album at the 2012 BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards ( 7 October ) . The group performed " Live While We 're Young " on The X Factor Italy ( 1 November ) and on the The X Factor Sweden ( 2 November ) . They also performed " Live While We 're Young " and " Little Things " on The X Factor USA ( 8 November ) . The band performed the track alongside " What Makes You Beautiful " , " Little Things " , and " Kiss You " on The Today Show at the Rockefeller Center ( 13 November ) , to a record crowd of 15 @,@ 000 . The group performed " Live While We 're Young " and " Little Things " on the BBC 's Children in Need 2012 telethon ( 16 November ) . One Direction also performed the track at Germany 's Bambi Awards ( 22 November ) . " Live While We 're Young " was included in the set list of the group 's headlining sold @-@ out show at Madison Square Garden ( 3 December ) . It also was incorporated on the set list of the group 's worldwide Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) , utilised as the show 's twentieth song . 
 " Live While We 're Young " was featured in a Pepsi television commercial for the United States that featured both One Direction and the American football player Drew Brees . It premiered on Fox in the United States on 10 October 2012 . Vena called the clip comedic and assessed : " The brand @-@ new commercial not only allows the group to show off their funny bones , but it also serves as a reminder that their new album Take Me Home , featuring " <unk> , " is only a month away from dropping . " It was one of the songs covered by the cast of Glee during the 29 November 2012 episode " Thanksgiving " . The fictional character Sebastian Smythe , portrayed by Grant Gustin , sang lead vocals while the fictional Dalton Academy Warblers sang back @-@ up . The version was released on the studio album , Glee : The Music , Season 4 , Volume 1 . The track was also used for the opening scene of the Miss Universe 2012 pageant . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download – EP 
 " Live While We 're Young " – 3 : 18 
 " Live While We 're Young " ( Dave Audé remix ) – 5 : 40 
 " Live While We 're Young " ( The Jump Smokers remix ) – 4 : 25 
 " I Want " ( Live ) – 3 : 06 
 " Moments " ( Live ) ( Pre @-@ order only ) – 4 : 44 
 UK and US CD single 
 " Live While We 're Young " – 3 : 18 
 " I Want " ( Live ) – 3 : 06 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Carl Falk – writing , production , programming , instruments , guitar , background vocals 
 Kristoffer <unk> – background vocals 
 Niall Horan – additional guitar 
 Savan Kotecha – writing , background vocals 
 Rami Yacoub – writing , production , programming , instruments , bass 
 Marcus Thompson - Flute 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Take Me Home . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = See Also = = 
 One Thing 
 Best Song Ever 
 Steal My Girl 
 What Makes You Beautiful 
 Drag Me Down 
 = New York State Route 373 = 
 New York State Route 373 ( NY 373 ) is a short state highway in Essex County , New York , within Adirondack State Park . It begins at U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) and proceeds eastward , ending at a ferry landing on Lake Champlain . It intersects two county routes , several local roads , and a reference route — NY <unk> — which connects it with US 9 . NY 373 is the only connector between US 9 and the hamlet of Port Kent and the ferry that serves it . 
 The hamlet of Port Kent and the connecting road were originally built in 1823 . The village was planned to act as a source of labor for iron manufacturing and to provide for the industrial needs of Essex County . The hamlet grew and eventually became connected to Burlington , Vermont , via an hour @-@ long ferry across Lake Champlain . The road that accessed Port Kent originally began in Keeseville , but became part of the longer Port Kent and Hopkinton Turnpike in the 1830s . The highway that is now NY 373 was also designated as part of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway in 1919 . 
 When NY 373 was assigned in 1930 , a small portion of it was maintained by the town of Chesterfield . This section was turned over to the State of New York during a maintenance swap with Essex County in 1985 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 373 , located entirely within Adirondack State Park , begins at US 9 at the Ausable Chasm , a deep , wooded canyon in the town of Chesterfield . The route intersects with NY <unk> , its southern connector to US 9 , about 0 @.@ 1 miles ( 160 m ) in . NY 373 continues farther along and intersects with County Route 71 ( CR 71 ) before heading east @-@ southeast just north of the Ausable River . The highway then intersects CR 17 and several local roads , and then turns east @-@ northeast . 
 The route then passes south of a golf course and enters Port Kent , where it intersects with more local streets , most of which serve homes and businesses . The highway turns northward soon afterward , crosses a pair of train tracks maintained by Canadian Pacific Railway and the Port Kent Amtrak station , makes a U @-@ turn and comes to an end at the Burlington – Port Kent Ferry landing . 
 The Burlington – Port Kent Ferry connects NY 373 and the hamlet of Port Kent to the city of Burlington , Vermont . This , one of three ferries to cross Lake Champlain , is the longest as it crosses the widest part of the lake . It is maintained by the Lake Champlain Transportation Company , and is open all seasons except winter . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Port Kent and the early highway to Keeseville = = = 
 In 1823 , a company was funded to establish a settlement and fishing wharf opposite the city of Burlington , Vermont on Lake Champlain in order to assist in the growth of iron factories and to supply dormant energy to the Essex County area . The newly founded company chose the name " Port Kent " and located the new hamlet on a site north of <unk> Point . The original alignment of what is now NY 373 began as a wide road that was built to access Port Kent from the nearby village of Keeseville . 
 NY 373 exists entirely within the boundaries of Adirondack Park , a protected area maintained by the State of New York . Adirondack Park was created in the 1880s after concerns arose about logging trees in the area . The logging was a substantial part of New York 's economy , but protests were lodged by The New York Times and others against the clearing of entire mountains and wilderness areas of trees . Public opinion turned firmly against the loggers by the 1880s , and the park was created in 1885 . It was the first State Forest Preserve in America . The park was further protected in 1894 when a clause was added to the New York State constitution which banned the selling of timber from state parks . 
 = = = Old roads and designation = = = 
 On April 16 , 1827 , a team of three surveyors were commissioned to determine a routing for a new highway leading from Hopkinton , a town in northeastern St. Lawrence County , to Lake Champlain . The task took 26 days , after which it was determined that the highway would meet Lake Champlain at Fort Kent . An act authorizing the construction of the highway was passed by the New York State Legislature on April 18 , 1829 . A total of approximately $ 38 @,@ 500 ( equivalent to $ 855 @,@ 542 in 2016 ) was devoted to the project by the state of New York through the same act . 
 The 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) highway opened in 1833 as a toll road named the Port Kent and Hopkinton Turnpike . The turnpike had only one toll gate , located near the center of the route . Two years later , the turnpike commissioners petitioned to the state of New York , asking for permission to replace the single gate with two gates at opposite ends of the turnpike that would collect half of the toll amount . The commissioners believed that the change in the toll gate locations would result in higher revenue , allowing them to continue maintaining the highway . The change was approved ; however , the toll road was dissolved anyway three years later on March 30 , 1838 . At that time , maintenance of the Port Kent – Hopkinton highway was transferred to the towns it ran through . 
 The Theodore Roosevelt International Highway , a transcontinental auto trail extending from Portland , Oregon , to Portland , Maine , was established in 1919 . In eastern New York , the highway went through Keeseville , Ausable Chasm , and Fort Kent along what used to be the Port Kent and Hopkinton Turnpike before entering Vermont by way of the Burlington – Port Kent Ferry across Lake Champlain . 
 The state of New York assumed maintenance of most of the Ausable Chasm – Port Kent roadway at some point after 1920 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the entirety of the highway from Ausable Chasm to the Port Kent ferry landing was designated as NY 373 , despite the fact that the small portion of the route east of Lake Street in Port Kent was not maintained by the state at the time . On April 1 , 1985 , ownership and maintenance of NY 373 east of Lake Street was transferred from the town of Chesterfield to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Essex County . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Chesterfield , Essex County . 
 = New York City draft riots = 
 The New York City draft riots ( July 13 – 16 , 1863 ) , known at the time as Draft Week , were violent disturbances in New York City that were the culmination of working @-@ class discontent with new laws passed by Congress that year to draft men to fight in the ongoing American Civil War . The riots remain the largest civil and racial insurrection in American history , aside from the Civil War itself . 
 U.S. President Abraham Lincoln diverted several regiments of militia and volunteer troops from following up after the Battle of Gettysburg to control the city . The rioters were overwhelmingly working @-@ class men , primarily ethnic Irish , resenting particularly that wealthier men , who could afford to pay a $ 300 ( equivalent to $ 5 @,@ 766 in 2015 ) commutation fee to hire a substitute , were spared from the draft . 
 Initially intended to express anger at the draft , the protests turned into a race riot , with white rioters , mainly but not exclusively Irish immigrants , attacking blacks wherever they could find them . The official death toll was listed at 119 . The conditions in the city were such that Major General John E. Wool , commander of the Department of the East , said on July 16 that " Martial law ought to be proclaimed , but I have not a sufficient force to enforce it . " 
 The military did not reach the city until after the first day of rioting , when mobs had already ransacked or destroyed numerous public buildings , two Protestant churches , the homes of various abolitionists or sympathizers , many black homes , and the Colored Orphan Asylum at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue , which was burned to the ground . 
 The demographics of the city changed as a result of the riot . So many blacks left Manhattan permanently ( many moving to Brooklyn ) , that by 1865 their population fell below 10 @,@ 000 , the number in 1820 . 
 = = Background = = 
 New York 's economy was tied to the South ; by 1822 nearly half of its exports were cotton shipments . In addition , upstate textile mills processed cotton in manufacturing . New York had such strong business connections to the South that on January 7 , 1861 , Mayor Fernando Wood , a Democrat , called on the city 's Board of Aldermen to " declare the city 's independence from Albany and from Washington " ; he said it " would have the whole and united support of the Southern States . " When the Union entered the war , New York City had many sympathizers with the South . 
 The city was also a continuing destination of immigrants . Since the 1840s , most were from Ireland and Germany . In 1860 , nearly 25 percent of the New York City population was German @-@ born , and many did not yet speak English . During the 1840s and 1850s , journalists had published sensational accounts , directed at the working class , dramatizing the " evils " of interracial socializing , relationships , and marriages . Reformers joined the effort . Newspapers carried derogatory portrayals of blacks and ridiculed " black aspirations for equal rights in voting , education , and employment . " Pseudo @-@ scientific lectures on phrenology were popular , although countered by doctors . At the time , some areas of the city , such as Lower Manhattan , had mixed populations of residents . 
 The Democratic Party Tammany Hall political machine had been working to enroll immigrants as U.S. citizens so they could vote in local elections , and had strongly recruited Irish , most of whom already spoke English . In March 1863 , with the war continuing , Congress passed the Enrollment Act to establish a draft for the first time , as more troops were needed . In New York City and other locations , new citizens learned they were expected to register for the draft to fight for their new country . Black men were excluded from the draft as they were largely not considered citizens , and wealthier white men could pay for substitutes . Free blacks and immigrants competed for low @-@ wage jobs in the city . 
 New York political offices , including the mayor , were held by Democrats , but the election of Abraham Lincoln as president had demonstrated the rise in Republican political power nationally . The Emancipation Proclamation of January 1863 alarmed much of the working class in New York , who feared that freed slaves would migrate to the city and add further competition to the labor market . There had already been tensions between black and white workers since the 1850s , particularly at the docks . In March 1863 , white longshoremen had refused to work with blacks and rioted , attacking 200 black men . In this area of the city , there were a variety of interracial venues of brothels and bars , and neighborhoods were mixed in terms of residents . Men competed as hacks ( carriage drivers ) , craftsmen , and in other jobs . 
 = = Riots = = 
 = = = Monday = = = 
 There were reports of rioting in Buffalo , New York , and certain other cities , but the first drawing of draft numbers — on July 11 , 1863 — occurred peaceably in New York City . The second drawing was held on Monday , July 13 , 1863 , ten days after the Union victory at Gettysburg in southern Pennsylvania . At 10 a.m. , a furious crowd of around 500 , led by the volunteer firemen of Engine Company 33 ( known as the " Black Joke " ) , attacked the assistant Ninth District provost marshal 's office , at Third Avenue and 47th Street , where the draft was taking place . The crowd threw large paving stones through windows , burst through the doors , and set the building ablaze . When the fire department responded , rioters broke up their vehicles . Others killed horses that were pulling streetcars and smashed the cars . To prevent other parts of the city being notified of the riot , they cut telegraph lines . Many of the rioters were Irish laborers who feared having to compete with emancipated slaves for jobs . 
 Since the New York State Militia had been sent to assist Union troops in Pennsylvania , the New York City Police Department was the only force to try to suppress the riots . The police superintendent , John A. Kennedy , arrived at the site on Monday to check on the situation . Although not in uniform , people in the mob recognized him and attacked him . Kennedy was left nearly unconscious , his face bruised and cut , his eye injured , his lips swollen , and his hand cut with a knife . He had been beaten to a mass of bruises and blood all over his body . 
 Police drew their clubs and revolvers , and charged the crowd , but were overpowered . The police forces were badly outnumbered and unable to quell the riots , but they kept the rioting out of Lower Manhattan below Union Square . Immigrants and others in the " Bloody Sixth " Ward , around the seaport and Five Points area , refrained from involvement in the rioting . 
 The Bull 's Head hotel on 44th Street , which refused to provide alcohol to the mob , was burned . The mayor 's residence on Fifth Avenue , the Eighth and Fifth District police stations , and other buildings were attacked and set on fire . Other targets included the office of the New York Times . The mob was turned back at the Times office by staff manning Gatling guns , including Times founder Henry Jarvis Raymond . Fire engine companies responded , but some firefighters were sympathetic to the rioters , as they had also been drafted on Saturday . Later in the afternoon , authorities shot and killed a man as a crowd attacked the Armory at Second Avenue and 21st Street . The mob broke all the windows with paving stones ripped from the street . 
 Rioters turned against black people as their scapegoats and the primary target of their anger . Many immigrants and other poor people viewed free black men as competition for scarce jobs , and worried about more slaves being emancipated and coming to New York for work . The mob beat , tortured or killed numerous black people , including one man who was attacked by a crowd of 400 with clubs and paving stones , then lynched , hanged from a tree and set alight . 
 The Colored Orphan Asylum at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue , a " symbol of white charity to blacks and of black upward mobility " that then provided shelter for 233 children , was attacked by a mob at around 4 p.m. A mob of several thousand , including many women and children , looted the building of its food and supplies . However , the police were able to secure the orphanage for enough time to allow the orphans to escape before the building burned down . Throughout the areas of rioting , mobs attacked and killed at least 120 black people , and destroyed their known homes and businesses , such as James McCune Smith 's pharmacy at 93 West Broadway , believed to be the first owned by a black man in the United States . 
 Near the midtown docks , tensions brewing since the mid @-@ 1850s boiled over . As recently as March 1863 , white employers had hired blacks , with whom Irish men refused to work , as longshoremen . An Irish mob attacked two hundred blacks who were working on the docks , while other rioters went into the streets in search of " all the negro porters , <unk> and laborers ... " to attempt to remove all evidence of a black and interracial social life from the area near the docks . White dockworkers attacked and destroyed brothels , dance halls , boarding houses , and tenements that catered to blacks . Mobs stripped the clothing off the white owners of these businesses . 
 = = = Tuesday = = = 
 Heavy rain fell on Monday night , helping to abate the fires and sending rioters home , but the crowd returned the next day . Rioters burned down the home of Abby Gibbons , a prison reformer and the daughter of abolitionist Isaac Hopper . They also attacked white " <unk> " , such as Ann Derrickson and Ann Martin , two white women who were married to black men , and Mary Burke , a white prostitute who catered to black men . The women escaped personal physical harm . 
 Governor Horatio Seymour arrived on Tuesday and spoke at City Hall , where he attempted to assuage the crowd by proclaiming that the Conscription Act was unconstitutional . Gen. John E. Wool , commander of the Eastern District , brought approximately 800 soldiers and Marines in from forts in New York Harbor , West Point , and the Brooklyn Navy Yard . He also ordered the militias to return to New York . 
 = = = Wednesday and Thursday : order restored = = = 
 The situation improved on Wednesday , when assistant provost @-@ marshal @-@ general Robert Nugent received word from his superior officer , Colonel James Barnet Fry , to postpone the draft . As this news appeared in newspapers , some rioters stayed home . But some of the militias began to return and used harsh measures against the remaining mobs . 
 Order began to be restored on Thursday . The New York State Militia and some federal troops were returned to New York , including the 152nd New York Volunteers , the 26th Michigan Volunteers , the 27th Indiana Volunteers and the 7th Regiment New York State Militia from Frederick , Maryland , after a forced march . In addition , the governor sent in the 74th and 65th regiments of the New York State Militia , which had not been in federal service , and a section of the 20th Independent Battery , New York Volunteer Artillery from Fort Schuyler in Throgs Neck . The NYSM units were the first to arrive . By July 16 , there were several thousand Federal troops in the city . 
 A final confrontation occurred on Thursday evening near Gramercy Park . According to Adrian Cook 's analysis in Armies of the Streets ( 1974 ) , twelve people died on the last day of the riots in skirmishes between rioters , the police , and the Army , including one African American , two soldiers , a bystander , and two women . 
 The New York Times reported on Thursday that Plug <unk> and Blood Tubs gang members from Baltimore , as well as " <unk> Rangers [ sic ] and other rowdies of Philadelphia , " had come to New York during the unrest to participate in the riots alongside the Dead Rabbits and " <unk> " . The Times editorialized that " the scoundrels cannot afford to miss this golden opportunity of indulging their brutal natures , and at the same time serving their colleagues the Copperheads and <unk> [ secessionist ] sympathizers . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The exact death toll during the New York Draft Riots is unknown , but according to historian James M. McPherson ( 2001 ) , at least 120 people were killed . In all , eleven black men were lynched over five days . The riots forced hundreds of blacks to flee the city . Violence by longshoremen against black men was especially fierce in the docks area . 
 The most reliable estimates indicate at least 2 @,@ 000 people were injured . Herbert Asbury , the author of the 1928 book Gangs of New York , upon which the 2002 film was based , puts the figure much higher , at 2 @,@ 000 killed and 8 @,@ 000 wounded , but this figure is not widely accepted . Total property damage was about $ 1 – 5 million ( $ 19 @.@ 2 million – $ 96 @.@ 1 million , adjusted for inflation ) . The city treasury later indemnified one @-@ quarter of the amount . 
 The historian Samuel Eliot Morison wrote that the riots were " equivalent to a Confederate victory " . Fifty buildings , including two Protestant churches and the Colored Orphan Asylum , were burned to the ground . During the riots , landlords , fearing that the mob would destroy their buildings , had driven blacks from their residences . As a result of the violence against blacks , hundreds left New York , including James McCune Smith , moving to Williamsburg , Brooklyn ( still a separate city until 1898 ) and New Jersey . 
 The white elite in New York organized to provide relief to black riot victims , helping them find new work and homes . The Union League Club and the Committee of Merchants for the Relief of Colored People provided nearly $ 40 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 victims of the riots . By 1865 the black population had dropped to under 10 @,@ 000 , the lowest since 1820 . The white working @-@ class riots had changed the demographics of the city , and whites exerted their control in the workplace ; they became " unequivocally divided " from blacks . 
 On August 19 , the government resumed the draft in New York . It was completed within 10 days without further incident . Fewer men were drafted than had been feared by the working class : of the 750 @,@ 000 selected nationwide for conscription , only about 45 @,@ 000 went into service . 
 While the rioting mainly involved the working class , middle and upper @-@ class New Yorkers had split sentiments on the draft and use of federal power or martial law to enforce it . Many wealthy Democratic businessmen sought to have the draft declared unconstitutional . Tammany Democrats did not seek to have the draft declared unconstitutional , but helped pay the commutation fees for those who were drafted . In December 1863 , the Union League Club recruited over 2000 black soldiers , outfitted and trained them , honoring and sending men off with a parade through the city to the Hudson River docks in March 1864 . A crowd of 100 @,@ 000 watched the procession , which was led by police and members of the Union League Club . 
 New York City 's support for the Union cause continued , however grudgingly , and gradually Southern sympathies declined in the city . New York banks eventually financed the Civil War , and the state 's industries were more productive than those of the entire Confederacy . By the end of the war , more than 450 @,@ 000 soldiers , sailors , and militia had enlisted from New York State , which was the most populous state at the time . A total of 46 @,@ 000 military men from New York State died during the war , more from disease than wounds . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = = New York City Police Department = = = 
 New York Metropolitan Police Department under the command of Superintendent John A. <unk> Thomas Coxon Acton and John G. Bergen took command when Kennedy was seriously injured by a mob during the early stages of the riots . 
 = = = New York State Militia = = = 
 1st Division : Major General Charles W. Sandford 
 = = = Union Army = = = 
 Department of the East : Major General John E. Wool headquartered in New York 
 Defenses of New York City : Brevet Brigadier General Harvey Brown , Brown was in overall command of the military fortresses in New York city at the time and volunteered his services to General Wool . Wool instructed Brown to serve under the command of militia General Sandford to which Brown initially refused but eventually offered to serve in whatever capacity needed . Brig. General Edward R. S. Canby 
 Artillery : Captain Henry F. Putnam , 12th United States Infantry Regiment . 
 Provost marshals tasked with overseeing the initial enforcement of the draft : 
 Provost Marshal General U.S.A. : Colonel James Fry 
 Provost Marshal General New York City : Colonel Robert Nugent ( During the first day of rioting on July 13 , 1863 , in command of the Invalid Corps : 1st Battalion ) 
 Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton authorized five regiments from Gettysburg , mostly federalized state militia and volunteer units from the Army of the Potomac , to reinforce the New York City Police Department . By the end of the riots , there were more than 4 @,@ 000 soldiers garrisoned in New York City . 
 = = Fiction = = 
 The Banished Children of Eve , A Novel of Civil War New York ( 1995 ) by Peter Quinn 
 On Secret Service ( 2000 ) by John Jakes 
 Paradise Alley ( 2003 ) by Kevin Baker 
 New York : the Novel ( 2009 ) by Edward Rutherfurd 
 Newt Gingrich 's alternate history novel Grant Comes East ( 2004 ) 
 Theatre and film : 
 The short @-@ lived 1968 Broadway musical Maggie Flynn , starring Shirley Jones , was set in the Tobin Orphanage for black children ( modeled on the Colored Orphan Asylum ) . 
 Gangs of New York ( 2002 ) , a film directed by Martin Scorsese , includes a fictionalized portrayal of the New York Draft Riots . 
 = Mary Seacole = 
 Mary Jane Seacole ( née Grant ; 1805 – 14 May 1881 ) was a Jamaican woman of Scottish and African descent who set up a " British Hotel " behind the lines during the Crimean War . She described this as " a mess @-@ table and comfortable quarters for sick and convalescent officers " , and provided succour for wounded servicemen on the battlefield . She was posthumously awarded the Jamaican Order of Merit in 1991 . In 2004 she was voted the greatest black Briton . 
 She acquired knowledge of herbal medicine in the Caribbean . When the Crimean War broke out , she applied to the War Office to assist but was refused . She travelled independently and set up her hotel and assisted battlefield wounded . She became extremely popular among service personnel who raised money for her when she faced destitution after the war . 
 After her death , she was forgotten for almost a century , but today is celebrated as a woman who successfully combatted racial prejudice . Her biography , Wonderful Adventures of Mrs. Seacole in Many Lands ( 1857 ) , is one of the earliest autobiographies of a mixed @-@ race woman , although some aspects of its accuracy have been questioned . It has been claimed that Seacole 's achievements have been exaggerated for political reasons . The erection of a statue of her at St Thomas ' Hospital , London on 30 June 2016 , describing her as a " pioneer nurse " , has generated controversy . Further controversy broke out in the United Kingdom late in 2012 over reports of a proposal to remove her from the country 's National Curriculum . 
 = = Early life , 1805 – 25 = = 
 Mary Seacole was born Mary Jane Grant in Kingston , Jamaica , the daughter of James Grant a Scottish soldier in the British Army , a Lieutenant , and a free Jamaican woman . Her mother was a " <unk> " , a healer who used traditional Caribbean and African herbal remedies . She ran Blundell Hall , a boarding house at 7 East Street , considered one of the best hotels in all Kingston . Here Seacole acquired her nursing skills . Seacole 's autobiography states that her early experiments in medicine were based on what she learned from her mother while ministering to a doll , then progressing to pets , before helping her mother treat humans . 
 Seacole was proud of her Scottish ancestry and called herself a Creole , a term that was commonly used in a racially neutral sense or to refer to the children of white settlers with indigenous women . In her autobiography , The Wonderful Adventures of Mrs. Seacole , she records her bloodline thus : " I am a Creole , and have good Scots blood coursing through my veins . My father was a soldier of an old Scottish family . " Legally , she was classified as a mulatto , a multiracial person with limited political rights ; Robinson speculates that she may technically have been a <unk> . Seacole emphasises her personal vigour in her autobiography , distancing herself from the contemporary stereotype of the " lazy Creole " , She was proud of her black ancestry , writing , " I have a few shades of deeper brown upon my skin which shows me related - and I am proud of the relationship - to those poor mortals whom you once held enslaved , and whose bodies America still owns . " 
 The West Indies were an outpost of the British Empire in the late 18th century , and in the 1790s one @-@ third of Britain 's foreign trade was with the British West Indies . Britain 's economic interests were protected by a massive military presence , with 69 line infantry regiments serving there between 1793 and 1801 , and another 24 between 1803 and 1815 . 
 Seacole spent some years in the household of an elderly woman , whom she called her " kind patroness " , before returning to her mother . She was treated as a member of her patroness 's family and received a good education . As the educated daughter of a Scottish officer and a free black woman with a respectable business , Seacole would have held a high position in Jamaican society . 
 In about 1821 , Seacole visited London , stayed for a year , and visited relatives , the merchant Henriques family . Although London had a number of black people , she records that a companion , a West Indian with skin darker than her own " dusky " shades , was taunted by children . Seacole herself was " only a little brown " , nearly white according to <unk> . She returned to London approximately a year later , bringing a " large stock of West Indian pickles and preserves for sale " . Her later travels would be as an " unprotected " woman , without a chaperone or sponsor — an unusual practice . Seacole returned to Jamaica in 1825 . 
 = = In the Caribbean , 1826 – 51 = = 
 After returning to Jamaica , Seacole nursed her " old indulgent patroness " through an illness , finally returning to the family home at Blundell Hall after the death of her patroness a few years later . Seacole then worked alongside her mother , occasionally being called to assist at the British Army hospital at Up @-@ Park Camp . <unk> Caribbean , visiting the British colony of New Providence in The Bahamas , the Spanish colony of Cuba , and the new republic of Haiti . Seacole records these travels , but omits mention of significant current events , such as the Christmas Rebellion in Jamaica of 1831 , the partial abolition of slavery in 1834 , and the full abolition of slavery in 1838 . 
 She married Edwin Horatio Hamilton Seacole in Kingston on 10 November 1836 . Her marriage , from betrothal to widowhood , is described in just nine lines at the conclusion of the first chapter of her autobiography . His middle names are intriguing : Robinson reports the legend in the Seacole family that Edwin was an illegitimate son of Horatio Nelson , 1st Viscount Nelson and his mistress Emma , Lady Hamilton , who was adopted by Thomas , a local " surgeon , apothecary and man midwife " ( Seacole 's will indicates that Horatio Seacole was Nelson 's godson : she left a diamond ring to her friend , Lord Rokeby , " given to my late husband by his godfather Viscount Nelson " , but there was no mention of this godson in Nelson 's own will or its codicils . ) Edwin was a merchant and seems to have had a poor constitution . The newly married couple moved to Black River and opened a provisions store which failed to prosper . They returned to Blundell Hall in the early 1840s . 
 During 1843 and 1844 , Seacole suffered a series of personal disasters . She and her family lost much of the boarding house in a fire in Kingston on 29 August 1843 . Blundell Hall burned down , and was replaced by New Blundell Hall , which was described as " better than before " . Then her husband died in October 1844 , followed by her mother . After a period of grief , in which Seacole says she did not stir for days , she composed herself , " turned a bold front to fortune " , and assumed the management of her mother 's hotel . She put her rapid recovery down to her hot Creole blood , blunting the " sharp edge of [ her ] grief " sooner than Europeans who she thought " nurse their woe secretly in their hearts " . She absorbed herself in work , declining many offers of marriage . She later became widely known and respected , particularly among the European military visitors to Jamaica who often stayed at Blundell Hall . She treated patients in the cholera epidemic of 1850 , which killed some 32 @,@ 000 Jamaicans . Seacole attributed the outbreak to infection brought on a steamer from New Orleans , Louisiana , demonstrating knowledge of contagion theory . This first @-@ hand experience would benefit her during the next five years . 
 = = In Central America , 1851 – 54 = = 
 In 1850 , Seacole 's half @-@ brother Edward moved to Cruces , Panama , which was then part of New Granada . There , approximately 45 miles ( 72 km ) up the Chagres River from the coast , he followed the family trade by establishing the Independent Hotel to accommodate the many travellers between the eastern and western coasts of the United States ( the number of travellers had increased enormously , as part of the 1849 California Gold Rush ) . Cruces was the limit of navigability of the Chagres River during the rainy season , which lasts from June to December . Travellers would ride on donkeys approximately 20 miles ( 32 km ) along the Las Cruces trail from Panama City on the Pacific Ocean coast to Cruces , and then 45 miles ( 72 km ) down @-@ river to the Atlantic Ocean at Chagres ( or vice versa ) . In the dry season , the river subsided , and travellers would switch from land to the river a few miles farther downstream , at Gorgona Most of these settlements have now been submerged by Gatun Lake , formed as part of the Panama Canal . 
 In 1851 , Seacole travelled to Cruces to visit her brother . Shortly after her arrival , the town was struck by cholera , a disease which had reached Panama in 1849 . Seacole was on hand to treat the first victim , who survived , which established Seacole 's reputation and brought her a succession of patients as the infection spread . The rich paid , but she treated the poor for free . Many , both rich and poor , succumbed . She eschewed opium , preferring mustard rubs and poultices , the laxative calomel ( mercuric chloride ) , sugars of lead ( lead ( II ) acetate ) , and rehydration with water boiled with cinnamon . While her preparations had moderate success , she faced little competition , the only other treatments coming from a " timid little dentist " , who was an inexperienced doctor sent by the Panamanian government , and the Roman Catholic Church . 
 The epidemic raged through the population . Seacole later expressed exasperation at their feeble resistance , claiming they " bowed down before the plague in slavish despair " . She performed an autopsy on an orphan child for whom she had cared , which gave her " decidedly useful " new knowledge . Towards the end of the epidemic , Seacole herself sickened but survived . Cholera was to return again : Ulysses S. Grant passed through Cruces in July , 1852 , on military duty ; a hundred and twenty men , a third of his party , died of the disease there or shortly afterwards en route to Panama City . 
 Despite the problems of disease and climate , Panama remained the favoured route between the coasts of the United States . Seeing a business opportunity , Seacole opened the British Hotel , which was a restaurant rather than an hotel . She described it as a " tumble down hut , " with two rooms , the smaller one to be her bedroom , the larger one to serve up to 50 diners . She soon added the services of a barber . 
 As the wet season ended in early 1852 , Seacole joined other traders in Cruces in packing up to move to Gorgona . She records a white American giving a speech at a leaving dinner in which he wished that " God bless the best <unk> woman he ever made " and asked the listeners to join with him in rejoicing that " she 's so many shades removed from being entirely black " . He went on to say that " if we could bleach her by any means we would [ ... ] and thus make her acceptable in any company [ , ] as she deserves to be " . Seacole replied firmly that she did not " appreciate your friend 's kind wishes with respect to my complexion . If it had been as dark as any nigger 's , I should have been just as happy and just as useful , and as much respected by those whose respect I value . " She declined the offer of " bleaching " and drank " to you and the general reformation of American manners " . Salih notes the use of American pidgin , against Seacole 's clear English , as representational of a supposed white moral and intellectual superiority . Seacole also comments on the positions of responsibility taken on by escaped American slaves in Panama , as well as in the priesthood , the army , and public offices , commenting that " it is wonderful to see how freedom and equality elevate men " . She also records an antipathy between Panamanians and Americans , which she attributes in part to the fact that so many of the former had once been slaves of the latter . 
 In Gorgona , Seacole briefly ran a woman @-@ only hotel . In late 1852 , she travelled home to Jamaica . The journey was delayed and difficult when she encountered racial discrimination while trying to book passage on an American ship . She was forced to wait for a later British boat . In 1853 , soon after arriving home , Seacole was asked by the Jamaican medical authorities to minister to victims of a severe outbreak of yellow fever . She found that she could do little , because the epidemic was so severe . Her memoirs state that her own boarding house was full of sufferers and she saw many of them die . Although she wrote , " I was sent for by the medical authorities to provide nurses for the sick at Up @-@ Park Camp , " she did not claim to bring nurses with her when she went . She left her sister with some nurses at her house , went to the camp ( about a mile , or 1 @.@ 6 km , from Kingston ) , " and did my best , but it was little we could do to mitigate the severity of the epidemic . " 
 Seacole returned to Panama in early 1854 to finalise her business affairs , and three months later moved to the New Granada Mining Gold Company establishment at Fort Bowen Mine some 70 miles ( 110 km ) away near <unk> . The superintendent , Thomas Day , was related to her late husband . Seacole had read newspaper reports of the outbreak of war against Russia before she left Jamaica , and news of the escalating Crimean War reached her in Panama . She determined to travel to England to volunteer as a nurse , to experience the " pomp , pride and circumstance of glorious war " as she described it in Chapter I of her autobiography . 
 = = Crimean War , 1854 – 56 = = 
 The Crimean War lasted from October 1853 until 1 April 1856 and was fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of the United Kingdom , France , the Kingdom of Sardinia , and the Ottoman Empire . The majority of the conflict took place on the Crimean peninsula in the Black Sea and Turkey . 
 Many thousands of troops from all the countries involved were drafted to the area , and disease broke out almost immediately . Hundreds perished , mostly from cholera . Hundreds more would die waiting to be shipped out , or on the voyage . Their prospects were little better when they arrived at the poorly staffed , unsanitary and overcrowded hospitals which were the only medical provision for the wounded . In Britain , a trenchant letter in The Times on 14 October triggered Sidney Herbert , Secretary of State for War , to approach Florence Nightingale to form a detachment of nurses to be sent to the hospital to save lives . Interviews were quickly held , suitable candidates selected , and Nightingale left for Turkey on 21 October . 
 Seacole travelled from Navy Bay in Panama to England , initially to deal with her investments in gold @-@ mining businesses . She then attempted to join the second contingent of nurses to the Crimea . She applied to the War Office and other government offices , but arrangements for departure were already underway . In her memoir , she wrote that she brought " ample testimony " of her experience in nursing , but the only example officially cited was that of a former medical officer of the West Granada Gold @-@ Mining Company . She also applied to the Crimean Fund , a fund raised by public subscription to support the wounded in Crimea , for sponsorship to travel there , but she again met with refusal . 
 Seacole finally resolved to travel to Crimea using her own resources and to open the British Hotel . Business cards were printed and sent ahead to announce her intention to open an establishment , to be called the " British Hotel " , near Balaclava , which would be " a mess @-@ table and comfortable quarters for sick and convalescent officers " . Shortly afterwards , her Caribbean acquaintance , Thomas Day , arrived unexpectedly in London , and the two formed a partnership . They assembled a stock of supplies , and Seacole embarked on the Dutch screw @-@ steamer Hollander on 27 January 1855 on its maiden voyage , to Constantinople . The ship called at Malta , where Seacole encountered a doctor who had recently left Scutari . He wrote her a letter of introduction to Nightingale . 
 Seacole visited Nightingale at the Barrack Hospital in Scutari , where she asked for a bed for the night , because she intended to travel to Balaclava the next day to join her business partner . In her memoirs , she reported that her meeting with Nightingale was friendly , with Nightingale asking " What do you want , Mrs. Seacole ? Anything we can do for you ? If it lies in my power , I shall be very happy . " Seacole told her of her " dread of the night journey by <unk> " and the improbability of being able to find the Hollander in the dark . A bed was then found for her and breakfast sent her in the morning , with a " kind message " from Mrs. Bracebridge , Nightingale 's helper . A footnote in the memoir states that Seacole subsequently " saw much of Miss Nightingale at Balaclava , " but no further meetings are recorded in the text . 
 After transferring most of her stores to the transport ship Albatross , with the remainder following on the Nonpareil , she set out on the four @-@ day voyage to the British bridgehead into Crimea at Balaclava . 
 Lacking proper building materials , Seacole gathered abandoned metal and wood in her spare moments , with a view to using the debris to build her hotel . She found a site for the hotel at a place she christened Spring Hill , near Kadikoi , some 3 ½ miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) along the main British supply road from Balaclava to the British camp near Sevastopol , and within a mile of the British headquarters . 
 The hotel was built from the salvaged driftwood , packing cases , iron sheets , and salvaged architectural items such as glass doors and window @-@ frames , from the village of Kamara , using hired local labour . The new British Hotel opened in March 1855 . An early visitor was Alexis Soyer , a noted French chef who had travelled to Crimea to help improve the diet of British soldiers . He records meeting Seacole in his 1857 work A Culinary Campaign and describes Seacole as " an old dame of a jovial appearance , but a few shades darker than the white lily " . Seacole requested Soyer 's advice on how to manage her business , and was advised to concentrate on food and beverage service , and not to have beds for visitors because the few either slept on board ships in the harbour or in tents in the camp . 
 The hotel was completed in July at a total cost of £ 800 . It included a building made of iron , containing a main room with counters and shelves and storage above , an attached kitchen , two wooden sleeping huts , outhouses , and an enclosed stable @-@ yard . The building was stocked with provisions shipped from London and Constantinople , as well as local purchases from the British camp near Kadikoi and the French camp at nearby <unk> . Seacole sold anything -- " from a needle to an anchor " — to army officers and visiting sightseers . Meals were served at the Hotel , cooked by two black cooks , and the kitchen also provided outside catering . 
 Despite constant thefts , particularly of livestock , Seacole 's establishment prospered . Chapter XIV of Wonderful Adventures describes the meals and supplies provided to officers . They were closed at 8 pm daily and on Sundays . Seacole did some of the cooking herself : " Whenever I had a few leisure moments , I used to wash my hands , roll up my sleeves , and roll out pastry . " When called to " dispense medications , " she did so . Soyer was a frequent visitor , and praised Seacole 's offerings , noting that she offered him champagne on his first visit . The Special Correspondent of The Times newspaper wrote approvingly of her work : " ... Mrs. Seacole ... doctors and cures all manner of men with extraordinary success . She is always in attendance near the battle @-@ field to aid the wounded , and has earned many a poor fellow ’ s blessings . " 
 To Soyer , near the time of departure , Florence Nightingale acknowledged favourable views of Seacole , consistent with their one known meeting in Scutari . Soyer 's remarks — he knew both women — show pleasantness on both sides . Seacole told him of her encounter with Nightingale at the Barrack Hospital : " You must know , M Soyer , that Miss Nightingale is very fond of me . When I passed through Scutari , she very kindly gave me board and lodging . " When he related Seacole 's inquiries to Nightingale , she replied " with a smile : ' I should like to see her before she leaves , as I hear she has done a deal of good for the poor soldiers . ' " Nightingale , however , did not want her nurses associating with Seacole , as she wrote to her brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Seacole often went out to the troops as a sutler , selling her provisions near the British camp at Kadikoi , and attending to casualties brought out from the trenches around Sevastopol or from the Tchernaya valley . She was widely known to the British Army as " Mother Seacole " . 
 Apart from serving officers at the British Hotel , Seacole also provided catering for spectators at the battles , and spent time on Cathcart 's Hill , some 3 ½ miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) north of the British Hotel , as an observer . On one occasion , attending wounded troops under fire , she dislocated her right thumb , an injury which never healed entirely . In a dispatch written on 14 September 1855 , William Howard Russell , special correspondent of The Times , wrote that she was a " warm and successful physician , who doctors and cures all manner of men with extraordinary success . She is always in attendance near the battle @-@ field to aid the wounded and has earned many a poor fellow 's blessing . " Russell also wrote that she " redeemed the name of sutler " , and another that she was " both a Miss Nightingale and a [ chef ] " . Seacole made a point of wearing brightly coloured , and highly conspicuous , clothing — often bright blue , or yellow , with ribbons in contrasting colours . While Lady Alicia Blackwood later recalled that Seacole had " ... personally spared no pains and no exertion to visit the field of woe , and minister with her own hands such things as could comfort or alleviate the suffering of those around her ; freely giving to such as could not pay ... " . 
 In late August , Seacole was on the route to Cathcart 's Hill for the final assault on Sevastopol on 7 September 1855 . French troops led the storming , but the British were beaten back . By dawn on Sunday 9 September , the city was burning out of control , and it was clear that it had fallen : the Russians retreated to fortifications to the north of the harbour . Later in the day , Seacole fulfilled a bet , and became the first British woman to enter Sevastopol after it fell . Having obtained a pass , she toured the broken town , bearing refreshments and visiting the crowded hospital by the docks , containing thousands of dead and dying Russians . Her foreign appearance led to her being stopped by French looters , but she was rescued by a passing officer . She looted some items from the city , including a church bell , an altar candle , and a three @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) long painting of the Madonna . 
 After the fall of Sevastopol , hostilities continued in a desultory fashion . The business of Seacole and Day prospered in the interim period , with the officers taking the opportunity to enjoy themselves in the quieter days . There were theatrical performances and horse @-@ racing events for which Seacole provided catering . 
 Seacole was joined by a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl , Sarah , also known as Sally . Soyer described her as " the Egyptian beauty , Mrs Seacole 's daughter Sarah " , with blue eyes and dark hair . Nightingale alleged that Sarah was the illegitimate offspring of Seacole and Colonel Henry Bunbury . However , there is no evidence that Bunbury met Seacole , or even visited Jamaica , at a time when she would have been nursing her ailing husband . <unk> speculates that Thomas Day could have been Sarah 's father , pointing to the unlikely coincidences of their meeting in Panama and then in England , and their unusual business partnership in Crimea . 
 Peace talks began in Paris in early 1856 , and friendly relations opened between the Allies and the Russians , with a lively trade across the River Tchernaya . The Treaty of Paris was signed on 30 March 1856 , after which the soldiers left Crimea . Seacole was in a difficult financial position , her business was full of unsalable provisions , new goods were arriving daily , and creditors were demanding payment . She attempted to sell as much as possible before the soldiers left , but she was forced to auction many expensive goods for lower @-@ than @-@ expected prices to the Russians who were returning to their homes . The evacuation of the Allied armies was formally completed at Balaclava on 9 July 1856 , with Seacole " ... conspicuous in the foreground ... dressed in a plaid riding @-@ habit ... " . Seacole was one of the last to leave Crimea , returning to England " poorer than [ she ] left it " . 
 Her contribution to the welfare of the British troops in the Crimea is summed up by sociology professor Lynn McDonald : 
 " Mary Seacole , although never the ' black British nurse ' she is claimed to have been , was a successful mixed @-@ race immigrant to Britain . She led an adventurous life , and her memoir of 1857 is still a lively read . She was kind and generous . She made friends of her customers , army and navy officers , who came to her rescue with a fund when she was declared bankrupt . While her cures have been vastly exaggerated , she doubtless did what she could to ease suffering , when no effective cures existed . In epidemics pre @-@ Crimea , she said a comforting word to the dying and closed the eyes of the dead . During the Crimean War , probably her greatest kindness was to serve hot tea and lemonade to cold , suffering soldiers awaiting transport to hospital on the wharf at Balaclava . She deserves much credit for rising to the occasion , but her tea and lemonade did not save lives , pioneer nursing or advance health care . " 
 = = Back in London , 1856 – 60 = = 
 After the end of the war , Seacole returned to England destitute and in poor health . In the conclusion to her autobiography , she records that she " took the opportunity " to visit " yet other lands " on her return journey , although Robinson attributes this to her impecunious state requiring a roundabout trip . She arrived in August 1856 , and considered setting up shop with Day in Aldershot , Hampshire , but nothing materialised . She attended a celebratory dinner for 2 @,@ 000 soldiers at Royal Surrey Gardens in Kennington on 25 August 1856 , at which Nightingale was chief guest of honour . Reports in The Times on 26 August and News of the World on 31 August indicate that Seacole was also fêted by the huge crowds , with two " burly " sergeants protecting her from the pressure of the crowd . However , creditors who had supplied her firm in Crimea were in pursuit . She was forced to move to 1 , Tavistock Street , Covent Garden in increasingly dire financial straits . The Bankruptcy Court in <unk> Street declared her bankrupt on 7 November 1856 . Robinson speculates that Seacole 's business problems may have been caused in part by her partner , Day , who dabbled in horse trading and may have set up as an unofficial bank , cashing debts . 
 At about this time , Seacole began to wear military medals . These are mentioned in an account of her appearance in the bankruptcy court in November 1856 . A bust by George Kelly , based on an original by Count Gleichen from around 1871 , depicts her wearing four medals , three of which have been identified as the British Crimea Medal , the French Légion d 'honneur and the Turkish Order of the Medjidie medal . Robinson says that one is " apparently " a Sardinian award ( Sardinia having joined Britain and France in supporting Turkey against Russia in the war ) . The Jamaican Daily Gleaner stated in her obituary on 9 June 1881 that she had also received a Russian medal , but it has not been identified . However , no formal notice of her award exists in the London Gazette , and it seems unlikely that Seacole was formally rewarded for her actions in Crimea ; rather , she may have bought miniature or " dress " medals to display her support and affection for her " sons " in the Army . 
 Seacole 's plight was highlighted in the British press . As a consequence a fund was set up , to which many prominent people donated money , and on 30 January 1857 , she and Day were granted certificates discharging them from bankruptcy . Day left for the Antipodes to seek new opportunities , but Seacole 's funds remained low . She moved from Tavistock Street to cheaper lodgings at 14 Soho Square in early 1857 , triggering a plea for subscriptions from Punch on 2 May . 
 Further fund @-@ raising kept Seacole in the public eye . In May 1857 she wanted to travel to India , to minister to the wounded of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , but she was dissuaded by both the new Secretary of War , Lord Panmure , and her financial troubles . Fund @-@ raising activities included the " Seacole Fund Grand Military Festival " , which was held at the Royal Surrey Gardens , from Monday 27 July to Thursday 30 July 1857 . This successful event was supported by many military men , including Major General Lord Rokeby ( who had commanded the 1st Division in Crimea ) and Lord George Paget ; over 1 @,@ 000 artists performed , including 11 military bands and an orchestra conducted by Louis Antoine Jullien , which was attended by a crowd of circa 40 @,@ 000 . The one @-@ shilling entrance charge was quintupled for the first night , and halved for the Tuesday performance . However , production costs had been high and the Royal Surrey Gardens Company was itself having financial problems . It became insolvent immediately after the festival , and as a result Seacole only received £ 57 , one quarter of the profits from the event . When eventually the financial affairs of the ruined Company were resolved , in March 1858 , the Indian Mutiny was over . 
 A 200 @-@ page autobiographical account of her travels was published in July 1857 by James Blackwood as Wonderful Adventures of Mrs. Seacole in Many Lands , the first autobiography written by a black woman in Britain . Priced at one shilling and six pence ( 1 / 6 ) a copy , the cover bears a striking portrait of Seacole in red , yellow and black ink . Robinson speculates that she dictated the work to an editor , identified in the book only as <unk> , who improved her grammar and orthography . In the work Seacole deals with the first 39 years of her life in one short chapter . She then expends six chapters on her few years in Panama , before using the following 12 chapters to detail her exploits in Crimea . She avoids mention of the names of her parents and precise date of birth . A short final " Conclusion " deals with her return to England , and lists supporters of her fund @-@ raising effort , including Rokeby , Prince Edward of Saxe @-@ Weimar , the Duke of Wellington , the Duke of Newcastle , William Russell , and other prominent men in the military . The book was dedicated to Major @-@ General Lord Rokeby , commander of the First Division ; and William Howard Russell wrote as a preface , " I have witnessed her devotion and her courage ... and I trust that England will never forget one who has nursed her sick , who sought out her wounded to aid and succour them and who performed the last offices for some of her illustrious dead . " 
 = = Later life , 1860 – 81 = = 
 Seacole had joined the Roman Catholic Church circa 1860 , and returned to a Jamaica changed in her absence as it faced economic downturn . She became a prominent figure in the country . However , by 1867 she was again running short of money , and the Seacole fund was resurrected in London , with illustrious new patrons , including the Prince of Wales , the Duke of Edinburgh , the Duke of Cambridge , and many other senior military officers . The fund burgeoned , and Seacole was able to buy land on Duke Street in Kingston , near New Blundell Hall , where she built a bungalow as her new home , plus a larger property to rent out . 
 By 1870 , Seacole was back in London , and Robinson speculates that she was drawn back by the prospect of rendering medical assistance in the Franco @-@ Prussian War . It seems likely that she approached Sir Harry Verney ( the husband of Florence Nightingale 's sister <unk> ) Member of Parliament for Buckingham who was closely involved in the British National Society for the Relief of the Sick and Wounded . It was at this time Nightingale wrote her letter to Verney insinuating that Seacole had kept a " bad house " in Crimea , and was responsible for " much drunkenness and improper conduct " . 
 In London , Seacole joined the periphery of the royal circle . Prince Victor of Hohenlohe @-@ Langenburg ( a nephew of Queen Victoria ; as a young Lieutenant he had been one of Seacole 's customers in Crimea ) carved a marble bust of her in 1871 that was exhibited at the Royal Academy summer exhibition in 1872 . Seacole also became personal masseuse to the Princess of Wales who suffered with white leg and rheumatism . 
 Seacole died in 1881 at her home in Paddington , London , the cause of death was noted as " apoplexy " . She left an estate valued at over £ 2 @,@ 500 . After some specific legacies , many of exactly 19 guineas , the main beneficiary of her will was her sister , ( Eliza ) Louisa . Lord Rokeby , Colonel Hussey Fane Keane , and Count Gleichen ( three trustees of her Fund ) were each left £ 50 ; Count Gleichen also received a diamond ring , said to have been given to Seacole ’ s late husband by Lord Nelson . A short obituary was published in The Times on 21 May 1881 . She was buried in St. Mary 's Roman Catholic Cemetery , Harrow Road , Kensal Green , London . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 While well @-@ known at the end of her life , Seacole rapidly faded from public memory . Her work in Crimea was overshadowed by Florence Nightingale 's for many years . However , in recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in her and efforts to properly acknowledge her achievements . Seacole has become a case study of racial attitudes and social injustices in Britain in the nineteenth century . She was cited as an example of " hidden " black history in Salman Rushdie 's The Satanic Verses , like Olaudah Equiano : " See , here is Mary Seacole , who did as much in the Crimea as another magic @-@ <unk> lady , but , being dark , could scarce be seen for the flame of Florence 's candle . " 
 She has been better remembered in the Caribbean , where she was posthumously awarded the Jamaican Order of Merit in 1991 . The headquarters of the Jamaican General Trained Nurses ' Association was christened " Mary Seacole House " in 1954 , followed quickly by the naming of a hall of residence of the University of the West Indies in Mona , Jamaica . A ward at Kingston Public Hospital was also named in her memory . Her grave was rediscovered in 1973 ; a service of <unk> was held on 20 November 1973 , and her impressive gravestone was also restored by the British Commonwealth Nurses ' War Memorial Fund and the <unk> Vitae Club . The centenary of her death was celebrated with a memorial service on 14 May 1981 . An English Heritage blue plaque was erected by the Greater London Council at her residence in 157 George Street , Westminster , on 9 March 1985 , but it was removed in 1998 before the site was redeveloped . A " green plaque " was unveiled at 147 George Street , in Westminster , on 11 October 2005 . However , another blue plaque has since been positioned at 14 Soho Square , where she lived in 1857 . 
 By the 21st century , Seacole was much more prominent . Several buildings and entities , mainly connected with health care , were named after her . In 2005 , Boris Johnson ( former Mayor of London , then editor of The Spectator ) wrote of learning about Seacole from his daughter 's school pageant and speculated : " I find myself facing the grim possibility that it was my own education that was blinkered . " In 2007 Seacole was introduced into the National Curriculum , and her life story is taught at many primary schools in the UK alongside that of Florence Nightingale . 
 She was voted into first place in an online poll of 100 Great Black Britons in 2004 . The portrait identified as Seacole in 2005 was used for one of ten first @-@ class stamps showing important Britons , to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the National Portrait Gallery . 
 British buildings and organisations now commemorate her by name . One of the first was the Mary Seacole Centre for Nursing Practice at Thames Valley University , which created the NHS Specialist Library for Ethnicity and Health , a web @-@ based collection of research @-@ based evidence and good practice information relating to the health needs of minority ethnic groups , and other resources relevant to multi @-@ cultural health care . There is another Mary Seacole Research Centre , this one at De Montfort University in Leicester , and a problem @-@ based learning room at St George 's , University of London is named after her . Brunel University in West London houses its School of Health Sciences and Social Care in the Mary Seacole Building . New buildings at the University of Salford and Birmingham City University bear her name , as does part of the new headquarters of the Home Office at 2 Marsham Street . There is a Mary Seacole ward in the Douglas Bader Centre in Roehampton . There are two wards named after Mary Seacole in Whittington Hospital in North London . 
 An annual prize to recognise and develop leadership in nurses , midwives and health visitors in the National Health Service was named Seacole , to " acknowledge her achievements " . An exhibition to celebrate the bicentenary of her birth opened at the Florence Nightingale Museum in London in March 2005 . Originally scheduled to last for a few months , the exhibition was so popular that it was extended to March 2007 . 
 A campaign to erect a statue of Seacole in London was launched on 24 November 2003 , chaired by Clive <unk> , Baron <unk> . The design of the sculpture , which is planned to be erected in the grounds of St Thomas ' Hospital , was announced on 18 June 2009 . There was significant opposition to the siting of the statue , but it was unveiled on 30 June 2016 . A feature film is being made of her life by Seacole Pictures . A short animation about Mary Seacole was adapted from a book entitled Mother Seacole , published in 2005 as part of the bicentenary celebrations . Seacole is featured in BBC 's Horrible Histories , where she is portrayed by Dominique Moore . 
 A two @-@ dimensional sculpture of Seacole was erected in Paddington in 2013 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Seacole 's recognition has provoked a reaction . It has been argued that she has been promoted at the expense of Florence Nightingale , and in an attempt to promote multiculturalism . Professor Lynn McDonald has written that " ... support for Seacole has been used to attack Nightingale 's reputation as a pioneer in public health and nursing . " There was opposition to the siting of a statue of Mary Seacole at St Thomas ' Hospital on the grounds that she had no connection with this institution , whereas Florence Nightingale did . Dr Sean Lang has stated that she " does not qualify as a mainstream figure in the history of nursing " , while a letter to the Times from the Florence Nightingale Society and signed by members including historians and biographers asserted that " Seacole 's battlefield excursions ... took place post @-@ battle , after selling wine and sandwiches to spectators . Mrs Seacole was a kind and generous businesswoman , but was not a frequenter of the battlefield " under fire " or a pioneer of nursing . " An article by Lynn McDonald in the Times Literary Supplement asked " How did Mary Seacole come to be viewed as a pioneer of modern nursing ? " , comparing her unfavourably with <unk> Pratt who was the first black nurse in the NHS , and concluded " She deserves much credit for rising to the occasion , but her tea and lemonade did not save lives , pioneer nursing or advance health care " . 
 Seacole 's name appears in an appendix to the Key Stage 2 National Curriculum , as an example of a significant Victorian historical figure . There is no requirement that teachers include Seacole in their lessons . At the end of 2012 it was reported that Mary Seacole was to be removed from the National Curriculum . Opposing this , Greg Jenner , historical consultant to Horrible Histories , has stated that while her medical achievements have been exaggerated , removing Seacole from the curriculum would be a mistake . While Peter Hitchens has argued that Seacole 's accomplishments have been exaggerated because anybody who put a contrary view was afraid to be accused of racism , both Jenner and Hugh Muir have asserted that this is not the case . Susan Sheridan has argued that the leaked proposal to remove Seacole from the National Curriculum is part of " a concentration solely on large @-@ scale political and military history and a fundamental shift away from social history . " In The Daily Telegraph , Cathy Newman argues that Michael Gove 's plans for the new history curriculum " could mean the only women children learn anything about will be queens " . 
 In January 2013 Operation Black Vote launched a petition to request Education Secretary Michael Gove to drop neither her nor <unk> Equiano from the National Curriculum Rev. Jesse Jackson and others wrote a letter to The Times protesting against the mooted removal of Mary Seacole from the National Curriculum . This was declared successful on 8 February 2013 , after approximately 35 @,@ 000 signatures forced Michael Gove to concede . 
 = Caesar Hull = 
 Caesar Barrand Hull , DFC ( 26 February 1914 – 7 September 1940 ) was a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) flying ace during the Second World War , noted especially for his part in the fighting for Narvik during the Norwegian Campaign in 1940 , and for being one of " The Few " — the Allied pilots of the Battle of Britain , in which he was shot down and killed . From a farming family , Hull 's early years were spent in Southern Rhodesia , South Africa and Swaziland . He boxed for South Africa at the 1934 Empire Games . After being turned down by the South African Air Force because he did not speak Afrikaans , he joined the RAF and , on becoming a pilot officer in August 1936 , mustered into No. 43 Squadron at RAF Tangmere in Sussex . 
 A skilful pilot , Hull dedicated much of his pre @-@ war service to aerobatics , flying Hawker <unk> , Furies and Hurricanes . He reacted to the outbreak of war with enthusiasm and achieved No. 43 Squadron 's first victory of the conflict in late January 1940 . Reassigned to Norway in May 1940 to command a flight of Gloster Gladiator biplanes belonging to No. 263 Squadron , he downed four German aircraft in an hour over the Bodø area south @-@ west of Narvik on 26 May , a feat that earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross . He was shot down the next day , and invalided back to England . Hull returned to action at the end of August , when he was made commander of No. 43 Squadron with the rank of squadron leader . A week later , he died in a dogfight over south London . 
 With eight confirmed aerial victories during the war , including five over Norway , Hull was the RAF 's first Gladiator ace and the most successful RAF pilot of the Norwegian Campaign . He was buried among fellow fighter pilots at Tangmere , and a monument to his memory was erected near his birthplace in Southern Rhodesia . This remained until 2004 , when the plaque was transported to England and donated to the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum . Other memorials to Hull were built in Bodø in 1977 and Purley , where his aircraft crashed , in 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Caesar Barrand Hull was born on 26 February 1914 at <unk> Farm , a property near Shangani in Southern Rhodesia . His childhood years were divided between Rhodesia and South Africa , and in his early teens the family moved to Swaziland . He was educated at home until 1926 , when he began to board at St. John 's College in Johannesburg . A champion boxer , he was a member of South Africa 's boxing team at the 1934 Empire Games in London . 
 Hull attempted to join the South African Air Force in 1935 , but was turned down because he did not speak Afrikaans . He joined the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) instead , enlisting in England in September 1935 . Completing the pilot 's course on 3 August 1936 with the rank of pilot officer , he joined No. 43 Squadron at RAF Tangmere in Sussex five days later . 
 Much of Hull 's early air force career was dedicated to aerobatics . He and Peter " Prosser " Hanks perfected a routine in which they would change places in a two @-@ seater Hawker Audax in mid @-@ air . Along with Peter Townsend ( who joined the squadron at the same time as Hull ) and Sergeant Frank Reginald Carey , they formed an aerobatic flight that performed stunts such as loops , barrel rolls and stall turns . Piloting a Hawker Fury , Hull flew the individual aerobatics at the air show at Hendon in 1937 honouring the coronation of King George VI . 
 Hull was promoted to flying officer on 16 April 1938 . As war loomed , the squadron began to prepare for combat in late 1938 , and in December that year was re @-@ equipped with Hawker Hurricane Mk Is . Hull reacted to the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 with great excitement ; according to Hector Bolitho , No. 43 Squadron 's intelligence officer , the Rhodesian leapt from one foot to the other in the officer 's mess , repeating the words " wizard , wizard " . 
 = = Air war in Europe = = 
 = = = Early war = = = 
 In November 1939 , No. 43 Squadron moved to RAF Acklington , near Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne , flying Hawker Hurricane Mk Is . Amid severe weather conditions , Hull scored the squadron 's first victory of the war on 30 January 1940 , when he shot down a Heinkel He 111 bomber of the Luftwaffe near the island of Coquet . On 26 February the squadron was transferred to RAF Wick in northern Scotland to help protect the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow . Hull , Carey and three others together downed another He 111 on 28 March 1940 . On 10 April 1940 , Hull took part in the destruction of a reconnaissance He 111 . The aircraft had been sent out in advance of a major raid launched by He 111s from Kampfgeschwader 26 and Kampfgruppe 100 , aimed at covering the German invasion of Norway . 
 When No. 43 Squadron returned to its home base at Tangmere in May 1940 , some of its leading pilots were reassigned to other units : among these were Townsend , who was assigned to No. 85 Squadron RAF as its commanding officer , and Hull , who was posted to No. 263 Squadron to command a flight of Gloster Gladiator biplanes during the unit 's second committal to the Norwegian Campaign . 
 = = = Norway = = = 
 No. 263 Squadron was deployed to the area around Narvik , a strategically valuable port city in northern Norway then under German control , but fiercely contested by the Norwegians and Allies . Crossing the Norwegian Sea aboard the aircraft carrier HMS Furious , the pilots took off on 21 May while at sea , in groups of three each led by a Fairey Swordfish of the Fleet Air Arm , and encountered thick mist around the island of <unk> ; the Swordfish and two Gladiators from one of the groups crashed into a mountain . Hull led the first four aircraft through and landed safely at Bardufoss airfield , about 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) north @-@ east of Narvik , at 04 : 20 . A further 12 Gladiators followed four hours later . Fourteen Gladiators were operational and began flying patrols from Bardufoss on 22 May , carrying out 30 sorties on the first day . Hull and two other pilots together downed a He 111 over Salangen on 24 May 1940 , killing two of the five German crew ; the other three were captured by Norwegian troops after making an emergency landing at <unk> . In all , during its two weeks of operations in northern Norway , No. 263 Squadron was to claim 26 confirmed kills and nine probable victories during 70 dogfights . 
 Hull and two other pilots , South African Pilot Officer Jack Falkson and Naval Lieutenant Tony Lydekker , volunteered to be detached to an improvised airstrip at Bodø , a port about 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) south @-@ west of Narvik , on 26 May 1940 to cover Allied troops who were retreating north for evacuation under Operation Alphabet . Arriving to find the airfield extremely muddy , the pilots had great difficulty moving their aircraft to drier ground to refuel from four @-@ gallon ( 18 @-@ l ) tin cans . A He 111 was spotted overhead while this was in progress , prompting the three pilots to scramble having only partially refuelled . Falkson 's plane crashed after mud clung to its wheels , and while Lydekker took off successfully , he had so little fuel that Hull almost immediately ordered him to land to add more . 
 The Rhodesian pursued the He 111 over the <unk> valley and , with three attacks from astern , set the bomber ablaze , forcing it to crash . Hull then downed a Junkers Ju 52 transport plane and , after unsuccessfully chasing another He 111 , destroyed two more Ju 52s . The transports had been coming to the aid of the hard @-@ pressed German forces fighting around Narvik ; one was loaded with supplies , while the other two were carrying Fallschirmjäger paratroops . One of the latter aircraft successfully landed in German @-@ held territory before burning out , allowing the crew and paratroopers aboard to exit safely , but the second spiralled out of control and crashed , killing eight German paratroopers . Hull then attacked another He 111 , which soon retreated , giving off smoke . Having used up all his ammunition , Hull returned to Bodø . In the space of about an hour , in a technologically @-@ outdated aircraft and without assistance , he had destroyed four German planes and damaged a fifth . 
 Hull , Falkson and Lydekker spent the night of 26 / 27 May 1940 patrolling the area around Rognan , about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) inland from Bodø . After driving German bombers away from British and Norwegian forces fighting at <unk> south of Rognan , the Gladiators strafed German ground forces . Around 08 : 00 on 27 May , Bodø was attacked by 11 Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers from I. / Sturzkampfgeschwader 1 ( StG 1 — Dive Bomber Wing 1 ) and three Messerschmitt Bf 110 fighters attached to I. / Zerstörergeschwader 76 ( ZG 76 — Destroyer Wing 76 ) . Lydekker claimed one of the Stukas , but was ultimately forced to limp north to Bardufoss to land , his Gladiator heavily damaged . Having initially been caught on the ground by the German attack , Hull got his fighter airborne during a pause in the raid . After engaging the German aircraft and shooting down Feldwebel Kurt <unk> 's Stuka , which fell into the sea , Hull was overcome by one of the Bf 110s , piloted by Oberleutnant Helmut Lent , and forced to crash near the Bodø airfield . Wounded in the head and the knee , he was initially treated at Bodø Hospital before being evacuated back to Britain for further treatment on a Sunderland flying boat via Harstad . Hull 's kills during the Norwegian Campaign made him the RAF 's first Gloster Gladiator ace , as well as the most successful RAF fighter pilot of the campaign . On 17 June , while convalescing , he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions in Norway . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 Hull was declared fit to return to operational duty after about two months ' rest and recuperation in Guildford , and on 31 August 1940 he was appointed commanding officer of his former unit , No. 43 Squadron , replacing Squadron Leader John " Tubby " Badger , who had been shot down and grievously wounded the previous day . The unit was still based at Tangmere , flying Hurricanes , and was by now fighting in the Battle of Britain , the Allied participants of which would later be dubbed " The Few " . Concurrently promoted to squadron leader , Hull expressed disbelief at his sudden elevation and " as if to emphasise his surprise " , Andy Saunders records , suffixed his first description of himself on paper as " Commanding No. 43 Sqn " with four exclamation marks . 
 The first engagement of Hull 's command , on 2 September , resulted in three of the squadron 's Hurricanes being shot down in return for two Messerschmitt Bf 109s . On 4 September , Hull led a group of Hurricanes in a decisive aerial victory over coastal Sussex against a large group of Bf 110s from <unk> 2 and 76 . Flight Lieutenant Thomas Dalton @-@ Morgan destroyed a Bf 110 north of Worthing and chased another until it crashed near Shoreham @-@ by @-@ Sea , while Sergeant Jeffreys shot down another Bf 110 in a field . Pilot Officer A E A van den Hove d <unk> , from Belgium , pursued a fourth back out to sea and sent it crashing into the English Channel , but was hit himself and compelled to make an emergency landing at RAF Ford . Hull and Flight Officer Hamilton Upton together seriously damaged two more Bf 110s . 
 Around 16 : 00 on 7 September 1940 , nine Hurricanes of No. 43 Squadron scrambled to intercept a large formation of German aircraft over Kent on their way to London . Hull led six of the aircraft towards the German bombers while Flight Lieutenant John " Killy " Kilmartin , from Ireland , headed a section of three tasked with countering the fighter escort . Hull took his aircraft above the bombers , then dived towards them , telling his pilots to " smash them up " . A very fast engagement followed in which Hull was killed while diving to the aid of Flight Lieutenant Dick Reynell , an Australian pilot who had come under heavy attack . Hull was last seen firing at a Dornier Do 17 , and was shot down by a Bf 109 . Reynell was also killed . The Rhodesian ace 's body was discovered largely burnt inside the shell of his Hurricane , which had crashed in the grounds of Purley Boys ' High School in Purley , Surrey . He was 26 years old . 
 The loss of Hull and Reynell , two of the squadron 's most popular pilots , affected morale deeply . Kilmartin , arriving back at Tangmere on the evening of 7 September , simply muttered " My God , My God " . Dalton @-@ Morgan took over command of the squadron . Hull 's remains were recovered and returned to Tangmere , where he was buried among fellow fighter pilots at St Andrew 's Church . His final confirmed record for the war was four German aircraft destroyed , two damaged and four shared destroyed ( counted at half a victory each ) ; also noted were one unconfirmed destroyed , two probably destroyed and one shared probable . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 After Hull 's death , the people of Shangani organised the construction of a memorial in his honour — a granite plinth to which a brass plaque was affixed commemorating the pilot 's service and bravery . This monument was completed before the end of the war and erected alongside the main road between Bulawayo and Gwelo , near the bridge over the Shangani River . A memorial to the actions of Hull , Falkson and Lydekker at Bodø was built at the town 's airport three decades later , and inaugurated on 17 June 1977 with the Norwegian Minister of Defence , Rolf Arthur Hansen , in attendance . 
 After Rhodesia 's reconstitution as Zimbabwe in 1980 , Robert Mugabe 's government disowned many old monuments making reference to the fallen of the World Wars , including the Hull memorial at Shangani . The Hull family resolved in 2003 to take the plaque down and donate it to the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum , an idea that the museum welcomed . The plaque was removed , flown to England free of charge by MK Airlines — a freight carrier owned by a former Rhodesian Air Force pilot , Mike Kruger — and ceremonially delivered to the Tangmere museum curator on 17 April 2004 by Hull 's sister , Wendy Bryan . 
 A new monument to Hull was erected at Coulsdon Sixth Form College , which today occupies the Purley High School site , in 2013 . Depicting an aeroplane and a dove intertwined , it was formally dedicated on 11 November that year , Remembrance Day , with Bryan present . 
 = = Character and reputation = = 
 Hull was remembered by his comrades as an exceptional pilot and an affable , jovial personality . Jimmy Beedle , in his 1966 history of No. 43 Squadron , called Hull one of its all @-@ time great characters , citing him as a major factor in the squadron 's " high standard of flying and ... outstanding squadron spirit " . John Simpson , who joined the unit as a pilot officer two months after Hull , recalled finding " a confidence when flying with Caesar that was wholly lacking otherwise . " " I have never seen anyone who could throw a fighter about with so much confidence as old Caesar , " said another pilot , quoted by Beedle . " Nobody gave me so much confidence to have a lead from , nobody gave me so much exhilaration and fun . Following Caesar you found yourself getting more out of your machine than you had ever imagined was possible , doing things that done by yourself would have made your hair stand on end . " 
 " All the superlatives have already been written about Caesar , " Beedle wrote . " Caesar Barrand Hull , of the <unk> hair and the croaky voice , the laughing warrior whose idea of a lark was to change seats in the air ... who had a phobia about worms or slugs , who would look under the bed ' in case there are any <unk> about ' , then kneel beside it and say his prayers . " Bolitho took a similar line in his 1943 book Combat Report , attesting to Hull 's " bubbling , unquenchable gaiety " . According to Bolitho , Hull was " possessed of a magic power of creating happiness in others ; making them belittle their cares , of inspiring them with confidence , not simply in him but in themselves . Of imbuing them with his own abounding love of life . Where Caesar was , laughter was . " 
 = Josh Sims = 
 Joshua S. Sims ( born July 29 , 1978 ) is an American former professional lacrosse player . He played in Major League Lacrosse through 2013 and last played box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League with the Philadelphia Wings in 2010 . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1997 through 2000 . He is a two @-@ time NCAA champion , three @-@ time MLL champion , and one @-@ time NLL champion . 
 At Princeton , he earned Ivy League Player of the Year honors , three first team United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American recognitions and three first team All @-@ Ivy League selections , two NCAA midfielder of the year honors , NCAA Top VIII Award recognition and two @-@ time Academic All @-@ American ( first team once ) honors . During his college career , Princeton earned four Ivy League championships , four NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament invitations and two NCAA championships . 
 As a professional , he is a five @-@ time MLL All @-@ star and an NLL All @-@ star . In the MLL , he has earned two league championships and holds the all @-@ time league record for playoff goals scored . He also has an NLL championship . He was selected to the MLL 10th Anniversary team in August 2010 and the Colorado Mammoth 10th Anniversary team in 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 As an <unk> junior lacrosse midfielder , he scored 20 goals and had 16 assists for the Severn School , earning him All @-@ Anne Arundel County honors from the Baltimore Sun . Sims was an All @-@ Anne Arundel County selection by the Baltimore Sun again as a senior captain when he was also named an All @-@ Metro selection for controlling 72 % of his face @-@ offs , while scoring 28 goals and adding 12 assists . Sims was a member of the Under @-@ 19 Team USA that won the World Championship in Tokyo in 1996 . 
 = = Collegiate career = = 
 After graduating from Severn , Sims attended Princeton University . He was the first Princeton Student @-@ Athlete to be presented with the NCAA Top VIII Award ( the first lacrosse player to be presented with the award since 1983 ) . He was only the fourth Ivy League athlete honored in the award 's 27 @-@ year history . He was awarded the 1998 & 2000 McLaughlin Award as the best NCAA lacrosse midfielder . He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 1998 , 1999 and 2000 . He was also first team All @-@ Ivy League in 1998 , 1999 and 2000 . Sims earned the 2000 Men 's Ivy League Player of the Year . As a freshman , he was a member of the 1997 team that is regarded as the best in school history with a record number of wins during its 15 – 0 season . He served as co @-@ captain of the 2000 team . Sims is one of two Princeton Lacrosse two @-@ time Academic All @-@ Americans . Following the 1999 season , he was selected as an at @-@ large second team Academic All @-@ American , and following the 2000 season , he was a first team selection . He was also a 2000 USILA Scholar All @-@ American . 
 The 1997 – 2000 teams were 6 – 0 undefeated outright Ivy League Conference champions . Two of these undefeated league champions won the 1997 and 1998 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championships , becoming the first team to threepeat since Syracuse from 1988 – 90 and the first to be recognized to have done so without an NCAA scandal since Johns Hopkins from 1978 – 80 . The 1999 and 2000 teams also earned NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitations , bringing the schools streak to eleven consecutive seasons . 
 In Sims ' first game as a Tiger , he scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 1997 overtime 7 – 6 victory over Johns Hopkins . Ten years later , ESPN described the goal as a " leaping , behind @-@ the @-@ back " shot , while the Baltimore Sun described the shot by saying that " . . <unk> flicked in a rebound shot blindly behind his back . " He was recognized twice in 1997 as Ivy League Rookie of the Week . During the 1998 season , Sims became a scoring threat from midfield as most defenses focused on the All @-@ American trio of Princeton attackmen ( Jesse Hubbard , Chris Massey and Jon Hess ) . In the 1998 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament , Sims scored a game @-@ high four goals in the quarterfinal 11 – 9 victory over Duke and a team @-@ high three goals , including the game @-@ winning goal in the semifinal 11 – 10 victory against Syracuse . For his efforts , he was named to the All @-@ tournament team . In 1999 , he scored a quadruple overtime game @-@ winning goal helping Princeton secure it invitation to the 1999 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament with its seventh consecutive victory . In the 2000 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament , he posted two goals and two assists in the 10 – 7 quarterfinal victory over Maryland . He also scored in the 12 – 11 semifinal victory against Virginia . Sims ' two goals made him the only person to score multiple goals for Princeton in the championship game 13 – 7 loss to Syracuse . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = NLL career = = = 
 Sims played the 2000 and 2001 seasons for the Washington Power of the National Lacrosse League . He then played the 2003 through 2009 seasons with the Colorado Mammoth . Sims was an original member of the Mammoth when they moved from Washington . He helped lead the Mammoth to their 2006 National Lacrosse League Champion 's Cup . In 2007 Season he was recognized by the league as one of the top transition players in the game by being named Transition Player of the Week three times and being named to his first National Lacrosse League All @-@ Star Game as a reserve . Prior to the 2009 NLL season , Sims announced his retirement from the indoor lacrosse league , and officially retired after the 2009 season . However , he returned to play the 2010 season for the Philadelphia Wings . 
 = = = MLL career = = = 
 Sims , who did not play in the 2014 season , has played in the MLL since 2001 : Baltimore Bayhawks ( 2001 – 2005 ) ; Denver Outlaws ( 2006 – 2009 , 2012 ) , Toronto Nationals ( 2010 ) and Chicago Machine ( 2010 ) . Sims was a starter and scored in the inaugural MLL All @-@ Star Game in 2001 . In 2002 and 2005 he was a member of the Baltimore Bayhawks Major League Lacrosse Champion Steinfeld Cup winners . In the 2002 All @-@ Star game he had a goal and an assist . In the 2002 championship game , he scored four second half goals in the 21 – 13 victory over the Long Island Lizards , which followed a two @-@ goal semifinal performance in a 15 – 10 victory over the Boston Cannons . During the 2005 season , he made his third MLL All @-@ Star Game appearance . During the playoff semifinals , he 3 goals and 9 ground balls . One of his goals put the Bayhawks ahead for good . Sims was acquired by the Denver Outlaws on March 6 , 2006 for the Outlaws 2006 first @-@ round , 2nd overall , Collegiate Draft Pick that eventually became Kyle Dixon . Sims returned to the MLL All @-@ Star game in 2006 and 2007 representing the Outlaws . He scored two goals ( one for two points ) in the 2006 contest . On December , 2009 , Sims was picked up by the Washington Bayhawks during the MLL supplemental draft . On February 12 , 2010 , Sims was traded from the Bayhawks to the Toronto Nationals . In June , Sims was traded from the Nationals to the Chicago Machine . 
 As of August 2010 , Sims was the Major League Lacrosse All @-@ Time leader in post @-@ season goals scored ( 29 ) . That month , during the MLL championship weekend , he was named to the 11 @-@ man MLL 10th Anniversary team . He did not play in 2011 , but in 2012 he returned to the Denver Outlaws and even scored 5 goals in one game for them . He began 2013 on the sideline with a hamstring injury for the Bayhawks . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Sims was the founder of Icon Lacrosse , LLC , and former Director of the Boulder Valley Lacrosse Association . According to his Denver Outlaws biography , he is married to Meghan Bauer Sims . 
 In college , he helped the Tigers to raise approximately $ 60 @,@ 000 for the Central Jersey Pediatric AIDS foundation and worked with the Special Olympics . He was an economics major at Princeton and an honors graduate , maintaining a 3 @.@ 54 GPA . 
 In the season 9 December 9 , 2011 episode of Extreme Makeover : Home Edition on ABC , Sims ' helped build a house in Mardela Springs , Maryland over a span of 106 hours in just five days . The nonprofit Project 911 ( <unk> ) along with The Fusion Cos . , an Annapolis modular @-@ home builder , built The Johnson @-@ <unk> Family house . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = NLL = = = 
 The following are his NLL career stats : 
 = = = MLL = = = 
 The following are his MLL career stats : 
 = Simarouba amara = 
 Simarouba amara is a species of tree in the Simaroubaceae family , found in the rainforests and savannahs of South and Central America and the Caribbean . It was first described by Aublet in French Guiana in 1775 and is one of six species of Simarouba . The tree is evergreen , but produces a new set of leaves once a year . It requires relatively high levels of light to grow and grows rapidly in these conditions , but lives for a relatively short time . In Panama , it flowers during the dry season in February and March , whereas in Costa Rica , where there is no dry season it flowers later , between March and July . As the species is dioecious , the trees are either male or female and only produce male or female flowers . The small yellow flowers are thought to be pollinated by insects , the resulting fruits are dispersed by animals including monkeys , birds and fruit @-@ eating bats and the seeds are also dispersed by leaf cutter ants . 
 Simarouba amara has been studied extensively by scientists in an attempt to understand the tree and also to gain a better understanding of the ecology of the rainforest in general . Many of these studies were conducted on Barro Colorado Island in Panama or at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica . Of particular interest is how it competes with other species and with individuals of the same species at different stages in its life cycle . The seedlings are normally limited by the amount of light and nutrients found where they are growing and the saplings are considered relatively light demanding compared to other species . Young individuals are more likely to survive when they grow further away from their parents and when there are few other individuals growing near to them , which may be due to them being able to escape diseases . Plant physiologists have investigated how the leaves of the tree differ depending on their location in the forest canopy finding they are thicker in the canopy and thinner in the understory . They have also measured how the water potential of their leaves changes and when their stomata open and close during the day ; the findings suggest that rather than closing their stomata to control water loss , it is controlled by the leaf area instead . Population geneticists have examined the way in which its genes vary , at both the local scale and across its range using microsatellites . It is genetically diverse , indicating gene flow occurs between populations and seeds can be dispersed up to 1 km . The leaves of S. amara are eaten by several species of caterpillar , particularly those in the Atteva genus . Several species of termite and ants live on or around the tree and lianas and epiphytes grow on the tree . 
 The bark of S. amara has been used by people in its range to treat dysentery and diarrhea , as well as other diseases , and was also exported to Europe in the eighteenth century to treat these illnesses . A number of compounds have since been isolated from the bark and have been shown to have antimicrobial effects . Local people use the wood of the tree for various purposes and it is also grown in plantations and harvested for its timber , some of which is exported . 
 = = Description = = 
 Simarouba amara grows to heights of up to 35 metres , with a maximum trunk diameter of 125 cm and a maximum estimated age of 121 years . It has compound leaves that are each around 60 cm long , the petioles are 4 – 7 cm long and each leaf has 9 – 16 leaflets . Each leaflet is 2 @.@ 5 – 11 cm long and 12 – 45 mm wide , with those towards the end of the compound leaf tending to be smaller . The flowers occur on a staminate panicle that is around 30 cm in length , which is widely branched and densely covered in flowers . The flowers are unisexual , small ( < 1 cm long ) and pale yellow in colour . They are thought to be pollinated by insects such as small bees and moths . On Barro Colorado Island ( BCI ) , Panama , it tends to flower during the dry season from the end of January to the end of April , persisting for 11 to 15 weeks each year . In Costa Rica , it flowers slightly later , between March and July , peaking in April . Fruits form between 1 and 3 months after pollination occurs . The fruits are brightly colored green to purplish @-@ black , approximately 17 mm long and contain large seeds ( 10 – 14 mm ) , they occur in groups of 3 – 5 drupes . The seeds cannot stay dormant and are dispersed by vertebrates . Each seed weighs approximately 0 @.@ 25 g . 
 It is an evergreen species , with a new flush of leaves growing between January and April , during the dry season , when the highest light levels occur in the rainforest . This phenology is thought to allow S. amara to <unk> most effectively , since the new leaves are more efficient than those they replace . It has visible , but indistinct growth rings that are on average 7 mm wide . A study of individuals in Panama found that they grow on average 8 @.@ 4 mm in diameter each year , in Costa Rica , growth rates as fast as 18 mm per year have been recorded , and the stem grows constantly throughout the year . The xylem vessels in mature trees range from 20 to 90 μm in diameter , with around 50 vessels present per mm2 of branch . The density of the wood is between 0 @.@ 37 – 0 @.@ 44 g / cm3 , lower than many other species in the rainforest . 
 It is a fast @-@ growing , light @-@ demanding and shade @-@ intolerant species . Saplings are typically one straight pole , with several compound leaves and only one point of growth . This allows the sapling to achieve the greatest vertical growth with a minimum amount of biomass . They start to branch once they are 2 – 5 m tall . 
 A study in the forest dynamics plot on BCI found that between 1982 and 2000 , around 65 % of individuals died , with mortality highest amongst small individuals ( < 1 cm dbh ) . Large trees ( > 20 cm dbh ) are relatively rare , averaging 2 @.@ 4 trees per hectare , compared to 40 trees per hectare of > 1 cm dbh . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Simarouba amara was first described by Jean Baptiste <unk> <unk> Aublet in French Guiana in 1775 and is the type species of the Simarouba genus . In 1790 , William Wright described <unk> simarouba , which Auguste Pyrame <unk> suggested was the same species as S. amara . However , because S. amara was described as monoecious by Aublet and Q. simarouba was described as dioecious by Wright , they were still regarded as separate species in 1829 . By 1874 , when the Flora <unk> was published , they were considered synonymous . 
 Among the six species of Simarouba , two besides S. amara occur on the continent : S. glauca and S. versicolor . S. amara can be distinguished from the other continental species by having smaller flowers , anthers and fruit , and straight , rather than curved petals . The leaves of Simarouba amara subsp. opaca are not glaucous ( a bluish @-@ grey or green colour ) on their underside , whereas those of Simarouba amara subsp. <unk> are . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 Simarouba amara is known by many common names , where in the Neotropics . In Bolivia it is known as <unk> , in Brazil as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . In Colombia it is called simaruba , in Ecuador as <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , in French Guiana as simarouba , in Guyana as <unk> , in Peru as <unk> , in Surinam as <unk> and in Venezuela <unk> blanco and simarouba . 
 In Europe , it was known by various names during the nineteenth century when it was used as a medicine ; these names included bitter ash , <unk> , mountain damson and stave @-@ wood . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The natural range of S. amara is in the Neotropics , the ecoregion of Central and South America . Its range extends from Guatemala in the north , to Bolivia in the south and from Ecuador in the west , to the east coast of Brazil . It has been introduced to the islands of Dominica and Puerto Rico in the Caribbean Sea , becoming naturalised in Puerto Rico . On BCI , mature trees ( > 10 cm dbh ) are found at a frequency of 5 per hectare , in Ecuador at 0 @.@ 7 per hectare and in French Guiana at 0 @.@ 4 per hectare . Genetic analysis of populations suggests that it has always been relatively common within its range . It grows in rainforests and in savannahs . The seedlings of S. amara are rare in primary forest due to their light @-@ demanding habit . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 Populations of S. amara display high levels of heterozygosity indicating that it is genetically diverse . This is consistent with the tree outcrossing over large distances by long @-@ distance pollen flow and that there has been sufficient long distance gene flow between populations to counteract the effects of genetic drift . A study of 478 plants from 14 populations across South America found that 24 % of all alleles occurred in only one population . A study of 300 plants on Barro Colorado Island found that the heterozygosity at 5 microsatellite loci varied between 0 @.@ 12 and 0 @.@ 75 . 8 out of the 50 alleles scored occurred in only one plant . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Individuals do not typically reproduce until they have a trunk diameter of 30 cm . Once mature , the trees produce flowers each year , but not all females produce fruit each year . Their flower morphology is typical of being pollinated by generalist small insects such as bees and moths . It has been reported to be pollinated by non @-@ <unk> moths , but other authors have questioned whether this is correct . 
 = = = Seed dispersal = = = 
 The seeds of S. amara are dispersed by vertebrates , mainly large birds and mammals , including <unk> , flycatchers , motmots , thrushes , howler monkeys , tamarins and spider monkeys . Leaf cutter ants have also been observed to disperse the seeds and dense seedling carpets form in areas where they dump waste material but most of the seedlings die and dispersal by the ants is thought to be unimportant in determining the long @-@ term patterns of recruitment and dispersal . Seeds that are eaten by monkeys are more likely to germinate than seeds that have not . Fruit @-@ eating <unk> bats have also been noted to disperse their seeds ; this may aid the regeneration of forests as they disperse the seeds of later successional species while they feed on S. amara . 
 Based on inverse modelling of data from seed traps on BCI , the estimated average dispersal distance for seeds is 39 m . Studying seedlings and parent trees on BCI using DNA microsatellites revealed that , in fact on average , seedlings grow 392 m away from their parents , with a standard deviation of ± 234 m and a range of between 9 m and 1 km . In the forest there are many seeds and seedlings beneath reproductive females ; genetic data indicate that seedlings are unlikely to be from nearby adults , but rather dispersed there by vertebrates that have fed on one tree and then moved to feed on another , defecating while in the canopy and depositing the seeds . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 Various aspects of the physiology or S. amara have been studied . The stomatal conductance of the leaves , an indication of the rate at which water evaporates , of mature trees at midday range from 200 to 270 mmol H2O m − 2 s − 1 . The leaf water potentials at midday range from − 0 @.@ 56 to − 1 @.@ 85 MPa , averaging around − 1 @.@ 2 MPa . <unk> is widespread in the trunk and the stomata do not close before cavitation occurs . Although this would normally be considered deleterious to the tree , it may buffer the leaf water potential and therefore be beneficial . The stomatal conductance and hydraulic conductance of the branches of taller trees ( ~ 30 m ) are much higher than in the branches of smaller trees ( ~ 20 m ) . Phillips , Bond and Ryan suggested that this is probably due to the branches of taller trees having a lower leaf @-@ to @-@ sapwood ratio than those of small branches . Dye staining shows that cavitation is common in the branches of S. amara . They concluded that water flux in S. amara is controlled by structural ( leaf area ) , rather than physiological ( closing stomata ) means . 
 Leaves absorb light in the photosynthetically active radiation ( PAR ) spectrum at wavelengths between 400 nm and 700 nm with a high efficiency , but the efficiency decreases at longer wavelengths . Generally plants absorb PAR at efficiencies of around 85 % ; the higher values found in S. amara are thought to be due to the high humidity of its habitat . The reflectance and transmittance of the leaves are low at between 400 and 700 nm . The optical properties and the mass of the leaves vary depending on their location in the forest canopy , with leaves becoming thicker and more efficient as their height within the canopy increases . For their weight , however , leaves in the understory are more efficient at capturing light than leaves in the canopy . 
 The concentration of bioavailable phosphate has been found to be higher underneath female individuals than underneath males , even though the total concentration of phosphate is equal . Rhoades et al. concluded that this difference was due to females changing the availability of phosphate , rather than females only growing in areas with high phosphate availability . This is thought to be caused either by the fruit containing high levels of phosphate which would fall off the tree and rot , or by the fruits attracting animals which deposit phosphate beneath the females . It is also possible that the sexes produce different root exudates , which affect the microbial community in their rhizosphere , thereby affecting phosphate availability . 
 The woody tissues of S. amara have been found to respire at a rate of 1 @.@ 24 μmol CO2 m − 2 s − 1 , and this rate of respiration correlates positively with the growth rate of the stem . Maintenance respiration was calculated at 31 @.@ 1 μmol CO2 m − 3 s − 1 and this rate correlated positively with the sapwood volume . 
 = = = Seedling physiology = = = 
 Experiments on BCI where trenches were dug around seedlings of S. amara , or where gaps in the canopy were made above them , show that their relative growth rate can be increased by both . This shows that their growth is normally limited by both above @-@ ground competition for light and by below @-@ ground competition for nutrients and water . Competition for light is normally more important , as shown by the growth rate increasing by almost 7 times and mortality decreasing , when seedlings were placed in gaps , compared to the understory . When seedlings in gaps had a trench dug round them to prevent below @-@ ground competition their growth increased further , by 50 % , demonstrating that in gaps the seedlings are limited by below @-@ ground competition . <unk> around seedlings in the understory did not significantly increase their growth , showing that they are normally only limited by competition for light . 
 Larger seedlings are more likely to survive the dry season on BCI than smaller seedlings . Density @-@ dependent inhibition occurs between seedlings : they are more likely to survive in areas where fewer seedlings of S. amara are growing . A study on individuals on BCI found that this pattern may be caused by differences in soil biota rather than by insect herbivores or fungal pathogens . Observations based on the distance of seedlings from their parents indicate that the Janzen @-@ Connell hypothesis applies to seedlings of S. amara : they are more likely to survive away from their parents as they escape pests such as herbivores and plant pathogens which are more common underneath the parent trees . 
 = = = <unk> physiology = = = 
 Saplings of S. amara are light demanding and are found in brighter areas of the rainforest compared to <unk> elegans and <unk> ampla seedlings . A study at the La Selva Biological Station found the leaves weigh approximately 30 g / m2 ( dry weight ) , similar to P. elegans , but around double the weight of L. ampla . The photosynthetic capacity of the leaves of S. amara is higher than that of the other two species , averaging around 6 μmol m − 1 s − 1 . Dark respiration is on average 0 @.@ 72 μmol m − 1 s − 1 , higher than that of the other two species . The maximum photosynthetic rate correlates with both stem diameter and vertical growth . Diffuse light is thought to be more important for seedling growth than <unk> . Another study of saplings at La Selva found that they grew 7 cm yr − 1 in height and 0 @.@ 25 mm yr − 1 in diameter . On average they had nine compound leaves , a leaf area index of 0 @.@ 54 and the total surface area of their leaves was 124 cm2 . The saplings that had the lowest leaf area were most likely to die during the study and those with a larger leaf area grew faster than other saplings . 
 A study of saplings between one and four centimeters in diameter on BCI found that the growth of saplings did not vary depending on which species grew near them , contrary to predictions that density @-@ dependence inhibition occurs . A model based on these findings predicted that saplings with a diameter of 2 cm are able to grow at a maximum rate of 13 mm yr − 1 and that if another tree with a diameter of 10 cm is growing within 5 m of the sapling , its growth is only reduced to 12 mm yr − 1 , indicating that they are not affected by crowding . Trees growing more than 15 m away from a sapling do not affect their growth . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Lianas are relatively rare on mature ( > 20 cm dbh ) individuals of S. amara , compared to other trees on BCI , with only around 25 % having lianas growing on them . Putz suggested that this may be due to the trees having large leaves , but the mechanism by which this would reduce the number of lianas is unknown . Smaller individuals also have fewer lianas and woody hemi @-@ epiphytes than other species of tree in the same forests . 
 The <unk> <unk> ( Atteva aurea ) and other members of the Atteva genus have been recorded to eat the new shoot tips of S. amara in Costa Rica . The larvae of the butterfly species , <unk> <unk> feed exclusively on saplings and <unk> of S. amara . Two termite species have been observed living on S. amara in Panama , <unk> <unk> in dead wood and <unk> <unk> nesting in a gallery on a branch . Bullet ants ( Paraponera clavata ) have been found to nest at the base of S. amara trees . The Hemiptera , <unk> sanguinea ( <unk> ) has been found preferentially on the trunks of S. amara . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Materials = = = 
 Simarouba amara is used locally for producing paper , furniture , plywood and matches and is also used in construction . It is also grown in plantations , as its bright and lightweight timber is highly sought after in European markets for use in making fine furniture and veneers . The wood dries rapidly and is easy to work with normal tools . It is creamy white to light yellow in colour , with a coarse texture and a straight grain . It has to be treated to prevent fungi , wood borers and termites from eating it . The heartwood has a density of 0 @.@ 35 – 0 @.@ 45 g / cm3 . It has been noted to be one of the best species for timber that can be grown in the Peruvian Amazon , along with <unk> <unk> , due to its rapid growth characteristics . The Worldwide Fund for Nature recommend that consumers ensure S. amara timber is certified by the Forest Stewardship Council so that they do not contribute to deforestation . Wood shavings of S. amara have been used in animal bedding leading to the poisoning of horses and dogs . 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 The leaves and bark of S. amara have been used as an herbal medicine to treat dysentery , diarrhea , malaria and other illnesses in areas where it grows . In 1713 , it was exported to France where it was used to treat dysentery , being an effective treatment during epidemics between 1718 and 1725 . In 1918 its effectiveness was validated by a study where soldiers in a military hospital were given a tea made of the bark to treat amoebic dysentery . In a 1944 study , the Merck Institute found it was 92 % effective at treating intestinal amoebiasis in humans . During the 1990s , scientists demonstrated it could kill the most common cause of dysentery , Entamoeba histolytica , and species of Salmonella and Shigella bacteria that cause diarrhea . 
 The main biologically active compounds found in S. amara are the <unk> , a group of triterpenes , of which the most therapeutic are <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . These have been reported to kill protozoa , amoeba , Plasmodium ( the cause of malaria ) and also cancerous human cells . The anti @-@ malarial properties were first investigated by scientists in 1947 ; they found that in chickens , 1 mg of bark extract per 1 kg of body weight had strong antimalarial activity . In 1997 a patent was filed in the United States for using an extract in a skin care product . 
 = Great Barrier Reef = 
 The Great Barrier Reef is the world 's largest coral reef system composed of over 2 @,@ 900 individual reefs and 900 islands stretching for over 2 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 400 mi ) over an area of approximately 344 @,@ 400 square kilometres ( 133 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The reef is located in the Coral Sea , off the coast of Queensland , Australia . 
 The Great Barrier Reef can be seen from outer space and is the world 's biggest single structure made by living organisms . This reef structure is composed of and built by billions of tiny organisms , known as coral polyps . It supports a wide diversity of life and was selected as a World Heritage Site in 1981 . CNN labelled it one of the seven natural wonders of the world . The Queensland National Trust named it a state icon of Queensland . 
 A large part of the reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , which helps to limit the impact of human use , such as fishing and tourism . Other environmental pressures on the reef and its ecosystem include runoff , climate change accompanied by mass coral bleaching , and cyclic population outbreaks of the crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish . According to a study published in October 2012 by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , the reef has lost more than half its coral cover since 1985 . 
 The Great Barrier Reef has long been known to and used by the Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander peoples , and is an important part of local groups ' cultures and spirituality . The reef is a very popular destination for tourists , especially in the Whitsunday Islands and Cairns regions . Tourism is an important economic activity for the region , generating over $ 3 billion per year . 
 In November 2014 , Google launched Google Underwater Street View in 3D of the Great Barrier Reef . A March 2016 report stated that the reef was experiencing widespread coral bleaching as a result of warming ocean temperatures . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 The Great Barrier Reef is a distinct feature of the East Australian Cordillera division . It includes the smaller Murray Islands . It reaches from Torres Strait ( between Bramble Cay , its northernmost island , and the south coast of Papua New Guinea ) in the north to the unnamed passage between Lady Elliot Island ( its southernmost island ) and Fraser Island in the south . Lady Elliot Island is located 1 @,@ 915 km ( 1 @,@ 190 mi ) southeast of Bramble Cay as the crow flies . 
 The Plate tectonic theory indicates Australia has moved northwards at a rate of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) per year , starting during the Cenozoic . Eastern Australia experienced a period of tectonic uplift , which moved the drainage divide in Queensland 400 km ( 250 mi ) inland . Also during this time , Queensland experienced volcanic eruptions leading to central and shield volcanoes and basalt flows . Some of these became high islands . After the Coral Sea Basin formed , coral reefs began to grow in the Basin , but until about 25 million years ago , northern Queensland was still in temperate waters south of the tropics — too cool to support coral growth . The Great Barrier Reef 's development history is complex ; after Queensland drifted into tropical waters , it was largely influenced by reef growth and decline as sea level changed . 
 Reefs can increase in diameter by 1 to 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) per year , and grow vertically anywhere from 1 to 25 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 9 @.@ 84 in ) per year ; however , they grow only above a depth of 150 metres ( 490 ft ) due to their need for sunlight , and cannot grow above sea level . When Queensland edged into tropical waters 24 million years ago , some coral grew , but a sedimentation regime quickly developed with erosion of the Great Dividing Range ; creating river deltas , oozes and turbidites , unsuitable conditions for coral growth . 10 million years ago , the sea level significantly lowered , which further enabled sedimentation . The reef 's substrate may have needed to build up from the sediment until its edge was too far away for suspended sediments to inhibit coral growth . In addition , approximately 400 @,@ 000 years ago there was a particularly warm interglacial period with higher sea levels and a 4 ° C ( 7 ° F ) water temperature change . 
 The land that formed the substrate of the current Great Barrier Reef was a coastal plain formed from the eroded sediments of the Great Dividing Range with some larger hills ( most of which were themselves remnants of older reefs or , in rare cases , volcanoes ) . The Reef Research Centre , a Cooperative Research Centre , has found coral ' skeleton ' deposits that date back half a million years . The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority ( GBRMPA ) considers the earliest evidence of complete reef structures to have been 600 @,@ 000 years ago . According to the GBRMPA , the current , living reef structure is believed to have begun growing on the older platform about 20 @,@ 000 years ago . The Australian Institute of Marine Science agrees , placing the beginning of the growth of the current reef at the time of the Last Glacial Maximum . At around that time , sea level was 120 metres ( 390 ft ) lower than it is today . 
 From 20 @,@ 000 years ago until 6 @,@ 000 years ago , sea level rose steadily around the world . As it rose , the corals could then grow higher on the newly submerged maritime margins of the hills of the coastal plain . By around 13 @,@ 000 years ago the sea level was only 60 metres ( 200 ft ) lower than the present day , and corals began to surround the hills of the coastal plain , which were , by then , continental islands . As the sea level rose further still , most of the continental islands were submerged . The corals could then overgrow the submerged hills , to form the present cays and reefs . Sea level here has not risen significantly in the last 6 @,@ 000 years . The CRC Reef Research Centre estimates the age of the present , living reef structure at 6 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 years old . The shallow water reefs that can be seen in air @-@ photographs and satellite images cover an area of 20 @,@ 679 km2 , most ( about 80 % ) of which has grown on top of limestone platforms that are relics of past ( Pleistocene ) phases of reef growth . 
 The remains of an ancient barrier reef similar to the Great Barrier Reef can be found in The Kimberley , Western Australia . 
 The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area has been divided into 70 bioregions , of which 30 are reef bioregions . In the northern part of the Great Barrier Reef , ribbon reefs and deltaic reefs have formed ; these structures are not found in the rest of the reef system . There are no atolls in the system , and reefs attached to the mainland are rare . 
 <unk> reefs are distributed widely , but are most common towards the southern part of the Great Barrier Reef , attached to high islands , for example , the Whitsunday Islands . <unk> reefs are found in the southern Great Barrier Reef , and further north , off the coast of Princess Charlotte Bay . <unk> reefs are the most common shape of reef in the middle of the system , for example the reefs surrounding Lizard Island . <unk> reefs are also found in the far north of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park , and in the Swain Reefs ( 20 – 22 degrees south ) . Planar reefs are found in the northern and southern parts , near Cape York Peninsula , Princess Charlotte Bay , and Cairns . Most of the islands on the reef are found on planar reefs . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The Great Barrier Reef supports a diversity of life , including many vulnerable or endangered species , some of which may be endemic to the reef system . 
 Thirty species of whales , dolphins , and porpoises have been recorded in the Great Barrier Reef , including the dwarf minke whale , Indo @-@ Pacific humpback dolphin , and the humpback whale . Large populations of dugongs live there . More than 1 @,@ 500 fish species live on the reef , including the clownfish , red bass , red @-@ throat emperor , and several species of snapper and coral trout . Forty @-@ nine species mass spawn , while eighty @-@ four other species spawn elsewhere in their range . Seventeen species of sea snake live on the Great Barrier Reef in warm waters up to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) deep and are more common in the southern than in the northern section . None found in the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area are endemic , nor are any endangered . 
 Six species of sea turtles come to the reef to breed : the green sea turtle , leatherback sea turtle , hawksbill turtle , loggerhead sea turtle , <unk> turtle , and the Olive Ridley . The green sea turtles on the Great Barrier Reef have two genetically distinct populations , one in the northern part of the reef and the other in the southern part . Fifteen species of seagrass in beds attract the dugongs and turtles , and provide fish habitat . The most common genera of seagrasses are Halophila and <unk> . 
 Saltwater crocodiles live in mangrove and salt marshes on the coast near the reef . Nesting has not been reported , and the salt water crocodile population in the <unk> is wide @-@ ranging but low density . Around 125 species of shark , stingray , skates or chimaera live on the reef . Close to 5 @,@ 000 species of mollusc have been recorded on the reef , including the giant clam and various nudibranchs and cone snails . Forty @-@ nine species of <unk> and nine species of seahorse have been recorded . At least seven species of frog inhabit the islands . 
 215 species of birds ( including 22 species of seabirds and 32 species of shorebirds ) visit the reef or nest or roost on the islands , including the white @-@ bellied sea eagle and roseate tern . Most nesting sites are on islands in the northern and southern regions of the Great Barrier Reef , with 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 7 million birds using the sites to breed . The islands of the Great Barrier Reef also support 2 @,@ 195 known plant species ; three of these are endemic . The northern islands have 300 – 350 plant species which tend to be woody , whereas the southern islands have 200 which tend to be herbaceous ; the Whitsunday region is the most diverse , supporting 1 @,@ 141 species . The plants are propagated by birds . 
 There are at least 330 species of ascidians on the reef system with the diameter of 1 – 10 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 4 in ) . Between 300 – 500 species of bryozoans live on the reef . Four hundred coral species , both hard corals and soft corals inhabit the reef . The majority of these spawn gametes , breeding in mass spawning events that are triggered by the rising sea temperatures of spring and summer , the lunar cycle , and the diurnal cycle . Reefs in the inner Great Barrier Reef spawn during the week after the full moon in October , while the outer reefs spawn in November and December . Its common soft corals belong to 36 genera . Five hundred species of marine algae or seaweed live on the reef , including thirteen species of genus <unk> , which deposit calcareous mounds up to 100 metres ( 110 yd ) wide , creating mini @-@ ecosystems on their surface which have been compared to rainforest cover . 
 = = Environmental threats = = 
 Climate change , pollution , crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish and fishing are the primary threats to the health of this reef system . Other threats include shipping accidents , oil spills , and tropical cyclones . Skeletal <unk> Band , a disease of bony corals caused by the protozoan <unk> <unk> , affects 31 coral species . According to a 2012 study by the National Academy of Science , since 1985 , the Great Barrier Reef has lost more than half of its corals with two @-@ thirds of the loss occurring from 1998 due to the factors listed before . 
 = = = Climate change = = = 
 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority considers the greatest threat to the Great Barrier Reef to be climate change , causing ocean warming which increases coral bleaching . Mass coral bleaching events due to elevated ocean temperatures occurred in the summers of 1998 , 2002 and 2006 , and coral bleaching is expected to become an annual occurrence . As global warming continues , corals will not be able to keep up with increasing ocean temperatures . Coral bleaching events lead to increased disease susceptibility , which causes detrimental ecological effects for reef communities . Climate change has implications for other forms of reef life — some fish 's preferred temperature range leads them to seek new habitat , thus increasing chick mortality in predatory seabirds . Climate change will also affect the population and sea turtle 's available habitat . 
 Bleaching events in benthic coral communities ( deeper than 20 metres or 66 feet ) in the Great Barrier reef are not as well documented as those at shallower depths , but recent research has shown that benthic communities are just as negatively impacted in the face of rising ocean temperatures . Five Great Barrier Reef species of large benthic corals were found bleached under elevated temperatures , affirming that benthic corals are vulnerable to thermal stress . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 Another key threat faced by the Great Barrier Reef is pollution and declining water quality . The rivers of north eastern Australia pollute the Reef during tropical flood events . Over 90 % of this pollution comes from farm runoff . 80 % of the land adjacent to the Great Barrier Reef is used for farming including intensive cropping of sugar cane , and major beef cattle grazing . Farming practices damage the reef due to overgrazing , increased run @-@ off of agricultural sediments , nutrients and chemicals including fertilisers , herbicides and pesticides representing a major health risk for the coral and biodiversity of the reefs . 
 = = = = Loss of coastal wetland = = = = 
 The runoff problem is exacerbated by the loss of coastal wetlands which act as a natural filter for toxins and help deposit sediment . It is thought that the poor water quality is due to increased light and oxygen competition from algae . 
 = = = = Eutrophication = = = = 
 Farming fertiliser runoff release nitrogen , phosphorus , and potassium into the oceanic ecosystem , these limiting nutrients cause massive algal growth which leads to depletion in oxygen available for other creatures which decreases the biodiversity in the affected areas , altering the species composition . A study by Katharina Fabricius and Glen Death of Australian Institute of Marine Science found that hard corals numbers were almost double on reefs that were far from agricultural areas . 
 Fertilizers also increase the amount of phytoplankton available for the crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish larvae to consume . A study showed that a doubling of the chlorophyll in the water leads to a tenfold increase in the crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish larvae 's survival rate . 
 = = = = Sediment runoff = = = = 
 Sediment runoff from farming carries chemicals into the reef environment also reduces the amount of light available to the corals decreasing their ability to extract energy from their environment . 
 = = = = Pesticides = = = = 
 Pesticides used in farming are made up of heavy metals such as lead , mercury , arsenic and other toxins are released into the wider environment due to erosion of farm soil , which has a detrimental effect on the coral . 
 = = = = Pollution from mining = = = = 
 Mining company Queensland Nickel discharged nitrate @-@ laden water into the Great Barrier Reef in 2009 and 2011 – on the later occasion releasing 516 tonnes ( 508 long tons ; 569 short tons ) of waste water . The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority ( GBRMPA ) stated " We have strongly encouraged the company to investigate options that do not entail releasing the material to the environment and to develop a management plan to eliminate this potential hazard ; however , GBRMPA does not have legislative control over how the <unk> tailings dam is managed " . 
 = = = Crown of thorns = = = 
 The crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish preys on coral polyps . Large outbreaks of these starfish can devastate reefs . In 2000 , an outbreak contributed to a loss of 66 % of live coral cover on sampled reefs in a study by the RRC ( Reefs Research Centre . ) Outbreaks are believed to occur in natural cycles , worsened by poor water quality and overfishing of the starfish 's predators . 
 = = = Overfishing = = = 
 The unsustainable overfishing of keystone species , such as the Giant Triton , can disrupt food chains vital to reef life . Fishing also impacts the reef through increased water pollution from boats , by @-@ catch of unwanted species ( such as dolphins and turtles ) and habitat destruction from trawling , anchors and nets . As of the middle of 2004 , approximately one @-@ third of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park is protected from species removal of any kind , including fishing , without written permission . 
 = = = Shipping = = = 
 Shipping accidents are a pressing concern , as several commercial shipping routes pass through the Great Barrier Reef . Although the route through the Great Barrier Reef is not easy , reef pilots consider it safer than outside the reef in the event of mechanical failure , since a ship can sit safely while being repaired . There have been over 1 @,@ 600 known shipwrecks in the Great Barrier Reef region . On 3 April 2010 , bulk coal carrier Shen Neng 1 ran aground on Douglas Shoals , spilling up to four tonnes of oil into the water and causing extensive damage to the reef . 
 = = Human use = = 
 The Great Barrier Reef has long been known to and used by the Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander peoples . Aboriginal Australians have been living in the area for at least 40 @,@ 000 years , and Torres Strait Islanders since about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . For these 70 or so clan groups , the reef is also an important cultural feature . 
 In 1768 Louis de Bougainville found the reef during an exploratory mission , but did not claim the area for the French . On 11 June 1770 , the HM Bark Endeavour , captained by explorer James Cook , ran aground on the Great Barrier Reef , sustaining considerable damage . Lightening the ship and re @-@ floating it during an incoming tide eventually saved it . One of the most famous wrecks was the HMS Pandora , which sank on 29 August 1791 , killing 35 men . The Queensland Museum has led archaeological digs to the Pandora since 1983 . Because the reef had no atolls , it was largely unstudied in the 19th century . During this time , some of the reef 's islands were mined for deposits of guano , and lighthouses were built as beacons throughout the <unk> as in Raine Island , the earliest example . In 1922 , the Great Barrier Reef Committee began carrying out much of the early research on the reef . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Royal Commissions disallowed oil drilling in the Great Barrier Reef , in 1975 the Government of Australia created the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and prohibited various activities . The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park does not include the entire Great Barrier Reef Province . The park is managed , in partnership with the Government of Queensland , through the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to ensure that it is used in a sustainable manner . A combination of zoning , management plans , permits , education and incentives ( such as eco @-@ tourism certification ) are employed in the effort to conserve the reef . 
 In 1999 , the Australian Parliament passed the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act , which improved the operation of national environmental law by providing guidance about regional biodiversity conservation priorities . The marine bioregional planning process came from the implementation of this law . This process conserves marine biodiversity by considering the whole ecosystem a species is in and how different species interact in the marine environment . 
 There are two steps to this process . The first step is to identify regional conservation priorities in the five ( currently ) different marine regions . The second step is to identify marine reserves ( protected areas or marine parks ) to be added to Australia 's National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas . Like protected areas on land , marine reserves are created to protect biodiversity for generations to come . Marine reserves are identified based on criteria written in a document created by Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council called " Guidelines for establishing the national representative system of marine protected areas " , also known as just " the Guidelines " . These guidelines are nationally recognised and implemented at the local level based on the Australian policy for implementation outlined in the " Goals and Principles for the Establishment of the National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas in Commonwealth Waters " . These policies are in place to make sure that a marine reserve is only added to the <unk> after careful evaluation of different data . 
 The priorities for each region are created based on human and environmental threats and the Marine <unk> Plans are drafted to address these priorities . To assess different region 's priorities , three steps are taken , first , a bioregional profile is created , second , a bioregional plan is drafted , and third , the plan is finalised . After the plan is finalised , activity in different bioregions may become limited based on particular threats an activity may pose . 
 In 2001 , the GBRMPA released a report about the declining water quality in the Great Barrier Reef and detailed the importance of this issue . In repose to this report a joint initiative between the governments of Australia and Queensland to improve the water quality of the Great Barrier Reef . In 2003 , the Australian and Queensland governments launched a joint initiative to improve the quality of water entering the Great Barrier Reef . The decline in the quality of water over the past 150 years ( due to development ) has contributed to coral bleaching , algal blooms , and pesticide pollution . These forms of pollution have made the reef less resilient to climate change . 
 When the plan was introduced in October in 2003 , it originally contained 65 actions built on previous legislation . Their immediate goal was to halt and reverse the decline in water quality entering the reef by 2013 . By 2020 , they hope that the quality of the water entering in the reef improves enough so that it doesn 't have a detrimental impact on the health of the Great Barrier Reef . To achieve these goals they decided to reduce pollutants in the water entering the reef and to rehabilitate and conserve areas of the reef that naturally help reduce water pollutants . To achieve the objectives described above , this plan focuses on non @-@ point sources of pollution , which cannot be traced to a single source such as a waste outlet . 
 The plan specifically targets nutrients , pesticides and sediment that make their way into the reef as a result of agricultural activities . Other non @-@ point sources of pollution that are attributed to urban areas are covered under different legislation . In 2009 , the plan was updated . The updated version states that to date , none of the efforts undertaken to improve the quality of water entering the reef has been successful . The new plan attempts to address this issue by " targeting priority outcomes , integrating industry and community initiatives and incorporating new policy and regulatory frameworks ( Reef Plan 5 ) " . This updated version has improved the clarity of the previous plan and targets set by that plan , have improved accountability and further improved monitoring and assessment . The 2009 report found that 41 out of the 65 actions met their original goals , however , 18 were not progressing well according to evaluation criteria as well as 6 were rated as having unsatisfactory levels of progress . 
 Some key achievements made since the plan 's initial passing in 2003 were the establishment of the Reef Quality Partnership to set targets , report findings and monitor progress towards targets , improved land condition by landowners was rewarded with extended leases , Water Quality Improvement Plans were created to identify regional targets and identified management changes that needed to be made to reach those targets , Nutrient Management Zones have been created to combat sediment loss in particular areas , education programs have been started to help gather support for sustainable agriculture , changes to land management practices have taken place through the implementation of the Farm Management Systems and codes of practice , the creation of the Queensland Wetland program and other achievements were made to help improve the water quality flowing into the coral reefs . 
 A taskforce of scientists was also created to assess the impact of different parts of the plan on the quality of water flowing into the coral reefs . They found that many of the goals have yet to be reached but found more evidence that states that improving the water quality of the Great Barrier Reef will improve its resilience to climate change . The <unk> summit in 2008 , which is also detailed in the report , came to similar conclusions . After this , a stakeholder working group was formed that worked between several groups as well as the Australian and Queensland governments to update reef goals and objectives . The updated version of the plan focuses on strategic priority areas and actions to achieve 2013 goals . Also quantitative targets have been made to critically assess whether targets are being met . 
 Some examples of the water quality goals outlined by this plan are that by 2013 , there will be a 50 % reduction in nitrogen and phosphorus loads at the end of catchments and that by 2020 , there will be a reduction in sediment load by 20 % . The plan also outlines a number of steps that must be taken by landholders to help improve grazing , soil , nutrient , and chemical management practices . There are also a number of supporting initiatives to take place outlined in the plan to help create a framework to improve land use practices which will in turn improve water quality . 
 Through these means the governments of Australia and Queensland hope to improve water quality by 2013 . The 2013 outlook report and revised water quality plan will assess what needs to be done in the future to improve water quality and the livelihoods of the wildlife that resides there . 
 In July 2004 , a new zoning plan took effect for the entire Marine Park , and has been widely acclaimed as a new global benchmark for marine ecosystem conservation . The rezoning was based on the application of systematic conservation planning techniques , using <unk> software . While protection across the Marine Park was improved , the highly protected zones increased from 4 @.@ 5 % to over 33 @.@ 3 % . At the time , it was the largest Marine Protected Area in the world , although in 2006 , the new Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Monument became the largest . 
 In 2006 , a review of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act of 1975 recommended are that there should be no further zoning plan changes until 2013 , and that every five years , a peer @-@ reviewed outlook report should be published , examining the reef 's health , management , and environmental pressures . In each outlook report , several assessments are required . Each assessment has a set of assessment criteria that allows for better presentation of available evidence . Each assessment is judged by these criteria and given a grade . Every outlook report follows the same judging and grading process so that information can be tracked over time . No new research is done to produce the report . Only readily available information goes into the report so little of what is known about the Reef is actually featured in each outlook report . 
 = = = = Abbot Point coal port dredge dumping controversy = = = = 
 In December 2013 , Greg Hunt , the Australian environment minister , approved a plan for dredging to create three shipping terminals as part of the construction of a <unk> . According to corresponding approval documents , the process will create around 3 million cubic metres of dredged seabed that will be dumped within the Great Barrier Reef marine park area . 
 On 31 January 2014 , the GBRMPA issued a dumping permit that will allow three million cubic metres of sea bed from Abbot Point , north of Bowen , to be transported and unloaded in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park . Potential significant harms have been identified in relation to dredge spoil and the process of churning up the sea floor in the area and exposing it to air : firstly , new research shows the finer particles of dredge spoil can cloud the water and block sunlight , thereby starving sea grass and coral up to distances of 80 km away from the point of origin due to the actions of wind and currents . Furthermore , dredge spoil can literally smother reef or sea grass to death , while storms can repeatedly <unk> these particles so that the harm caused is ongoing ; secondly , disturbed sea floor can release toxic substances into the surrounding environment . 
 The dredge spoil from the Abbot Point port project is to be dumped 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) away , near Bowen in north Queensland , and the approval from the Authority will result in the production of an extra 70 million tonnes of coal annually , worth between A $ 1 @.@ 4 billion and $ 2 @.@ 8 billion . Authority chairman , Dr Russell <unk> , stated after the confirmation of the approval : 
 This approval is in line with the agency ’ s view that port development along the Great Barrier Reef coastline should be limited to existing ports . As a deepwater port that has been in operation for nearly 30 years , Abbot Point is better placed than other ports along the Great Barrier Reef coastline to undertake expansion as the capital and maintenance dredging required will be significantly less than what would be required in other areas . It ’ s important to note the seafloor of the approved disposal area consists of sand , silt and clay and does not contain coral reefs or seagrass beds . 
 The approval was provided with a corresponding set of 47 new environmental conditions that include the following : 
 A long @-@ term water quality monitoring plan extending five years after the disposal activity is completed . 
 A heritage management plan to protect the Catalina second world war aircraft wreck in Abbot Bay . 
 The establishment of an independent dredging and disposal technical advice panel and a management response group , to include community representatives . 
 The Australian Federal Government announced on 13 November that there would now be a ban on the dumping of dredge spoil in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park . The World Heritage Committee asked Environment Minister Greg Hunt to investigate alternative options to dump on land instead . The Queensland government and the Commonwealth have now accepted the alternative option and advice from The World Heritage Committee and will now commence dumping on land . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Due to its vast biodiversity , warm clear waters and accessibility from the tourist boats called " live <unk> " , the reef is a very popular destination , especially for scuba divers . Tourism on the Great Barrier Reef is concentrated in Cairns and also The <unk> due to their accessibility . These areas make up 7 % – 8 % of the Park 's area . The <unk> and Cairns have their own Plans of Management . Many cities along the Queensland coast offer daily boat trips . Several continental and coral cay islands are now resorts , including Green Island and Lady Elliot Island . As of 1996 , 27 islands on the Great Barrier Reef supported resorts . 
 In 1996 , most of the tourism in the region was domestically generated and the most popular visiting times were during the Australian winter . At this time , it was estimated that tourists to the Great Barrier Reef contributed A $ 776 million per annum . As the largest commercial activity in the region , it was estimated in 2003 that tourism generated over A $ 4 billion annually , and the 2005 estimate increased to A $ 5 @.@ 1 billion . A Deloitte report published by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority in March 2013 states that the Reef 's 2 @,@ 000 kilometres of coastline attracts tourism worth A $ 6 @.@ 4 billion annually and employs more than 64 @,@ 000 people . 
 Approximately two million people visit the Great Barrier Reef each year . Although most of these visits are managed in partnership with the marine tourism industry , there is a concern among the general public that tourism is harmful to the Great Barrier Reef . 
 A variety of boat tours and cruises are offered , from single day trips , to longer voyages . Boat sizes range from dinghies to <unk> . Glass @-@ bottomed boats and underwater observatories are also popular , as are helicopter flights . By far , the most popular tourist activities on the Great Barrier Reef are snorkelling and diving , for which pontoons are often used , and the area is often enclosed by nets . The outer part of the Great Barrier Reef is favoured for such activities , due to water quality . 
 Management of tourism in the Great Barrier Reef is geared towards making tourism ecologically sustainable . A daily fee is levied that goes towards research of the Great Barrier Reef . This fee ends up being 20 % of the GBRMPA 's income . Policies on cruise ships , bareboat charters , and anchorages limit the traffic on the Great Barrier Reef . 
 The problems that surround ecotourism in the Great Barrier Reef revolve around permanent tourism platforms . Platforms are large , ship @-@ like vessels that act as a base for tourists while scuba diving and snorkelling in the Great Barrier Reef . Seabirds will land on the platforms and defecate which will eventually be washed into the sea . The feces carry nitrogen , phosphorus and often DDT and mercury , which cause aspergillosis , yellow @-@ band disease , and black band disease . Areas without tourism platforms have 14 out of 9 @,@ 468 ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) diseased corals versus areas with tourism platforms that have 172 out of 7 @,@ 043 ( 12 % ) diseased corals . Tourism is a major economic activity for the region . Thus , while non @-@ permanent platforms could be possible in some areas , overall , permanent platforms are likely a necessity . Solutions have been suggested to siphon bird waste into gutters connecting to tanks helping lower runoff that causes coral disease . 
 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has also placed many permanent anchorage points around the general use areas . These act to reduce damage to the reef due to anchoring destroying soft coral , chipping hard coral , and disturbing sediment as it is dragged across the bottom . Tourism operators also must comply with speed limits when travelling to or from tourist destinations , to prevent excessive wake from the boats disturbing the reef ecosystem . 
 = = = Fishing = = = 
 The fishing industry in the Great Barrier Reef , controlled by the Queensland Government , is worth A $ 1 billion annually . It employs approximately 2000 people , and fishing in the Great Barrier Reef is pursued commercially , for recreation , and as a traditional means for feeding one 's family . 
 = = = Dugong hunting = = = 
 Under the Native Title Act 1993 , native title holders retain the right to legally hunt dugongs and green turtles for ' personal , domestic or non @-@ commercial communal needs ' . 
 Four traditional owners groups agreed to cease the hunting of Dugongs in the area in 2011 due to their declining numbers , partially accelerated by seagrass damage from the 2011 Queensland Floods . 
 = = Photo gallery = = 
 = Cyclone Emma ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Cyclone Emma was a weak but unusually large tropical cyclone that affected a substantial portion of Western Australia during the 2005 – 06 Australian region cyclone season . Forming out of an area of low pressure on 25 February , the precursor to Emma slowly tracked southward . Although classified tropical , the structure of the system represented that of a monsoonal storm . However , low wind shear and well @-@ developed outflow gradually allowed convection to develop near the centre of circulation . As the system approached the Pilbara coastline of Western Australia on 27 February , it intensified into a Category 1 cyclone and attained peak 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . After moving inland near Mardie , Emma weakened to a tropical low but became exceedingly large ; its cloud cover obscured most of Western Australia . The remnants of the weak storm persisted until 1 March , at which time they dissipated over the Great Australian Bight . 
 Although a weak storm , rainfall from Emma caused flooding in numerous parts of Western Australia . In Karratha , six people required rescue after their cars became stranded in floodwaters . The most significant damage took place along the Murchison River which swelled to roughly 20 km ( 12 mi ) in width . Although only one town was threatened by the river , large areas of farmland were inundated by the expanding river , leading to substantial agricultural losses . Despite the extensive flooding , no fatalities were reported as a result of Emma . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Cyclone Emma originated from an area of low pressure that formed to the southeast of Java on 22 February 2006 . Over the following few days , a monsoonal trough developed over the Timor Sea , leading to an increased likelihood of tropical cyclone formation from the initial low within several days . On 25 February , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology began monitoring the system as a tropical low . The low tracked slowly towards the south throughout the day and the centre of circulation relocated farther south late on 26 February . By this time , the Bureau of Meteorology anticipated the low to develop into a tropical cyclone and attain winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) before moving over land in Western Australia . 
 Early on 27 February , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) classified the system as a tropical depression . During the day , a QuikSCAT pass revealed a broad low @-@ level circulation with the highest winds located around the periphery of the storm , a characteristic of monsoonal systems . Although it was situated within a region of low wind shear and underneath an anticyclone , convective activity was mostly present in the system 's large outer bands . Later that day , the Bureau of Meteorology upgraded the system to a Category 1 cyclone on the Australian intensity scale and named it Emma . At this time , Emma was located roughly 305 km ( 190 mi ) north of Onslow , Western Australia . Several hours later , the JTWC classified Emma as Tropical Storm 15S following the development of convection near the centre of circulation . 
 The storm continued to track southward in response to a strong mid to upper @-@ level ridge situated over central Australia . Emma attained its peak wind speed of 75 km / h ( 45 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) late on 27 February as it neared landfall . However , the JTWC assessed Emma to have been slightly weaker , peaking with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . The storm maintained this intensity through its landfall early on 28 February near Mardie along the Pilbara coastline . Shortly after moving over land , the JTWC declared Emma extratropical and issued their final advisory on the storm . The Bureau of Meteorology , however , continued to monitor the cyclone as it rapidly tracked over Western Australia . Over land , the storm became unusually large , with outer bands from the storm covering most of Western Australia . Late on 28 February , the lowest barometric pressure in relation to Emma , 988 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) , was recorded . The remnants of Emma persisted through most of 1 March before the system moved over the Great Australian Bight and dissipated . 
 The Australian Bureau of Meteorology uses 10 @-@ minute sustained winds , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses one @-@ minute sustained winds . The Bureau of Meteorology 's peak intensity for Emma was 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Emma was 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained , or 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Ahead of the storm , oil and mining operations in threatened regions were temporarily shut down . Already suffering from the impacts of Cyclones Clare and Daryl , residents were warned about the likelihood of flooding due to the already saturated grounds . The Bureau of Meteorology also issued tropical cyclone warnings for most of the Pilbara coastline on 28 February . The same day , the Fire and Emergency Services of Australia issued a Yellow Alert for Point Samson , Roebourne , Wickham , Dampier , Karratha , and Mardie . Residents in these areas were advised to evacuate if necessary and ensure that all cyclone preparations had been completed . Shelters were also opened for residents who sought need for one . Schools throughout the Pilbara region were also closed for several days as a result of the storm . 
 Due to the low intensity of the storm at landfall , little or no wind damage took place from Emma . On land , sustained winds were recorded up to 78 km / h ( 48 mph ) and gusts up to 95 km / h ( 59 mph ) . A storm surge of 0 @.@ 8 m ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) was recorded at Dampier but , no damage resulted from it . Heavy rains produced by the storm caused moderate to severe flooding in Western Australia . In Karratha , six people were rescued from two cars after they became stranded on a flooded road . Total rainfall from the storm was recorded at 308 mm ( 12 @.@ 1 in ) in the city . Localised flooding was reported in Pannawonica . Some buildings reported minor flooding but overall structural damage was minimal . The 190 mm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) of rain that fell in a 24 @-@ hour span in Karratha pushed the city above its annual average rainfall totals in the first two months of the year . Near the <unk> Station , the Robe River overflowed its banks , inundating the area and forcing the evacuation of everyone in the homestead . In the Gascoyne region 30 cattle drowned after flood waters rapidly overtook a pasture . 
 In the Murchison region , rainfall exceeding 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) brought the worst floods in decades , inundating numerous farms and causing substantial agricultural losses . Two weeks after the storm passed , the mouth of the Murchison River was closed after a ship became stranded in the swollen river . By 14 March , the river had broadened to roughly 20 km ( 12 mi ) in places normally 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in width . These values marked the largest flood ever recorded in the river 's history . Officials distributed sandbags to build temporary levee to protect low @-@ lying areas . The largest operation took place at Kalbarri , near the mouth of the river , where 60 firefighters and 18 volunteers worked to put up 9 @,@ 000 sandbags . The <unk> and <unk> stations were also isolated from surrounding areas after the Murchison River inundated the area . Several stations in the area remained under water for over a month and farmers requested urgent assistance from the government to help alleviate losses . Initial damage from the storm was placed at A $ 1 million ( $ 706 @,@ 580 USD ) . 
 Flood waters from the Murchison River finally began to recede on 17 March ; however , it took several weeks for the river to return to its normal level . Although Emma had only minor effects in Carnarvon , the town enacted a A $ 14 million ( $ 10 million USD ) flood protection plan in the wake of the storm . The plan would lead to the construction of new levees in areas surrounding the town and keep flood waters within Nicol Bay Flats . Additionally , four sections of the North West Coastal Highway were set to be upgraded for similar reasons . Due to the combined effects of Cyclones Clare , Darryl , Jim , Emma , Kate and Glenda , gold production in Australia fell by 8 percent , resulting in earnings losses of A $ 130 million . 
 = American Gothic House = 
 The American Gothic House , also known as the Dibble House , is a house in Eldon , Iowa , designed in the Carpenter Gothic style with a distinctive upper window . It was the backdrop of the 1930 painting American Gothic by Grant Wood . Generally considered Wood 's most famous work and among the most recognized paintings in twentieth century American art , the painting is the model for hundreds of parodies across every creative medium . Grant Wood , who observed the house only once in his lifetime , made only an initial sketch of the house — he completed American Gothic at his studio in Cedar Rapids . 
 First owned by Eldon resident Charles Dibble after its construction in 1881 and 1882 , the home was ( with one 1897 exception ) a private residence until the late twentieth century . After a thirty @-@ year preservation effort culminated with the donation of the house in 1991 to the State Historical Society of Iowa , the site now includes the original house in its 1930 form and a visitors center . The house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974 . Since 1991 , various caretaker @-@ occupants have continued to rent the home privately . 
 = = Early history and architecture = = 
 Charles A. Dibble ( born 1836 in Saratoga County , New York ) , by various accounts a railroad man , livery stable owner , and Civil War veteran , lived in Eldon in the late nineteenth century . He and his wife , Catharine , began building the house in 1881 for themselves and their eight children . Its relatively simple board @-@ and @-@ batten siding , white color , and moderate size — just 504 square feet ( 46 @.@ 8 m2 ) — were quite common in nineteenth century Iowa architecture . A similar style can be observed in the birthplace of President Herbert Hoover in West Branch , built a decade before the American Gothic House , which features board @-@ and @-@ batten siding , a simple shingled roof , a central chimney , white color , and a moderate size as well . Unique and unusual exterior features of the house include its two Gothic windows in the gable and its steep @-@ pitched roof . Both features would later be exaggerated by Grant Wood in American Gothic . The lower floor of the house contains three rooms and a bathroom , while the upper floor has two bedrooms . The house has been called the best @-@ known example of a Carpenter Gothic cottage in the United States . 
 There is no conclusive evidence explaining why the Dibbles chose to place Gothic windows on the upper level . The windows are believed to have been purchased through the Sears catalog . There are two commonly accepted theories : the Dibbles may have wanted the windows to beautify their home at a time when rural life in Iowa was a struggle , or they could have been following a trend in which extravagant details were desirable in residences in the late nineteenth century , and the Dibbles chose windows whose costs would have been relatively reasonable at the time . 
 The Dibbles ' house was foreclosed around 1897 after they were unable to pay their taxes , and they moved to Portland , Oregon by 1900 . It exchanged hands several times until 1917 , when Gideon and Mary Hart Jones purchased it . The Jones family owned the house until 1933 ( and notably added a kitchen which created the west wing of the house ) ; thus , it was the Jones family who allowed Grant Wood to use their home as a backdrop for American Gothic . 
 = = American Gothic = = 
 During the summer of 1930 , Edward Rowan , a young gallery director from Cedar Rapids , a large city approximately 80 miles ( 130 km ) to the northeast of Eldon , attempted to promote fine arts in the rural town by opening a gallery and library and leading art classes in Eldon . Rowan 's attempts were met with success — the Eldon Forum called the exhibitions " an unusual treat . " This , along with an indebtedness Wood felt toward Rowan , drew the painter ( himself a native of Anamosa , Iowa ) to come to Eldon . 
 In August , Wood was driven around the town by a young painter from Eldon , John Sharp , looking for inspiration . Sharp 's brother suggested in 1973 that it was on this drive that Wood first sketched the house on the back of an envelope . Wood did not immediately regard the house as beautiful , but he did find it captivating . His earliest biographer , Darrell Garwood , noted that Wood " thought it a form of borrowed pretentiousness , a structural absurdity , to put a Gothic @-@ style window in such a flimsy frame house . " At the time , Wood classified it as one of the " <unk> [ sic ] frame houses on Iowa farms " and considered it " very <unk> . " After obtaining the permission of the Jones family , Wood made a sketch the next day in oil on paperboard from the house 's front yard . This sketch displayed a steeper roof and a longer window with a more pronounced ogive than the actual house , features which eventually adorned the final work ; however , Wood did not add figures to the sketch until he returned to Cedar Rapids . He would not return to Eldon again before his death in 1942 , although he did request a photograph of the home to complete his painting . 
 = = Later history and current status = = 
 Decades after American Gothic was regarded as an American icon , the house continued to serve as a private residence , usually for rent , transferring ownership only once more from the Jones family to the Seldon Smith family at a " distress sale " in 1942 . A grassroots movement to preserve the house was started as early as 1945 by Nan Wood , Grant Wood 's sister and the female figure depicted in American Gothic . A visit in 1960 to the house ( which was beginning to fall into disrepair ) by Des Moines architect and historian William J. Wagner , <unk> capped these early efforts . He was among the first to suggest preservation of the house as a historic site : 
 In the early 1970s , a series of letters between Eldon businessmen and Carl E. Smith , the newly @-@ inherited owner of the house , revealed differing opinions on continued use of the house : Smith wanted to renovate the house and protect it from vandalism only ; the Eldon leaders were more in favor of making the house a historic site . The house was abandoned for much of the 1970s — a bullet was fired in an upstairs bedroom ; weather and vandalism took their toll as well . Only in the late 1980s did the owner of the property consider turning the house over to the state . Indeed , many southern Iowans were conflicted on the issue — the owner wanted to keep the house only because he believed the current renters would have nowhere else to go if they were forced to leave . 
 After the home was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974 ( the result of an application by an Eldon farmer ) , the owner refurbished the house , installing an indoor bathroom and electricity and restoring the windows and wallpaper . Local politicians believed such work coupled with a new museum and education center could provide a major boost to local tourism — one state senator hoped for as many as 100 @,@ 000 visitors per year . After the house 's owner eventually turned over the property to the State Historical Society of Iowa in 1991 , an effort was made to move the house to Living History Farms outside Des Moines , but <unk> fought to keep it within their city limits . The house was renovated in 1992 , with boosters hoping to see the house become a pop @-@ culture tourism attraction , much like the Field of Dreams site in similarly rural <unk> . Today the American Gothic House Center hosts approximately 15 @,@ 000 visitors per year , which does not account for additional after @-@ hours visitors . 
 Visitors are encouraged to view the house from the outside and have their photo taken — in fact , the visitors center provides many sizes of similar aprons and jackets worn by the original painting 's models . The adjacent American Gothic House Center , completed in 2007 , contains exhibits about the painting , artist Grant Wood , and the community around the house . Each June , the city of Eldon holds its Gothic Days festival , a celebration of the painting and rural life in Eldon in the 1930s . Starting in 2015 , tours began in the first floor of the home . The Gothic House is not handicap accessible . 
 = A. Scott Berg = 
 Andrew Scott Berg ( born December 4 , 1949 ) is a Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning American biographer . 
 After graduating from Princeton University in 1971 , Berg expanded his senior thesis on editor Maxwell Perkins into a full @-@ length biography , Max Perkins : Editor of Genius ( 1978 ) , which won a National Book Award . His second book Goldwyn : A Biography was published in 1989 . 
 Berg 's third book Lindbergh , a highly anticipated biography of aviator Charles Lindbergh was published in 1998 , becoming a New York Times Best Seller , and winning the 1999 Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography . In 2003 Berg published Kate Remembered , a biography @-@ cum @-@ memoir about his friendship with actress Katharine Hepburn that received mixed reviews . His book Wilson , a biography of Woodrow Wilson was published on September 10 , 2013 . 
 Berg also wrote the story for Making Love ( 1982 ) , a controversial film that was the first major studio drama to address the subjects of gay love , closeted marriages , and coming out . He has contributed articles to magazines such as Architectural Digest and Vanity Fair . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life and work = = = 
 Berg was born in Norwalk , Connecticut . The son of Barbara ( Freedman ) Berg and film producer Dick Berg , Berg was raised Jewish . When Berg was eight , his family relocated to Los Angeles , California . While a sophomore at Palisades Charter High School , Berg researched the author F. Scott Fitzgerald ( a favorite of Barbara 's , who named her son in part after Fitzgerald ) for a report and " developed a mania " for his writing . Berg read all of Fitzgerald 's works and later recalled : " It was the first time I saw the fusion of an artist and his life , a tragic and romantic life . " Scott applied to Princeton University , primarily because it was Fitzgerald 's alma mater , and was accepted in 1967 . 
 At Princeton , Berg performed in the Princeton Triangle Club theater troupe and considered dropping out to become an actor , though he was convinced by English professor Carlos Baker , a well @-@ regarded biographer of Ernest Hemingway , to " graduate , so at least you 'll be an actor with a college degree " . Berg studied under Baker , who offered him " constant encouragement and counsel " on his senior thesis , which was a study of editor Maxwell Perkins 's career between 1919 and 1929 . After graduating from Princeton in 1971 , Berg decided to expand the thesis into a full @-@ length biography , thinking it would take around nine months . He also formulated a career plan at this time , and later recalled : " I did tell myself early on : I think it would be interesting , perhaps , to spend a career writing a half @-@ dozen biographies of twentieth @-@ century American cultural figures — each one , as I often use as my metaphor , a different wedge of the great apple pie . " The Perkins biography , Max Perkins : Editor of Genius , took longer than Berg anticipated and was eventually published in 1978 . It won a 1980 National Book Award in Biography . 
 In 1982 , Berg was approached by Samuel Goldwyn , Jr. to write a biography of his father , the independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn . Berg initially turned the project down , telling Goldwyn that " he was interested in American culture , not Hollywood , " but changed his mind after visiting Goldwyn 's archives and discovering gin rummy <unk> , menus from Goldwyn 's dinner parties , and " all the quotidian minutiae that are a biographer 's dream " . He won a 1982 Guggenheim Fellowship , which helped finance his work on the biography . The same year , Berg wrote the story for Making Love , a controversial film that was the first major studio drama to address the subjects of homosexual love , closeted marriages , and coming out . He also narrated Directed by William Wyler , a 1986 documentary about the filmmaker William Wyler for which Berg interviewed Wyler , Bette Davis , Audrey Hepburn , Laurence Olivier , and Barbra Streisand , among others . In 1989 , Berg published Goldwyn : A Biography , his second biography . 
 = = = Lindbergh = = = 
 After completing Goldwyn in 1989 , Berg began the search for his next subject , who he wanted to be " another great American cultural figure but — because I had written about Perkins and Goldwyn — not somebody from the worlds of publishing or film " . After briefly considering Tennessee Williams , Berg decided to research the aviator Charles Lindbergh , attracted by what he described as " the dramatic possibilities of the story of the great hero who became a great victim and a great villain " . Berg convinced Lindbergh 's widow , Anne Morrow Lindbergh , to grant him unprecedented access to the man 's archives , which he was surprised to find totaled " 1 @,@ 300 boxes , or several million papers " . 
 The biography , Lindbergh , was highly anticipated ; prior to its publication , the book 's film rights were bought , sight unseen , by Steven Spielberg , who planned to direct a movie of it . Published in 1998 , Lindbergh sold about 250 @,@ 000 copies in hardcover , and won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography . Berg was noted for his exhaustive research , as well as his sympathetic , but by no means uncritical , approach to Lindbergh , whose alleged anti @-@ Semitism he addressed in a straightforward , unblinking manner . 
 = = = Recent work = = = 
 From 1998 to 2000 , Berg wrote Kate Remembered , a biography @-@ cum @-@ memoir detailing his 20 @-@ year friendship with the Hollywood actress Katharine Hepburn . The book was published in 2003 , only 12 days after Hepburn 's death . It spent 11 weeks on the New York Times Nonfiction Best Seller list , but received uneasy critical response . In The New York Times , Robert Gottlieb called it an " odd and unsettling book [ that leaves ] a sense of exploitation " , and gossip columnist Liz Smith , a friend of Hepburn 's , called Berg " vain and narcissistic " , and declared the book " [ s ] elf @-@ promoting fakery .... Hepburn would have despised it and his betrayal of her friendship . " Berg responded in a written statement , saying that he was " truly shocked at Liz Smith 's professional behaviour — or , more accurately , her lack thereof " in " her personal assault on my reputation , one that stops just short of character assassination " . 
 Berg served on Princeton University 's Board of Trustees from 1999 to 2003 . In 2000 , he began researching a biography of Woodrow Wilson , of whom Berg says , " I have an image of him in my mind that is unlike any picture I have seen anywhere else , based on material at Princeton and 35 years of researching and thinking about him " . In March 2010 he became involved in a film production project , transforming the 1960s television program 77 Sunset Strip into a feature film , which delayed the Wilson biography a further 18 months . Wilson was published on September 10 , 2013 . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Berg lives with his friend Kevin McCormick , a film producer , in Los Angeles . 
 His brothers are Jeff Berg , former CEO of International Creative Management , a leading Hollywood talent and literary agency ; and music producer and musician Tony Berg . His youngest brother Rick is a partner and manager at the production company Code Entertainment . His niece is Z Berg , a musician of The Like and <unk> . 
 = Lillestrøm Stadion = 
 Lillestrøm idrettspark , colloquially known as Lillestrøm stadion , is a sports facility located at Lillestrøm in Skedsmo , Norway . The main venue is Romerike <unk> , an athletics stadium with eight all @-@ weather running tracks . It has multiple football pitches , including one with artificial turf and one with gravel . The park features of two arenas , LSK @-@ Hallen with a full @-@ size artificial football pitch and Skedsmohallen for indoor sports . The venue is located adjacent to Åråsen Stadion , the home ground of Lillestrøm SK . The main tenants for Lillestrøm idrettspark are <unk> BK and Focus FK in football , and Strømmen IF , Lørenskog FIL and Minerva IS in athletics . The stadium opened on 6 June 1920 and was the main venue for Lillestrøm SK until 1951 . The athletics stadium opened two years later . In 2004 , the artificial turf pitch was laid and in 2007 a new athletics venue and LSK @-@ Hallen opened . 
 = = History = = 
 The stadium opened on 6 June 1920 and was originally named Lillestrøm <unk> <unk> ( " Lillestrøm Municipal Sports Place " ) . Lillestrøm SK was the main football tenant from the opening until 1951 , when they opened Åråsen Stadion . The original athletics stadium opened in 1953 , located at the same place as the current athletics stadium . Minerva arranged the first tournament on 16 June 1954 . Subsequently a velodrome was installed outside the running track . A municipal grant of 5 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) allowed a steeplechase obstacle to be installed in 1959 . A cage for discus throw and hammer throw was installed on the current artificial turf pitch in 1970 . 
 The athletics venue suffered with drainage problems , and from the 1970s it was no longer used for competitions . This forced Minerva IS to hold many of its trainings at <unk> stadion in Oslo and Jessheim stadion in <unk> . In 1976 , Minerva IS took initiative to lay all @-@ weather running track , but the proposal was rejected by the municipality . In 1990 , Skedsmo Municipal Council initially voted to allocate NOK 2 million for all @-@ weather running track , but the funding was reallocated to fix a leaking roof on Skedsmo Church . No further grants were issued for the stadium . 
 In 2004 , Lillestrøm SK took initiative to convert one of the gravel pitches to artificial turf . The proposal also saw the installation of floodlights and under @-@ soil heating . The new field cost NOK 9 million , which was covered by LSK , betting grants and the municipality . Construction started in August 2004 and was completed in November . The pitch located behind Skedsmohallen was converted to a throwing venue in 2005 . 
 Ahead of the 2003 municipal elections , the Labour Party mayor candidates for the municipalities of Skedsmo , <unk> and Lørenskog , Andreas <unk> , Terje <unk> and Åge <unk> , proposed that a central , inter @-@ municipal athletics venue be built for Nedre Romerike . The proposal was followed up by the three athletics clubs in the area , Minerva IS , Strømmen IF and Lørenskog FIL , who established a committee . Several locations were considered , but the committee landed on Lillestrøm idrettspark because of the availability of existing utilities , parking and changing rooms , which would reduce the investment costs . In the process , Strømmen stadion was rejected because it was undergoing upgrades to receive artificial turf and <unk> was deemed too remote . Also <unk> in Lørenskog was deemed unsuitable . The choice of Lillestrøm idrettspark was selected by consensus among the municipalities and the sports clubs in June 2005 . 
 Grants were issued from the municipalities in 2005 , the size of which was determined by the population of each municipality . <unk> was hired to design the venue and construction started on 28 June 2006 . Earthworks were completed by November and <unk> started on 16 May 2007 . The all @-@ weather surface was completed on 13 June and technical installations were completed by mid @-@ August . The new venue was inaugurated on 1 September 2007 . It cost NOK 28 @.@ 6 million , of which NOK 15 @.@ 9 million were paid for by the municipalities in ratio of their population . The rest was financed through a combination of betting grants , value added tax compensation and volunteer work . 
 In 2006 , the municipality approved Lillestrøm SK 's plans to build an indoor football pitch . The hall was inaugurated on 11 October 2007 and cost NOK 62 million . In 2009 , Lillestrøm launched itself as one of six candidate cities for Norway 's joint bid with Sweden to host the UEFA Euro 2016 . This would involve building a new venue seating between 35 @,@ 000 and 44 @,@ 000 in Lillestrøm . One of three potential locations was at Lillestrøm idrettspark . The stadium would be built in modules , so the upper tiers could be dismounted after the championship and installed on other venues . The proposal was selected as one of four for the bid , but the bid was never sent . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Lillestrøm idrettspark is located across the railway from Åråsen Stadion , the home ground of Lillestrøm SK . It is the main recreational sports complex in Skedsmo , located just north of Lillestrøm . It contains several football pitches , including one with gravel and one with artificial turf . The artificial and two of the natural grass pitches have undersoil heating . LSK @-@ Hallen contains an indoor 105 @-@ by @-@ 68 @-@ meter ( 115 by 74 yd ) artificial turf football pitch with capacity for 3 @,@ 000 spectators . Skedsmohallen is the main indoor arena in Skedsmo ; it is largely used for ball sports , athletics and martial arts , but also sees cultural evens such as concerts . Lillestrøm og <unk> <unk> undertakes archery practice behind Skedsmohallen . Also at the park is a driving range and a skateboarding park . 
 Romerike <unk> is an inter @-@ municipal athletics venue jointly owned by the municipalities of Skedsmo , <unk> and Lørenskog . The venue is built to a sufficient standard to host the Norwegian Athletics Championship . It features a 400 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) long all @-@ weather surface with eight tracks , permitting 110 meters hurdles on both sides . Both sides have two jumping pits , and two areas for pole vault and two for high jump . Javelin throw is possible from both ends , with undersoil heating in the last part of the approach . The throwing cage permits discus throw and hammer throw , and the area for shot put is heated . The venue is used exclusively for athletics and is constructed such that it cannot be used for football . The athletics field has a spectator capacity of 750 , of which 185 can be seated . It has floodlighting at 200 lux and electronic timekeeping equipment , as well as two huts . In addition , a gravel football pitch is used for throwing practice . 
 = = Events = = 
 Lillestrøm SK uses Lillestrøm idrettspark and LSK @-@ Hallen for training sessions for the elite team and for lower @-@ level matches . The Women 's Premier League side LSK <unk> FK play their home matches in LSK @-@ Hallen . The football grounds are also used by <unk> BK and Focus FK in the Third Division . The athletics venue is used by Minerva IS , Lørenskog FIL and Strømmen IF . During the 1952 Winter Olympics , the stadium was one of five rinks used for ice hockey . Three rinks were located outside Oslo in order to spread the games to a wider audience . The single match at Lillestrøm stadion saw Poland beat Finland 4 – 2 on 23 February . The former velodrome hosted two Norwegian championships . The athletics venue annually hosts <unk> and one of the three <unk> Grand Prix events . Since 2012 the Norway national football team started using Åråsen and Lillestrøm stadion for training . 
 = Abram Lincoln Harris = 
 Abram Lincoln Harris , Jr . ( January 17 , 1899 – November 6 , 1963 ) was an American economist , academic , anthropologist and a social critic of blacks in the United States . Considered by many as the first African American to achieve prominence in the field of economics , Harris was also known for his heavy influence on black radical and neo @-@ conservative thought in the United States . As an economist , Harris is most famous for his 1931 collaboration with political scientist Sterling Spero to produce a study on African American labor history titled The Black Worker and his 1936 work The Negro as Capitalist , in which he criticized black businessmen for not promoting interracial trade . He headed the economics department at Howard University from 1936 to 1945 and taught at the University of Chicago from then until his death . As a social critic , Harris took an active radical stance on racial relations by examining historical black involvement in the workplace , and suggested that African Americans needed to take more action in race relations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harris was born into a middle @-@ class African American family on January 17 , 1899 in Richmond , Virginia . His father was a butcher at a meat shop , and his mother was a schoolteacher . The family that ran the Richmond meat shop where Harris ' father worked was German American . As a result of his frequent contact with the family , Harris learned German and became a fluent speaker of the language . Harris ' mastery of the language would help him later in life , when he examined the writings of German economists and social reformers like Karl Marx . 
 He attended Virginia Union University , graduating in 1922 with a Bachelor of Science degree . Harris went on to earn an M.A. in economics from the University of Pittsburgh in 1924 . It was his masters ' thesis , The Negro Laborer in Pittsburgh , that started his lifelong examination on the African American labor forces 
 = = Career = = 
 He later published two articles in the National Urban League 's journal , Opportunity , that discussed the difficulties faced by African American mineworkers . His work in this field also addressed his concern about blacks and their white counterparts . Harris examined race prejudice of blacks by white workers . Meanwhile , Harris taught at West Virginia State University , a small historically black public college in Institute , West Virginia . During this year , he began a long and sustaining friendship with V. F. Calverton . He taught for a year , before he shifted directions and took the position as director of the Minneapolis Urban League . As director , he prepared a detailed report titled The Negro Population in Minneapolis : A Study of Race Relations dealing with the living conditions of African Americans in Minneapolis , Minnesota . Harris described the physical and socio @-@ economic conditions of African Americans in Minneapolis in 1926 . Using census data and statistical surveys , Harris tried to show that there was a strong social rift at the workplace between blacks and whites . Harris then enrolled at Columbia University to pursue a Ph.D in economics . In 1927 , just a year into his doctorate studies , Harris joined the faculty of Howard University . There , Harris collaborated with fellow black colleagues Ralph Bunche and E. Franklin Frazier , and attacked old values and outlooks on race . 
 Continuing with previous writings , Harris wrote his Ph.D thesis on the rift between African American and white labor in the United States . In 1930 , he became the second African American to receive a doctorate in Economics in the United States , following Sadie <unk> Alexander . The following year , he collaborated his thesis with political scientist , Sterling Spero , to produce a famous study of African American labor history entitled The Black Worker , the Negro & the Labor Movement . Harris believed that African Americans needed to contribute to the development of a working @-@ class political party in the United States . He expressed dislike for other strategies like rebellion , secession , or the various Back to Africa movements — which Harris described as " Negro Zionism " — led by such figures as Marcus Garvey and Haile Selassie I. 
 In The Black Worker , Spero and Harris asserted that African Americans could put an end to the racial antagonism in the working class . They wrote about the history of the racial predicament between whites and blacks had stemmed from the days of slavery . They argued that many African Americans had just recently migrated to the urban setting , and had been unaware of trade unionism and its benefits . They stated that the anti @-@ union beliefs held by organizations such as the National Urban League also provided for the racial division seen in the working class between blacks and whites . Harris also was the author of a Progressive Labor Party pamphlet in 1930 that called for the formation of a working @-@ class political party in the United States . By this point , he and Calverton had grown distant ; white journalist Benjamin Stolberg took Calverton 's place as a major correspondent in Harris ' life . They critiqued each other 's work and encouraged each other towards greater heights of accomplishment . 
 Harris , along with Frazier and Bunche , led the attack on the older generations at the NAACP 's 1933 Amenia Conference . Harris ' radical beliefs prompted a 1935 report entitled the Harris Report suggesting that the NAACP take a more active and affirmative stance on race relations in the United States . As the Great Depression progressed , Harris ' radicalism declined . As Harris wrote in the 1957 introduction to his personal collection of essays , he was " emerging from a state of social rebellion [ while ] still <unk> [ ing ] somewhat to socialistic ideas by the late 1920s . " He published his most famous economics work in 1936 , The Negro as Capitalist : A Study of Banking and Business . In the work , Harris wrote about the growing anti @-@ business sentiment of the Great Depression . Harris argued that black businessmen were under the false sense of racial solidarity between whites and blacks . He said that African Americans needed to participate in trade unionism with white businessmen . This was the reason for the problems in the development of black business . Harris concluded that the black middle class was using their racial pride and unity to support businesses controlled by the American middle class . He felt that blacks were not reaching out to whites , and black business would not grow if there was no interracial trade . In reference to black complaints against Jewish businessmen , Harris said : 
 Despite the heavy criticism against fellow black businesspeople , Harris ' book achieved notability and recognition in the field of economics during the Great Depression . In 1937 , Harris founded the liberal Social Science Division of Howard University , and served as the group 's leader through the late 1930s and early 1940s . 
 Harris left Howard in 1945 and moved to the University of Chicago , and became one of the first African American academics with a high position at a historically white institution . His move was facilitated on part of the efforts of Chicago economist Frank Knight , one of the founders of the famed Chicago School of economics that fostered the likes of Nobel Prize @-@ winning economists Milton Friedman and George Stigler . Knight had been publishing many of Harris ' papers on the subject of economic doctrine in the Journal of Political Economy since the late 1920s when Harris was at Howard . With his move to Chicago , Harris ' economic ideologies also seemed to change . His writings took more of the tone of orthodox economics , and his previous defense of Karl Marx and other radical economists had turned into critical examinations of the works of these men . 
 Harris expressed deep concerns about the Soviet Union 's totalitarian direction led by Joseph Stalin in works such as Black Communist in Dixie , published in the National Urban League magazine , Opportunity . However , Harris became silenced on the topic of race , and did not write about it for the remainder of his academic career . Harris spent the rest of his life at the University of Chicago and died on November 18 , 1963 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Harris is best known for his work as an economist and social critic of African American business . He had a heavy influence on both black radical and neo @-@ conservative thought . A recipient of the Guggenheim Fellowship for Economics in 1935 , 1936 , 1943 and 1953 , Harris was one of the leaders of black economics through the early and mid 20th century . His early works such as The Negro as Capitalist set the precedent for contemporary African American radical thought . Harris ' great number of works on race relations such as The Black Worker served as a model for future African American studies . His essays in The Journal of Political Economy have played a significant role for <unk> economists and for economists studying the history of economic doctrines . He is still widely regarded as one of the first African Americans to achieve prominence in academia in the early 20th century , and an influential figure on a wide range of African American topics of interest . 
 = King Arthur & the Knights of Justice ( video game ) = 
 King Arthur & the Knights of Justice is an action @-@ adventure game developed by Manley & Associates and published by Enix for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in May 1995 . Based on the cartoon series of the same title , which was loosely inspired by the Arthurian legend , the game was released in North America exclusively . 
 The player takes on the role of a team of American football players who are transported to Medieval England and given the mission to save King Arthur and destroy the evil sorceress Morgana and her army . The game was the first Enix title developed by an American company , and was inspired by The Legend of Zelda series and various written works . It was received with reviews ranging from mediocre to extremely poor . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a standard action @-@ adventure game , played from a top @-@ down perspective . The player takes on the role of Arthur King and is accompanied by two Knights of Justice controlled by the game console . The player battles enemies using a regular sword swing or a special attack , and can block high and low attacks . 
 Twelve Knights are available from the start ( including Arthur King ) , each with his own weapon , personality and statistics for life force , defense , strength and speed . Each boss of the game has a specific weakness against one of the Knights . Changing party members is done by visiting the Round Table room in Camelot . Each character has a life meter , and Arthur also has a power meter . Various items must be collected to complete quests and objectives , while some can be used to restore a character 's life meter . 
 An overworld map feature allows the player to directly access locations already visited once . The game has no saving feature but allows accessing various points of the storyline with a system of passwords . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The events of the game are set in a fictional version of Britain in the 5th century . The evil sorceress Morgana has magically imprisoned King Arthur and the Knights of the Round in the Cave of Glass beneath her castle , past Hadrian 's Wall . At Camelot , the King 's wizard Merlin uses a crystal ball and locates a brave team of " warriors " in the future , led by Arthur King and dubbed " The Knights " . They are actually American football players , though Merlin interprets their names as a sign of fate . He summons them back in time , and the Lady of the Table transforms them into " Knights of Justice " . Merlin asks them to break the seal on King Arthur and the Knights of the Round by gathering the twelve Keys of Truth . 
 The party retrieves the Excalibur sword from the Lady of the Lake , proving their worth by claiming the Pendragon Shield from a young dragon at Shield Heights . They assist <unk> , the deposed ruler of Tintagel Castle , and recover the first Key of Truth in the castle . They make their way into the village of Welton , which is under a mind control spell , and recover the second Key of Truth at Gruesome Keep . After breaking the spell on Welton and crossing the Blinder 's Way , they claim the third Key of Truth at Castle Sanguine . 
 During the event , a Warlord infiltrates Camelot and poisons Squire Everett . The party collects an antidote in the Swamp of Zagar and saves the Squire . They then claim the fourth Key of Truth in Stone Keep . They rescue the son of the Gnome King to obtain the fifth Key of Truth , and collects four Elemental Keys to unlock access to Castle <unk> and the sixth Key of Truth . The party finds the seventh and eighth Keys of Truth in <unk> village and the Cape of Death , respectively . The ninth and tenth Keys are found in <unk> Keep and the Dark Citadel while searching for the missing pieces of the Staff of <unk> , which can break open a path in Hadrian 's Wall . 
 Using the Staff , the party goes past Hadrian 's Wall and into the Dark Forest , where the eleventh Key of Truth is found . In a cemetery , they stumble upon a statue of Morgana , which fires a magic beam that kills the two Knights in the party . Arthur travels to the Town of the Dead by himself then to the Plain of the Dead and retrieves his two dead Knights . They reach Morgana 's castle , Stone Gardens , and defeat Morgana in her dragon form , thus obtaining the last Key of Truth . In the game 's ending sequence , the party members are congratulated by the real , freed King Arthur , and Merlin uses Stonehenge to send them back to their era . 
 = = Development = = 
 King Arthur & the Knights of Justice was the first Enix game developed by an American company : Manley & Associates in Issaquah , Washington . Roughly two dozen people worked on the game , though not all at the same time . It was initially planned for a 16 @-@ megabit cartridge , but four additional megabits were eventually added to expand the game . Development spanned about two years . 
 In addition to the original cartoon series , the developers gathered ideas from several sources for inspiration , including The Legend of Zelda action @-@ adventure game series , and books such as T. H. White 's The Book of Merlyn and fables from Medieval poet Marie de France . They noted that the hardest part of development was coming up with puzzles for each of the regions , as they had to be " fun and challenging , but not repetitive " . While they tried to maintain a balance between action and puzzles , they noted that they focused more on the puzzle aspect of the game . Favorite parts of the game for the developers include the dragon battles , the boss Blackwing and Morgana 's Warlords . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The title received generally negative reviews . Video game magazines Nintendo Power and Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the title a score of 2 @.@ 68 out of 5 and 5 @.@ 62 out of 10 respectively , while the website Allgame rated it 3 out of 5 stars . Freelance critic Robert Schmitz gave the title a score of 0 @.@ 5 out of 11 , calling it " awful " and explaining the game is almost " better left unsaid " . Schmitz blamed Enix 's decision to base the game on a little @-@ known cartoon series , a comment echoed by both the Video Game Bible . 
 Milligan called the game a " staggeringly ill @-@ conceived game " and likened it to a " succession of fetch quests " . Electronic Gaming Monthly felt the graphics lack vibrant colors , but that the music was " alright " . Allan Milligan , in a review for the Gaming Intelligence Agency , judged the graphics and audio both mediocre , the character designs " terrible " , the plot generic and the puzzles not challenging . Moreover , he noted that it is impossible for the player to know in advance which Knight is best suited for which boss . 
 Concerning the gameplay , Milligan criticized the fact that all enemies on a screen must be defeated to progress through some passages , and the possibility for characters and enemies to be hidden from the player 's view behind large objects . The unintuitive angle made by Arthur 's sword when attacking and the Knights ' artificial intelligence were also denounced as poorly conceived , as were the lack of animation when a character or enemy is hit . While Milligan noted no major glitches or bugs in the game , Schmitz felt the testers rushed their job . The game seemed " unfinished and underdeveloped " for the Video Game Bible , as well as by Milligan , who called the packaging " nice " and the manual readable , wondering why " thinking human beings " would ever agree to make a game " this unambitious and dull " . 
 = Tulsidas = 
 Tulsidas ( Hindi : <unk> ; Hindi pronunciation : [ t ̪ <unk> ̪ <unk> ̪ <unk> ̪ ] , also known as Goswami Tulsidas ( <unk> ् <unk> <unk> ) ; 1497 / 1532 – 1623 ) was a Hindu poet @-@ saint , reformer and philosopher from <unk> Sampradaya in the lineage of Jagadguru Ramanandacharya renowned for his devotion to the Lord Shri Rama . A composer of several popular works , he is best known as the author of the epic Ramcharitmanas , a retelling of the Sanskrit Ramayana based on Rama 's life in the vernacular Awadhi . 
 Tulsidas was acclaimed in his lifetime to be a reincarnation of Valmiki , the composer of the original Ramayana in Sanskrit . He is also considered to be the composer of the Hanuman Chalisa , a popular devotional hymn dedicated to Hanuman , the divine devotee of Rama . 
 Tulsidas spent most of his life in the city of Varanasi . The Tulsi Ghat on the Ganges River in Varanasi is named after him . He founded the Sankatmochan Temple dedicated to Hanuman in Varanasi , believed to stand at the place where he had the sight of Hanuman . Tulsidas started the Ramlila plays , a folk @-@ theatre adaption of the Ramayana . 
 He has been acclaimed as one of the greatest poets in Hindi , Indian , and world literature . The impact of Tulsidas and his works on the art , culture and society in India is widespread and is seen to date in vernacular language , Ramlila plays , Hindustani classical music , popular music , and television series . 
 = = Transliteration and etymology = = 
 The Sanskrit name of Tulsidas can be transliterated in two ways . Using the original Sanskrit , the name is written as <unk> . Using the Hunterian transliteration system , it is written as Tulsidas or <unk> reflecting the vernacular pronunciation ( since the written Indian languages maintain the vestigial letters that are no longer pronounced ) . The lost vowels are an aspect of the Schwa deletion in Indo @-@ Aryan languages and can vary between regions . The name is a compound of two Sanskrit words : <unk> , which is an Indian variety of the basil plant considered auspicious by Vaishnavas ( devotees of god Vishnu and his avatars like Rama ) , and <unk> , which means slave or servant and by extension , devotee . Tulsidas , thus means a servant of the plant Tulsi . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Incarnation of Valmiki = = = 
 Tulsidas is believed by many to be a reincarnation of Valmiki . In the Hindu scripture <unk> Purana , the god Shiva tells his wife Parvati how Valmiki , who got a boon from Hanuman to sing the glory of Rama in vernacular language , will incarnate in future in the Kali Yuga ( the present and last Yuga or epoch within a cycle of four <unk> ) . 
 <unk> writes in his <unk> ( literally , the Garland of Saints ) that Tulsidas was the re @-@ incarnation of Valmiki in the Kali Yuga . The <unk> sect believes that it was Valmiki himself who incarnated as Tulsidas in the Kali Yuga . 
 According to a traditional account , Hanuman went to Valmiki several times to hear him sing the Ramayana , but Valmiki turned down the request saying that Hanuman being a monkey was unworthy of hearing the epic . After the victory of Rama over Ravana , Hanuman went to the Himalayas to continue his worship of Rama . There he scripted a play version of the Ramayana called Mahanataka or Hanuman Nataka engraved on the Himalayan rocks using his nails . When Valmiki saw the play written by Hanuman , he anticipated that the beauty of the Maha Nataka would eclipse his own Ramayana . Hanuman was saddened at Valmiki 's state of mind and , being a true <unk> without any desire for glory , Hanuman cast all the rocks into the ocean , some parts of which are believed to be available today as Hanuman Nataka . After this , Valmiki was instructed by Hanuman to take birth as Tulsidas and compose the Ramayana in the vernacular . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 [ [ File : Tulsi <unk> 
 pg | thumb | Birthplace of Tulsidas ] ] 
 = = = = Birth = = = = 
 Tulsidas was born on <unk> , the seventh day of <unk> paksha , the bright half of the lunar Hindu calendar month <unk> ( July – August ) . Although as many as seven places are mentioned as his birthplace , most scholars identify the place with Rajapur ( Chitrakoot ) , a village on the banks of the river Yamuna , on the border between the states of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh . In 2012 <unk> Rajapur village on <unk> Road near <unk> <unk> Bajar , currently in District Gonda , Uttar Pradesh , approximately 50 km from Ayodhya , was declared officially by the government of Uttar Pradesh as the birthplace of Tulsi <unk> . His parents were <unk> and <unk> Dubey . Most sources identify him as a <unk> Brahmin of the Parashar Gotra ( lineage ) , although some sources claim he was a <unk> or <unk> Brahmin . 
 There is difference of opinion among biographers regarding the year of birth of Tulsidas . Many sources rely on Veni Madhav Das ' account in the Mula Gosain Charita , which gives the year of Tulsidas ' birth as <unk> Samvat 1554 ( 1497 CE ) . These sources include <unk> Pathak , popular editions of Ramcharitmanas ( Gita Press , Naval Kishore Press and <unk> Press ) , Edwin Greaves , Hanuman Prasad <unk> , Ramanand Sarasvati , <unk> Sharma , Ramchandra Shukla , <unk> , and Rambhadracharya . A second group of biographers led by Sant Tulsi Sahib of <unk> and Sir George Grierson give the year as Vikram 1589 ( 1532 CE ) . These biographers include <unk> Gopal Bhandarkar , <unk> Dwivedi , James <unk> , Swami Sivananda and others . A third small group of authors which includes H. H. Wilson , <unk> De <unk> and <unk> Mishra gives the year as Vikram 1600 ( 1543 CE ) . The year 1497 appears in many current @-@ day biographies in India and in popular culture . Biographers who disagree with this year argue that it makes the life span of Tulsidas equal 126 years , which in their opinion is unlikely if not impossible . In contrast , Ramchandra Shukla says that an age of 126 is not impossible for a Mahatma ( great soul ) like Tulsidas . The Government of India and provincial governments celebrated the 500th birth anniversary of Tulsidas in the year 1997 CE , according to the year of Tulsidas ' birth in popular culture . 
 = = = = Childhood = = = = 
 Legend goes that Tulsidas was born after staying in the womb for twelve months , he had all thirty two teeth in his mouth at birth , his health and looks were like that of a five @-@ year @-@ old boy , and he did not cry at the time of his birth but uttered Rama instead . He was therefore named Rambola ( literally , he who uttered Rama ) , as Tulsidas himself states in Vinaya Patrika . As per the Mula Gosain Charita , he was born under the <unk> constellation , which according to Jyotisha ( Hindu astrology ) causes immediate danger to the life of the father . Due to the inauspicious events at the time of his birth , he was abandoned by his parents on the fourth night , sent away with <unk> ( some sources call her <unk> ) , a female servant of <unk> . In his works Kavitavali and Vinayapatrika , Tulsidas attests to his parents abandoning him after birth due to an inauspicious astrological configuration . 
 <unk> took the child to her village of <unk> and looked after him for five and a half years after which she died . Rambola was left to fend for himself as an impoverished orphan , and wandered from door to door begging for alms . It is believed that the goddess Parvati assumed the form of a Brahmin woman and fed Rambola every day . 
 = = = = Initiation from guru and learning = = = = 
 At the age of five years , Rambola was adopted by Narharidas , a Vaishnava ascetic of Ramananda 's monastic order who is believed to be the fourth disciple of Ramananda , or alternately , the disciple of <unk> . Rambola was given the Virakta Diksha ( <unk> initiation ) with the new name of Tulsidas . Tulsidas narrates the dialogue that took place during the first meeting with his guru in a passage in the Vinayapatrika . When he was seven years old , his Upanayana ( " sacred thread ceremony " ) was performed by Narharidas on the fifth day of the bright half of the month of Magha ( January – February ) at Ayodhya , a pilgrimage @-@ site related to Rama . Tulsidas started his learning at Ayodhya . After some time , Narharidas took him to a particular Varaha Kshetra ( a holy place with temple dedicated to Varaha – the boar avatar of Vishnu ) , where he first narrated the Ramayana to Tulsidas . Tulsidas mentions this in the Ramcharitmanas . 
 Most authors identify the Varaha Kshetra referred to by Tulsidas with the Varaha temple on the second entrance of the pilgrimage of <unk> in Chitrakuta . Some biographers believe this <unk> is the <unk> Varaha Kshetra in modern @-@ day Kanshi Ram Nagar , while some others believe it to be <unk> @-@ Rajapur Varaha Kshetra in current @-@ day Gonda . Tulsidas further mentions in the Ramcharitmanas that his guru repeatedly narrated the Ramayana to him , which led him to understand it somewhat . 
 Tulsidas later came to the sacred city of Varanasi and studied Sanskrit grammar , four Vedas , six <unk> , Jyotisha and the six schools of Hindu philosophy over a period of 15 – 16 years from guru Shesha Sanatana who was based at the <unk> Ghat in Varanasi . Shesha Sanatana was a friend of Narharidas and a renowned scholar on literature and philosophy . After completing his studies , Tulsidas came back to his birthplace Rajapur with the permission of Shesha Sanatana . Here he found that his family was no more , with his parents dead . Tulsidas performed the Shraddha ceremony ( which deals with giving offerings to the ancestors ) of his parents . He started living in his ancestral home and narrating the Katha ( " story " ) of Ramayana in Chitrakuta . 
 = = = = Marriage and renunciation = = = = 
 There are two contrasting views regarding the marital status of Tulsidas . According to the Mula Gosain Charita and some other works , Tulsidas was married to Ratnavali on the thirteenth day of the bright half of the <unk> month ( May – June ) in Vikram 1583 ( 1526 CE ) . Ratnavali was the daughter of <unk> Pathak , a Brahmin of the Bharadwaja Gotra , who belonged to <unk> village of Kaushambi district . They had a son named Tarak who died as a toddler . Once when Tulsidas had gone to a Hanuman temple , Ratnavali went to her father 's home with her brother . When Tulsidas came to know this , he swam across the Yamuna river in the night to meet his wife . Ratnavali chided Tulsidas for this , and remarked that if Tulsidas was even half as devoted to God as he was to her body of flesh and blood , he would have been redeemed . Tulsidas left her instantly and left for the holy city of Prayag . Here , he renounced the Grihastha ( householder 's life ) stage and became a Sadhu ( Hindu ascetic ) . 
 Some authors consider the marriage episode of Tulsidas to be a later interpolation and maintain that he was a bachelor . They include Rambhadracharya , who interprets two verses in the Vinayapatrika and Hanuman <unk> to mean that Tulsidas never married and was a Sadhu from childhood . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 = = = = Travels = = = = 
 After renunciation , Tulsidas spent most of his time at Varanasi , Prayag , Ayodhya , and Chitrakuta but visited many other nearby and far @-@ off places . He travelled across India to many places , studying different people , meeting saints and Sadhus and meditating . The Mula Gosain Charita gives an account of his travels to the four pilgrimages of Hindus ( Badrinath , Dwarka , Puri and Rameshwaram ) and the Himalayas . He visited the <unk> lake in current @-@ day Tibet , where tradition holds he had Darshan ( sight ) of <unk> , the crow who is one of the four narrators in the Ramcharitmanas . 
 = = = = Darshan of Hanuman = = = = 
 Tulsidas hints at several places in his works , that he had met face to face with Hanuman and Rama . The detailed account of his meetings with Hanuman and Rama are given in the <unk> of Priyadas . According to Priyadas ' account , Tulsidas used to visit the woods outside Varanasi for his morning ablutions with a water pot . On his return to the city , he used to offer the remaining water to a certain tree . This quenched the thirst of a Preta ( a type of ghost believed to be ever thirsty for water ) , who appeared to Tulsidas and offered him a boon . Tulsidas said he wished to see Rama with his eyes , to which the Preta responded that it was beyond him . However , the Preta said that he could guide Tulsidas to Hanuman , who could grant the boon Tulsidas asked for . The Preta told Tulsidas that Hanuman comes everyday disguised in the mean attire of a leper to listen to his Katha , he is the first to arrive and last to leave . 
 That evening Tulsidas noted that the first listener to arrive at his discourse was an old leper , who sat at the end of the gathering . After the Katha was over , Tulsidas quietly followed the leper to the woods . In the woods , at the spot where the Sankat Mochan Temple stands today , Tulsidas firmly fell at the leper 's feet , shouting " I know who you are " and " You cannot escape me " . At first the leper feigned ignorance but Tulsidas did not relent . Then the leper revealed his original form of Hanuman and blessed Tulsidas . When granted a boon , Tulsidas told Hanuman he wanted to see Rama face to face . Hanuman told him to go to Chitrakuta where he would see Rama with his own eyes . 
 At the beginning of the Ramcharitmanas , Tulsidas bows down to a particular Preta and asks for his grace ( Ramcharitmanas , Doha 1 @.@ 7 ) . According to Rambhadracharya , this is the same Preta which led Tulsidas to Hanuman . 
 = = = = Darshan of Rama = = = = 
 As per Priyadas ' account , Tulsidas followed the instruction of Hanuman and started living in an Ashram at <unk> in Chitrakuta . One day Tulsidas went to perform the <unk> ( circumambulation ) of the <unk> mountain . He saw two princes , one dark and the other fair , dressed in green robes pass by mounted on <unk> . Tulsidas was enraptured at the sight , however he could not recognise them and took his eyes off them . Later Hanuman asked Tulsidas if he saw Rama and his brother Lakshmana on horses . Tulsidas was disappointed and <unk> . Hanuman assured Tulsidas that he would have the sight of Rama once again the next morning . Tulsidas recalls this incident in a song of the Gitavali and laments how " his eyes turned his own enemies " by staying fixed to the ground and how everything happened in a <unk> . On the next morning , Wednesday , the new @-@ moon day of Magha , Vikram 1607 ( 1551 CE ) or 1620 ( 1564 CE ) as per some sources , Rama again appeared to Tulsidas , this time as a child . Tulsidas was making sandalwood paste when a child came and asked for a sandalwood Tilaka ( a religious mark on the forehead ) . This time Hanuman gave a hint to Tulsidas and he had a full view of Rama . Tulsidas was so charmed that he forgot about the sandalwood . Rama took the sandalwood paste and put a Tilaka himself on his forehead and Tulsidas ' forehead before disappearing . 
 In a verse in the Vinayapatrika , Tulsidas alludes to a certain " miracle at Chitrakuta " , and thanks Rama for what he did for him at Chitrakuta . Some biographers conclude that the deed of Rama at Chitrakuta referred to by Tulsidas is the Darshan of Rama . 
 = = = = Darshan of Yajnavalkya and Bharadvaja = = = = 
 In Vikram 1628 ( 1572 CE ) , Tulsidas left Chitrakuta for Prayag where he stayed during the Magha Mela ( the annual fair in January ) . Six days after the Mela ended , he had the Darshan of the sages Yajnavalkya and Bharadvaja under a banyan tree . In one of the four dialogues in the Ramcharitmanas , Yajnavalkya is the speaker and Bharadvaja the listener . Tulsidas describes the meeting between Yajnavalkya and Bharadvaja after a Magha Mela festival in the Ramcharitmanas , it is this meeting where Yajnavalkya narrates the Ramcharitmanas to Bharadvaja . 
 = = = = Attributed Miracles = = = = 
 In Priyadas ' biography , Tulsidas is attributed with the power of working miracles . In one such miracle , he is believed to have brought back a dead Brahmin to life . While the Brahmin was being taken for cremation , his widow bowed down to Tulsidas on the way who addressed her as <unk> ( a woman whose husband is alive ) . The widow told Tulsidas her husband had just died , so his words could not be true . Tulsidas said that the word has passed his lips and so he would restore the dead man to life . He asked everybody present to close their eyes and utter the name of Rama , on doing which the dead Brahmin was raised back to life . 
 In another miracle described by Priyadas , the emperor of Delhi , Akbar summoned Tulsidas on hearing of his bringing back a dead man to life . Tulsidas declined to go as he was too engrossed in creating his verses but he was later forcibly brought before the Akbar and was asked to perform a miracle , which Tulsidas declined by saying " It 's a lie , all I know is Rama . " The emperor imprisoned Tulsidas at Fatehpur Sikri , " We will see this Rama . " Tulsidas refused to bow to Akbar and created a verse in praise of Hanuman and chanted it ( Hanuman Chalisa ) for forty days and suddenly an army of monkeys descended upon the town and wreaked havoc in all corners of Fatehpur Sikri , entering each home and the emperor 's harem , scratching people and throwing bricks from ramparts . An old Hafiz told the emperor that this was the miracle of the imprisoned Fakir . The emperor fell at Tulsidas ' feet , released him and apologised . Tulsidas stopped the menace of monkeys and asked the emperor to abandon the place . The emperor agreed and moved back to Delhi . Ever since Akbar became a close friend of Tulsidas and he also ordered a firman that followers of Rama , Hanuman & other Hindus , should not be harassed in his kingdom . 
 Priyadas narrates a miracle of Tulsidas at Vrindavan , when he visited a temple of Krishna . When he began bowing down to the idol of Krishna , the Mahant of the temple named <unk> decided to test Tulsidas . He told Tulsidas that he who bows down to any deity except their <unk> Devata ( cherished form of divinity ) is a fool , as Tulsidas ' <unk> Devata was Rama . In response , Tulsidas recited the following extemporaneously composed couplet 
 When Tulsidas recited this couplet , the idol of Krishna holding the flute and stick in hands changed to the idol of Rama holding the bow and arrow in hands . Some authors have expressed doubts on the couplet being composed by Tulsidas . 
 = = = Literary life = = = 
 Tulsidas started composing poetry in Sanskrit in Varanasi on the Prahlada Ghat . Tradition holds that all the verses that he composed during the day , would get lost in the night . This happened daily for eight days . On the eighth night , Shiva – whose famous Kashi Vishwanath Temple is located in Varanasi – is believed to have ordered Tulsidas in a dream to compose poetry in the vernacular instead of Sanskrit . Tulsidas woke up and saw both Shiva and Parvati who blessed him . Shiva ordered Tulsidas to go to Ayodhya and compose poetry in Awadhi . Shiva also predicted that Tulsidas ' poetry would <unk> like the Sama Veda . In the Ramcharitmanas , Tulsidas hints at having the Darshan of Shiva and Parvati in both dream and awakened state . 
 = = = = Composition of Ramcharitmanas = = = = 
 In the year Vikram 1631 ( 1575 CE ) , Tulsidas started composing the Ramcharitmanas in Ayodhya on Tuesday , <unk> day ( ninth day of the bright half of the Chaitra month , which is the birthday of Rama ) . Tulsidas himself attests this date in the Ramcharitmanas . He composed the epic over two years , seven months and twenty @-@ six days , and completed the work in Vikram 1633 ( 1577 CE ) on the Vivaha Panchami day ( fifth day of the bright half of the Margashirsha month , which <unk> the wedding of Rama and his wife Sita ) . 
 Tulsidas came to Varanasi and recited the Ramcharitmanas to Shiva ( Vishwanath ) and Parvati ( Annapurna ) at the Kashi Vishwanath Temple . A popular legend goes that the Brahmins of Varanasi , who were critical of Tulsidas for having rendered the Sanskrit Ramayana in the vernacular , decided to test the worth of the work . A manuscript of the Ramcharitmanas was kept at the bottom of pile of Sanskrit scriptures in the sanctum sanctorum of the <unk> temple in the night , and the doors of the sanctum sanctorum were locked . In the morning when the doors were opened , the Ramcharitmanas was found at the top of the pile . The words Satyam Shivam Sundaram ( Sanskrit : सत ् <unk> <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ् , literally " truth , auspiciousness , beauty " ) were inscribed on the manuscript with the signature of Shiva . The words were also heard by the people present . 
 Per traditional accounts , some Brahmins of Varanasi were still not satisfied , and sent two thieves to steal the manuscript . The thieves tried to break into the Ashram of Tulsidas , but were confronted by two guards with bows and arrows , of dark and fair complexion . The thieves had a change of heart and came to Tulsidas in the morning to ask who the two guards were . Believing that the two guards could be none other than Rama and Lakshmana , Tulsidas was aggrieved to know that they were guarding his home at night . He sent the manuscript of <unk> to his friend Rai <unk> Mal , the finance minister of Akbar , and donated all his money . The thieves were reformed and became devotees of Rama . 
 = = = = Last compositions = = = = 
 Around Vikram 1664 ( 1607 CE ) , Tulsidas was afflicted by acute pain all over his body , especially in his arms . He then composed the Hanuman <unk> , where he describes his bodily pain and suffering in several stanzas . He was relieved of his pain after this composition . Later he was also afflicted by <unk> boils ( Hindi : <unk> ़ , <unk> caused by pulling out of the hair ) , which may have been the cause of his death . 
 The Vinaypatrika is considered as the last compositions of Tulsidas , believed to be written when Kali Yuga started troubling him . In this work of 279 stanzas , he beseeches Rama to give him Bhakti ( " devotion " ) , and to accept his petition . Tulsidas attests in the last stanza of Vinaypatrika that Rama himself signed the manuscript of the work . The 45th stanza of the Vinaypatrika is sung as the evening Aarti by many Hindus . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Tulsidas died at the Assi Ghat on the bank of the river Ganga in the <unk> ( July – August ) month of the year Vikram 1680 ( 1623 CE ) . Like the year of his birth , traditional accounts and biographers do not agree on the exact date of his death . Different sources give the date as the third day of the bright half , seventh day of the bright half , or the third day of the dark half . 
 = = Works = = 
 Twelve works are widely considered by biographers to be written by Tulsidas , six major works and six minor works . Based on the language of the works , they have been classified into two groups as follows – 
 Awadhi works – Ramcharitmanas , <unk> Nahachhu , Barvai Ramayan , Parvati Mangal , Janaki Mangal and Ramagya Prashna . 
 Braja works – Krishna Gitavali , Gitavali , sahitya ratna , Dohavali , Vairagya <unk> and Vinaya Patrika . 
 Besides these twelve works , four more works are popularly believed to be composed by Tulsidas which include Hanuman Chalisa , Hanuman <unk> , Hanuman <unk> and Tulsi Satsai . 
 = = = Ramcharitmanas = = = 
 Ramacharitamanas ( <unk> , 1574 – 1576 ) , " The Mānasa lake brimming over with the exploits of Lord Rāma " is an Awadhi rendering of the Ramayana narrative . It is the longest and earliest work of Tulsidas , and draws from various sources including the Ramayana of Valmiki , the Adhyatma Ramayana , the Prasannaraghava and Hanuman Nataka . The work consists of around 12 @,@ 800 lines divided into 1073 stanzas , which are groups of <unk> separated by Dohas or <unk> . It is divided into seven books ( Kands ) like the Ramayana of Valmiki , and is around one @-@ third of the size of Valmiki 's Ramayana . The work is composed in 18 metres which include ten Sanskrit metres ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Malini , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) and eight Prakrit metres ( <unk> , Doha , <unk> , Harigitika , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) . It is popularly referred to as <unk> Ramayana , literally The Ramayana composed by Tulsidas . The work has been acclaimed as " the living sum of Indian culture " , " the tallest tree in the magic garden of medieval Indian poesy " , " the greatest book of all devotional literature " , " the Bible of Northern India " , and " the best and most trustworthy guide to the popular living faith of its people . " 
 Several manuscripts of the Ramcharitmanas are claimed to have been written down by Tulsidas himself . Grierson wrote in the late nineteenth century , two copies of the epic were said to have existed in the poet 's own handwriting . One manuscript was kept at Rajapur , of which only the <unk> is left now , which bears marks of water . A legend goes that the manuscript was stolen and thrown into Yamuna river when the thief was being pursued , and only the second book of the epic could be rescued . Grierson wrote that the other copy was at <unk> in Lucknow district , of which only one leaf was missing . Another manuscript of the <unk> claimed to be in the poet 's own hand exists at <unk> in Etah district , one of the places claimed to be Tulsidas ' birthplace . One manuscript of <unk> , dated Samvat 1661 , nineteen years before the poet 's death , claimed to be corrected by Tulsidas , is at Ayodhya . Some other ancient manuscripts are found in Varanasi , including one in possession of the Maharaja of Benares that was written in Vikram 1704 ( 1647 ) , twenty @-@ four years after the death of Tulsidas . 
 = = = Other major works = = = 
 The five major works of Tulsidas apart from Ramcharitmanas include – 
 Dohavali ( <unk> , 1581 ) , literally Collection of Dohas , is a work consisting of 573 miscellaneous Doha and <unk> verses mainly in Braja with some verses in Awadhi . The verses are aphorisms on topics related to tact , political wisdom , righteousness and the purpose of life . 85 Dohas from this work are also found in the Ramcharitmanas , 35 in Ramagya Prashna , two in Vairagya <unk> and some in Rama Satsai , another work of 700 Dohas attributed to Tulsidas . 
 sahitya ratna or ratna Ramayan ( 1608 – 1614 ) , literally Collection of <unk> , is a Braja rendering of the Ramayana , composed entirely in metres of the <unk> family – <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . It consists of 325 verses including 183 verses in the <unk> . Like the Ramcharitmanas , it is divided into seven Kands or books and many episodes in this work are different from the Ramcharitmanas . 
 Gitavali ( <unk> ) , literally Collection of Songs , is a Braja rendering of the Ramayana in songs . All the verses are set to Ragas of Hindustani classical music and are suitable for singing . It consists of 328 songs divided into seven Kands or books . Many episodes of the Ramayana are elaborated while many others are abridged . 
 Krishna Gitavali or <unk> ( <unk> ् <unk> , 1607 ) , literally Collection of Songs to Krishna , is a collection of 61 songs in honour of Krishna in Braja . There are 32 songs devoted to the childhood sports ( <unk> ) and Rasa Lila of Krishna , 27 songs form the dialogue between Krishna and <unk> , and two songs describe the episode of disrobing of Draupadi . 
 Vinaya Patrika ( <unk> ् <unk> ) , literally Petition of Humility , is a Braja work consisting of 279 stanzas or hymns . The stanzas form a petition in the court of Rama asking for Bhakti . It is considered to be the second best work of Tulsidas after the Ramcharitmanas , and is regarded as important from the viewpoints of philosophy , erudition , and eulogistic and poetic style of Tulsidas . The first 43 hymns are addressed to various deities and Rama 's courtiers and attendants , and remaining are addressed to Rama . 
 = = = Minor works = = = 
 Minor works of Tulsidas include – 
 Barvai Ramayana ( <unk> <unk> , 1612 ) , literally The Ramayana in Barvai metre , is an abridged rendering of the Ramayana in Awadhi . The works consists of 69 verses composed in the Barvai metre , and is divided into seven Kands or books . The work is based on a psychological framework . 
 Parvati Mangal ( <unk> ् <unk> मंगल ) , literally The marriage of Parvati , is an Awadhi work of 164 verses describing the penance of Parvati and the marriage of Parvati and Shiva . It consists of 148 verses in the Sohar metre and 16 verses in the Harigitika metre . 
 Janaki Mangal ( <unk> मंगल ) , literally The marriage of Sita , is an Awadhi work of 216 verses describing the episode of marriage of Sita and Rama from the Ramayana . The work includes 192 verses in the <unk> metre and 24 verses in the Harigitika metres . The narrative differs from the Ramcharitmanas at several places . 
 <unk> Nahachhu ( <unk> <unk> ) , literally The Nahachhu ceremony of the child Rama , is an Awadhi work of 20 verses composed in the Sohar metre . The Nahachhu ceremony involves cutting the nails of the feet before the Hindu <unk> ( rituals ) of <unk> , Upanayana , <unk> , <unk> or Vivaha . In the work , events take place in the city of Ayodhya , so it is considered to describe the Nahachhu before Upanayana , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Ramagya Prashna ( <unk> ् <unk> प ् <unk> ् न ) , literally <unk> the Will of Rama , is an Awadhi work related to both Ramayana and Jyotisha ( astrology ) . It consists of seven Kands or books , each of which is divided into seven <unk> or <unk> of seven Dohas each . Thus it contains 343 Dohas in all . The work narrates the Ramayana non @-@ sequentially , and gives a method to look up the <unk> ( omen or portent ) for astrological predictions . 
 Vairagya <unk> ( <unk> ् य <unk> , 1612 ) , literally Kindling of Detachment , is a philosophical work of 60 verses in Braja which describe the state of Jnana ( realisation ) and Vairagya ( dispassion ) , the nature and greatness of saints , and moral conduct . It consists of 46 Dohas , 2 <unk> and 12 <unk> metres . 
