 Although defeated in the election , Henderson remained the party leader while Lansbury headed the Labour group in parliament — the Parliamentary Labour Party ( PLP ) . In October 1932 Henderson resigned and Lansbury succeeded him . In most historians ' reckonings , Lansbury led his small parliamentary force with skill and flair . He was also , says Shepherd , an inspiration to the dispirited Labour rank and file . As leader he began the process of reforming the party 's organisation and machinery , efforts which resulted in considerable by @-@ election and municipal election successes — including control of the LCC under Herbert Morrison in 1934 . According to Blythe , Lansbury " represented political hope and decency to the three million unemployed . " During this period Lansbury published his political credo , My England ( 1934 ) , which envisioned a future socialist state achieved by a mixture of revolutionary and evolutionary methods . 
 The small Labour group in parliament had little influence over economic policy ; Lansbury 's term as leader was dominated by foreign affairs and disarmament , and by policy disagreements within the Labour movement . The official party position was based on collective security through the League of Nations and on multilateral disarmament . Lansbury , supported by many in the PLP , adopted a position of Christian pacifism , unilateral disarmament and the dismantling of the British Empire . Under his influence the party 's 1933 conference passed resolutions calling for the " total disarmament of all nations " , and pledged to take no part in war . Pacifism became temporarily popular in the country ; on 9 February 1933 the Oxford Union voted by 275 to 153 that it would " in no circumstances fight for its King and Country " , and the Fulham East by @-@ election in October 1933 was easily won by a Labour candidate committed to full disarmament . Lansbury sent a message to the constituency in his position as Labour Leader : " I would close every recruiting station , disband the Army and disarm the Air Force . I would abolish the whole dreadful equipment of war and say to the world : “ Do your worst ” . " October 1934 saw the emergence of the Peace Pledge Union ; the 1934 – 35 Peace Ballot , an unofficial public referendum , produced massive majorities against war . Meanwhile , Adolf Hitler had come to power in Germany , and had withdrawn from the international Conference on Disarmament in Geneva . Blythe observes that Britain 's noisy flirtations with pacifism " drowned out the sounds from German dockyards " , as German rearmament began . 
 As fascism and militarism advanced in Europe , Lansbury 's pacifist stance drew criticism from the trades union elements of his party — who controlled the majority of party conference votes . Walter Citrine , the TUC general secretary , commented that Lansbury " thinks the country should be without defence of any kind ... it certainly isn 't our policy . " The party 's 1935 annual conference took place in Brighton during October , under the shadow of Italy 's impending invasion of Abyssinia . The national executive had tabled a resolution calling for sanctions against Italy , which Lansbury opposed as a form of economic warfare . His speech — a passionate exposition of the principles of Christian pacifism — was well received by the delegates , but immediately afterwards his position was destroyed by Ernest Bevin , the Transport and General Workers ' Union leader . Bevin attacked Lansbury for putting his private beliefs before a policy , agreed by all the party 's main institutions , to oppose fascist aggression , and accused him of " hawking your conscience round from body to body asking to be told what to do with it " . Union support ensured that the sanctions resolution was carried by a huge majority ; Lansbury , realising that a Christian pacifist could no longer lead the party , resigned a few days later . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Lansbury was 76 years old when he resigned the Labour leadership ; he did not , however , retire from public life . In the general election of November 1935 he kept his seat at Bow and Bromley ; Labour , now led by Attlee , improved its parliamentary representation to 154 . Lansbury devoted himself entirely to the cause of world peace , a quest that took him , in 1936 , to the United States . He addressed large crowds in 27 cities before meeting President Roosevelt in Washington to present his proposals for a world peace conference . In 1937 he toured Europe , visiting leaders in Belgium , France and Scandinavia , and in April secured a private meeting with Hitler . No official report of the discussion was issued , but Lansbury 's personal memorandum indicates that Hitler expressed willingness to join in a world conference if Roosevelt would convene it . Later that year Lansbury met Mussolini in Rome ; he described the Italian leader as " a mixture of Lloyd George , Stanley Baldwin and Winston Churchill " . Lansbury wrote several accounts of his peace journeys , notably My Quest for Peace ( 1938 ) . His mild and optimistic impressions of the European dictators were widely criticised as naïve and out of touch ; some British pacifists were dismayed at Lansbury 's meeting with Hitler , while the Daily Worker accused him of diverting attention from the aggressive realities of fascist policies . Lansbury continued to meet European leaders through 1938 and 1939 , and was nominated , unsuccessfully , for the 1940 Nobel Peace Prize . 
 At home , Lansbury served a second term as Mayor of Poplar , in 1936 – 37 . He argued against direct confrontation with Mosley 's Blackshirts during the October 1936 demonstrations known as the Battle of Cable Street . In October 1937 he became president of the Peace Pledge Union , and a year later he welcomed the Munich Agreement as a step towards peace . During this period he worked on behalf of refugees from Nazi Germany , and was chairman of the Polish Refugee Fund which provided relief to displaced Jewish children . On 3 September 1939 , after Neville Chamberlain 's announcement of war with Germany , Lansbury addressed the House of Commons . Observing that the cause to which he had dedicated his life was going down in ruins , he added : " I hope that out of this terrible calamity will arise a spirit that will compel people to give up the reliance on force . " 
 Early in 1940 Lansbury 's health began to fail ; although unaware , he was suffering from stomach cancer . In an article published in the socialist magazine Tribune , published on 25 April 1940 , he made a final statement of his Christian pacifism : " I hold fast to the truth that this world is big enough for all , that we are all brethren , children of one Father " . Lansbury died on 7 May 1940 , at the Manor House Hospital in Golders Green . His funeral in St Mary 's Church , Bow , was followed by cremation at Ilford Crematorium , before a memorial service in Westminster Abbey . His ashes were scattered at sea , in accordance with the wish expressed in his will : " I desire this because although I love England very dearly ... I am a convinced internationalist " . 
 = = Tributes and legacy = = 
 Most historical assessments of Lansbury have tended to stress his character and principles rather than his effectiveness as a party political leader . Although Taylor labels him " the most lovable figure in modern politics " , and the outstanding figure of the English revolutionary left in the 20th century , Kenneth O. Morgan , in his biography of a later Labour leader , Michael Foot , regards Lansbury as " an agitator of protest , not a politician of power " . Journalists commonly accused Lansbury of sentimentality , and party intellectuals accused him of lacking mental capacity . Nevertheless , his speeches in the House of Commons were often flavoured with historical and literary allusions , and he left behind a considerable body of writing on socialist ideas ; Morgan refers to him as a " prophet " . Foot , who as a young man met and was influenced by Lansbury , was particularly impressed by the older man 's achievements in establishing the Daily Herald , given his complete lack of journalistic training . Nevertheless , Foot felt that Lansbury 's pacifism was unrealistic , and believed that Bevin 's demolition at the 1935 conference was justified . 
 There is much agreement among historians and analysts that Lansbury was never self @-@ serving and , guided by his Christian socialist principles , was consistent in his efforts on behalf of the poorest in society . Shepherd believes that " there could have been no better leader for the Labour Party at the collapse of its political fortunes in 1931 than Lansbury , a universally popular choice and a source of inspiration among Labour ranks " . In the House of Commons on 8 May 1940 , the day following Lansbury 's death , Chamberlain said of him : " There were not many hon . Members who felt convinced of the practicability of the methods which he advocated for the preservation of peace , but there was no one who did not realise his intense conviction , which arose out of his deep humanitarianism " . Attlee also paid tribute to his former leader : " He hated cruelty , injustice and wrongs , and felt deeply for all who suffered ... [ H ] e was ever the champion of the weak , and ... to the end of his life he strove for that in which he believed " . 
 After the Second World War , a stained glass window designed by the Belgian artist Eugeen <unk> was placed in the Kingsley Hall community centre in Bow , as a memorial to Lansbury . His memory is further sustained by streets and housing developments named after him , most notably the Lansbury Estate in Poplar , completed in 1951 A further enduring memorial , Attlee suggests , is the extent to which the then @-@ revolutionary social policies that Lansbury began advocating before the turn of the 20th century had become accepted mainstream doctrine little more than a decade after his death . 
 = = Personal and family life = = 
 For most of their married life , George and Bessie Lansbury lived in Bow , originally in St Stephen 's Road and , from 1916 , at 39 Bow Road , a house which , Shepherd records , became " a political haven " for those requiring assistance of any kind . Bessie died in 1933 , after 53 years of a marriage that had produced 12 children between 1881 and 1905 . Of the 10 who survived to adulthood , Edgar followed his father into local political activism as a Poplar councillor in 1912 , serving as the borough 's mayor in 1924 – 25 . He was for a time a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) . After the death of his first wife Minnie in 1922 , Edgar married <unk> <unk> , an actress from Belfast ; their daughter Angela Lansbury , born in 1925 , became a famous stage and screen actress . George Lansbury 's youngest daughter Violet ( 1900 – 71 ) was an active CPGB member in the 1920s , who lived and worked in Moscow for many years . She married Clemens Palme Dutt , the brother of the prominent Marxist intellectual Rajani Palme Dutt . 
 Another daughter , Dorothy ( 1890 – 1973 ) , was a women 's rights activist and later a campaigner for contraceptive and abortion rights . She married Ernest <unk> , the Labour MP for Shoreditch , and was herself a member of Shoreditch council , serving as mayor in 1936 . She and her husband founded the Workers ' Birth Control Group in 1924 . Her younger sister Daisy ( 1892 – 1971 ) served as George Lansbury 's secretary for 20 years . In 1913 she helped Sylvia Pankhurst to evade police capture by disguising herself as Pankhurst . She was married to Raymond Postgate , the left @-@ wing writer and historian , who was Lansbury 's first biographer and founder of The Good Food Guide . Their son , Oliver Postgate , was a successful writer , animator and producer for children 's television . 
 The Lansbury home in Bow Road was destroyed by bombing during the London Blitz of 1940 – 41 . 
 = = Books by Lansbury = = 
 Your Part in Poverty . London : Allen and Unwin . 1918 . OCLC <unk> . 
 These Things Shall Be . London : <unk> Press . 1920 . OCLC <unk> . 
 What I Saw in Russia . London : L. Parsons . 1920 . OCLC <unk> . 
 My Life . London : Constable & Co . 1928 . OCLC <unk> . 
 My England . London : Selwyn & Blount . 1934 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Looking Backwards and Forwards . London and Glasgow : Blackie and Son . 1935 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Why <unk> Should Be Socialists . London : FACT . 1937 . OCLC <unk> . 
 My Quest for Peace . London : M. Joseph . 1938 . OCLC <unk> . 
 This Way to Peace . London : Rich and Cowan . 1940 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Road to ... ( Family Guy ) = 
 The " Road to ... " episodes , also known as the Family Guy Road shows , are a series of episodes in the animated series Family Guy . They are a parody of the seven Road to ... comedy films , starring Bing Crosby , Bob Hope , and Dorothy Lamour . 
 These episodes revolve around baby , Stewie Griffin and anthropomorphic dog , Brian on a road trip in a foreign , supernatural or science fiction setting not familiar to the show 's normal location in Quahog , Rhode Island . The first , titled " Road to Rhode Island " , aired on May 30 , 2000 , as a part of the second season . The episodes are known for featuring elaborate musical numbers , similar to the original films . As of 2016 , there are eight Road to episodes . 
 The Road to episodes contain several signature elements , including a special version of the opening sequence , custom musical cues and musical numbers , and parodies of science fiction and fantasy films . Many of the episodes are popular among television critics , and have been nominated for several awards . In 2000 , " Road to Rhode Island " was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) " category . In 2009 , " Road to Germany , " along with two other episodes from the seventh season , were nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category , the first time in 48 years multiple episodes of one animated series were nominated for the same award . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Segments = = 
 Road to episodes typically consist of three parts following a series of theatrical or cultural @-@ themed credits , and beginning with a segment at the Griffin family home in Quahog , Rhode Island . This segment usually establishes a conflict that Stewie and Brian must overcome by leaving Quahog and the rest of the Griffin family . For the second segment , Stewie and Brian obtain the established goal , which differs in each episode , and have included Brian reuniting with his mother in " Road to Rhode Island " , Stewie finding his lost teddy bear in " Road to Rupert " , and rescuing Mort Goldman , the town 's pharmacist , in " Road to Germany " . In " Road to the Multiverse " various different animation styles and techniques are showcased , such as Disney and Robot Chicken . The final segment involves the two 's struggle to return to their home in Quahog . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The Road to episodes are a parody of the seven Road to ... comedy films released between 1940 and 1962 , which starred actors Bing Crosby , Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour . Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane came up with the idea to create the episodes , being a fan of the original film series . 
 The first Road to episode , titled " Road to Rhode Island " , aired in 2000 as a part of the second season of Family Guy , and featured Brian and Stewie attempting to find Brian 's mother . The episode was the first Family Guy contribution by director Dan Povenmire , and it was written by Gary Janetti , who had previously written for the show during its first and second seasons . MacFarlane granted Povenmire substantial creative freedom . Povenmire recalled that MacFarlane would tell him , " We 've got two minutes to fill . Give me some visual gags . Do whatever you want . I trust you . " Povenmire praised MacFarlane 's management style for letting him " have [ ... ] fun " . 
 After the episode 's success , including its nomination for a Primetime Emmy Award , a second episode in the Road to series was produced for the third season , titled " Road to Europe . " The episode was inspired by the 1941 film Road to Morocco , including its musical number " ( We 're off on the ) Road to Morocco " , which was previously parodied by the two characters , with new lyrics , in " Rhode Island " . Povenmire returned to direct the episode but this time it was written by Daniel Palladino , who was a guest @-@ writer . 
 The third episode in the series was not produced in the fourth season , but instead it was produced in the fifth season , titled " Road to Rupert " , which followed Stewie in his attempt to relocate his teddy bear , Rupert , who was taken to Aspen , Colorado , was the last episode of the Road shows to be directed by Dan Povenmire . Povenmire left Family Guy soon after , following the conclusion of the fifth season , to create his own series , titled Phineas and Ferb , which has since been nominated for five Primetime Emmy Awards with two Emmy wins . It was written by Patrick Meighan who had written the fourth season episode " 8 Simple Rules for Buying My Teenage Daughter " . 
 As a result , series regular Greg Colton , who had worked on " Brian Goes Back to College " , " No Meals on Wheels " , and also " 8 Simple Rules for Buying My Teenage Daughter " , took over Povenmire 's role as director of the Road to episodes . The next installment was titled " Road to Germany " , which follows Brian and Stewie going back in time to rescue their neighbor Mort Goldman from the Nazi invasion of Poland . The episode was produced for the seventh season , it aired on October 19 , 2008 . Meighan returned to write the episode . After reading the script aloud , Jewish executive producer David A. Goodman said , " I 'm going to get kicked out of my temple . " 
 The next Road to episode was announced at the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California , on July 25 , 2008 @.@ it was titled " Road to the Multiverse " and it was produced in the seventh eighth season . Though it was not originally intended to be a Road to episode , Greg Colton convinced series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane and " Spies Reminiscent of Us " director Cyndi Tang to change the episode 's title from " Sliders " , parodying the science fiction television series Sliders . Colton 's suggestion of the new title " Road to the Multiverse " was accepted , as was altering the premise of " Spies Reminiscent of Us " , the season 's original Road to episode . The episode was not written by Meighan , instead it was written by Wellesley Wild who wrote " PTV " . 
 The sixth episode was announced at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , and follows Brian and Stewie on an adventure to the North Pole . It aired during the show 's ninth season , and is titled " Road to the North Pole " . The episode was the first Road show to be produced and broadcast in high @-@ definition , the first to be a full hour in length , and was directed by Colton . 
 The tenth season episode " Back to the Pilot " , originally titled " Road to the Pilot " , was at first intended to be the seventh installment in the Road series , however it was changed before airing . 
 The seventh episode was announced at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . The episode involves Brian and Stewie teleporting to Las Vegas . Except something goes wrong with the machine and Brian and Stewie get cloned . One pair has the best possible time in Las Vegas , the other two have the worst possible time . The episode , titled " Roads to Vegas , " aired as the show ’ s eleventh season finale in May 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Road to episodes are often among the most critically acclaimed episodes of the series . In a 2009 review of " Road to Rhode Island " , Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode a perfect score of ten out of ten , praising the episode for its " great writing , hilarious jokes , a catchy musical , and a story that 's both hilarious and touching at the same time . " In a subsequent review by IGN of " Road to Germany " , Haque again gave the episode high marks for its " exciting storyline , and some hilariously offensive humor . " Similarly , " Road to the Multiverse " was received very positively by television credits , who called the episode " the best of the early episodes we 've seen on the series . " In addition , " Road to the Multiverse " was the highest rated episode of the eighth season , in terms of total viewership . 
 The episodes are generally praised by critics for the connection between Brian and Stewie . IGN stated that when Stewie and Brian are paired together for adventures in the series it becomes hilarious , also mentioning that it was great that they could learn more deeply Brian and see Stewie 's transformation of character . TV Squad critic Brett Love has stated that he enjoys the episodes , especially the parts that show Stewie and Brian relationship , in his review of " Road to Rupert " he commented that Stewie and Brian 's story made the episode for him . Both IGN and TV Squad have praised " Road to Germany " , " Road to Rupert " and " Road to Rhode Island " for having that type of connection in their respective reviews . 
 Though the series receives praise there are some critics that give the episodes a negative review . Alex Rocha of TV Guide was critical in her review of " Road to Germany " stating , " it seemed that the show has taken a slight fall back . After having great episodes the past few weeks to get this current season started on a roll , we have witnessed another average , even sub @-@ par episode . Although Brett Love of TV Squad praised " Road to Rupert " , he did state that he did not like the B @-@ story of the episode . 
 Although the Parents Television Council , a frequent Family Guy critic , did not name " Road to the Multiverse " its " Worst TV Show of the Week " , it did refer to this episode in its negative review of the following episode , " Family Goy " , due to both episodes depicting violence against a recurring Jewish character , Mort Goldman . The PTC did name a later Road to episode , " Road to the North Pole " , as its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for sexually explicit humor at the episode 's beginning , and graphic violence ( wherein Stewie beats a homeowner to death after discovering him and Brian in the house and concluding them to be burglars ) . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 2000 , " Road to Rhode Island " was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) " category , but ultimately lost to The Simpsons episode " Behind the Laughter " . In 2009 , " Road to Germany " , along with two other episodes from the seventh season , were nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Comedy Series " category , the first time in 48 years an animated series was nominated for the same award . The show lost to the NBC series 30 Rock , who had won the award in both 2007 and 2008 . In 2011 , " Road to the North Pole " won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half @-@ Hour ) and Animation . 
 In IGN 's top ten list of Stewie and Brian 's Greatest Adventures , the Road to episodes gains each spot on the top five with " Road to Europe " in spot number five , " Road to Germany " in number four , " Road to Rupert " in number three , " Road to the Multiverse " in number two , and the first episode , " Road to Rhode Island " , in the number @-@ one spot in the list . Other episodes in the list included " Saving Private Brian " , " Stuck Together , Torn Apart " and " Movin ' Out ( Brian 's Song ) " . 
 = Project Isinglass = 
 Project Isinglass was the code name given to two heavily classified , manned reconnaissance aircraft studied by the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) as potential replacements for the Lockheed A @-@ 12 and SR @-@ 71 during the mid 1960s . The first proposal under the Isinglass name , a high @-@ altitude plane to fly at Mach 4 to 5 , was considered an insufficient advancement over existing aircraft ; the second , much more advanced design , sometimes referred to as Project Rheinberry , was an air @-@ launched , Mach 20 rocket @-@ powered boost @-@ glide aircraft that would use a very @-@ high @-@ altitude trajectory to avoid defenses . This aircraft was considered too costly for development , and the project was abandoned in 1967 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Project Isinglass was developed as a result of the vulnerability of existing manned reconnaissance aircraft , such as the Lockheed U @-@ 2 and the Lockheed A @-@ 12 , to Soviet air defenses in the early 1960s , catalysed by the shooting down in May 1960 of Francis Gary Powers . Although there were continuing plans to overfly the Soviet Union with the A @-@ 12 – referred to by the CIA as Project Oxcart – these failed to come to pass , and the CIA began plans for an aircraft with superior performance to replace Oxcart . 
 = = The Convair proposal = = 
 The initial aircraft proposed under the Project Isinglass name was developed by the Convair division of General Dynamics , and was developed from work done on the Super Hustler , FISH , and <unk> programs , as well as leveraging off work done on the F @-@ 111 tactical bomber . Convair 's design utilised avionics and hydraulics systems that had been developed for use by the F @-@ 111 , and was intended to be capable of cruising at speeds of Mach 4 to Mach 5 , at an altitude of 98 @,@ 000 ft ( 30 km ) . The feasibility study conducted by General Dynamics was completed in the fall of 1964 ; the aircraft was determined to be too costly , and was also still considered potentially vulnerable to projected Soviet air defense capabilities , so the project was halted . 
 = = The McDonnell proposal = = 
 = = = Design and development = = = 
 An alternative design completed by McDonnell Aircraft in 1965 is usually considered part of Project Isinglass , however some documents refer to the aircraft as having been codenamed Project Rheinberry . McDonnell 's proposed boost @-@ glide aircraft , submitted to the CIA independently of the Convair Isinglass proposals , featured a small , manned , rocket @-@ powered craft with a high lift @-@ to @-@ drag ratio that would be air @-@ launched by a B @-@ 52 bomber while flying over the Atlantic Ocean . The aircraft would ignite its rocket engine and adopt a trajectory that would take it over the Soviet Union at speeds of Mach 20 and at an altitude of over 200 @,@ 000 feet ( 61 km ) , before descending over the Pacific Ocean to a landing at Groom Lake , Nevada , as a glider , landing on the lake bed using a skid landing gear . 
 The Isinglass / Rheinberry concept was considered to be superior to spy satellites in a number of ways , including rapid turnaround time and quick response capability . As there was little funding to be had from the CIA budget , McDonnell developed the aircraft using its own funds , although technical support gleaned from Oxcart was supplied by the CIA . The McDonnell <unk> / Rheinberry proposal 's shape remains classified , although it has been described as being similar to the Space Shuttle , albeit much reduced in size . A 1 / 3 cross @-@ sectional model of the aircraft was constructed to illustrate the principles used in its construction . 
 Simulations showed that the aircraft would be essentially unstoppable by existing or projected air defenses ; even surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles armed with nuclear warheads could do no better than force the aircraft to change course to avoid the fringe effects of the explosions . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 Following fourteen months of work , McDonnell had developed the aircraft to the point where serious proposals were made for its construction . However , neither the CIA or the National Reconnaissance Office had an official requirement for such an aircraft ; in addition , the projected cost of the aircraft was astronomical , the cost for eight aircraft being projected to be $ 2 @.@ 6 billion USD in 1965 dollars ( inflation adjusted US $ 19 @.@ 52 billion in 2016 ) , a sum considered to be far too high for the available budget . In addition , there were concerns that the aircraft 's trajectory could be mistaken for that of an incoming ballistic missile . 
 When the CIA failed to receive approval for funding , McDonnell approached the U.S. Air Force with the project ; however the Air Force proved uninterested in adopting the CIA project , despite the support of General Bernard Schriever , chief of the Air Force Systems Command . Therefore , in late 1967 the Isinglass project was terminated , with a brief effort to revive the project in 1968 proving unsuccessful . 
 = = Engine development = = 
 Although the development of the Isinglass / Rheinberry aircraft was conducted using McDonnell 's own funding , the United States Air Force 's Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory did fund the development of the aircraft 's intended engine , the Pratt & Whitney XLR @-@ 129 , intended to be a reusable rocket engine . To be powered by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen and producing 250 @,@ 000 lbf ( 1 @,@ 100 kN ) thrust at full throttle , development of the XLR @-@ 129 continued even after the cancellation of Project Isinglass , and was considered for use by the Space Shuttle , but was cancelled in the early 1970s . 
 = Hayley Westenra = 
 Hayley Dee Westenra ( born 10 April 1987 ) is a New Zealand singer , classical crossover artist , songwriter , and UNICEF Ambassador . Her first internationally released album , Pure , reached No. 1 on the UK classical charts in 2003 and has sold more than two million copies worldwide . Pure is the fastest @-@ selling international début classical album to date , having made Westenra an international star at age 16 . In August 2006 , she joined the Irish group Celtic Woman , was featured on their Celtic Woman : A New Journey CD and DVD , toured with them on their 2007 Spring Tour , and was also featured on their DVD , The Greatest Journey : Essential Collection , released in 2008 . Westenra has produced five New Zealand number one studio albums , holding the title for the most number one records for any New Zealand act , a record shared with alternative rock band Shihad since the release of their 2014 album , <unk> . 
 Across classical music to easy listening , folk and pop style songs , Westenra has performed songs in English , Irish , Spanish , Italian , German , French , Portuguese , Latin , Japanese , Mandarin Chinese , and Catalan . 
 Westenra has performed for dignitaries all over the world . She is the second youngest UNICEF Ambassador to date and has contributed to charities around the globe . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Westenra was born in Christchurch , New Zealand . Her parents , Jill and Gerald Westenra , have two other children , Sophie and Isaac . Westenra 's grandmother Shirley Ireland was a singer , and her grandfather was a pianist who also played the piano accordion . She has Irish , Dutch and English heritage . 
 She began performing at age six when she was cast in the lead singing role of " Little Star " in the Christmas play at her school , <unk> Open Air School . After the show , a teacher who had watched the performance approached her parents to tell them that their daughter was " pitch perfect " . The teacher encouraged Westenra to learn how to play a musical instrument ; Hayley soon after learned to read music and play the violin , piano , guitar , and recorder . She then began voice lessons and discovered a passion for musical theatre . By age 11 , she had performed more than 40 times on stage , but was often given male parts : " I got boy parts quite often . In ballet , there were not enough boys . So they ended up choosing half and half . I got chosen to wear the grey suit and the wig , and not the pretty dresses . In A Christmas Carol , I was Tiny Tim , so I got to be quite a sick , sick boy . There was a severe lack of singing boys and , at the time , it was quite disappointing . " Westenra attended Cobham Intermediate School in 1998 and 1999 , where a performing arts building was later named in her honour . She won a talent quest in her first year ( Year 9 ) at Burnside High School , which she attended from 2000 to 2003 . 
 = = Career = = 
 At 12 , Westenra entered a professional recording studio to record Walking in the Air , a demo album originally created for friends and family . At first , her parents paid for 70 copies ; soon after , 1 @,@ 000 more were cut for sale , hand @-@ out , and publicity . After finishing her album , Westenra and her sister Sophie busked in Christchurch , giving away a few of the original 70 albums ( at the behest of passersby ) and selling some of the latter 1000 . The pair drew large crowds , and one woman asked the girls if they had ever recorded anything . The woman , a journalist with Canterbury Television , asked Westenra to appear on air . Gray Bartlett , the director of a concert promotion company , saw the show and became interested in working with Westenra . Shortly after , she was offered a recording deal with Universal Records New Zealand . On that label , Westenra , who in the meantime was attending Burnside High School , released a self @-@ titled album of show tunes and light classical songs , as well as My Gift to You , a CD of Christmas music . Following the success of her albums , she was offered and later received lessons from Dame Malvina Major . 
 = = = International success = = = 
 Westenra 's albums were successful in New Zealand , but she was not well known worldwide until she signed a contract with Decca Records and recorded Pure , a CD of classical , light pop , and traditional Māori songs . Decca 's British president was also impressed with her voice when they signed her to the label , saying that she was " captivated by the beauty and expressiveness of her voice . " Pure enjoyed record success : it became the fastest @-@ selling international debut album in the history of the UK classical chart , with 19 @,@ 068 copies purchased in its first week alone , quickly reached No. 1 on the British charts , and entered the UK Pop Chart at # 8 . Over two million copies of Pure have been sold to date . In New Zealand , Pure has been certified 12x platinum , making her the best @-@ selling artist , regardless of genre , in the country 's history . 
 Pure 's success ensured that Decca would take Westenra seriously . Some of her fame today can be directly attributed to the way in which Decca promoted her . Although the traditional audience of classical crossover music is adult women , they also promoted her music to children and teenagers . Westenra recorded the end @-@ title song for Disney 's movie Mulan II . They also featured her in the national Radio Disney music education tour for middle @-@ school students . 
 On 24 August 2003 , Westenra performed on the stage with opera tenor José Carreras and Bryn Terfel in front of the capacity crowd of 10 @,@ 000 people from <unk> Festival in Wales . 
 Decca has also promoted Westenra on television . She took her first acting role on the US programme American Dreams ( " Charade " ) , where she played guitar and sang " Who Painted the Moon Black ? " . While she was being promoted in Los Angeles , Marc Johnston , senior VP / GM for the Universal Classics Group , said , " When she was out there , people were giving her scripts to read , and she had a few rather impromptu auditions . So some film and TV roles are currently in the works . " In 2005 , she was featured in the song " Bridal Ballad " recorded for the movie The Merchant of Venice . In 2006 , she was featured on the motion picture soundtrack for The New World with the song " Listen to the Wind " . 
 Westenra was the 2004 Vodafone New Zealand Music Awards winner of " Highest Selling New Zealand Album " and " International Achievement Award " . On 20 February 2004 , Prime Minister Helen Clark awarded her for being the first New Zealand artist to receive the tenfold platinum status in the New Zealand market , where she held the number one artist position for 18 weeks . She has won two Japanese <unk> for her work ( Song of the Year , " Amazing Grace " and Album of the Year , Pure ) . Her version of Amazing Grace was used as the theme song for the popular Japanese drama , Shiroi Kyoto ( The White Tower ) . Hayley met the cast of the series during a promotional tour of Japan in October 2003 . 
 Also in 2004 , she began her world tour of New Zealand , Australia , Japan , USA and Britain , performing in a concert in November for Her Majesty The Queen , the Prime Minister Tony Blair , The Prince of Wales , Colin Powell , Condoleezza Rice and the President at the time George W. Bush . In her autobiography , she remembered feeling more nervous in an audition where she sight read to Andrew Lloyd Webber an unreleased piece that he had written . On 28 July 2004 , Westenra and American tenor James Doing staged Wisconsin concert with Wisconsin Chamber Orchestra and broadcast by Wisconsin Public Television . She concluded 2004 with a Christmas tour of the East Coast of the United States as guest soloist with the Boston Pops Orchestra . 
 In 2004 , Westenra was recorded a live DVD , Hayley Westenra : Live from New Zealand , featured duet with baritone Teddy Tahu Rhodes and soprano Sophie Westenra in St. James Theatre . David Horn , the producer of her live TV special , which aired on PBS ' Great Performances , said , " Her singing is so gorgeous , it 's reminiscent of the great boy @-@ soprano sound of Anglican church choirs . " 
 In 2005 , she released a new album , Odyssey . A mix of classical , pop , Celtic , and new @-@ age music , she co @-@ wrote and arranged some of the tracks on the album , which was released in the United States on 18 October 2005 . A more recent version of Odyssey containing several recordings not on the original album was released in the United Kingdom on 10 April 2006 , her 19th birthday . On 18 December 2005 , she made an appearance on Kurt Browning 's programme Gotta Skate , in which she performed with Andrea Bocelli . 
 Westenra spent the first half of 2006 performing as a supporting act for the pop @-@ opera quartet Il Divo on a worldwide tour , though in March she performed solo concerts in the US as well . That tour officially ended in June , but was then extended by six performances . She then held several concerts in the UK and Germany through the end of the northern summer . On 5 September 2006 , Westenra was named as one of the ten outstanding young people in the world by the Junior Chamber International , becoming the first New Zealander so honoured . 
 On 13 November 2006 she participated in the dedication of the New Zealand War Memorial in London . Three of Westenra 's great @-@ uncles served in World War II ; one was killed . 
 After releasing Pure , Westenra and her family moved to London . She continues to reside in a central London flat , even though her family subsequently returned home to Christchurch . Although she spent most of 2006 touring , she did visit them when her schedule allowed . 
 In August 2006 , Westenra joined Celtic Woman and is featured on their second major DVD / CD album , Celtic Woman : A New Journey , which was released 30 January 2007 and immediately hit the Billboard Top 200 music chart at # 4 . She toured with the group in the United States in 2007 , with scheduled appearances in 88 venues across the country ; the tour ended in June . During this time , Hayley alternated with <unk> Ní <unk> , who had recently returned from maternity leave , to maintain a five @-@ member line @-@ up . She also got along well with another member , Chloë Agnew , who was at the time only 17 years old . 
 In 2006 as a part of <unk> Festival ( 27 Oct ) , Westenra performed a concert with tenor Alfie Boe in Canterbury Cathedral . 
 Westenra 's third international album , Treasure , was released on 26 February 2007 in the UK . All the songs on this CD were chosen by Westenra , who gave her record company " no say in the matter . I basically didn 't let them in on what I was recording until the last minute so they had no choice . I didn 't give them much room to disagree . " Tracks on this album include " E Pari Ra " , " One Fine Day " , " Let Me Lie " , " Danny Boy " , and " Abide with Me " . Westenra co @-@ wrote four of the fifteen tracks , and the album also features singer Humphrey Berney . The US / Australia / NZ edition followed in March under the name Celtic Treasure . Westenra dedicated the album to her grandmother , Shirley Ireland . Inside the sleeve of the British edition , she wrote " I come from a musical family , and one with a real sense of history . My forefathers were on the maiden voyage from Ireland to Christchurch , New Zealand in 1850 – there 's even a commemoration plaque in Cathedral Square , Christchurch , which bears the name Westenra . My grandmother used to sit me on her knee and sing songs like Danny Boy from as early as I can remember . A singer herself in her earlier years , she has always been a never @-@ ending source of songs . It 's this legacy of music that she 's been passing down to me since my childhood , and it 's many of these beautiful old songs that I 've explored here on my album . " 
 On the day before St. Patrick 's Day 2007 , she performed as part of Celtic Woman for President George W. Bush at the White House . She had plans to present the president with a petition to place a mandatory carbon cap on the United States . The goal of the petition was compliance with the commitment made by President Bill Clinton in previous years to follow the Kyoto Protocol . However , she was not able to present the petition because the president was rushed away after the concert , due to security concerns . 
 On 6 May 2007 , Westenra was invited to the Crystal Cathedral as a guest performing " Abide with Me " on the Hour of Power , an American Christian television program . She had performed there twice before , the first time singing " Amazing Grace " and the second time " I Say Grace " . 
 Westenra starred as Maria in the 2007 recording of West Side Story , which was released on 30 July . On 28 July , she starred in Woburn LIVE 2007 , where she performed a selection of the music of West Side Story with the other recording artists , including Vittorio Grigolo , from the 2007 release . 
 In 2007 , Hayley 's vocals were featured in the soundtracks of the movie Flood and the television series , Jekyll , composed by Debbie Wiseman , in the UK . 
 In Nov 2007 , Hayley Westenra successfully staged Japan " treasure " concert tour in Fukuoka , Sapporo , Tokyo , Sendai , Nagoya , Osaka , Yokohama , Hiroshima . 
 In June 2008 , Hayley released an album for Japan , called Hayley Sings Japanese Songs . The songs include popular Japanese songs sung in English , and some in Japanese . Amazing Grace is performed as a duet with the late Minako Honda , in English and Japanese . A second Japanese album , Hayley Sings Japanese Songs 2 , was released in March 2009 , with a " mother " theme . All of the songs are about her gratefulness to her mother . She wrote , This album is dedicated to my loving mother ... thank you . On 7 August , Westenra performed solo and duet with Dame Malvina Major at St James 's Church , Piccadilly among ChristChurch Cathedral Choir 2008 UK Tour . On 17 August , Westenra participated in the tribute concert Lyrics by Don Black , which was held at the London Palladium and featured performances of Black 's songs by a selection of guest artists . She sang the duet Amigos Para Siempre , the score of which was written by Andrew Lloyd Webber , with Jonathan Ansell . The evening , hosted by Michael Parkinson was recorded by BBC Radio 2 Friday Night is Music Night and broadcast on 22 August 2008 . 
 The song " Prayer " , composed by Secret Garden and performed by Westenra , is featured in the Nintendo Wii videogame Endless Ocean as well as its advertising . Westenra also contributed several other songs , including her rendition of the Māori folk song " Pokarekare Ana " . 
 On 1 October 2008 , Westenra recorded as solo vocals in the CD " Different Voices " composed and conducted by Debbie Wiseman and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra , with narration by Stephen Fry and lyrics written by Don Black . On 8 November , Westenra performed at the Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall , singing Today Won 't Come Again , written by Geoff Stevens and Don Black , with English tenor Jonathan Ansell , and accompanied Ansell on Here 's to the Heroes , by Black and John Barry , when returning soldiers proceeded into the auditorium . On 30 November , Westenra was presented by Elaine Paige with the Variety Club Showbiz Awards 2008 Classical Performer of the Year for raising money to help sick , disabled and disadvantaged children and young people . 
 On 16 July 2009 , she performed at the Opening Ceremony of the World Games 2009 in Kaohsiung , Taiwan before 45 @,@ 000 stadium audiences and numerous worldwide TV audiences . She sang several songs including Amazing Grace , The Prayer in English & Italian with Russell Watson , Pokarekare Ana in Māori with Russell Watson , We Are The Champions with other stars , Japanese translated song Nada <unk> ( Tears For You ) and ' The Moon Represents My Heart ( <unk> ) in Mandarin Chinese with <unk> . On 29 August , Westenra led the traditional singing of Abide with Me at the Rugby League Challenge Cup final at Wembley Stadium . 
 On 7 November 2009 , Hayley performed at the Festival of Remembrance , singing We 'll Meet Again , made famous by Dame Vera Lynn during WWII , at the Royal Albert Hall . During the performance , an old recording of Lynn performing the song was played behind on the big screen . Lynn was present , as well as Her Majesty the Queen . 
 On 5 February 2010 , Westenra performed " Silent Night " on the soundtrack of Nativity ! Later that year , on 30 October , Westenra staged a recital at the Shanghai Grand Theatre with international backing musicians in an east Asian concert tour . On 13 November , Westenra performed at the Festival of Remembrance , singing " For the Fallen " , a poem by Laurence Binyon set to music by Karl Jenkins . It is featured on the special 10th anniversary edition of Karl Jenkins ' The Armed Man : A Mass for Peace . 
 Westenra 's face adorns publicity for the southwest London rugby union club Quintin RFC . 
 In the spring and summer of 2010 , Hayley began working with film composer Ennio Morricone for a collaboration on her album Paradiso . The album featured new songs written by Morricone , as well as some of his best known film compositions of the last 50 years . Hayley recorded the album with Morricone 's orchestra in Rome during the summer 2010 . 
 In April 2011 , Westenra was invited as a guest performer to Mario <unk> TV concert in Greek . On May , Westenra was a guest performer on Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli 's The Magic of Love Asian concert tour , Westenra and Bocelli collaborated on one of Westenra 's albums Odyssey and live performances before . On Memorial Day , 29 May , Hayley was invited to perform for the annual PBS special , the National Memorial Day Concert live in Washington , DC . She performed the song Pie Jesu following the emotional story of a woman who had never met her father , who died in the Vietnam War , but got to know him many years later through a soldier who had fought alongside him . On 9 July , Westenra was invited as a guest performer to Joseph <unk> 's annual concert in Malta . On 22 July , Westenra was among artists performing with the BBC Concert Orchestra in an American West @-@ themed show from a BBC radio concert programme Friday Night is Music Night . On 24 July , Westenra staged the 61st King 's Lynn Festival concert with Daniel Boys and performed classical repertoire including new songs from Paradiso . On 27 July , Kiwi songbird Hayley Westenra has been announced as the voice of UK broadcaster ITV 's coverage of this year 's Rugby World Cup , with her special version of World in Union . On October , Songs of Praise broadcast " Whispers in a Dream " and " Amazing Grace " performed by Westenra in Salisbury Cathedral . On 23 , Westenra performed the New Zealand national anthem " God Defend New Zealand " at Eden Park in Auckland before the final of the 2011 Rugby World Cup , and also performed the traditional New Zealand song " Now Is the Hour " to bring the event to a close . On 31 , Westenra was featured on André Rieu classical music album And the Waltz Goes On with the only vocal track " Dreaming of New Zealand " . 
 On 12 March 2012 , Westenra attended a reception for celebrating the achievements of inspirational women today the event held by the Duchess of Cornwall to mark Commonwealth Day . On 16 March , Westenra was invited to perform and make the presentation to the winner of a Korean live TV show _ <unk> . On 22 April 2012 , Westenra staged debut concert at the Koncerthuset in Copenhagen . On 28 April , Westenra Performed with Chinese tenor <unk> and <unk> on the 2nd Beijing International Film Festival symphony concert at Olympic Green accompanying by Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . In May 2012 , Westenra was featured with Laura Wright and Alfie Boe on a souvenir album " Gary Barlow & The Commonwealth Band " for celebrating Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II . On 14 June , Westenra staged a concert with RTÉ Concert Orchestra and David Brophy at National Concert Hall in Dublin . On 21 June , Westenra performed at Greek tenor Mario <unk> ' Boston Symphony Hall concert accompanying by Boston Pops Orchestra . On November , Westenra was a guest performer on the David Foster & Friends ' Far East tour . She was also a special guest in Korea 's Opera Star final singing two songs " Lascia Ch 'io <unk> " in her solo and " You Raise Me Up " with Park Gi Yeong and Son Ho Yeong . 
 On April 2013 , Westenra staged a Far East tour in Taipei , Tainan , Kaohsiung and performed with Chinese tenor <unk> in Beijing . 
 On 30 November and 1 December 2013 , Westenra staged concert with City Chamber Orchestra of Hong Kong , Hong Kong Welsh Male Voice Choir and the Hong Kong Treble Choir in Hong Kong . 
 On 29 April 2014 , Westenra was one of the performers at Classic FM Live in Royal Albert Hall London . 
 = = Philanthropy and charity = = 
 Westenra is active in contributing to charities around the world . 
 On 26 November 2003 , Westenra performed " Pokarekare Ana " and " Amazing Grace " on the 75th Anniversary of the Royal Variety Performance show in the presence of Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip on behalf of the Entertainment Artistes ' Benevolent Fund . 
 Westenra is the second youngest UNICEF Ambassador to date , behind Selena Gomez . In 2005 , Westenra visited Ghana to publicise her project , " Bikes for Ghana " , and actively helped with fundraising to purchase bicycles for young girls , allowing them to get to their schools from outlying surrounding areas . When she was later interviewed about this charity work , she had this to say , " I met girls who had been given bikes and I could see how much it meant to them . We wanted to borrow one just for a photo and they wouldn 't let them go ; they were really reluctant " . 
 In 2006 , A new Hybrid Tea Rose was named in honour of Hayley Westenra to raise charity funds for UNICEF . The Hayley Westenra Rose won the 2010 Rose of the Year Award and also the best Hybrid Tea Rose Award . In June , She appeared at a fundraiser for UK charity Act Against Bullying . 
 On 8 June 2007 , Westenra performed in a fundraising concert for Bikes for Ghana at the Victoria Hall in Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . On 24 February , Westenra took part in the <unk> " Children helping Children " concert at the Cadogan Hall , Sloan Square London in front of 900 people , including HRH Princess Alexandra the charity 's patron . 
 In 2008 , Westenra was selected by the New Zealand Society to receive the Global Kiwis Young Achiever Award for remarkable achievement in her field of endeavour on a global scale . She has also received numerous awards for her contributions to music , both in New Zealand and elsewhere . 
 On 25 June 2008 , Westenra is the ambassador for Classic FM 's charity Music Makers . Hayley says of the partnership " I am thrilled to be the first official charity Ambassador for Classic FM Music Makers . I have seen first hand the power which music can have in changing people 's lives , and I can 't wait to help all I can . " Over the next few months Hayley will be visiting some of the music therapy and education projects across the UK , which Music Makers funds ... In September , she visited Ghana again on behalf of UNICEF . She was working on raising funds for one of her favourite projects in Ghana , to install playgrounds for children , with rides that harness " kid power " to drive pumps used for providing clean drinking water from wells in that country . Hundreds of thousands of children have been poisoned by contaminated drinking water in Ghana , and this project is a focus of Hayley 's . 
 On 4 September 2008 , Hayley Westenra became a patron of Royal New Zealand Air Force . In Oct , Forces songbird Hayley Westenra help launch the Poppy Appeal with British Armed Forces in Iraq . In Oct , Forces songbird Hayley Westenra and tenor Jonathan Ansell took to the streets to sell poppies at Waterloo Station to support the Royal British Legion . On 12 Nov , Westenra performed " River of Dreams " , duet " Today Won 't Come Again " with tenor Jonathan Ansell in the Royal Albert Hall for the Annual Festival of Remembrance and was broadcast by the BBC . In November , she was named " classical performer of the year " at the Variety Club 's annual awards in London . 
 She has also been the ambassador for Save the Children in Hong Kong . More recently , she took part in a breast cancer awareness campaign in New Zealand . One of the other charities that she helps is the Women 's Environmental Network . Another major charity she supports is the Nordoff @-@ Robbins Center for Music Therapy , which provides help for children who are disabled . 
 On 7 September 2009 , She joined the Dame Vera Lynn Trust as a Vice @-@ President for this Children with Cerebral Palsy charity . On 22 Oct , Forces sweethearts from the original Second World War Forces sweetheart @-@ Dame Vera Lynn joined by one of today 's Forces sweetheart Kiwi songbird Hayley Westenra in launching the Poppy Appeal with a fundraising goal of £ 31 million . In Dec , New forces sweetheart Hayley Westenra performed with Faryl Smith and Camilla Kerslake in a special service for British troops serving in Afghanistan from St Clements Church , London . 
 On 7 March 2010 , Classical singing star Hayley Westenra lent her support with some other most successful female role models in <unk> 's " The Breaking the Mould " conference to inspire a generation of young women to aim high in their careers . On 20 Jun , Hayley Westenra took her role as Forces Sweetheart to the Cotswold Air Show , visiting Kemble to support the work of the Royal Air Force Benevolent Fund . On 6 Oct , Forces songbird Hayley Westenra whose uncle served in the Royal New Zealand Air Force united with British legends for charity CD " We Will Remember Them " . 
 On 3 March 2011 , Westenra led one of the national anthems " God Defend New Zealand " in a London Westminster Cathedral vigil service together with about 5 @,@ 000 Kiwis fundraising charity for her hometown Christchurch , after being devastated by a 6 @.@ 3 @-@ magnitude earthquake on 22 February 2011 . On 18 March , Westenra performed " Amazing Grace " in the national Christchurch memorial service at Hagley Park of Christchurch in the presence of Prince William , Prime Minister John Key , Bob Parker , Dame Malvina Major , Christchurch Cathedral Choir , dignitaries , international rescue teams and tens of thousands of New Zealanders . On 27 March , Westenra was invited to read out a testimony in the Christchurch memorial service at Westminster Abbey in the presence of The Prince of Wales , The High Commissioner from New Zealand to the United Kingdom and thousands of churchgoers . On 30 March , Westenra attended The News Of The World Children 's Champion Awards in London for supporting those people ( voted by the public ) who have done a brilliant , unsung job for children . On 2 April , Westenra as a Vice @-@ President of the Dame Vera Lynn Trust performed for this Children with Cerebral Palsy charity at the Lancaster London Hotel . 
 On 29 May , Westenra performed Pie Jesu at PBS 's 2011 National Memorial Day concert . On 10 June , Westenra was invited by Prime Minister David Cameron attending Downing Street Poppy Party along with injured Service personnel , bereaved Armed Forces families and veterans of Afghanistan and previous conflicts to celebrate the Legion 's 90th anniversary and help raise funds for The Royal British Legion Battle Back Centre . On 20 September , Westenra sang Laurence Binyon ’ s For The Fallen on a service of the 90th anniversary of the Royal British Legion held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of The Princess Royal , Church of England members and family of Royal Marines . On 5 December , Westenra performed solo " Whispers in a Dream " and duet with Rolando on the Royal Variety Performance show in the presence of the Princess Royal . 
 To promote Paradiso with peace and love message , Westenra would be embarking the Paradiso Homecoming Tour from 17 September 2011 to 8 March 2012 , and would raise charity attention to her UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador appeal and the Christchurch Earthquake Relief fund for supporting Christchurch to revive . 
 On 24 August 2012 , Westenra staged a concert in the Gŵyl Gobaith Music Festival in Wales to support for charities Cancer Research UK , Wales Air Ambulance , CLIC Sargent and <unk> . In Christmastime 2012 , Westenra was featured on the debut album " Starship Christmas Album " along with Justin Bieber , Queen , Lady Gaga , Elton John , Ronan Keating , Michael Jackson , Maroon 5 , <unk> , The Jackson Five , Tiki <unk> , OneRepublic and Lucy Lawless for supporting Starship Children 's Health . On 30 November , Westenra lent her support to Kate Winslet ’ s Golden Hat Foundation together with Tim Janis , Sarah McLachlan , Loreena McKennitt , Andrea Corr , Sleepy Man Banjo Boys , Dawn Kenney , Jana <unk> , Amy Petty and a choir performing on " The American Christmas Carol " concert in Carnegie Hall . 
 On 20 November 2013 , Westenra recorded a Children in Need Christmas single 2013 album " Christmas Dream " with Sir Terry Wogan and Aled Jones featured Bond and the Portsmouth Citadel Salvation Army Band . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Westenra has been known as a vegetarian / <unk> . In 2007 , she was nominated for PETA 's ' Sexiest Vegetarian ' . However , when touring she sometimes has worried about getting the appropriate amounts of nutrients . She was sometimes unable to obtain the more nutritious vegetables and other foods she preferred , and now on occasions she eats meat . In 2007 , Westenra told The New Zealand Herald , " I 'm completely bursting the bubble now , aren 't I ? That 's that ruined . " 
 Westenra married her French boyfriend of three years , Arnaud <unk> ( born 1981 ) , on 29 December 2013 in Hawarden , North Canterbury , New Zealand . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Notable tours and concerts = = 
 = War of the Bavarian Succession = 
 A Saxon – Prussian alliance fought the War of the Bavarian Succession ( July 1778 – 21 May 1779 ) against the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy to prevent the Habsburgs from acquiring the Electorate of Bavaria . Although the war consisted of only a few minor skirmishes , thousands of soldiers died from disease and starvation , earning the conflict the name <unk> ( Potato War ) in Prussia and Saxony ; in Habsburg Austria , it was sometimes called the <unk> ( Plum Fuss ) . 
 On 30 December 1777 , Maximilian Joseph , the last of the junior line of Wittelsbach , died of smallpox , leaving no children . Charles IV Theodore , a scion of a senior branch of the House of Wittelsbach , held the closest claim of kinship , but he also had no legitimate children to succeed him . His cousin , Charles II August , Duke of Zweibrücken , therefore had a legitimate legal claim as Charles Theodore 's heir presumptive . Across Bavaria 's southern border , Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II coveted the Bavarian territory and had married Maximilian Joseph 's sister Maria Josepha in 1765 to strengthen any claim he could extend . His agreement with the heir , Charles Theodore , to partition the territory neglected any claims of the heir presumptive , Charles August . 
 Acquiring territory in the German @-@ speaking states was an essential part of Joseph 's policy to expand his family 's influence in Central Europe . For Frederick the Great , Joseph 's claim threatened the Prussian ascendancy in German politics , but he questioned whether he should preserve the status quo through war or through diplomacy . Empress Maria Theresa , who co @-@ ruled with Joseph , considered any conflict over the Bavarian electorate not worth bloodshed , and neither Maria Theresa nor Frederick saw any point in pursuing hostilities . Joseph would not drop his claim despite his mother 's contrary insistence . Frederick August III , Elector of Saxony , wanted to preserve the territorial integrity of the Duchy for his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Charles August , and had no interest in seeing the Habsburgs acquire additional territory on his southern and western borders . Despite his dislike of Prussia , which had been Saxony 's enemy in two previous wars , Charles August sought the support of Frederick , who was happy to challenge the Habsburgs . France became involved to maintain the balance of power . Finally , Catherine the Great 's threat to intervene on the side of Prussia with fifty thousand Russian troops forced Joseph to reconsider his position . With Catherine 's assistance , he and Frederick negotiated a solution to the problem of the Bavarian succession with the Treaty of Teschen , signed on 13 May 1779 . 
 For some historians , the War of the Bavarian Succession was the last of the old @-@ style Cabinet Wars ( <unk> ) of the Ancien Régime in which troops maneuvered while diplomats traveled between capitals to resolve their monarchs ' complaints . The subsequent French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars differed in scope , strategy , organization and tactics . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1713 , Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI established a line of succession that gave precedence to his own daughters over the daughters of his brother . To protect the Habsburg inheritance , he coerced , cajoled , and persuaded the crowned heads of Europe to accept the Pragmatic Sanction . In this agreement , they acknowledged any of his legitimate daughters as the rightful Queen of Bohemia , Hungary and Croatia , and Archduchess of Austria – a break from the tradition of male succession . 
 Holy Roman Emperors had been elected from the House of Habsburg for most of the previous three centuries . Charles VI arranged a marriage of his eldest daughter , Maria Theresa , to Francis of Lorraine . Francis relinquished the Duchy of Lorraine near France in exchange for the Grand Duchy of Tuscany near Austria to make himself a more appealing candidate for eventual election as Emperor . On paper , many heads of state and , most importantly , the rulers of the German states of the Holy Roman Empire , accepted the Pragmatic Sanction and the idea of Francis as the next Emperor . Two key exceptions , the Duchy of Bavaria and Saxony , held important electoral votes and could impede or even block Francis 's election . When Charles died in 1740 , Maria Theresa had to fight for her family 's entitlements in Bohemia , Hungary and Croatia , and her husband faced competition in his election as the Holy Roman Emperor . 
 Charles , Prince Elector and Duke of Bavaria , claimed the German territories of the Habsburg dynasty as a son @-@ in @-@ law of Joseph I , and furthermore presented himself as Charles VI 's legitimate Imperial successor . If women were going to inherit , he claimed , then he should be first in line : his wife , Maria Amalia , was the daughter of Joseph I. Both Charles VI and his predecessor Joseph I had died without sons . Charles of Bavaria suggested that the legitimate succession pass to Joseph 's female children , rather than to the daughters of the younger brother , Charles VI . For different reasons , Prussia , France , Spain and the Polish @-@ Saxon monarchy supported Charles of Bavaria 's claim to the Habsburg territory and the Imperial title and reneged on the Pragmatic Sanction . 
 Charles of Bavaria needed military assistance to take the Imperial title by force , which he secured the treaty of <unk> ( July 1741 ) . During the subsequent War of the Austrian Succession , he successfully captured Prague , where he was crowned King of Bohemia . He invaded Upper Austria , planning to capture Vienna , but diplomatic exigencies complicated his plans . His French allies redirected their troops into Bohemia , where Frederick the Great , himself newly king of Prussia , had taken advantage of the chaos in Austria and Bavaria to annex Silesia . 
 Charles 's military options disappeared with the French . Adopting a new plan , he subverted the Imperial election . He sold the County of Glatz to Prussia for a reduced price in exchange for Frederick 's electoral vote . Charles 's brother , Klemens August of Bavaria , archbishop and prince @-@ elector of the Electorate of Cologne , voted for him in the Imperial election and personally crowned him on 12 February 1742 in the traditional ceremony in Frankfurt am Main . The next day , Charles 's Bavarian capital of Munich capitulated to the Austrians to avoid being plundered by Maria Theresa 's troops . In the following weeks , her army overran most of Charles 's territories , occupied Bavaria , and barred him from his ancestral lands and from Bohemia . 
 Charles VII spent most of his three @-@ year reign as Emperor residing in Frankfurt while Maria Theresa battled Prussia for her patrimony in Bohemia and Hungary . Frederick could not secure Bohemia for Charles , but he did manage to push the Austrians out of Bavaria . For the last three months of his short reign , the gout @-@ ridden Charles lived in Munich , where he died in January 1745 . His son , Maximilian III Joseph ( known as Max Joseph ) inherited his father 's Electoral dignities but not his Imperial ambition . With the Peace of Füssen ( 22 April 1745 ) , Max Joseph promised to vote for Francis of Lorraine , Maria Theresa 's husband , in the pending Imperial election . He also acknowledged the Pragmatic Sanction . In return , he obtained the restitution of his family 's Electoral position and territories . For his subjects , his negotiations ended five years of warfare and brought a generation of peace and relative prosperity that began with his father 's death in 1745 and ended with his own in 1777 . 
 = = Contenders = = 
 As the Duke of Bavaria , Max Joseph was the prince of one of the largest states in the German @-@ speaking portion of the Holy Roman Empire . As a prince @-@ elector , he stood in the highest rank of the Empire , with broad legal , economic , and judicial rights . As an elector , he was one of the men who selected the Holy Roman Emperor from a group of candidates . He was the son of one Holy Roman Emperor ( Charles VII ) , and the grandson of another ( Joseph I ) . When he died of smallpox on 30 December 1777 , he left no children to succeed him and several ambitious men prepared to carve his patrimony into pieces . 
 = = = Heir = = = 
 The Sulzbach branch of the Wittelsbach family inherited the Duchy of Bavaria . In this line , the 55 @-@ year @-@ old Charles IV Theodore , the Duke of Berg @-@ Jülich , held the first claim . Unfortunately for Charles Theodore , he was already the Elector Palatine . By the terms of the 1648 Peace of Westphalia , he had to cede the Palatine electorate to his own heir before he could claim the Bavarian electorate . He was not eager to do so , even though Bavaria was larger and more important . He preferred living in the Palatinate , with its salubrious climate and compatible social scene . He patronized the arts , and had developed in Mannheim , his capital city , an array of theaters and museums at tremendous cost to his subjects . He hosted Voltaire at one of his many palaces . During the visit , he had enticed Voltaire 's secretary , the Florentine noble Cosimo Alessandro Collini ( 1727 – 1806 ) , into his own employment , considered a coup in some of the Enlightenment circles . Thomas Carlyle referred to Charles Theodore as a " poor idle creature , of purely egoistical , ornamental , dilettante nature ; sunk in theatricals , [ and ] bastard children " . The French foreign minister Vergennes , who knew him , described Charles Theodore 's foibles more forcefully : 
 Although by nature intelligent , he [ Charles Theodore ] has never succeeded in ruling by himself ; he has always been governed by his ministers or by his father @-@ confessor or ( for a time ) by the <unk> [ his wife ] . This conduct has increased his natural weakness and apathy to such a degree that for a long time he has had no opinions save those inspired in him by his entourage . The void which this indolence has left in his soul is filled with the amusements of the hunt and of music and by secret liaisons , for which His Electoral Majesty has at all times had a particular penchant . 
 The Electress had provided him with a son , who had immediately died , but Charles Theodore 's " particular penchant " for secret liaisons , most of whom were French actresses that he had raised to the status of countess , had produced several natural children . By the time of Max Joseph 's death , he had legitimated seven of the males of his various alliances , and was considering the legitimation of two more . With this host of male offspring , although Charles Theodore certainly wished to acquire more territory , he needed it to be territory that he could bequeath through his testament , rather than territory encumbered by a legal entailment that could only pass to a legitimate child . 
 = = = Deal @-@ maker = = = 
 Joseph , Archduke of Austria , King of the Romans , and co @-@ ruler with his mother , Empress Maria Theresa , coveted Bavaria . He felt the War of the Austrian Succession had shown that the House of Habsburg @-@ Lorraine needed a wider sphere of influence in the German @-@ speaking parts of the Holy Roman Empire . Without this , the family could not count on the election of their chosen male candidate as emperor , nor could the family count on an uncontested succession to the Habsburg territories of Bohemia , Hungary and Croatia . For most of Joseph 's adult life , he sought to strengthen his family 's influence in German @-@ speaking lands . For him , this meant the acquisition of German lands ( generally better @-@ developed economically ) , not lands in the eastern region of the Habsburg empire , even such strategic territories as Bukovina . 
 Joseph married Max Joseph 's sister , Maria Josepha , in 1765 , hoping he could claim the Bavarian electorate for his offspring . After two years of unhappy marriage , Maria Josepha died without issue . When Max Joseph died ten years later , Joseph could only present a weak legal claim to Lower Bavaria through a dubious and ancient grant made by the Emperor Sigismund to the House of Habsburg in 1425 . Knowing its poor legal grounds , Joseph negotiated a secret agreement with Charles Theodore shortly after Max Joseph 's death . In this agreement ( 3 January 1778 ) , Charles Theodore ceded Lower Bavaria to Austria in exchange for uncontested succession to the remainder of the duchy . Charles Theodore also hoped to acquire from Joseph some unencumbered parts of the Austrian Netherlands and parts of Anterior Austria that he could bequeath to his bastards , but this was not written into the agreement and Joseph was not a particularly generous man . Furthermore , the agreement entirely ignored the interests of Charles Theodore 's own heir presumptive , Charles II August , of the House of Palatinate @-@ Zweibrücken @-@ Birkenfeld . Charles August was the presumptive heir of Charles Theodore 's domains and titles . He had a clear and direct interest in the disposition of the Bavarian duchy , especially in its territorial integrity . 
 = = = Heir presumptive = = = 
 Unbeknownst to either Charles Theodore or Joseph , a widow ( historians are uncertain which widow ) opened secret negotiations with Prussia to secure the eventual succession of Charles II August ( Charles August ) . Some historians maintain the active negotiator was Max Joseph 's widow , Maria Anna Sophia of Saxony . Others assert it was Max Joseph 's sister , Maria Antonia of Bavaria , who was also Charles August 's mother @-@ in @-@ law and the mother of the reigning Elector of Saxony . Ernest Henderson even maintained she was the " only manly one among the many Wittelsbach parties " involved in the issue . 
 Charles August was no great admirer of Joseph 's . As a younger man , he had sought the hand of Joseph 's sister , Archduchess Maria Amalia . She had been quite content to take him , but Joseph and their mother insisted she marry instead the better @-@ connected Duke of Parma . After this disappointment , Charles II August married Maria Amalia of Saxony in 1774 ; she was the daughter of the Elector Christian ( d . 1765 ) and his wife Maria Antonia , Max Joseph 's sister . In 1769 , the reigning Saxon elector , Frederick Augustus III , had married Charles August 's sister . Charles August , sometimes called duc de Deux @-@ Ponts ( a French translation of Zweibrücken , or two bridges ) , was a French client and could theoretically draw on French support for his claim . However , he had especially good relations with the Saxon Electors : both his <unk> and brother @-@ in @-@ law wanted to ensure that Maria Amalia 's husband received his rightful inheritance . 
 = = Diplomacy = = 
 = = = Interested parties = = = 
 Count Karl @-@ Wilhelm Finck von <unk> , Frederick the Great 's prime minister , believed that any Austrian acquisition in Bavaria would shift the balance of power in the Holy Roman Empire , diminishing Prussia 's influence . Prussia 's recent gains had been hard @-@ won : thirty years earlier , Frederick had engaged in protracted wars in Silesia and Bohemia , resulting in Prussia 's annexation of most of Silesia , and now , with the economy and society modernizing under his direction , Prussia was emerging as a world power . In the Silesian Wars and the Seven Years ' War , Frederick had earned a new , if grudging , respect for his kingdom 's military and diplomatic prowess from the European powers of France , Russia , Britain and Austria . To protect Prussia 's status and territory , Finck and Frederick constructed an alliance with the Electorate of Saxony , ostensibly to defend the rights of Charles II August , Duke of Zweibrücken . 
 Although equally interested in maintaining its influence among the German states , France had a double problem . As a supporter of the rebellious British colonies in North America , she wished to avoid a continental engagement ; she could do more damage to the British in North America than in Europe . The Diplomatic Revolution in 1756 had gone against two hundred years of French foreign policy of opposition to the House of Habsburg , arguably bringing France massive territorial gains in repeated wars with Habsburg Austria and Spain . A reversal of this policy in 1756 tied French foreign policy in Europe to Vienna which , although it could give France additional influence and leverage , could also cripple the country 's diplomatic maneuvers with the other power players : Britain , Russia , and Prussia . Despite this restructuring , there existed in the French Court at Versailles , and in France generally , a strong anti @-@ Austrian sentiment . The personal union ( the diplomatic term for marriage ) of Louis , then the Dauphin , and the Austrian Archduchess Marie Antoinette , was considered both a political and matrimonial <unk> in the eyes of many Frenchmen . It flew in the face of 200 years of French foreign policy , in which the central axiom " had been hostility to the House of Habsburg . " The French foreign minister , the Comte de Vergennes , maintained deep @-@ seated hostility to the Austrians that antedated the alliance of 1756 . He had not approved of the shift in France 's traditional bonds and considered the Austrians untrustworthy . Consequently , he managed to extricate France from immediate military obligations to Austria by 1778 . 
 = = = Tensions rise = = = 
 On 3 January 1778 , a few days after Max Joseph 's death , the ducal equerry proclaimed the succession of Charles Theodore . Dragoons rode through the streets of Munich , some banging drums and some blowing trumpets , and others shouting , " Long Live our Elector Charles Theodore . " According to the 3 January agreement between Joseph and Charles Theodore , fifteen thousand Austrian troops occupied Mindelheim , ultimately more territory than had been granted to Joseph . Charles Theodore , who had dreamed of rebuilding the Burgundian empire , realized that Joseph was not seriously planning to exchange Bavaria , or even a portion of it , for the entirety of the Austrian Netherlands . At best , he might acquire a few portions of it , perhaps Hainaut or Guelders , Luxembourg , Limburg , or various dispersed possessions in Anterior Austria , most of which lay in southwestern Germany , but Joseph would never release any sizable portion of territory , and certainly not any territory of strategic military or commercial value . 
 While Charles Theodore 's dream of a Burgundian renaissance receded , Joseph continued on his course to annex part of Bavaria . The widow — Max Joseph 's widow or the mother @-@ in @-@ law or both — petitioned Prussia on behalf of Charles II August . Frederick 's envoys to the heir presumptive convinced this slighted prince to lodge protests with the Imperial Diet in Regensburg . Joseph 's troops remained in portions of Bavaria , even establishing an Austrian administration at Straubing , precipitating a diplomatic crisis . Austrian occupation of Bavaria was unacceptable to Charles August 's champion , Frederick . Prussian troops mobilized near Prussia 's border with Bohemia , reminiscent of the invasion in 1740 that so endangered Maria Theresa 's succession to the Habsburg hereditary lands . Meanwhile , the French wriggled out of their diplomatic obligations to Austria , telling Joseph that there would be no military support from Paris for a war against Prussia . Britain , Prussia 's strongest ally , was already mired in a war in North America , but Prussia 's military had recovered from the Seven Years ' War and Frederick did not require any help . Prussia 's other ally , Saxony , aligned by two marriages with Charles August , was strategically prepared for war against Austria and ready to contribute twenty thousand troops . Watching from St. Petersburg , Catherine II was willing to mop up the spoils of war for the Russian Empire but did not want to get involved in another costly European conflict . 
 For four months , negotiators shuttled between Vienna and Berlin , Dresden and Regensburg , and Zweibrücken , Munich and Mannheim . By early spring 1778 , Austria and Prussia faced each other with armies several times the size of their forces during the Seven Years ' War , and their confrontation had the potential to explode into another European @-@ wide war . 
 = = Action = = 
 When it became clear that other monarchs were not going to acquiesce to a de facto partition of Bavaria , Joseph and his foreign minister , Anton von Kaunitz , scoured the Habsburg realm for troops and concentrated six hundred guns and a 180 @,@ 000 – 190 @,@ 000 @-@ man Austrian army in Bohemia , Moravia , and Austrian Silesia . This amounted to most of Austria 's two hundred thousand effectives , leaving much of the Habsburg border regions with the Ottoman Empire under @-@ guarded . On 6 April 1778 , Frederick of Prussia established his army of eighty thousand men on the Prussian border with Bohemia , near Neisse , Schweidnitz , and the County of Glatz , which Frederick had acquired from the Wittelsbach contender in 1741 in exchange for his electoral support of Charles VII . At Glatz , Frederick completed his preparations for invasion : he gathered supplies , arranged a line of march , brought up his artillery and drilled his soldiers . His younger brother , Prince Henry , formed a second army of seventy @-@ five to a hundred thousand men to the north and west , in Saxony . In April , Frederick and Joseph officially joined their armies in the field , and diplomatic negotiations ended . 
 In early July 1778 , the Prussian general Johann Jakob von Wunsch ( 1717 – 1788 ) crossed into Bohemia near the fortified town of Náchod with several hundred men . The local garrison , commanded by Friedrich Joseph , Freiherr ( Baron ) von Nauendorf , then a rittmeister ( captain of cavalry ) , included only fifty hussars . Despite the poor numerical odds , Nauendorf sallied out to engage Wunsch 's men . When his small force reached Wunsch 's , he greeted the Prussians as friends ; by the time the Prussians were close enough to realize the allegiance of the hussars , Nauendorf and his small band had acquired the upper hand . Wunsch withdrew ; the next day , Nauendorf was promoted to major . In a letter to her son , the Empress Maria Theresa wrote : " They say you were so pleased with Nauendorf , a rookie from Carlstadt or Hungary , who killed seven men , that you gave him twelve ducats . " 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 A few days after Wunsch 's encounter with Nauendorf , Frederick entered Bohemia . His eighty thousands troops occupied Náchod but advanced no further . The Habsburg army stood on the heights of the Elbe river , nominally under Joseph but with Count Franz Moritz von Lacy in practical command . Lacy had served under Marshal Daun during the Seven Years ' War and knew his military business . He established the Austrian army on the most defensible position available : centered at <unk> , a triple line of redoubts extended 15 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) southwest along the river to Königgrätz . The Austrians also augmented this defensive line with their six hundred artillery . 
 While the main Habsburg army faced Frederick at the Elbe , a smaller army under the command of Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon guarded the passes from Saxony and Lusatia into Bohemia . Laudon was another battle @-@ hardened and cagey commander with extensive field experience , but even he could not cover the long frontier completely . Shortly after Frederick crossed into Bohemia , Prince Henry , a brilliant strategist in his own right , maneuvered around Laudon 's troops and entered Bohemia at <unk> . To avoid being flanked , Laudon withdrew across the Iser River , but by mid @-@ August , the main Austrian army was in danger of being outflanked by Henry on its left wing . At its center and right , it faced a well @-@ disciplined army commanded by Frederick , arguably the best tactical general of the age and feared for his victories against France and Austria in the previous war . 
 While his main army was entrenched on the heights above the Elbe , Joseph encouraged raids against the Prussian troops . On 7 August 1778 , with two squadrons of his regiment , the intrepid " rookie " , now Major , Nauendorf , led a raid against a Prussian convoy at <unk> in the County of Glatz . The surprised convoy surrendered and Nauendorf captured its officers , 110 men , 476 horses , 240 wagons of flour , and thirteen transport wagons . This kind of action characterized the entire war . There were no major battles ; the war consisted of a series of raids and counter @-@ raids during which the opposing sides lived off the country @-@ side and tried to deny each other access to supplies and fodder . Soldiers later said they spent more time foraging for food than they did fighting . 
 The armies remained in their encampments for the campaign season while men and horses ate all the provisions and forage for miles . Prince Henry wrote to his brother , suggesting they complete their operations by 22 August , at which time he estimated he would have exhausted local supplies of food for his men and fodder for his horses . Frederick agreed . He laid plans to cross the Elbe and approach the Austrian force from the rear , but the more he examined the conditions of Joseph 's entrenchments , the more he realized the campaign was already lost . Even if he and Henry executed simultaneous attacks on the Königgrätz heights , such a plan exposed Henry to a flanking attack from Laudon . A coordinated frontal and rear assault was also unlikely to succeed . Even if it did , the Prussian losses would be unacceptable and would demolish his army 's capacity to resist other invaders . From Frederick 's perspective , the Russians and the Swedes were always ready to take advantage of any perceived Prussian weakness , and the French also could not be trusted to keep their distance . For Frederick , it was a risk not worth taking . Despite this realization , the four armies — two Austrian , two Prussian — remained in place until September , eating as much of the country 's resources as they could . 
 From their advantageous height by Königgrätz , the Austrians frequently bombarded the Prussian army encamped below them . On the same day that Frederick 's doctors bled him , an Austrian cannonade grew so strong that Frederick rode out to observe the damage . During the ride , his vein opened . A company medic bound his wound , an incident later depicted by the painter Bernhard Rode . In his admiring history of Frederick the Great , the English historian Thomas Carlyle ( 1795 – 1881 ) relayed the story of Frederick and a Croatian marksman . As Frederick was reconnoitering , Carlyle maintained , the King encountered the Croat taking aim at him . Reportedly , he wagged his finger at the man , as if to say , " Do not do that . " The Croat thought better of shooting the King , and disappeared into the woods ; some reports maintain he actually knelt before the king and kissed his hand . 
 Nauendorf continued his raids , the soldiers foraged for food and dug up the local potato crop , and Joseph and Frederick glared at one another by Königgrätz . Maria Theresa had sent Kaunitz on a secret mission to Berlin to offer a truce . In a second trip , she offered a settlement , and finally wrote to Catherine in Russia to ask for assistance . When Joseph discovered his mother 's maneuvering behind his back , he furiously offered to resign . His mother enlisted the assistance she needed . Catherine offered to mediate the dispute ; if her assistance was unacceptable , she was willing to send fifty thousand troops to augment the Prussian force , despite the fact that she disliked Frederick and her alliance with him was strictly defensive . Frederick withdrew portions of his force in mid @-@ September . In October , Joseph withdrew most of his army to the Bohemian border and Frederick withdrew his remaining troops into Prussia . Two small forces of hussars and dragoons remained in Bohemia to provide a winter cordon ; these forces allowed Joseph and Frederick to keep an eye on each other while their diplomats negotiated at Teschen . 
 = = = Winter actions = = = 
 Appointed to be commander of the Austrian winter cordon , Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser ordered a small assault column under the command of Colonel Wilhelm <unk> to attack the village of <unk> . <unk> led a column of Croats into the village . During the action , four hundred Prussians were killed , another four hundred made prisoner , and eight colors were captured . Following his successes against the Prussians in 1778 , Joseph awarded Wurmser the Knight 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa on 21 October 1778 . 
 In another raid , on 1 January 1779 , Colonel Franz <unk> led 3 @,@ 200 men ( four battalions , six squadrons , and 16 artillery ) into <unk> , a village in Silesia on the Prussia border , 7 kilometers ( 4 mi ) south of <unk> . There , he ran against a 10 @,@ 000 – man Prussian force commanded by General von Wunsch ; the Austrians decisively defeated the Prussians , with a loss of 20 men ( wounded ) against the Prussian losses of 800 . Two weeks later , Wurmser advanced into the County of Glatz in five columns , two of which , commanded by Major General Franz Joseph , Count Kinsky , surrounded Habelschwerdt on 17 – 18 January . While one column secured the approach , the other , under the leadership of Colonel Pallavicini , stormed the village and captured the Prince of Hessen @-@ <unk> , 37 officers , plus 700 – 1 @,@ 000 men , three cannon and seven colors ; in this action , the Prussians lost 400 men dead or wounded . Wurmser himself led the third column in an assault on the so @-@ called Swedish blockhouse at <unk> . It and the village of Habelschwerdt were set on fire by howitzers . Major General Ludwig , Baron of Terzi ( 1730 – 1800 ) , who was covering with the remaining two columns , threw back the enemy support and took three hundred Prussian prisoners . Meanwhile , Wurmser maintained his position at the nearby villages of <unk> and <unk> . His forward patrols reached the outskirts of Glatz and patrolled much of the Silesian border with Prussia near Schweidnitz . <unk> and <unk> were both destroyed . 
 On 3 March 1779 , Nauendorf again raided <unk> with a large force of infantry and hussars and captured the entire Prussian garrison . Joseph awarded him the Knight 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa ( 19 May 1779 ) . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In the Treaty of Teschen ( May 1779 ) , Maria Theresa returned Lower Bavaria to Charles Theodore , but kept the so @-@ called <unk> , a 2 @,@ 200 @-@ square @-@ kilometer ( 850 sq mi ) strip of land in the drainage basin of the Inn River . She and Joseph were surprised to find that the small territory had 120 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Saxony received a financial reward of six million gulden from the principal combatants for its role in the intervention . 
 The War of the Bavarian Succession was the last war for both Frederick and Maria Theresa , whose reigns began and ended with wars against one another . Although they deployed armies three to four times the size of the armies of the Seven Years ' War , neither monarch used the entirety of the military force each had at his or her disposal , making this war @-@ without @-@ battles remarkable . Despite the restraint of the monarchs , some early nineteenth @-@ century casualty estimates suggest that tens of thousands died of starvation and hunger @-@ related disease . Carlyle 's more moderate estimate lies at about ten thousand Prussian and probably another ten thousand Austrian dead . Michael <unk> assesses combined casualties at approximately thirty thousand ; Robert Kann gives no estimate of casualties but suggests the primary causes of death were cholera and dysentery . Gaston <unk> , whose 1915 work is still considered the authority on Austrian military losses , is specific : five Austrian generals ( he does not name them ) , over twelve thousand soldiers , and 74 officers died of disease . In minor actions and skirmishes , nine officers and 265 men were killed and four officers and 123 men were wounded , but not fatally . Sixty @-@ two officers and 2 @,@ 802 men were taken prisoner , and 137 men were missing . Over three thousand Imperial soldiers deserted . Finally , twenty @-@ six officers and 372 men were discharged with disabilities . <unk> also gives Prussian losses : one general killed ( he does not say which ) , 87 officers and 3 @,@ 364 men killed , wounded or captured . Overall , he assumes losses of ten percent of the fighting force . Little has been discovered of civilian casualties , although certainly the civilians also suffered from starvation and disease . There were other damages : for example , Habelschwerdt and one of its hamlets were destroyed by fire . 
 Despite its short duration , the war itself cost Prussia thirty @-@ three million florins . For the Austrians , the cost was higher : sixty @-@ five million florins , for a state with an annual revenue of fifty million . Joseph himself described war as " a horrible thing ... the ruin of many innocent people . " 
 = = = Change in warfare = = = 
 This was the last European war of the old style , in which armies maneuvered sedately at a distance while diplomats hustled between capitals to resolve their Majesties ' differences . Given the length of time — six months — the cost in life and treasure was high . In light of the scale of warfare experienced in Europe less than a generation later in the French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars , though , this six @-@ month engagement seems mild . Yet while historians often dismissed it as the last of the archaic mode of Ancien Régime warfare , elements of the war foreshadowed conflicts to come : the sheer sizes of the armies deployed reflected emerging abilities and willingness to conscript , train , equip and field larger armies than had been done in previous generations . 
 The war also reflected a new height in military spending , especially by the Habsburgs . After the Seven Years ' War , the size of the Habsburg military shrank , from 201 @,@ 311 men in arms in 1761 to 163 @,@ 613 in 1775 . In preparing for a second summer 's campaign , Joseph 's army grew from 195 @,@ 108 effectives in the summer of 1778 to 308 @,@ 555 men in arms in Spring 1779 . Habsburg military strength never dropped below two hundred thousand effectives between 1779 and 1792 , when Austria entered the War of the First Coalition . Several times it surged above three hundred thousand men in arms , responding to needs on the Ottoman border or the revolt in the Austrian Netherlands . The military also underwent a massive organizational overhaul . 
 In the vernacular , the Austrians called the war <unk> ( " Plum Fuss " ) , and for the Prussians and Saxons , it was <unk> ( " Potato War " ) . In the historiography of European warfare , historians almost always describe the War of the Bavarian Succession " in dismissive or derisive terms [ as ] the apotheosis ( or perhaps caricature ) of old regime warfare , " despite its grand name . Some historians have maintained that the focus on the consumption of the produce of the land gave the war its popular name . Others suggest that the two armies lobbed potatoes instead of cannonballs or mortars . A third theory maintains that the war acquired its popular name because it took place during the potato harvest . 
 = = = Resurgence of the problem = = = 
 The underlying problem was not solved : Joseph 's foreign policy dictated the expansion of Habsburg influence over German @-@ speaking territories , and only this , he believed , would counter Prussia 's growing strength in Imperial affairs . In 1785 , Joseph again sought to make a territorial deal with Charles Theodore , again offering to trade portions of Bavarian territory for portions of the Austrian Netherlands . This time it would be a straight trade : territory for territory , not a partition . Although the Austrian Netherlands was a wealthy territory , it was a thorn in Joseph 's side , opposing his administrative and bureaucratic reforms and devouring military and administrative resources he desperately needed elsewhere in his realm . Despite its problems , Joseph could not afford to give up the Netherlands entirely , so his efforts to negotiate a partial territorial exchange guaranteed him some of the financial benefits of both his Netherlands possessions and the Bavarian territories . 
 Even if Joseph had to give up the Austrian Netherlands , it meant " the barter of an indefensible strategic position and ... an economic liability for a great territorial and political gain , adjacent to the monarchy . " Again , Charles II August , Duke of Zweibrücken , resented the possible loss of his Bavarian expectancy , and again , Frederick of Prussia offered aid . This time , no war developed , not even a " Potato War " . Instead , Frederick founded the <unk> , or the Union of Princes , comprising the influential princes of the northern German states , and these individuals jointly pressured Joseph to relinquish his ambitious plans . Rather than increasing Austria 's influence in German affairs , Joseph 's actions increased Prussian influence , making Prussia seem like a protector state against greedy Habsburg imperialism ( an ironic contrast to the earlier stage of the Austro @-@ Prussian rivalry , in which Frederick seized German @-@ speaking lands with military force and without formal declaration of war , causing most of the German states to join Austria ) . In 1799 , the duchy passed to Maximilian IV Joseph , brother of Charles August , whose only child had died in 1784 . 
 = = Long @-@ term effect : the intensification of German dualism = = 
 Joseph understood the problems facing his multi @-@ ethnic patrimony and the ambivalent position the Austrians held in the Holy Roman Empire . Although the Habsburgs and their successor house of Habsburg @-@ Lorraine had , with two exceptions , held the position of Emperor since the early 15th century , the basis of 18th @-@ century Habsburg power lay not in the Holy Roman Empire itself , but in Habsburg territories in Eastern Europe ( where the family had vast domains ) , the Italian peninsula , and the Lowlands . For Joseph or his successors to wield influence in the German @-@ speaking states , they needed to acquire additional German @-@ speaking territories . Acquisition of Central European territories with German @-@ speaking subjects would strengthen the Austrian position in the Holy Roman Empire . As far as Joseph was concerned , only this could shift the center of the Habsburg empire into German @-@ speaking Central Europe . This agenda made dispensable both the Austrian Netherlands — Habsburg territories which lay furthest west — and Galicia , furthest east . It also made the recovery of German @-@ speaking Silesia and acquisition of new territories in Bavaria essential . 
 By the late 1770s , Joseph also faced important diplomatic obstacles in consolidating Habsburg influence in Central Europe . When the British had been Austria 's allies , Austria could count on British support in its wars , but Britain was now allied with Prussia . In the Diplomatic Revolution , the French replaced the British as Austria 's ally , but they were fickle , as Joseph discovered when Vergennes extricated Versailles from its obligations . Russia , which also had been an important Austrian ally for most of the Seven Years ' War , sought opportunities for expansion at the expense of its weak neighbors . In 1778 , that meant Poland and the Ottoman Empire , but Joseph fully understood the danger of appearing weak in Russia 's eyes : Habsburg lands could be carved off easily by the cagey Catherine 's diplomatic knife . Still , Frederick of Prussia was the most definite enemy , as he had been throughout the reigns of Theresa and Franz before him , when the Prussian state 's emergence as a player on the European stage had occurred at Habsburg expense , first with the loss of Silesia , and later in the 1750s and 1760s . Joseph sought to unify the different portions of his realm , not the German states as a whole , and to establish Habsburg hegemony in German @-@ speaking central Europe beginning with the partition of Bavaria . 
 The broad geographic outlines of European states changed rapidly in the last fifty years of the century , with partitions of Poland and territorial exchanges through conquest and diplomacy . Rulers sought to centralize their control over their domains and create well @-@ defined borders within which their writ was law . For Joseph , the acquisition of Bavaria , or at least parts of it , would link Habsburg territories in Bohemia with those in the Tyrol and partially compensate Austria for its loss of Silesia . The Bavarian succession crisis provided Joseph with a viable opportunity to consolidate his influence in the Central European states , to bolster his financially strapped government with much @-@ needed revenue , and to strengthen his army with German @-@ speaking conscripts . Supremacy in the German states was worth a war , but for Frederick , the preservation of Charles August 's inheritance was not . He had had sufficient war in the first years of his reign , and in its last twenty years , he sought to preserve the status quo , not to enter into risky adventures that might upset it . If he had to withdraw from engagement with Joseph 's army , such a sacrifice was a temporary measure . Warfare was only one means of diplomacy , and he could employ others in this contest with Austria . The Austro @-@ Prussian dualism that dominated the next century 's unification movement rumbled ominously in the War of the Bavarian Succession . 
 = Jonas Mouton = 
 Jonas Mouton ( born March 17 , 1988 ) is an American football linebacker who is currently a free agent . He played his college football for the Michigan Wolverines football team . He started at weakside linebacker and was previously a highly rated safety for Venice High School . 
 He led the Big Ten Conference in tackles for the 2010 NCAA Division I FBS football season . He was the starting weakside linebacker for the 2008 , 2009 team and 2010 teams . Mouton was named on the preseason watch list for the 2010 Butkus Award for linebackers and was a postseason 2010 All @-@ Big Ten Conference second team selection by the media . In high school , he played safety in the U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl . 
 = = High school = = 
 Mouton played as a defensive back at Venice High School . In September 2005 , the Los Angeles Times ran a feature story about his accomplishments at Venice . The Times story opened as follows : 
 " The hardest @-@ working player on the Venice High football team is Jonas Mouton , and he has ability to match . A 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 , 215 @-@ pound senior defensive back with linebacker @-@ like hitting skills , a quarterback 's awareness of the field and the shifty quickness of a running back , Mouton could rely on natural abilities and coast through high school . But he out @-@ hustled , out @-@ ran and out @-@ lifted just about everyone else during spring practice his sophomore year to earn a spot on varsity . He hasn 't slowed since . " 
 The major high school rating reports evaluated him as a safety . Rivals.com listed him as the third best safety in the class of 2006 , the seventh best California football player and the 45th best player in the nation . Scout.com ranked him as the sixth best safety . ESPN ranked him as the 14th best safety and 128th best high school football player in the 2006 class . He participated in the January 7 , 2006 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl . 
 = = College career = = 
 He redshirted in 2006 and made his career debut on September 15 , 2007 against Notre Dame . On January 1 , 2008 , in the Capital One Bowl against Florida he had a 20 @-@ yard kickoff return . 
 On September 6 , 2008 , he made his first career start against Miami ( OH ) . On September 27 , 2008 , he had his first quarterback sack in an eight @-@ tackle effort against Wisconsin . Mouton had his first ten @-@ tackle game ( eight solo and two assists ) on October 18 , 2008 against Penn State . On November 15 , 2008 against Northwestern he set a new career high with eleven tackles ( six solo and five assists ) . Over the course of the season , he started eleven of the twelve games at weakside linebacker . That season , he finished second on the Wolverines in tackles . However , following the season he was unavailable when 2009 spring practice began due to an injured shoulder . 
 In the September 12 , 2009 Michigan – Notre Dame rivalry game Mouton punched a Notre Dame player and was suspended . Twice in 2009 he had ten tackles ( five solo and six assists on September 26 , 2009 v. Indiana and two solo and nine assists on November 21 , 2009 v. Ohio State ) . Both games matched his career @-@ high tackles total and against Ohio State , he added an interception . He started at weakside linebacker in all eleven games that he played in . 
 Mouton was one of fifty @-@ one players named on the preseason watch list for the 2010 Butkus Award for linebackers . On September 11 , 2010 , Mouton set a career high with thirteen tackles ( 6 solo and 7 assists ) v. Notre Dame . In that game , he made an interception that led to a one @-@ play thirty @-@ one @-@ yard Michigan touchdown drive . At the midpoint of Michigan 's 12 @-@ game 2010 regular season schedule , he ranked second in the Big Ten Conference in tackles and tied for sixth in interceptions . He took over the lead in tackles after Michigan 's eighth game . Then with a career @-@ high fourteen tackles against Illinois in the ninth game of the season on November 6 , he retained his first place rank in the conference and moved up from 32nd to 20th on the national list . Coupled with the 12 tackles on October 30 against Penn State , it was the first time he had back @-@ to @-@ back double digit tackle performances . Mouton was unavailable for the Purdue game on November 13 due to a chest injury . However , the following week against Wisconsin he resumed his streak of double digit tackle performances with thirteen . This moved him up to 17th in the nation in tackles . Mouton ended the 2010 Big Ten Conference football season as the leader in tackles . Following the Big Ten conference regular season he was a second team All @-@ Conference selection by the media . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 Mouton was one of 32 linebackers invited to participate in the February 24 — March 1 , 2011 NFL Scouting Combine . He ranked twelfth in the Standing long jump with a distance of 9 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 92 m ) . He ranked eleventh in the 3 cone drill with a time of 7 @.@ 08 . He ranked fourteenth in the 20 @-@ yard shuttle with a time of 4 @.@ 34 . 
 = = = San Diego Chargers = = = 
 Mouton was drafted by the San Diego Chargers with the 61st overall pick in the 2011 NFL Draft . In week 3 of the 2011 NFL season , the Chargers put Mouton on injured reserve for the season . Mouton began the 2012 season inactive . He made his NFL debut on December 2 against the Cincinnati . 
 On July 26 , 2013 , Mouton suffered a torn ACL during training camp . As a result , Mouton was eliminated for the entire 2013 season . 
 On July 23 , 2014 , Mouton was waived . 
 = STS @-@ 8 = 
 STS @-@ 8 was the eighth NASA Space Shuttle mission and the third flight of the Space Shuttle Challenger . It launched on August 30 , 1983 and landed on September 5 , conducting the first night launch and night landing of the Space Shuttle program . It also carried the first African @-@ American astronaut , Guion Bluford . The mission successfully achieved all of its planned research objectives , but was marred by the subsequent discovery that a solid @-@ fuel rocket booster had almost malfunctioned catastrophically during the launch . 
 The mission 's primary payload was INSAT @-@ 1B , an Indian communications and weather observation satellite , which was released by the orbiter and boosted into a geostationary orbit . The secondary payload , replacing a delayed NASA communications satellite , was a four @-@ metric @-@ ton dummy payload , intended to test the use of the shuttle 's " Canadarm " remote manipulator system . Scientific experiments carried onboard Challenger included the environmental testing of new hardware and materials designed for future spacecraft , the study of biological materials in electric fields under microgravity , and research into space adaptation syndrome ( also known as " space sickness " ) . The flight furthermore served as shakedown testing for the previously launched TDRS @-@ 1 satellite , which would be required to support the subsequent STS @-@ 9 mission . 
 = = Crew = = 
 This mission had a crew of five , with three mission specialists . It was the second mission ( after STS @-@ 7 ) to fly with a crew of five , the largest carried by a single spacecraft up to that date . The crew was historically notable for the participation of Guion " Guy " Bluford , who became the first African @-@ American to fly in space . 
 The commander , Truly , was the only veteran astronaut of the crew , having flown as the pilot on STS @-@ 2 in 1981 and for two of the Approach and Landing Tests aboard Enterprise in 1977 . Prior to this , he had worked as a capsule communicator for all three Skylab missions and the Apollo @-@ Soyuz mission . Brandenstein , Gardner and Bluford had all been recruited in 1978 , and been training for a mission since 1979 . The mission had originally been planned for a crew of four , with Thornton added to the crew as a third mission specialist in December 1982 , eight months after the crew was originally named . As with Truly , he was an Apollo @-@ era recruit , having joined NASA in 1967 . His participation on the mission included a series of tests aimed at gathering information on the physiological changes linked with Space Adaptation Syndrome , more commonly known as " space sickness " ; this had become a focus of attention in NASA , as astronauts succumbed to it during Shuttle missions . 
 The orbiter carried two EMUs for use in case of an emergency spacewalk ; if needed , they would be used by Truly and Gardner . 
 = = Mission plan and payloads = = 
 An early plan for STS @-@ 8 , released in April 1982 , had scheduled it for July 1983 . It was expected to be a three @-@ day mission with four crew members , and would launch INSAT @-@ 1 @-@ B , an Indian satellite , and TDRS @-@ B , a NASA communications relay satellite . However , following problems with the Inertial Upper Stage ( <unk> ) used to deploy TDRS @-@ A on the STS @-@ 6 mission , it was announced in May 1983 that the TDRS was not going to be flown . It was replaced in the manifest by the Payload Flight Test Article . After re @-@ development of the <unk> , TDRS @-@ B was eventually re @-@ manifested for the STS @-@ 51 @-@ L mission , and was lost along with the Space Shuttle Challenger and its crew when the launch failed in January 1986 . 
 The primary element of the STS @-@ 8 mission payload was INSAT @-@ 1B . It was the second in a series of multi @-@ purpose weather and communications satellites to be operated by the Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) ; the first , INSAT @-@ 1A , had been launched by a Delta rocket in April 1982 , but had to be shut down shortly afterwards due to a failure of the onboard reaction control system . The satellite was carried in the rear of the shuttle 's payload bay , and was boosted into a geosynchronous transfer orbit by a Payload Assist Module ( PAM @-@ D ) , a small solid rocket upper stage , after its release from the orbiter . The satellite , with its upper stage , massed a total of 3 @,@ 377 kg ( 7 @,@ 445 lb ) , with the cradle massing another 1 @,@ 102 kg ( 2 @,@ 429 lb ) , and had cost around $ 50 million . 
 The Payload Flight Test Article ( <unk> ) had been scheduled for launch in June 1984 on STS @-@ 16 in the April 1982 manifest , but by May 1983 it had been brought forward to STS @-@ 11 . That month , when the TDRS missions were delayed , it was brought forward to STS @-@ 8 to fill the hole in the manifest . It was an aluminum structure resembling two wheels with a six @-@ meter long central axle , ballasted with lead to give it a total mass of 3 @,@ 855 kg ( 8 @,@ 499 lb ) , which could be lifted by the " Canadarm " Remote Manipulator System – the Shuttle 's " robot arm " – and moved around to help astronauts gain experience in using the system . It was stored in the midsection of the payload bay . 
 The orbiter carried the Development Flight Instrumentation ( DFI ) pallet in its forward payload bay ; this had previously flown on Columbia to carry test equipment . The pallet was not outfitted with any flight instrumentation , but was used to mount two experiments . The first studied the interaction of ambient atomic oxygen with the structural materials of the orbiter and payload , while the second tested the performance of a heat pipe designed for use in the heat rejection systems of future spacecraft . 
 Four Getaway Special payloads were carried . One studied the effects of cosmic rays on electronic equipment . The second studied the effect of the gas environment around the orbiter using ultraviolet absorption measurements , as a precursor to ultraviolet equipment being designed for Spacelab 2 . A third , sponsored by the Japanese Asahi Shimbun newspaper , tried to use water vapor in two tanks to create snow crystals . This was a second attempt at an experiment first flown on STS @-@ 6 , which had had to be redesigned after the water in the tanks froze solid . The last was similar to an experiment flown on STS @-@ 3 , and studied the ambient levels of atomic oxygen by measuring the rates at which small carbon and osmium wafers oxidized . 
 Finally , in cooperation with the US Postal Service , the mission also carried 260 @,@ 000 postal covers franked with $ 9 @.@ 35 express postage stamps , which were to be sold to collectors , with the profits divided between the USPS and NASA . Two storage boxes were attached to the DFI pallet , with more stored in six of the Getaway Special canisters . 
 A number of other experiments were to be performed inside the orbiter crew compartment . Among these was the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System , being flown for the fourth time . This separated solutions of biological materials by passing electric fields through them ; the experiment aimed at supporting research into diabetes treatments . A small animal cage was flown containing six rats ; no animal experiment was carried out on the flight , but a student involvement project was planned for a later mission which would use the cage , and NASA wanted to ensure it was flight @-@ tested . The student involvement project carried out on STS @-@ 8 involved William Thornton using biofeedback techniques , to try to determine if they worked in microgravity . A photography experiment would attempt to study the spectrum of a luminous atmospheric glow which had been reported around the orbiter , and determine how this interacted with firings of the reaction control system . 
 The mission was also scheduled to carry out a series of tests with the TDRS @-@ 1 satellite which had been deployed by STS @-@ 6 , to ensure the system was fully operational before it was used to support the Spacelab 1 program on the upcoming STS @-@ 9 flight . The orbiter furthermore carried equipment to allow for encrypted transmissions , to be tested for use in future classified missions . 
 = = = Support crew = = = 
 John E. Blaha 
 Mary L. Cleave 
 William F. Fisher 
 Jeffrey A. Hoffman 
 Bryan D. O 'Connor ( ascent CAPCOM ) 
 = = = Crew seating arrangements = = = 
 = = Mission summary = = 
 = = = Launch preparations = = = 
 Preparation for the mission began on June 3 , with the assembly of the shuttle 's solid rocket boosters ( SRB ) on the Mobile Launcher Platform . The boosters were stacked on June 20 , 1983 , and the external tank mated to the assembly on June 23 . Challenger arrived at Kennedy Space Center on June 29 , and was transferred to the Orbiter Processing Facility on June 30 . After post @-@ flight maintenance and preparation for the new mission , including the installation of most flight payloads , the shuttle was transferred to the Vehicle Assembly Building on July 27 , and mated to the booster / tank stack . The stack was checked out on July 29 and 30 , and moved to Launch Complex 39A on August 2 , 1983 . INSAT @-@ 1B was loaded into the orbiter when on the pad ; the overall processing time from Challenger arriving at KSC to being ready for launch was only sixty @-@ two days , a record for the program at the time . 
 The launch had originally been scheduled for August 4 , 1983 , and was later rescheduled for August 20 . The requirement to conduct testing with the TDRS system required a delay of ten days for the system to be ready , during which the stack remained on the launch pad . During the on @-@ pad delay , Hurricane Barry ( 1983 ) hit the Florida coastline , making landfall just south of the Kennedy Space Center on the morning of August 25 . The storm had only been identified two days earlier , and there was no time to roll Challenger back from the pad ; the decision was made to secure the launch stack and ride out the storm . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Challenger finally launched at 06 : 32 UTC ( 02 : 32 EDT ) on August 30 , 1983 , after a final 17 @-@ minute delay due to thunderstorms near the launch site . The launch window extended from 06 : 15 to 06 : 49 . The countdown to launch was called by Mark Hess , public information officer . 
 The launch , which occurred in pre @-@ dawn darkness , was the first American night launch since Apollo 17 , and was watched by several thousand spectators . The unusual launching time was due to tracking requirements for the primary payload , INSAT @-@ 1B ; the program would not have another night launch until STS @-@ 61 @-@ B in 1985 . The crew had attempted to prepare for it by training in darkened simulators so as to keep their night vision , but in practice it was discovered that the light of the solid @-@ fuel rocket boosters made the immediate area around the launchpad virtually as bright as a day launch . 
 The launch was the first to use a newly developed high @-@ performance motor for the solid rocket boosters , which gave approximately 7 % greater thrust , and the second @-@ last to use the original standard @-@ mass steel casings for the boosters . These had been replaced by a thinner case , saving some 1 @,@ 800 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 000 lb ) , on STS @-@ 6 and STS @-@ 7 , but because of safety concerns the next two flights used the conventional cases . 
 = = = Orbital operations = = = 
 After a successful insertion into a circular orbit at 296 kilometers ( 160 nmi ) , the first experiments began ; the first two samples were run through the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System , and measurements were taken for the atmospheric luminosities study . A hydraulic circulation pump failed , but this was worked around and it proved to have no impact on operations . 
 The major event of the second day ( August 31 , 1983 ) was the successful deployment of the INSAT @-@ 1B satellite , which took place at 7 : 48 UTC , with Challenger then maneuvering to avoid the firing of the booster motor forty minutes later . Other experimentation continued , though telemetry through TDRS was lost for around three hours , requiring manual intervention . A fire alarm sounded in the morning , indicating signs of a fire in the avionics compartment , but a second alarm remained silent and it was eventually determined to be a false alarm . 
 On the third and fourth days ( September 1 and 2 , 1983 ) , work began with the Canadarm Remote Manipulator System and the payload test article , and communications testing through TDRS continued . The former was successful , but the latter lost contact on a number of occasions , due to problems at the White Sands ground station . As a result , the crew had to be awakened early on September 1 in order to deal with the problem . A minor cabin pressure leak on September 2 was traced to the waste management system , and quickly controlled . The orbiter performed an Orbital Maneuvering System firing on September 2 to place itself in a lower orbit , where the air density was higher and the oxygen interaction experiments would work more effectively . 
 On the fifth day ( September 3 , 1983 ) , testing of the Canadarm continued , including a number of optional " shopping list " tests , and the TDRS tests were carried out with more success . A live press conference was held late in the day , the first in @-@ flight press conference since Apollo 17 . On the sixth day ( September 4 , 1983 ) , experiment runs were completed and the crew prepared to deorbit . Two systems failures were recorded on this last day , the most serious of which involved a synchronization failure in one of the onboard computers . 
 While on orbit , Challenger made a number of altitude and attitude adjustments , in order to test the behavior of a Shuttle orbiter and to perform some experiments in different thermal conditions . By exposing or shading areas from the sun in an unusual way , it was possible to induce particularly warm or cold conditions and observe any resulting problems . 
 = = = Landing = = = 
 The mission plan called for a landing at Edwards Air Force Base , California , at 121 : 28 mission elapsed time . On the original plan , this would have been at 7 : 44 UTC on September 4 , 1983 , before accounting for the last @-@ minute launch delay ; in the event , this was put back by one day to allow for further communications testing , and Challenger touched down at 07 : 40 : 33 UTC ( 00 : 40 : 33 PDT ) , September 5 , 1983 , on Runway 22 at Edwards AFB , on the morning of the seventh day of the mission . As with the launch , this was the first night landing of the program . The Shuttle orbiters had no on @-@ board lights , due to the difficulty of designing landing lights to survive re @-@ entry , and so the runway was lit by high @-@ intensity xenon arc lamps to guide the orbiter in . There was no pressing operational requirement for a night landing , but there was a desire to prove it was possible . Footage of the landing was shown in the 1986 film <unk> . 
 = = Post @-@ flight safety analysis = = 
 The launch was carried out with no obvious anomalies , but on September 27 , 1983 , during post @-@ flight inspection of the solid rocket boosters , severe corrosion was discovered in the left @-@ hand booster . The three @-@ inch ( 8 cm ) -thick resin lining protecting the rocket nozzle , which was designed to erode about half its thickness during firing , was found to have burned down to as little as 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) in places . By some estimations , this left around 14 seconds of firing time before the nozzle would have ruptured , a situation which would have resulted in loss of control and the probable break @-@ up of the spacecraft . It was later determined that this fault was due to the particular batch of resin used on this set of boosters . The burn @-@ through problem was treated as a small mishap by the media , and did not receive significant interest until after the Challenger disaster in 1986 ; the only major contemporary public criticism came from NASA 's Soviet counterparts . As a result of this incident , the flight of STS @-@ 9 was delayed for a month while the nozzles of its boosters were changed . 
 Post @-@ flight inspection of the thermal protection system tiles found seven major debris impacts and forty @-@ nine minor impacts , of which three and twenty @-@ six respectively were on the orbiter 's underside . This was the lowest incidence of major tile damage until at least STS @-@ 74 , and compares very favorably with the program average of twenty @-@ three major impacts to the underside . It was the first Shuttle flight with no significant problems reported for the thermal protection system . Three windows were removed from the orbiter due to pitting and hazing . 
 A total of thirty @-@ three in @-@ flight anomalies were eventually reported . As well as the issues above , STS @-@ 8 's more minor problems ranged from faulty thermostats to an unusually high amount of dust in the cabin . 
 = = Scientific results = = 
 Overall , the crew successfully completed all fifty @-@ four of the planned mission test objectives . While the INSAT deployment was a success , the satellite had problems unfolding its solar array once in geostationary orbit , and was not fully operational until the middle of September . Once functional , however , it provided satisfactory service for seven years , returning 36 @,@ 000 images of Earth and broadcasting television to thousands of remote Indian villages . The Payload Flight Test Article evaluation found that the Canadarm remote manipulator system was capable of moving bulky masses with some accuracy , to a precision of 5 cm and one degree of alignment . 
 The TDRS @-@ 1 program was overall less successful , with the satellite suffering several computer failures and an overall loss of telemetry for several hours . In all , the orbiter was able to use the satellite for 65 of the planned 89 orbits , and could make successful use of the connection on about forty . The Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System equipment functioned as planned , processing several hundred times more material than would have been possible on Earth , and the Asahi Shimbun crystal experiment , flown for the second time , was able to produce snow crystals after the canister was redesigned . 
 Thornton 's research into space adaptation sickness noted that the STS @-@ 8 astronauts had escaped severe cases , with none suffering loss of motor control ; Gardner suffered a " mild case " , but was still able to manage effectively , while Brandenstein – who had suffered from induced motion sickness during training operations – was entirely unaffected . The symptoms were found to abate within three days of launch . 
 = = Wake @-@ up calls = = 
 NASA began a tradition of playing music to astronauts during the Gemini program , and first used music to wake up a flight crew during Apollo 15 . Each track is specially chosen , often by the astronauts ' families , and usually has a special meaning to an individual member of the crew , or is applicable to their daily activities . 
 = Hurricane Iris = 
 Hurricane Iris of 2001 was the most destructive hurricane in Belize since Hurricane Hattie in 1961 . Iris was the second @-@ strongest storm of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season , behind Hurricane Michelle . It was the ninth named storm , fifth hurricane , and third major hurricane of the year , forming from a tropical wave on October 4 just southeast of Barbados . It moved westward through the Caribbean , intensifying into a tropical storm on October 5 south of Puerto Rico and into a hurricane the following day . While passing south of the Dominican Republic , Iris dropped heavy rainfall that caused landslides , killing eight people . Later , the hurricane passed south of Jamaica , where it destroyed two houses . On reaching the western Caribbean Sea , Iris rapidly intensified into a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson scale . A small hurricane with an eye of only 7 mi ( 11 km ) in diameter , Iris reached peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) before making landfall in southern Belize near Monkey River Town on October 9 . The hurricane quickly dissipated over Central America , although its remnants contributed to the formation of Tropical Storm Manuel in the eastern Pacific Ocean . 
 Destruction was heaviest in Belize and totaled $ 250 million ( 2001 USD ) . Because Iris was compact , the damage was largely confined to 72 % of the houses in the Toledo district and 50 % of the houses in the Stann Creek district . The hurricane damaged or destroyed 3 @,@ 718 homes nationwide , and wrecked more than 95 % of the homes in 35 villages in the poorest parts of the country . Iris left about 15 @,@ 000 people homeless , many receiving assistance from the government and the local Red Cross chapter . High winds also damaged large swaths of forest and crops , mostly affecting the banana industry . Iris killed 24 people in Belize , including 20 who died when a scuba diving boat capsized near Big Creek . The storm also killed eight people and damaged about 2 @,@ 500 homes in neighboring Guatemala , and later dropped heavy rainfall in southern Mexico , where two people died . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Toward the end of September 2001 , a poorly defined tropical wave moved westward across the tropical Atlantic Ocean through an area of hostile wind shear , which was caused by a large upper @-@ level low within a trough to the northeast of the Lesser Antilles . A few days later , the upper @-@ level low detached from the trough and moved southwestward over the Caribbean Sea , allowing for an upper @-@ level ridge , or high @-@ pressure area , to form over the tropical wave . The change provided a favorable environment for tropical development , and an area of convection soon blossomed along the wave 's axis . As the tropical wave approached the Lesser Antilles , a mid @-@ level wind circulation formed within the deepest part of the convection , and a low @-@ level circulation became gradually more pronounced on satellite imagery . Although its low @-@ level circulation was small and poorly defined , the system increased in organization enough to be classified as Tropical Depression Eleven at 12 : 00 UTC on October 4 , located about 100 mi ( 160 km ) southeast of Barbados . Operationally , however , Hurricane Hunters did not confirm the depression 's formation until nine hours later . 
 In its early stages , the depression moved west @-@ northwestward between the islands of St. Vincent and St. Lucia under the influence of a strong ridge to its north . Compared to its appearance 24 hours before forming , the depression exhibited improved outflow and more distinct convection , although its lower circulation remained very poorly organized . This was confirmed by a Hurricane Hunters flight into the system , which failed to report a closed circulation despite the depression 's well @-@ organized appearance on satellite imagery . At 21 : 00 UTC on October 5 , they reported a strengthening circulation with flight @-@ level winds of 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) , corresponding to a surface wind intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Based on these data , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Iris , situated about 155 mi ( 250 km ) south of the southern coast of Puerto Rico . In post @-@ season analysis , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) estimated that Iris had attained tropical storm status about nine hours earlier . 
 Despite the storm 's intensification and well @-@ organized satellite appearance , the circulation failed to become better defined . In their first discussion on Iris , the NHC mentioned the potential for the system to degenerate into a tropical wave if it maintained its fast forward speed . One forecaster noted that the center was fragile and that the cyclone could dissipate quickly if it encountered stronger wind shear to its south . Although its overall appearance did not change significantly , the Hurricane Hunters reported a closed eye with a diameter 23 mi ( 37 km ) and a stadium effect ( eyewall curvature ) on October 6 . Later that day , Iris reached hurricane strength just southwest of the southern tip of the Dominican Republic , and the NHC remarked that land interaction with the Greater Antilles was the only factor impeding further development . After Iris reached winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) early on October 7 , its intensity remained steady for about 24 hours . During that time , the satellite appearance became slightly ragged as its outflow became restricted , possibly due to an upper @-@ level low . By late on October 7 , the area of hurricane force winds associated with Iris extended only 25 mi ( 35 km ) from its 16 mi ( 22 km ) wide eye . 
 Early on October 8 , after turning west @-@ southwestward away from the Greater Antilles , Iris began strengthening again , with warm waters and an absence of significant wind shear . The NHC predicted peak winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) before the storm would hit Belize . It rapidly intensified with the favorable conditions , intensifying from 95 mph ( 150 km / h ) to 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) in a 12 @-@ hour period on October 8 , making Iris a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale ; in the same duration , the minimum central pressure dropped 38 mbar ( 1 @.@ 12 inHg ) . While intensifying , the hurricane developed concentric eyewalls , with an innermost eye having a diameter of 7 mi ( 11 km ) . For comparison , the smallest known eye diameter on record for an Atlantic hurricane was about 3 mi ( 5 km ) , during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 . With such a small eye , a Hurricane Hunters flight could not deploy a dropsonde into the center of Iris , and shortly after the flight , the innermost eye collapsed as the core paralleled the Honduras coastline just offshore . This resulted in a temporary and slight weakening during an eyewall replacement cycle , but within a few hours Iris re @-@ intensified to attain peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) just off Belize . At 02 : 00 UTC on October 9 , it made landfall at peak intensity in Monkey River Town in the southern portion of Belize . 
 Initially , Hurricane Iris was forecast to remain a tropical cyclone while crossing Central America and to re @-@ intensify in the eastern Pacific Ocean ; had it done so , it would have retained the name Iris . Instead , the hurricane rapidly weakened after moving into the mountainous terrain of Guatemala , and within six hours of landfall the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm . Late on October 9 , within sixteen hours of landfall , the circulation dissipated over extreme southeastern Mexico . As the remnants approached the Pacific Ocean , a new area of convection developed south of the original circulation of Iris . It gradually organized while continuing westward , developing into Tropical Storm Manuel ; the new storm ultimately lasted until October 18 before succumbing to cooler waters and wind shear . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Over a stretch of four days , sixteen tropical cyclone watches and warnings were issued in association with Iris , affecting the Dominican Republic , the Cuban provinces of Granma and Santiago de Cuba , Jamaica , Cayman Islands , the Yucatán Peninsula , Guatemala , Honduras and Belize . The threat from Iris prompted the Jamaica National Emergency Operations Center to be activated . Shelters were opened in the country but were ultimately unused . 
 In Belize , a hurricane warning was issued about 23 hours before Iris moved ashore . A state of national emergency was declared on October 8 as Hurricane Iris neared landfall . All emergency response committees were activated to quickly begin recovery efforts . A mandatory evacuation was issued for Stann Creek and Toledo coastal villages and all offshore islands . The main hospital in Belize City was evacuated as a precaution and the city itself was placed under a voluntary evacuation order . Overall , 11 @,@ 380 people evacuated their homes in Belize , including many in Belize City . These evacuations were later credited for limiting the death toll . Hurricane Keith had struck the nation a year prior , preparing some citizens for what to expect . Disaster response teams arrived the day after Iris was projected to make landfall . Pan American Health Organization staff were on standby in Belize , Guatemala and Honduras and were ready to respond to any post @-@ storm disease outbreaks . 
 On October 8 , the Government of Honduras declared a red alert for all northern regions , advising residents to expect " extreme weather conditions " . About 5 @,@ 000 people in the country evacuated from their homes . To the north of Belize , officials in Mexico evacuated people from fishing villages and closed ports . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Lesser and Greater Antilles = = = 
 While Iris was in its development stages , residents as far north as Saint Thomas reported rain and thunderstorms . In the Dominican Republic , Iris dropped around 3 in ( 76 mm ) of rainfall along the coast , forcing 35 families to evacuate their homes after rivers exceeded their banks . The rains triggered a landslide outside of Santo Domingo that destroyed a home , killing a family of three . There was another landslide in the region that injured two people . Iris 's passage near Jamaica destroyed two houses and damaged the roofs of two others , causing one injury . Otherwise , damage in the country was minimal . 
 = = = Offshore = = = 
 A 120 ft ( 37 m ) scuba diving boat overturned during the hurricane near Big Creek , Belize , possibly hit by a tornado . The boat , named the Wave Dancer , had 28 people on board , including 20 from the Richmond Dive Club out of Richmond , Virginia ; most of them were upstairs in the boat , and none were diving . The captain had delayed returning to shore , and the passengers waited for the storm to pass along a dock , not anticipating the ferocity . Iris cut the ropes connecting the boat to the dock , causing it to overturn in 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) waters . Eight people survived , and 11 bodies were recovered ; it was presumed that 20 people died during the wreck , including 15 from the Richmond area and three crew members . 
 Another boat , the <unk> , also reportedly capsized with people on board . 
 = = = Belize = = = 
 Hurricane Iris moved ashore in Belize with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) , although the highest measured winds were 106 mph ( 171 km / h ) at a station in Big Creek . Because of its small diameter , Iris produced heavy damage only in a 70 mi ( 110 km ) area of southern Belize . In that region , the hurricane produced a storm surge of up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , with waves of over 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) in height , causing street flooding and some damage to the offshore cayes . 
 As it moved ashore , Iris damaged houses and schools in dozens of villages . In 35 villages , the storm destroyed more than 95 % of the buildings . Its small size confined the worst damage largely to Toledo and Stann Creek districts , which are the two southernmost and poorest districts of the country . The percentage of damaged houses was 72 % in Toledo district and about 50 % in Stann Creek , leaving about 15 @,@ 000 people homeless . In both districts , the storm caused power outages and contaminated water supplies . In the worst @-@ affected areas , poor Mayan people living on farms lost much of what they owned . At Placencia near the coast , about 80 % of the homes were destroyed and many of the remaining buildings had roof damage , with downed power poles in the streets . About 90 % of the houses in nearby Seine Bight were destroyed , and where Iris made landfall , over 90 % of the homes were destroyed throughout Monkey River Town . The storm damaged several roads and fishing piers in southern Belize . Iris also damaged tourism facilities , including minor impact to the Maya ruins of Belize , and damaged 20 % of the hotel rooms in the country , accounting for $ 37 million in losses . The remainder of the country remained generally unaffected during the storm . 
 In southern Belize , the storm 's strong winds left crop damage , in some cases where the harvest had just begun . About 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) of bananas were destroyed , along with over 3 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 400 ha ) of rice , 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) of corn , and other crops to a lesser degree . The storm also flooded fields and killed several livestock . The shrimp industry lost 25 % of its catch , partly due to contaminated waters . Crop damage in Belize was estimated at $ 103 million , mostly from banana losses . Iris 's strong winds also damaged large swaths of forest , with upwards of 40 % of trees affected in some areas . This disrupted the habitats of several animals , and it is likely that many of the howler monkeys near Monkey River were killed . The storm 's strong waves eroded the beach , although marine effects were much less than those of Hurricane Keith in the previous year . Nevertheless , there were reports of fish die @-@ offs after the storm , possibly from low oxygen due to too much decaying matter . 
 Nationwide , Iris damaged or destroyed 3 @,@ 718 homes , directly affecting a total of 21 @,@ 568 people , or 8 @.@ 5 % of the total population . The storm damaged or destroyed 31 schools and 17 health facilities , along with 21 government buildings . There was about $ 25 million in damage to the transportation sector , including highways and bridges . Iris killed 24 people in and around the country , including the victims of the Wave Dancer shipwreck . Overall damage was estimated at $ 250 million , making it the most damaging storm in the country since Hurricane Hattie in 1961 . 
 = = = Elsewhere in Central America = = = 
 High tides and heavy rainfall caused power outages across both Guatemala and Honduras . In the former , the hurricane 's rainfall generally amounted to 3 to 4 in ( 76 to 102 mm ) , triggering flash flooding and landslides that injured nearly 100 people . The damage was heaviest in Petén Department in the northern portion of the country . The storm damaged 26 schools and 2 @,@ 500 homes in the country 's interior . An estimated 27 @,@ 500 people were affected by the storm throughout Guatemala . There were eight deaths in the country , two of them the result of falling trees . 
 The remnants of Iris dropped heavy rainfall over southern Mexico , accumulating 4 @.@ 80 in ( 122 mm ) in the southern state of Chiapas . In Oaxaca , the storm produced heavy rains and damaged a total of 120 houses . A mudslide in one village demolished 20 homes and killed a child , while elsewhere in the state a man drowned after being swept away in a flooded river . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 9 , the government of Belize issued the " all clear " signal , indicating that the storm had fully passed , and began reconstruction efforts and damage assessment . The government declared Stann Creek and Toledo districts as disaster areas , and officials declared a nighttime curfew . By the day after the storm struck , the airport in Belize City had been reopened , and transportation in all but the southern portion of the country returned to normal . Residents in the southern part of the country lost access to fresh water , forcing them to drink unclean water . Officials sent medical teams to southern Belize in the most affected areas . The Belmopan Red Cross issued an appeal for residents to donate money , clothing , and food for storm victims . The Red Cross also set up shelters and gave food to more than 7 @,@ 000 people . By October 19 , most roads in southern Belize were reopened . The Belize government printed a new postage stamp to help pay for reconstruction costs , and officials authorized spending $ 1 @.@ 2 million to rebuild damaged homes . To assist the farmers who lost crops , the Belize government provided 18 @,@ 000 lb ( 8 @,@ 200 kg ) of maize seeds , as well as fertilizer . After the storm , the World Food Programme and the Belize Red Cross collectively provided food for the 9 @,@ 000 families in need of subsidence . By October 31 , the Red Cross had provided blankets , tarps , and hygienic supplies to 4 @,@ 800 people severely affected by the storm . Homes were gradually repaired , and crop production returned to normal by early 2002 . Around Christmas of 2001 , the Belize Red Cross provided presents to school children in 14 villages affected by the storm . The lost banana crop caused sales to decrease by 22 % in 2002 , although sales gradually recovered . 
 The government of Belize issued an appeal to the international community for assistance in the days following Iris 's landfall , and various countries provided aid . The United Kingdom sent a helicopter to assist in damage assessment and a crew to clean the water . The United States also sent a crew for damage assessment and donated plastic sheeting . Although sustaining significant damage , the Government of Guatemala deployed a working team with members from throughout the country to assist in recovery in Belize . Mexico sent blankets , mattresses , food , and water , as well as a medical team . The Japanese government sent tents and blankets , and the Chinese government donated 500 lb ( 230 kg ) of rice and dried fruits . Various United Nations departments donated about $ 225 @,@ 000 . 
 The American victims of the Wave Dancer boat wreck were flown back to the Richmond , Virginia area following the storm . The insurance company covering the boat reached a $ 4 million settlement , which was disbursed among the survivors and the victims ' families . The boat operator remained in business following the accident . 
 Following the major damage in Belize , the name Iris was retired in the spring of 2002 by the World Meteorological Organization and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . The name Ingrid was used instead in the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season , and 2013 Atlantic hurricane season but this name was also retired after Hurricane Ingrid in 2013 caused heavy damage in Mexico . 
 = Early life of Mao Zedong = 
 The early life of Chinese revolutionary and politician Mao Zedong covered the first 27 years of his life , from 1893 to 1919 . Born in Shaoshanchong , Shaoshan in Hunan province , Mao grew up as the son of Mao Yichang , a wealthy farmer and landowner . Sent to the local Shaoshan Primary School , Mao was brought up in an environment of Confucianism , but reacted against this from an early age , developing political ideas from pro @-@ western literature . Aged 13 his father organised a marriage for him with Luo <unk> , the daughter of another land @-@ owning family , but Mao denounced the marriage and moved away from home . 
 In 1911 Mao began further education in the Hunanese capital of Changsha , where he came under the influence of republicanism , and became an admirer of republican revolutionary Sun Yat @-@ Sen. When the Xinhai Revolution broke out between republicans and monarchists , Mao signed up as a soldier , although conflict subsided and he left the army after six months . Seeing himself as an intellectual , he became heavily influenced by classical liberalism , and began studying at the First Normal School of Changsha , as well as penning his first publications . With Xiao Zisheng he co @-@ founded the Renovation of the People Study Society in April 1918 to discuss and perpetuate revolutionary ideas among students , before graduating in June 1919 . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Mao biographer Lee Feigon asserted that Mao experienced " a relatively typical childhood " . He commented that it was for this reason that previous biographers had found it difficult to " find something fundamentally wrong with Mao from an early age " with which they had hoped to explain his later development into " a revolutionary tyrant " . 
 = = = Birth : 1893 = = = 
 Mao was born on December 26 , 1893 in his familiar home in the rural village of Shaoshanchong in Xiangtan county , Hunan Province , part of south @-@ central China . Typical of many Hunanese villages , Shaoshanchong was situated in a narrow valley surrounded by mountains . Both the village and the nearest town , Shaoshan , were named for the local Shaoshan Mountain ( " Music Mountain " ) , a prominent feature in the local landscape with sacred associations for the region 's Buddhists . The village was inhabited by many individuals with the surname of Mao ; the Mao clan traced their lineage back to Mao <unk> , a warrior from Jiangxi Province who had moved to Xiangtan county in the mid @-@ fourteenth century after fighting for Zhu Yuanzhang 's military campaign to overthrow the Mongol @-@ governed Yuan dynasty . 
 Mao 's father , Mao Yichang , had been born in Shaoshanchong to a family of poverty before undergoing an arranged marriage to Mao 's mother , Wen Qimei , when he was fifteen years old . While Yichang had received two years of schooling and could read and write , conversely Qimei was illiterate . Serving for several years in the regional Xiang Army , Yichang saved up his wages and on leaving the army used these to pay off his family 's debts and purchase the lands that his father had sold . By the time of Zedong 's birth , Yichang owned two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half acres of rice paddy , which would have been considered a substantial amount by the standards of the region . Through frugal living and hard work , over the coming years he was able to purchase a further acre and employ two farm laborers , with his farm encompassing a cow shed , a grain storage hut , a pigsty , and a small mill . Expanding the family 's wealth , Yichang purchased mortgages on other peasants ' land , thus becoming their landlord , while also purchasing the grain from the poorest farmers in the village before selling it on for a profit at the county seat of Xiangtan . In doing so , he amassed a fortune of two to three thousand Chinese silver dollars at a time when the majority of China 's peasantry continued to live in poverty . This being the case , Mao biographer Philip Short could assert that the Mao family were " comfortably off " by the standards of the period . 
 According to the traditional lunar @-@ based Chinese calendar , Mao Zedong 's birth fell on the ninth day of the eleventh month of the Year of the Snake . After the birth , Mao 's mother – who had previously birthed two sons who had died in infancy – was worried for his welfare , and consulted a Buddhist nun who lived as a hermit in the mountains for advice . The nun recommended that prayers be said for the child ; doing so , Qimei then prostrated herself at a local temple dedicated to the Buddhist Bodhisattva Guanyin , requesting that the Bodhisattva become Zedong 's foster @-@ mother . 
 Several biographers have suggested it likely that local traditional customs would have been observed after the birth ; in this circumstance , a rooster would have been presented to his parents , while Mao would probably not have been bathed until three days after the birth , an event which would have been the first culturally @-@ appropriate opportunity for guests to view the child . The child 's father was expected to add onion and ginger to the bath water , symbolizing mind and health , while also providing sacrifices to the spirits of the ancestors . A Daoist fortune @-@ teller was then employed to draw up a horoscope for the child , which revealed that he was lacking in the water element ; Mao was therefore given the personal name of Zedong because according to Hunanese custom the character of ze ( " to anoint " ) was deemed to correct this deficiency . The character of ze however had a dual meaning ; as well as referring to moisture , it also implied kindness and beneficence . Yichang chose the latter part of his son 's name , dong ( " east " ) , so that the child 's name would mean " benefactor of the east " . 
 According to traditional custom , the child was also given a second , unofficial name to be used on specific ceremonial occasions ; this was <unk> ( " Dewy Orchard " ) . His mother gave him a third name , <unk> ( " the Third Child Named Stone " ) , which reflected that he was her third child while also protecting him from misfortune and linking to the protection offered by Guanyin . If traditional Hunanese customs were adhered to , the baby 's head would have been shaved after four weeks , with a small tuft of hair left on the crown and at the nape of the neck ; it was at this point that the child would have been officially given its name . According to tradition , visitors probably would have gathered for this ceremony , bringing gifts of money , pork , fish , fruit , and decorated eggs . 
 = = = Growing up : 1893 – 1900 = = = 
 The Mao family lived in a clay @-@ brick farmhouse which had been constructed in 1878 , although Yichang oversaw its extension during Zedong 's boyhood . They occupied the eastern wing of their house , with the neighboring Zou family living in the western half . The building was large enough for Zedong to be allocated his own bedroom ; a rarity at the time . In front of the house was a pond and a rice paddy , while pine and bamboo groves grew behind the building . Aside from his parents , Mao lived at home with his paternal grandfather , Mao <unk> , until the latter 's death when Mao was ten . Mao 's paternal grandmother , Liu , had died in 1884 , nine years before his birth . When Zedong was two years old , his mother gave birth to her fourth child , Mao Zemin , with a further son , Mao Zetan , being born when Zedong was eleven . She also gave birth to two daughters , both of whom died in infancy , although soon after Zetan 's birth the couple adopted a baby girl , <unk> , who was the daughter of one of Mao 's paternal uncles . 
 As was common at the time , Mao began embarking on farming activities aged five or six , being instructed to watch over the cattle and tend to the ducks . Mao 's habits were heavily influenced by his peasant background ; biographer Stuart Schram suggested that this took the form of a " lack of social graces and of a concern either for comfort or appearances . " In later life , Mao would never become accustomed to the use of a toothbrush , instead retaining the habit of washing his mouth out with tea . Similarly , he continued to prefer cleaning himself with a steaming towel than with soap and water , again reflecting his peasant upbringing . Further , it was from traditional Hunanese cuisine that he developed his lifelong love of spicy food . 
 Qimei was a practising Buddhist , and encouraged her sons to follow Buddhist teachings ; embracing this faith , Zedong often accompanied her on visits to the local Buddhist temple , influencing her hopes that he would become a monk . Conversely , Yichang was largely irreligious , although after surviving an encounter with a tiger , gave offerings to the gods in thanks . According to Mao 's account , Yichang was a staunch disciplinarian , and would beat his children as punishment for disobedience and a perceived lack of filial piety , with Mao describing the beating he received on one occasion when he humiliated his father in public . He added that his mother would often try to protect her children from these beatings . 
 During the 1930s , Mao would claim that he resented his father , viewing him as stingy and <unk> . He contrasted this with the affection he received from his mother , thus adopting a Marxist dialectical perspective by dividing the family into two camps : his mother and himself on one side , his father on another . Biographers have interpreted this filial relationship in different ways ; while Jung Chang and Jon Halliday stated that " Mao hated his father " , conversely , Schram pointed out that even in Mao 's accounts of Yichang , his description is nuanced , and " not simply one of unremitting hatred " . Ross Terrill suggested that " Behind Zedong 's expressed hatred of his father was an unacknowledged identification ; he was driven to become an authoritarian like his father , and on a far grander scale . " Feigon has questioned the veracity of Mao 's account of this issue , suggesting that the alleged bad relationship between the two was " probably overstated " ; highlighting that Yichang clearly went to great efforts to financially support his son , Feigon also noted that the anti @-@ father trope was " wildly popular among young Chinese intellectuals " during the 1930s , and that Mao 's account hence may well be a reflection of this rather than reality . 
 = = = Shaoshan Primary School : 1901 – 06 = = = 
 Yichang was keen for his eldest son to gain a basic education rooted in Confucianism , the dominant moral ideology of Chinese society ; he deemed a knowledge of Confucian teaching to be essential in allowing his son to develop key business and administrative skills . His hope was that Zedong would gain an apprenticeship with a Xiangtan rice merchant before taking over the family business and supporting his parents during their old age . Yichang was particularly adamant on the need to learn about Confucianism after losing a lawsuit over a parcel of land ; he believed that his opponent had been victorious in the dispute as a result of their ability to quote the sayings of ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius throughout their argument . 
 Thus , from the age of eight , Mao was sent to gain a basic education at the private Shaoshan Primary School . Adopting a traditional syllabus and method of education , the school emphasised the copying and recitation by rote of a series of classical Chinese texts preaching Confucian morals : the Three Character Classic , the Book of Names , the Thousand Character Classic , the Odes for Children , the Filial Classic , and Filial Learning . Perceived failure or disobedience resulted in beatings with a bamboo rod from the teacher , who like Mao 's father was a stern disciplinarian . Disliking this mode of education , Mao later asserted that " I hated Confucius from the age of eight . " Although expressing his dislike for them , Mao nevertheless accepted the utility of learning these texts , finding himself able to win arguments – including those against his father – by the selective use of Confucian quotations . 
 Far more to Mao 's liking were the accounts of war and banditry found in the Four Great Classical Novels , including Romance of the Three Kingdoms , Journey to the West , and Water Margin ; while also steeped in Confucian morality , they emphasised the need to fight for justice in society , and it is possible that these texts inspired his interest in history . According to his later account , it was at this point that he attained a strong belief in justice ; he began to divide his lunch in two to share with a poorer boy who could not afford food . On another occasion , he got into a physical fight with an older classmate ; this greatly upset his mother , who held pacifist beliefs . According to his later account , at one point he rebelled when the teacher tried to punish him for disobedience ; rather than permitting himself to be beaten with a rod , he marched out of the school and into the wooded mountains . He remained there for three days , until being discovered by a family member and brought home . 
 Despite this education , biographers Alexander Pantsov and Steven Levine commented that the " moral @-@ ethical precepts of Confucius seem to have left not a trace in his soul " . Conversely , biographer Philip Short asserted that for Mao , as for all Chinese children who went underwent traditional education , these Confucian texts " fixed the underlying pattern of [ his ] thought for the rest of his life " . Short went so far as to suggest that Confucianism would prove to be " at least as important to [ Mao ] as Marxism " , noting that even in later life , Mao 's speeches contained a greater number of quotations from Confucius and other ancient Chinese philosophers than from major Marxist theoreticians Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin . 
 = = = Marriage and secondary education : 1908 – = = = 
 Aged thirteen , Mao left Shaoshan Primary School , pleased to have gotten away from what he saw as its oppressive atmosphere . The decision had been made by his father , who wanted Mao to devote his attentions to the family business by working on the farm and managing the financial accounts . However , relations between him and his father became increasingly strained . Mao continued to read in his free time , often staying up late at night in his bedroom to read by candle light ; this angered his father , who saw recreational reading as an unproductive pursuit . At this point he read a book which inspired his interest in politics : Zheng <unk> 's Sheng @-@ shih Wei @-@ yen ( " Words of Warning to an Affluent Age " ) . Published in 1893 , the book lamented the deterioration of Chinese power in East Asia , and argued for technological , economic and political reform , believing that China could be <unk> if it abandoned its absolute monarchy and politically modelling itself on the representative democracies and constitutional monarchies of the Western world . His political views were shaped by protests – led by the <unk> , or Elder Brother Society – which erupted following a famine in Hunanese capital Changsha ; Mao supported the protesters ' demands , but the armed forces suppressed the dissenters and executed their leaders . The famine spread to Shaoshan , where starving peasants seized his father 's grain ; disapproving of their actions as morally wrong , Mao nevertheless claimed sympathy for their situation . 
 Yichang decided to organise an arranged marriage for Mao , selecting for him the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Luo <unk> , the daughter of a local landowner . Although unhappy with the arrangement , Mao agreed to go through with the marriage , with the wedding taking place in 1907 or 1908 . According to his later account however , he never consummated the marriage and refused to live with Luo . Instead , he claimed that he made use of connections with his maternal family to leave his parental home and move in to the house of an unemployed student in Shaoshan , where he lived for a year . There , he continued his reading , enjoying tales of ancient Chinese rulers such as Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian and Ban Gu 's History of the Former Han Dynasty . He was also influenced by Feng <unk> 's Personal Protests from the Study of Jiao Bin , which had been compiled in 1861 . Like <unk> 's book , it called on China to adopt foreign techniques to strengthen itself , and to use them to defend itself from foreign aggression . Mao also read a pamphlet by the Chinese revolutionary Chen <unk> , which recounted China 's loss of sovereignty to Japanese and European imperialists ; Mao claimed that this was a great influence on him , for after reading it " I felt depressed about the future of my country and began to realize that it was the duty of all the people to help save it . " Meanwhile , Luo was locally disgraced and eventually died of dysentery in 1910 , while Qimei moved to live with her brother 's family in her native village of <unk> . 
 In the autumn of 1910 , Mao requested that his father permit him to attend the Dongshan Higher Primary School , which was located fifteen miles from Shaoshan ; unlike the Shaoshan Primary School , this establishment taught modern subjects such as natural sciences . Yichang agreed to fund his son 's tuition and dormitory space , and so the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Mao set off to Dongshan with his older cousin , Wen <unk> , who was also enrolled there . His two best friends at the school were <unk> and Xiao <unk> ( also known as Xiao San ) , who would later join Mao in the communist movement and would become one of his first biographers . However , he was bullied for being rural and unsophisticated by many of his classmates , who were typically the sons of wealthy landlords from <unk> district . He nevertheless proved to be a successful student , gaining the respect of his teachers through hard work , an ability to compose essays in the classical style , and voracious reading . Here , he first learned about geography , and increased his knowledge of ancient Chinese history . He began to read too about foreign history , coming to be particularly influenced by a book titled Great Heroes of the World , through which he learned about – and was inspired by – the military prowess and nationalistic fervour of American George Washington and Frenchman Napoleon Bonaparte . Schram believed that it was here , at this school , that " we can date the real beginnings of Mao 's intellectual and political development " . Mao remained at the school for seven or eight months , before deciding to enroll at a middle school in the provincial capital of Changsha . 
 = = Early adulthood and politicization = = 
 = = = The Xinhai Revolution : 1911 – 1912 = = = 
 In 1911 , Mao convinced his father to allow him to attend middle school in Changsha . The city was " a revolutionary hotbed " , with widespread animosity towards the absolute monarchy of Emperor Puyi . While some advocated a reformist transition to a constitutional monarchy , most revolutionaries advocated republicanism , arguing for an elected presidency . The primary figurehead behind the republican movement was Sun Yat @-@ sen , an American @-@ educated Christian who led a secret society known as the Tongmenghui . At Changsha , Mao came under the influence of Sun 's newspaper , The People 's Independence ( <unk> bao ) , penning his first political essay , which he stuck to the school wall ; later admitting it was " somewhat muddled " , it involved the creation of a republic governed by Sun , but with concessions made to the moderates by having Kang Youwei as premier and Liang <unk> as minister of foreign affairs . As a symbol of rebellion against the Manchu monarch , he and a friend cut off their queue pigtails — a sign of subservience to the emperor — before forcibly cutting off those of several classmates . 
 Inspired by Sun 's republicanism , the army rose up against the emperor across southern China , sparking the Xinhai Revolution . Changsha initially remained under monarchist control , with the governor proclaiming martial law to quell protest . When the infantry brigade guarding the city defected to the revolution , the governor fled , leaving the city in republican hands . Supporting the revolution , Mao joined the rebel army as a private soldier , but was not involved in the fighting . The northern provinces remained loyal to the emperor , and hoping to avoid a civil war , Sun Yat @-@ sen — proclaimed " provisional president " by his supporters — compromised with the monarchist general Yuan Shikai . The monarchy would be abolished , creating the Republic of China , but the monarchist Yuan would become president . The Xinhai Revolution over , Mao resigned from the army in 1912 , after six months of being a soldier . Around this time , Mao discovered socialism from a newspaper article ; proceeding to read pamphlets by Jiang <unk> , the student founder of the Chinese Socialist Party , Mao remained interested yet unconvinced by the idea . 
 = = = Fourth Normal School of Changsha : 1912 – 1917 = = = 
 Returning to education , Mao enrolled and dropped out of a police academy , a soap @-@ production school , a law school and an economics school . His father only approved of the latter , but the lectures were in English , which Mao didn 't understand , and so Mao abandoned it for the government @-@ run Changsha Middle School ; he soon dropped out of this too , finding it rooted in Confucianism . Undertaking his studies independently , he spent much time in the Changsha public library , reading core works of classical liberalism such as Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations and Montesquieu 's The Spirit of the Laws , as well as the works of western scientists and philosophers such as Charles Darwin , J.S. Mill , Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , and Herbert Spencer . Viewing himself as an intellectual , years later he admitted that at this time he thought himself better than working people . Inspired by the work of Friedrich Paulsen , the liberal emphasis on individualism led Mao to believe that strong individuals were not bound by moral codes but should strive for the greater good ; that the end justifies the means . Seeing no use in his son 's intellectual pursuits , Mao 's father cut off his allowance , forcing Mao to move into a hostel for the destitute . 
 Desiring to become a teacher , Mao enrolled at a teacher training college , the Fourth Normal School of Changsha , which had high standards , yet low fees and cheap accommodation . Several months later , it merged with the First Normal School of Changsha , widely seen as the best school in Hunan . Befriending Mao , Professor of Ethics Yang <unk> urged him to read a radical newspaper , New Youth ( Xin <unk> ) , the creation of his friend Chen Duxiu , Dean of the Faculty of Letters at Peking University . Although a Chinese nationalist , Chen argued that China must look to the west , adopting " Mr. Democracy and Mr. Science " in order to cleanse itself of superstition and autocracy . Mao published his first article , " A Study of Physical Culture " , in New Youth in April 1917 , instructing readers to increase their physical strength to serve the revolution . He joined The Society for the Study of Wang Fuzhi ( Chuan @-@ shan <unk> @-@ she ) , a revolutionary group founded by Changsha literati who wished to emulate Wang Fuzhi , a philosopher who symbolized Han resistance to Manchu invasion . 
 In his first school year , Mao befriended an older student , Xiao Zisheng ; together they went on a walking tour of Hunan , begging and writing literary couplets to obtain food . A popular student , Mao remained active in school politics , and in 1915 was elected secretary of the Students Society . He used his position to forge an Association for Student Self @-@ Government , leading protests against school rules . In spring 1917 , he was elected to command the students ' volunteer army , set up to defend the school from marauding warlord soldiers , arming these troops with makeshift bamboo spears and wooden rifles . Increasingly interested in the techniques of war , he took a keen interest in the events of World War I , but also began to develop a sense of solidarity with workers . Mao undertook feats of physical endurance with Xiao Zisheng and Cai <unk> , describing themselves as the " Three Heroes , " a sobriquet taken from the Romance of the Three Kingdoms . With other young revolutionaries they formed the Renovation of the People Study Society in April 1918 to debate Chen Duxiu 's ideas . Desiring personal and societal transformation , the Society gained between 70 and 80 members , including some females , many of whom would go on to join the Communist Party . Mao graduated in June 1919 , being ranked third in the year . 
 = You Can 't Win ( song ) = 
 " You Can 't Win " is an R & B , pop and soul song written by Charlie Smalls and performed by American recording artist Michael Jackson , who played Scarecrow in the 1978 musical film The Wiz , an urbanized retelling of L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . The movie featured an entirely African American cast and was based on the 1975 Broadway musical The Wiz . 
 After the original soundtrack version was recorded , Michael Jackson and Quincy Jones went back into the studio and re @-@ recorded the track . It was the re @-@ recording that was released in January 1979 as the second single from The Wiz : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , following the release of " Ease On Down the Road " in 1978 , and was Michael 's first solo chart single on Epic Records . The 7 @-@ inch version split the song in half , with " Part 1 " as the A @-@ side and " Part 2 " as the B @-@ side ; the full @-@ length version was released as a 12 @-@ inch single and later was included on The Ultimate Collection in 2004 . 
 The single only charted in the United States , where it reached number 81 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 42 on the R & B singles chart . Since its release , the song has been well received by music critics . The song has been performed by contemporary singers such as Jill Scott and Charles Grigsby . 
 In 1982 " Part 2 " of " You Can 't Win , " in which Michael Jackson repeatedly sings the line " Can 't get outta the game , " was vocally overdubbed , and the resulting track was titled " Can 't Get Outta the Rain " ; it became the B @-@ side of " The Girl Is Mine , " the first single from Jackson 's landmark album Thriller . Despite " Can 't Get Outta the Rain " being melodically identical to " You Can 't Win , " as well as lyrically identical except for the word " rain , " Jackson and Quincy Jones are credited as the song 's composers , not Charlie Smalls . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You Can 't Win " was originally written and performed during the pre @-@ Broadway Baltimore run of the stage version of The Wiz in 1974 , sung by the chorus of Winkies , the Wicked Witch 's slaves . The number was cut from the musical before the official Broadway opening and wasn 't performed again until the movie version was under consideration , 3 years later . The producers resurrected the song as a solo for Michael Jackson to replace " I Was Born on the Day Before Yesterday " , which had been Scarecrow 's solo in the Broadway musical . " You Can 't Win " and its corresponding scene in the movie allude to mistreatment of African Americans . Jackson stated in his 1988 autobiography Moonwalk that the lyrics to " You Can 't Win " are about humiliation and helplessness , feelings , he stated , that many people have experienced at one point in their life . The singer added that the song was also about " the feeling that there are people out there who don 't actively hold you back as much as they work quietly on your insecurities so that you hold yourself back " . " You Can 't Win " opens with the lines , " You can 't win , you can 't break even , and you can 't get out of the game . People keep sayin ' , things are gonna change , but they look just like they 're staying the same . " William F. Brown , who wrote the book for the Broadway musical , stated that such verses made " You Can 't Win " a " black message song " . Musically , the track has been described as an R & B , pop and soul song by Renée Graham of The Boston Globe . According to the sheet music published on Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , the track was performed in common time , with a tempo of 80 beats per minute . It adds that the song is composed in E with a range from B3 to C ♭ 5 . 
 = = In The Wiz = = 
 The scene that corresponds with " You Can 't Win " in The Wiz begins with Dorothy Gale ( played by Diana Ross ) , stumbling upon a scarecrow being heckled by crows while stuck in the air on a pole . Dorothy remains hidden while the crows mock Scarecrow for asking to be let down . They state that he will remain on the pole because that is his role and there is nothing to get down for . The crows tell Scarecrow that even if he was let down , he would not be able to walk as he is a " straw paper dummy " . Scarecrow tries to reason with the birds by reading relevant quotations from figures such as Francis Bacon and Cicero as a rationale to be freed . The crows do not relent , however , and make him recite their " Crow Commandments " : " Thou shall honor all crows " , " Thou shall stop reading all bits of paper and literature " and " Thou shall never , never get down off of this here pole " . In addition , the birds tell Scarecrow to sing the crow anthem , " You Can 't Win " . After the song concludes , Dorothy comes out of hiding and releases Scarecrow from the pole . Together , they then dance their way down the yellow brick road in search of The Wiz , singing " Ease on Down the Road " as they go . 
 The song is also heard in The Wiz Live ! , replacing " I Was Born on the Day Before Yesterday " . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Elwood Watson , author of Pimps , <unk> , Studs , Thugs and Gentlemen : Essays on Media Images of Masculinity , states that The Wiz offers an " important allegorical treatment of ordinary African American men living in the wake of the Civil Rights movement " . Watson writes that while the crows do not intend to cause physical harm to Scarecrow , the beginning of their scene recalls experiences of the ritual lynching of black men in the United States . The author states that the crows ' refusal to allow Scarecrow to read literature was reminiscent of laws that forbade black slaves from being educated . Watson writes , " Scarecrow 's desire for knowledge that will help him interpret the discourses and institutions that shape his life signifies on the slave narrative . With its emphasis on literacy and freedom , African American slave narratives document that for many African Americans literacy was understood as an essential path to freedom . " Watson continues : 
 The Crows ' insistence that reading is useless , even dangerous for Scarecrow because it only leads to discontentment takes on an especially haunting reminder of the ways in which the residues of slavery continue to injure contemporary African Americans . The Crows reinforce Scarecrow 's subjection at their hands through a song whose refrain " you can 't win child , you can 't get out of the game " that aims to disabuse Scarecrow of any aspirations toward freedom ... Their insistence that " reading is stupid " suggests that a Eurocentric education does not promise liberation from " the game " that race and racism create ... The Crow 's dismissal of education and western thought fails because they do not offer Scarecrow an alternative that will emancipate him . The Crow 's attempt to discipline Scarecrow by displacing his hope with nihilism . For The Crow 's so @-@ called book of knowledge is less valuable than what they perceive to be real knowledge @-@ street smarts . Though they are not tethered to a pole , they are seemingly unable or as their commandments and anthem suggests , unwilling to find opportunities than their present location provides . The Crow 's chorus to Scarecrow 's song is revealing for what it says about their loss of hope ... The Crow 's are even more disadvantaged than Scarecrow because , unlike him , they are hopeless . The Crow 's chorus , like The Crow Commandments , reflects their disillusionment with their inability to realize the promise of upward mobility . 
 Watson continued his analysis , writing that despite the crows ' attempts to erode Scarecrow 's confidence , " [ he ] gives no indication that he intends to abort his efforts to liberate himself physically and intellectually . " Watson concluded his study of Scarecrow and his scene by stating , " His encounter with Dorothy will help him to realize , contrary to The Crow 's assertions , that Scarecrow 's pursuit of knowledge can indeed help him to win opportunities for improving his life . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In January 1979 , " You Can 't Win " was released as the second single from The Wiz : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , a double album distributed by Motown Records in September 1978 . The single was issued after the September 1978 release of " Ease on Down the Road " , a duet between Jackson and Diana Ross , who played protagonist Dorothy Gale in The Wiz . " You Can 't Win " was distributed under Epic Records , and was Jackson 's first solo single issued by the company after Epic executives signed him and his brothers to the label in 1976 . " You Can 't Win " entered Billboard 's R & B singles chart on January 20 , 1979 . It reached number 42 and remained in the chart for ten weeks . A month later , on February 24 , 1979 , it entered the Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at number 81 . The single stayed in the chart for three weeks . In May 1979 , " You Can 't Win " was released in Britain , as was a 7 " picture disc of the song . The single failed to enter the British charts . When Jackson 's Off the Wall was first released in August 1979 , the picture disc supplemented the album . 
 Since its release , " You Can 't Win " has received positive reviews from music critics . A journalist from the Kansas City Star said that the song was the best one from The Wiz . Kenny Mack of the Santa Monica Daily Press asserted that Jackson 's " famous vulnerability and the power of his voice on ' You Can 't Win ' combined for perfect casting " in the film . The Boston Globe 's Renée Graham stated in 2005 , " Halfway through the [ song ] , Jackson lets out a whoop , and the tune evolves from a pop @-@ soul confection into a true R & B delight , spiced with barking horns and hand @-@ claps as funky and loose as anything Jackson has ever done . " Writer Geoff Brown wrote in his book Michael Jackson : A Life in Music that the singer 's performance of " You Can 't Win " in The Wiz was " one of the few bright moments in a drab remake of The Wizard of Oz " . Margo Jefferson wrote in the biography On Michael Jackson that the entertainer sang the song in the film with " rough , gospel edges of desperation " . She added , " The torment feels genuine . It 's a painful scene . " After Jackson 's death in 2009 , Edmund W. Lewis of The Louisiana Weekly said that he was " still amazed at the quality of [ the singer ] ' s performance in The Wiz " . He added , " As the scarecrow , he sang the hell out of [ the song ] . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " You Can 't Win " has been referenced and performed on several occasions . In the 1982 blockbuster film E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , a snippet of the song is heard on a car radio . In 2001 Jill Scott performed the song during the Michael Jackson : 30th Anniversary Special celebration . In 2003 , during the second season of American Idol , contestant Charles Grigsby sang " You Can 't Win " for a movie theme night . An Entertainment Weekly writer said that the song choice was " oddly appropriate " , as the hopeful was eliminated from the competition after the performance . Decades after the release of " You Can 't Win " , William F. Brown stated that the song had been dropped from his theater productions of The Wiz . He said this was because the musical was not a black message show , but a show for everybody to enjoy . He expressed the opinion that " You Can 't Win " was no longer relevant , stating , " [ It 's ] all changed . Black people can win . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Limited edition picture disc – 7 " single 
 " You Can 't Win ( Pt . 1 ) " – 3 : 43 
 " You Can 't Win ( Pt . 2 ) " – 2 : 58 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Stephen J. Chamberlin = 
 Stephen Jones Chamberlin ( 23 December 1889 – 23 October 1971 ) was a lieutenant general in the United States Army who served during World War II as General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 , the staff officer in charge of plans and operations . Born in Spring Hill , Kansas on 23 December 1889 , he was a 1912 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . During World War I , he was aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Major General David C. Shanks , the New York Port of Embarkation commander at Hoboken , New Jersey , for which he was one of twelve Army officers who received the Navy Cross . 
 After the war , he attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , and served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department . He attended the Army War College and was posted to the staff of the Army 's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter , Hawaii , as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 . 
 In 1938 , he became assistant chief of the Construction Branch in the G @-@ 4 Division of War Department General Staff . He became involved in the vast construction program of arsenals , depots , airbases and coastal defenses as the United States rearmed prior to its entry into World War II . In January 1942 , he was sent to Australia , where he became Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 , at General MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) , Southwest Pacific Area . In this role , he was responsible for planning and overseeing the execution of MacArthur 's major operations , including the New Guinea , Philippines and Borneo campaigns . 
 Chamberlin was director of the Intelligence Division , G @-@ 2 , on the War Department General Staff from 1946 to 1948 , when he became commander of the Fifth Army . He retired in September 1951 , and was then employed as chief of security for the US Air Force 's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base , Tennessee . He died on 23 October 1971 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stephen Jones Chamberlin was born in Spring Hill , Kansas on 23 December 1889 . He was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York , which he entered on 2 March 1908 and from which he graduated on 12 June 1912 . 
 Chamberlin was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 16th Infantry , which was then stationed at the Presidio of San Francisco . In May 1914 , the regiment moved to El Paso , Texas . He transferred to the 8th Infantry on 1 February 1915 and served at Fort William McKinley in the Philippines . He was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 July 1916 , becoming a battalion adjutant on 14 October . He was assistant to the post quartermaster from 31 October 1916 to 1 January 1917 , and then Post Exchange Officer from 20 December 1916 to 9 June 1917 . He was promoted to captain on 15 May 1917 and was acting Regimental Adjutant from 9 June to 1 September 1917 . 
 = = World War I = = 
 With the United States now involved in World War I , Chamberlin became aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Major General David C. Shanks , the New York Port of Embarkation commander at Hoboken , New Jersey . Chamberlin was also the officer in charge of troop movements . On 2 March 1918 , Chamberlin married Shank 's daughter , Sarah Chapman , at St. Bartholomew 's Episcopal Church , New York on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 44th Street , in a simple ceremony attended only by Sarah 's sister Katherine and Captain Maxwell Sullivan as best man . 
 Chamberlin was promoted to major on 7 June 1918 . For his " distinguished service in the line of his profession as dispatch officer at the Port of Embarkation , Hoboken , New Jersey " , he became one of only twelve Army officers to receive the Navy Cross during World War I. He was also awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States takes pleasure in presenting the Army Distinguished Service Medal to Stephen J. Chamberlin , Major ( Infantry ) , US Army , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility during World War I. As Acting Dispatch Officer at Port of Embarkation , Hoboken , New Jersey , from November 15 , 1917 to September 6 , 1918 , Major Chamberlin displayed marked ability in handling the movements of troops through the port , assigning units and detachments to camps , convoys , and ships , and by foresight , thorough organization , and hard work arranged for the smooth working of troop movements , prevented congestion at the camps and piers , thus enabling the transports to sail at the appointed time with the appropriate number of troops . 
 In September 1918 , Shanks was appointed commander of the 16th Division at Camp Kearny , California , and Chamberlin was appointed the division 's Assistant Chief of Staff . To prepare for the role , he attended a course at the Army War College . Following the Armistice with Germany , he was sent on a tour of the battlefields in France and Belgium . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 In the aftermath of World War I , Chamberlin was reduced in rank to captain on 9 February 1919 , but was promoted to major again on 1 July 1920 . A year later he was posted to the Panama Canal Zone , initially as transportation officer , and then with 33rd Infantry . On returning to the United States in January 1922 , he joined the staff of 19th Infantry Brigade at Fort McPherson , Georgia . He was transferred to the 22nd Infantry at Fort Benning , Georgia , on 17 February 1923 . 
 From 1924 to 1925 , he attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , graduating as an Honor Graduate . Duty then followed with the Third Corps Area from 30 June to 5 July 1925 ; with the National Guard at Staunton , Virginia from 5 July 1925 to 1 July 1926 ; in the Office Chief of Infantry at Washington , D.C. ; and at Camp Perry , Ohio as Publicity Officer . He served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department from 1926 to 1930 , and then commanded a battalion of the 22nd Infantry from 1930 to 1932 . 
 Chamberlin attended the Army War College from July 1932 to June 1933 . Upon graduation , he was posted to the staff of the Army 's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter , Hawaii , serving as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 . After more than 15 years as a major , he was finally promoted to lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1935 . On returning to the United States in July 1936 , he became Assistant Professor of Military Science and Tactics for the high schools of Los Angeles . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1938 , Chamberlin became Assistant Chief of the Construction Branch in the G @-@ 4 Division of War Department General Staff . At this time , the United States was embarking on a military buildup in response to a worsening international situation , which culminated in the outbreak of World War II on 1 September 1939 . A major component of this build up was a vast construction program of arsenals , depots , airbases and coastal defenses . Some $ 175 million was allocated to construction under the Expansion Program , as it became known . 
 On 7 May 1940 , the Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 , Major General Richard C. Moore , G @-@ 4 of the War Department General Staff , asked for an estimate of the cost to house an additional 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 men and balked at the estimate he received of $ 800 per head . To save on the cost of cantonments , Moore decided not to paint them . Chamberlin disagreed on the grounds that paint would reduce maintenance costs . President Franklin Roosevelt intervened and directed that the buildings be painted . As a result , an order was placed for 96 @,@ 500 US gallons ( 365 @,@ 000 l ; 80 @,@ 400 imp gal ) of paint , resulting in an $ 11 million budget shortfall . Chamberlin was promoted to colonel on 14 February 1941 . Commenting after the war on the construction program , he wrote : 
 Actually a phenomenal standard was set , one in which all Americans can glory . As far as wasting a few dollars was concerned , the construction effort cannot hold a candle to Lend @-@ Lease , the Marshall Plan , or the Military Assistance Program . Had it not been for the courageous performance of those in charge of the War Department in the emergency , we might well have been defeated , and how then would the expenditure of a few millions have loomed in the long @-@ range picture ? 
 In January 1942 , Chamberlin was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 , of US Army Forces in Australia , arriving by air from Washington , D.C. , on 9 January . He soon became Chief of Staff of US Army Forces in Australia , first under Major General Julian F. Barnes , and then under his successor , Lieutenant General George H. Brett . Chamberlin was promoted to brigadier general on 15 February 1942 . General Douglas MacArthur arrived in Australia on 17 March to become Supreme Commander of the newly established Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , which now included the US Army Forces in Australia . On 19 April , MacArthur formally established his General Headquarters ( GHQ ) , and Chamberlin was appointed its Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 . 
 As G @-@ 3 , Chamberlin was one of the most highly rated members of the GHQ staff , although not being part of the " Bataan Gang " – the group of officers who had escaped with MacArthur from the Philippines – made him something of an outsider at GHQ . Chamberlin was responsible for planning and overseeing the execution of MacArthur 's major operations , including the New Guinea , Philippines and Borneo campaigns . One member of the staff later recalled : 
 Chamberlin , G @-@ 3 , was an outstanding staff planner : quiet , unassuming , methodical , determined , aggressive in defending his position when challenged . He had a fine sense of timing and integration . He manipulated his three separate planning teams to move down parallel paths toward the same objective , or , when necessary , to move along divergent paths to map out a change of direction . Once an objective had been defined in long @-@ run terms , Chamberlin and his planners set the basic sequence of events . All major commanders participated in the planning process , with Chamberlin coordinating and adjusting to smooth out conflicts . Considering the huge distances involved and the necessity for working in the humid heat of equatorial islands , the performance was stupendous . The apparent ease that characterized the operations reflected the thoroughness of the planning process . On those occasions when MacArthur required a sudden and pressing shift of direction , Chamberlin delivered , not always with great patience . The deadlines were met with a finely turned operational plan . 
 Chamberlin jealously guarded his position . In late 1943 , Chamberlin differed with one of his planners , Brigadier General Bonner Fellers , over a proposed landing at Hansa Bay . Fellers thought that Hansa Bay could be bypassed , but Chamberlin felt that this would be too risky . While Fellers was a newcomer to GHQ , he had known MacArthur for many years , and Fellers took his proposal directly to MacArthur , who approved it . A furious Chamberlin had Fellers fired from G @-@ 3 . MacArthur made him his military secretary . 
 One of Chamberlin 's challenges was working with the Australians . Their decentralized mode of planning was entirely different from the top @-@ down approach used by GHQ , and Chamberlin found this a source of frustration , as it was difficult to extract information from them . Nonetheless , he established a good working relationship with the Australian Deputy Chief of the General Staff , Lieutenant General Frank Berryman . 
 When MacArthur began looking for a new chief of staff to replace Lieutenant General Richard K. Sutherland in 1945 , he considered but rejected giving the post to Chamberlin . Chamberlin became Deputy Chief of Staff in February 1946 , and was briefly acting as Chief of Staff from 2 May to 10 June 1946 . For his services in the Southwest Pacific and the Occupation of Japan , Chamberlin was awarded three Army Distinguished Service Medals and the Silver Star . In September 1946 , he was one of five American major generals who was made an honorary Commander of Order of the British Empire in the Military Division for his work with US Army Forces in Australia and GHQ SWPA . 
 = = Later life = = 
 From June 1946 to October 1948 Chamberlin was director of the Intelligence Division , G @-@ 2 , on the War Department General Staff . He commanded the Fifth Army from 1948 to 1951 , receiving promotion to lieutenant general on 24 January 1948 . In 1949 , he was chairman of a general officer committee that researched the role of race in the Army , and produced a report favoring the continuation of segregation and the maintenance of a quota that limited the number of African @-@ Americans who could serve in uniform . 
 He retired in September 1951 , and was then employed as chief of security for the US Air Force 's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base , Tennessee . He died at Hoag Memorial Hospital in Newport Beach , Orange , California on 23 October 1971 . He was buried in Section 3 , Site 1968 A WH of Arlington National Cemetery . His wife Sarah was subsequently interred with him in 1975 . His papers are in the US Army Heritage and Education Center in Carlisle , Pennsylvania . 
 = Green marketing = 
 Green marketing is the marketing of products that are presumed to be environmentally preferable to others . Thus green marketing incorporates a broad range of activities , including product modification , changes to the production process , sustainable packaging , as well as modifying advertising . Yet defining green marketing is not a simple task where several meanings intersect and contradict each other ; an example of this will be the existence of varying social , environmental and retail definitions attached to this term . Other similar terms used are environmental marketing and ecological marketing . 
 Green , environmental and eco @-@ marketing are part of the new marketing approaches which do not just refocus , adjust or enhance existing marketing thinking and practice , but seek to challenge those approaches and provide a substantially different perspective . In more detail green , environmental and eco @-@ marketing belong to the group of approaches which seek to address the lack of fit between marketing as it is currently practiced and the ecological and social realities of the wider marketing environment . 
 The legal implications of marketing claims call for caution . Misleading or overstated claims can lead to regulatory or civil challenges . In the United States , the Federal Trade Commission provides some guidance on environmental marketing claims . This Commission is expected to do an overall review of this guidance , and the legal standards it contains , in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The term Green Marketing came into prominence in the late 1980s and early 1990s . The proceedings of this workshop resulted in one of the first books on green marketing entitled " Ecological Marketing " . 
 The Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) Reports started with the ice cream seller Ben & Jerry 's where the financial report was supplemented by a greater view on the company 's environmental impact . In 1987 a document prepared by the World Commission on Environment and Development defined sustainable development as meeting “ the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own need ” , this became known as the Brundtland Report and was another step towards widespread thinking on sustainability in everyday activity . Two tangible milestones for wave 1 of green marketing came in the form of published books , both of which were called Green Marketing . They were by Ken Peattie ( 1992 ) in the United Kingdom and by Jacquelyn Ottman ( 1993 ) in the United States of America . 
 According to Jacquelyn Ottman , ( author of " The New Rules of Green Marketing : Strategies , Tools , and Inspiration for Sustainable Branding " ( Greenleaf Publishing and Berrett @-@ Koehler Publishers , February 2011 ) ) from an organizational standpoint , environmental considerations should be integrated into all aspects of marketing — new product development and communications and all points in between . The holistic nature of green also suggests that besides suppliers and retailers new stakeholders be enlisted , including educators , members of the community , regulators , and NGOs . Environmental issues should be balanced with primary customer needs . 
 The past decade has shown that harnessing consumer power to effect positive environmental change is far easier said than done . The so @-@ called " green consumer " movements in the U.S. and other countries have struggled to reach critical mass and to remain in the forefront of shoppers ' minds . While public opinion polls taken since the late 1980s have shown consistently that a significant percentage of consumers in the U.S. and elsewhere profess a strong willingness to favor environmentally conscious products and companies , consumers ' efforts to do so in real life have remained sketchy at best . One of green marketing 's challenges is the lack of standards or public consensus about what constitutes " green , " according to Joel <unk> , a writer on green marketing . In essence , there is no definition of " how good is good enough " when it comes to a product or company making green marketing claims . This lack of consensus — by consumers , marketers , activists , regulators , and influential people — has slowed the growth of green products , says <unk> , because companies are often reluctant to promote their green attributes , and consumers are often skeptical about claims . 
 Despite these challenges , green marketing has continued to gain adherents , particularly in light of growing global concern about climate change . This concern has led more companies to advertise their commitment to reduce their climate impacts , and the effect this is having on their products and services . 
 = = Greenhouse gas reduction market = = 
 The emerging greenhouse gas reduction market can potentially catalyze projects with important local environmental , economic , and quality @-@ of @-@ life benefits . The Kyoto Protocol ’ s Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) , for example , enables trading between industrial and developing nations , providing a framework that can result in capital flows to environmentally beneficial development activities . Although the United States is not participating in the Kyoto Protocol , several US programs enable similar transactions on a voluntary and regulatory basis . 
 While international trade in greenhouse gas reductions holds substantial promise as a source of new funding for sustainable development , this market can be largely inaccessible to many smaller @-@ scale projects , remote communities , and least developed localities . To facilitate participation and broaden the benefits , several barriers must be overcome , including : a lack of market awareness among stakeholders and prospective participants ; specialized , somewhat complicated participation rules ; and the need for simplified participation mechanisms for small projects , without which transaction costs can overwhelm the financial benefits of participation . If the barriers are adequately addressed , greenhouse gas trading can play an important role supporting activities that benefit people ’ s lives and the environment . 
 = = Popularity and effectiveness = = 
 = = = Ongoing debate = = = 
 The popularity of such marketing approach and its effectiveness is hotly debated . Supporters claim that environmental appeals are actually growing in number – the Energy Star label , for example , now appears on 11 @,@ 000 different companies ' models in 38 product categories , from washing machines and light bulbs to skyscrapers and homes . However , despite the growth in the number of green products , green marketing is on the decline as the primary sales pitch for products . Shel Horowitz , a green marketer for over 30 years and primary author of Guerrilla Marketing Goes Green states that to market effectively , green businesses need to market to three different audiences , " deep green , " " lazy green , " and " <unk> " , and that each must be approached differently . Each will have different trigger points that will move them to buy , and for the <unk> audience , marketing effectively usually requires emphasizing product superiority rather than care for the planet . On the other hand , Roper ’ s Green Gauge shows that a high percentage of consumers ( 42 % ) feel that environmental products don ’ t work as well as conventional ones . This is an unfortunate legacy from the 1970s when shower heads sputtered and natural detergents left clothes dingy . Given the choice , all but the greenest of customers will reach for synthetic detergents over the premium @-@ priced , proverbial " Happy Planet " any day , including Earth Day . New reports , however show a growing trend towards green products . 
 = = = Confusion = = = 
 One challenge green marketers -- old and new -- are likely to face as green products and messages become more common is confusion in the marketplace . " Consumers do not really understand a lot about these issues , and there 's a lot of confusion out there , " says Jacquelyn Ottman ( founder of J. Ottman Consulting and author of " Green Marketing : Opportunity for Innovation . " ) Marketers sometimes take advantage of this confusion , and purposely make false or exaggerated " green " claims . Critics refer to this practice as " green washing " . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Corporations are increasingly recognizing the benefits of green marketing , although there is often a thin line between doing so for its own benefit and for social responsibility reasons . The term “ greenwashing ” refers to all industries that adopt outwardly green acts with an underlying purpose to increase profits . The primary objective of greenwashing is to provide consumers with the feeling that the organization is taking the necessary steps to responsibly manage its ecological footprint . In reality , the company may be doing very little that is environmentally beneficial The term greenwashing was first used by environmentalist Jay Westerveld when objecting to hotelier 's practice of placing notices in hotel rooms which asked their guests to reuse towels to “ save the environment ” . Westerveld noted that there was little else to suggest that the hoteliers were interested in reducing their environmental impacts , and that their interest in washing fewer towels seemed to be motivated by a concern to save costs rather than the environment . Since then greenwashing has become a central feature of debates about marketing communications and sustainability , with “ awards ” for greenwashing established and numerous campaigns , law and advices developed in an attempt to reduce or curb it . 
 = = = Benefit corporations = = = 
 In January 2012 , Patagonia became the first brand to register for benefit corporation status . 
 A benefit corporation is an alternative to its standard counterpart as it operates under the legal premise of 1 ) creating a positive impact socially and environmentally in its materials , 2 ) uphold corporate social responsibility in terms of considering its workers , its community , and the environment as well as challenge its current boundaries in those areas , and 3 ) report its activity as a company as well as its achievements in social and environmental areas publicly using a non @-@ partisan third party source . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 According to market researcher <unk> , about 12 % of the U.S. population can be identified as True Greens , consumers who seek out and regularly buy so @-@ called green products . Another 68 % can be classified as Light Greens , consumers who buy green sometimes . " What chief marketing officers are always looking for is touch points with consumers , and this is just a big , big , big touch point that 's not being served , " says <unk> Research Director David Lockwood . " All the corporate executives that we talk to are extremely convinced that being able to make some sort of strong case about the environment is going to work down to their bottom line . " 
 = = <unk> = = 
 In 1989 , 67 percent of Americans stated that they were willing to pay 5 @-@ 10 percent more for ecologically compatible products . By 1991 , environmentally conscious individuals were willing to pay between 15 @-@ 20 percent more for green products . Today , more than one @-@ third of Americans say they would pay a little extra for green products 
 An important challenge facing marketers is to identify which consumers are willing to pay more for environmentally friendly products . It is apparent that an enhanced knowledge of the profile of this segment of consumers would be extremely useful . 
 Everett Rogers , communication scholar and author of “ Diffusion of Innovations ” , claims that the following five factors can help determine whether a new idea will be adopted or not , including the idealism of the shift towards “ green ” : 
 Relative advantage : is the degree to which the new behavior is believed to accrue more beneficial outcomes than current practice . 
 <unk> : is how easy it is to witness the outcomes of the new behavior . 
 <unk> : is the ease with which the new behavior can be tested by an individual without making a full commitment . 
 Compatibility : is the degree to which the new behavior is consistent with current practice . 
 Complexity : is how difficult the new behavior is to implement . 
 = = = LOHAS = = = 
 LOHAS stands for Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability , and describes an integrated , rapidly growing market for goods and services that appeal to consumers whose sense of environmental and social responsibility influences their purchase decisions . The Natural Marketing Institute ’ s ( short : NMI ) estimates the US LOHAS consumer market of products and services to be USD 209 billion – sold across all consumer segments . 
 The five LOHAS segments as defined by NMI include : 
 LOHAS : Active environmental stewards dedicated to personal and planetary health . These are the heaviest purchasers of green and socially responsible products and the early adopters who influence others heavily . 
 <unk> : Motivated primarily by personal health considerations . They tend to purchase more LOHAS consumable products vs. durable items . 
 Drifters : While their intentions may be good , <unk> follow trends when it is easy and affordable . They are currently quite engaged in green purchasing behaviours . 
 <unk> : Pragmatists who embrace LOHAS behaviour when they believe they can make a difference , but are primarily focused on being very careful with their resources and doing the ‘ right ’ thing because it will save them money . 
 Unconcerned : Either unaware or unconcerned about the environment and societal issues mainly because they do not have the time or the means – these consumers are largely focused on getting by . 
 = = The green marketing mix = = 
 A model green marketing mix contains four " P 's " : 
 Product : A producer should offer ecological products which not only must not contaminate the environment but should protect it and even liquidate existing environmental damages . 
 Price : Prices for such products may be a little higher than conventional alternatives . But target groups like for example LOHAS are willing to pay extra for green products . 
 Place : A distribution logistics is of crucial importance ; main focus is on ecological packaging . Marketing local and seasonal products e.g. vegetables from regional farms is more easy to be marketed “ green ” than products imported . 
 Promotion : A communication with the market should put stress on environmental aspects , for example that the company possesses a CP certificate or is ISO 14000 certified . This may be publicized to improve a firm ’ s image . Furthermore , the fact that a company spends expenditures on environmental protection should be advertised . Third , sponsoring the natural environment is also very important . And last but not least , ecological products will probably require special sales promotions . 
 Additional social marketing " P 's " that are used in this process are : 
 Publics : Effective Social Marketing knows its audience , and can appeal to multiple groups of people . " Public " is the external and internal groups involved in the program . External publics include the target audience , secondary audiences , policymakers , and gatekeepers , while the internal publics are those who are involved in some way with either approval or implementation of the program . 
 Partnership : Most social change issues , including " green " initiatives , are too complex for one person or group to handle . Associating with other groups and initiatives to team up strengthens the chance of efficacy . 
 Policy : Social marketing programs can do well in motivating individual behavior change , but that is difficult to sustain unless the environment they 're in supports that change for the long run . Often , policy change is needed , and media advocacy programs can be an effective complement to a social marketing program . 
 Purse Strings : How much will this strategic effort cost ? Who is funding the effort ? 
 The level of greening — strategic , quasi @-@ strategic , or tactical — dictates what activities should be undertaken by a company . Strategic greening in one area may or may not be leveraged effectively in others . A firm could make substantial changes in production processes but opt not to leverage them by positioning itself as an environmental leader . So although strategic greening is not necessarily strategically integrated into all marketing activities , it is nevertheless strategic in the product area . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 An individual 's belief that an environmental claim lacks honesty can have a negative effect on attitude toward a brand . If , on the other side , the consumer grants credibility to the claim , the individual will behave more respectfully toward the environment . The problem in extending that credibility to a brand is that consumers interested in ecological products generally are skeptical of commercial advertisements . This skepticism is due to various factors such as lack of language , the absence of scientific knowledge necessary to interpret advertising meaning , and , in particular , the falsehoods and exaggeration of some advertising techniques . To resolve this problem , independent organizations may choose to guarantee messages on the environmental benefits of brands with environmental labeling systems sponsored by independent organizations . This practice tries to diminish perceived biases in environmental information by promoting standardization of the information with the aim of improving confidence in the evaluation of environmental benefits of products — all of which should positively affect the purchase intention . 
 = = Life @-@ cycle assessment = = 
 During the late 1980s , new instruments such as life @-@ cycle assessment ( LCA ) were invented which allowed ecological considerations to be introduced into marketing decisions . 
 The life cycle assessment model seeks to identify the main types of environmental impact throughout the life cycle of a product . LCA was developed according to ISO <unk> . The main goal of the LCA is to define the energy and environmental profile of the finished products . The reasons to use LCA arose from the need to have a precise process accounting and to highlight potential improvements that could be used in order to increase the environmental , energy and economic efficiency and overall effectiveness of the processes . In addition , the purpose was to quantify the environmental advantages deriving from the use of recycled raw material . 
 = = = Example for LCA = = = 
 LCA is used for example in the building sector . Buildings today account for the 40 % of the world ’ s energy use . The resulting carbon emissions are substantially higher than those of the transportation sector . New buildings using more energy than necessary are being built every day , and millions of today 's inefficient buildings will remain standing until at least 2050 . It ’ s therefore necessary to start reducing energy use in new and existing buildings in order to reduce the planet 's energy @-@ related carbon footprint . Growing interest , space , and attention in the architecture sector are directed to environmental issues according to the principles of green building . Mineral , vegetable , or animal materials such as perlite , vermiculite , rock wool , glass wool , cork , plant fibers ( cotton , flax , hemp , coconut ) , wood fiber , cellulose , and sheep 's wool can be used for the production of insulation panels . 
 = = Green marketing cases = = 
 = = = Phillips 's " Marathon " CFL lightbulb = = = 
 Philips Lighting 's first shot at marketing a standalone compact fluorescent light ( CFL ) bulb was Earth Light , at $ 15 each versus 75 cents for incandescent bulbs . The product had difficulty climbing out of its deep green niche . The company re @-@ launched the product as " Marathon , " underscoring its new " super long life " positioning and promise of saving $ 26 in energy costs over its five @-@ year lifetime . Finally , with the U.S. EPA 's Energy Star label to add credibility as well as new sensitivity to rising utility costs and electricity shortages , sales climbed 12 percent in an otherwise flat market . 
 = = = Car sharing services = = = 
 Car @-@ sharing services address the longer @-@ term solutions to consumer needs for better fuel savings and fewer traffic tie @-@ ups and parking nightmares , to complement the environmental benefit of more open space and reduction of greenhouse gases . They may be thought of as a " time @-@ sharing " system for cars . Consumers who drive less than 7 @,@ 500 miles a year and do not need a car for work can save thousands of dollars annually by joining one of the many services springing up , including Zipcar ( East Coast ) , I @-@ GO Car ( Chicago ) , and Hour Car ( Twin Cities ) . 
 = = = Electronics sector = = = 
 The consumer electronics sector provides room for using green marketing to attract new customers . One example of this is HP 's promise to cut its global energy use 20 percent by the year 2010 . To accomplish this reduction below 2005 levels , The Hewlett @-@ Packard Company announced plans to deliver energy @-@ efficient products and services and institute energy @-@ efficient operating practices in its facilities worldwide . 
 = = = Products and services = = = 
 Now companies are offering more eco @-@ friendly alternatives for their customers . Recycled products for example , are one of the most popular alternatives that can benefit the environment . These benefits include sustainable forestry , clean air , energy efficiency , water conservation , and a healthy office . One example , is the E @-@ commerce business and office supply company <unk> which offers a web tool that allows you to replace similar items in your shopping cart with greener products . 
 = = = Introduction of CNG in Delhi = = = 
 New Delhi , capital of India , was being polluted at a very fast pace until Supreme Court of India forced a change to alternative fuels . In 2002 , a directive was issued to completely adopt CNG in all public transport systems to curb pollution . 
 = International Development Association = 
 The International Development Association ( IDA ) is an international financial institution which offers concessional loans and grants to the world 's poorest developing countries . The IDA is a member of the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1960 to complement the existing International Bank for Reconstruction and Development by lending to developing countries which suffer from the lowest gross national income , from troubled creditworthiness , or from the lowest per capita income . Together , the International Development Association and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are collectively generally known as the World Bank , as they follow the same executive leadership and operate with the same staff . 
 The association shares the World Bank 's mission of reducing poverty and aims to provide affordable development financing to countries whose credit risk is so prohibitive that they cannot afford to borrow commercially or from the Bank 's other programs . The IDA 's stated aim is to assist the poorest nations in growing more quickly , equitably , and sustainably to reduce poverty . The IDA is the single largest provider of funds to economic and human development projects in the world 's poorest nations . From 2000 to 2010 , it financed projects which recruited and trained 3 million teachers , immunized 310 million children , funded $ 792 million in loans to 120 @,@ 000 small and medium enterprises , built or restored 118 @,@ 000 kilometers of paved roads , built or restored 1 @,@ 600 bridges , and expanded access to improved water to 113 million people and improved sanitation facilities to 5 @.@ 8 million people . The IDA has issued a total $ 238 billion USD in loans and grants since its launch in 1960 . Thirty @-@ six of the association 's borrowing countries have graduated from their eligibility for its concessional lending . However , eight of these countries have relapsed and have not re @-@ graduated . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , developing countries with the poorest incomes began realizing that they could no longer afford to borrow capital and needed more @-@ favorable lending terms than offered by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) . At the onset of his inaugural term in 1949 , then @-@ President of the United States Harry S. Truman assembled an advisory group to suggest ways to accomplish his Point Four Program , of which a significant component was an effort to strengthen developing countries , especially those nearest to the Eastern Bloc , to dissuade them from aligning with other communist states . The advisory group recommended an international mechanism that would function somewhere in between providing strictly @-@ loaned and strictly @-@ granted funds . The UN and United States government published reports expressing support for the creation of a multilateral , concessional lending program for the poorest developing countries . However , the United States was largely unresponsive and ultimately distracted by its involvement in the Korean War and unconvinced that development needed greater financial stimulation . 
 Developing countries grew increasingly frustrated with not being able to afford IBRD lending and perceived the Marshall Plan as a comparatively generous gift to European nations . In the late 1940s and early 1950s , developing countries began calling for the United Nations ( UN ) to create a development agency that would offer technical support and concessional financing , with a particular desire that the agency adhere to other UN bodies ' convention of each country having one vote as opposed to a weighted vote . However , the United States ultimately opposed proposals of that nature . As the United States grew more concerned over the growth of the Cold War , it made a concession in 1954 at the behest of its Department of State by backing the conception of the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) . Despite the launch of the IFC in 1956 , developing countries persisted in demanding the creation of a new concessional financing mechanism and the idea gained traction within the IBRD . Then @-@ President of the IBRD Eugene R. Black , Sr. began circulating the notion of an International Development Association , as opposed to an idea of a concessional named the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development ( SUNFED ) governed by the United Nations . Paul Hoffman , the Marshall Plan 's former Administrator , proposed the idea of a soft @-@ loan facility within the World Bank , where the US would have a preponderant voice in the allocation of such <unk> Senator Mike Monroney of Oklahoma supported this idea . As Chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on International Finance , Monroney proposed a resolution recommending a study of the potential establishment of an International Development Association to be affiliated with the IBRD . Monroney 's proposal was more preferred received within the United States than the SUNFED . The resolution passed the senate in 1958 , and then @-@ U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert B. Anderson encouraged other countries to conduct similar studies . In 1959 , the World Bank 's Board of Governors approved a U.S.-born resolution calling for the drafting of the articles of agreement . SUNFED later became the Special Fund and merged with the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance to form the United Nations Development Programme . 
 By the end of January 1960 , fifteen countries signed the articles of agreement which established the International Development Association . The association launched in September of that same year with an initial budget of $ 913 million ( $ 7 @.@ 1 billion in 2012 dollars ) . Over the next eight months following its launch , the IDA grew to 51 member states and loaned $ 101 million ( $ 784 @.@ 2 million in 2012 dollars ) to four developing countries . 
 = = Governance and operations = = 
 The IDA is governed by the World Bank 's Board of Governors which meets annually and consists of one governor per member country ( most often the country 's finance minister or treasury secretary ) . The Board of Governors delegates most of its authority over daily matters such as lending and operations to the Board of Directors . The Board of Directors consists of 25 executive directors and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group . The executive directors collectively represent all 187 member states of the World Bank , although decisions regarding IDA matters concern only the IDA 's 172 member states . The president oversees the IDA 's overall direction and daily operations . As of July 2012 , Jim Yong Kim serves as the President of the World Bank Group . The association and IBRD operate with a staff of approximately 10 @,@ 000 employees . 
 The IDA is evaluated by the Bank 's Independent Evaluation Group . In 2009 , the group identified weaknesses in the set of controls used to protect against fraud and corruption in projects supported by IDA lending . In 2011 , the group recommended the Bank provide recognition and incentives to staff and management for implementing activities which implement the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness principles of harmonization and alignment , promote greater use of sector @-@ wide approaches to coordination , and explain the reasons why when a country 's financial management system is not used so that the client country may address those shortcomings . It also recommended that the Bank collaborate with development partners to strengthen country @-@ level leadership of development assistance coordination by offering greater financial and technical support . Development economists , such as William Easterly , have conducted research which ranked the IDA as featuring the most transparency and best practices among donors of development aid . 
 Researchers from the Center for Global Development expect that the IDA 's collection of eligible borrowing countries will decrease by half by the year 2025 ( marking the 65th anniversary of the association 's establishment ) due to graduations and that remaining borrowers will consist primarily of African countries and will face substantial population declines . These changes will imply a need for the association to carefully examine its financial models and business operations to determine an appropriate strategy going forward . The center recommended that the World Bank leadership begin discussing the long @-@ term future of the IDA . 
 = = Membership = = 
 The IDA has 173 member countries which pay contributions every three years as replenishments of its capital . The IDA lends to 81 borrowing countries , nearly half of which are in Africa . Membership in the IDA is available only to countries who are members of the World Bank , particularly the IBRD . Throughout its lifetime , 36 borrowing countries have graduated from the association , although a number of these countries have relapsed as borrowers after not sustaining their graduate status . 
 To be eligible for support from the IDA , countries are assessed by their poverty and their lack of creditworthiness for commercial and IBRD borrowing . The association assesses countries based on their per capita income , lack of access to private capital markets , and policy performance in implementing pro @-@ growth and anti @-@ poverty economic or social reforms . As of 2012 , to borrow from the IDA 's concessional lending programs , a country 's gross national income ( GNI ) per capita must not exceed $ 1 @,@ 175 ( in 2010 dollars ) . 
 = = = Countries graduated from IDA lending = = = 
 The following countries have graduated from their eligibility for IDA lending . 
 = = = Countries relapsed to IDA lending = = = 
 The following countries have relapsed to their eligibility for IDA lending and have not yet re @-@ graduated or have instead become partially eligible ( also referred to as a blend country ) . 
 Cameroon ( 1994 ) 
 Congo ( 1994 ) 
 Cote d 'Ivoire ( 1992 ) 
 Honduras ( 1991 ) 
 Nicaragua ( 1991 ) 
 Nigeria ( 1989 ) 
 Papua New Guinea ( 2003 , partially eligible ) 
 Zimbabwe ( 1992 ) 
 = = Replenishment rounds = = 
 The IDA is a unique part of the World Bank as it requires continuous replenishment of its resources . Member countries replenish its funds through contributions in addition to supplementary funds provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) . Whereas the IBRD acquires most of its funds by raising capital on international financial markets , the IDA heavily depends on contributions from its member states . The IDA received 2 billion in special drawing rights ( $ 3 billion USD ) from the IBRD and IFC . Approximately half of the IDA 's resources come from the 45 donating member countries . In its early years , the IDA received most of its replenishments from the United Kingdom and United States but , because they were not always reliable sources of funding , other developed nations began to step in and fill the economic gaps not met by these two countries . Every three years , member nations that provide funds to the IDA gather together to replenish the IDA 's resources . These funds come primarily from well @-@ developed countries including the United States , Japan , France , Germany , and the United Kingdom with 58 % from the US , 22 % from France , and 8 % from the UK . As of 2014 , there have been 17 IDA replenishment rounds . Fifty one member countries participated in the IDA 's 16th replenishment of $ 49 @.@ 3 billion USD . The IDA 's loans and grants are usually not paid in full to the borrower at the outset , but rather disbursed incrementally as needed by the project . Most of the donor countries such as the United States commit letters of credit to the IDA which bear no interest and are not able to be transferred or revoked , and which are exchanged for cash as needed for project disbursal . Other countries pay their contributions in full on the date of commitment to the IDA so that it may cover its operating expenses . Donors receive no return of funds and repayments from borrowers are again loaned to future projects such that donors won 't need to commit those funds again in the future . 
 Although the IDA 's funds are now regularly replenished , this does not happen without some financial and political challenges for the donating countries . When donor countries convene to negotiate the replenishments , there is often intense discussion about redefining the association 's goals and objectives or even about reforming the IDA . Due to delays in the United States Congress impeding the approval of IDA funding , the association 's members implemented a set of policy triggers outlining the commitment threshold necessary for replenishment to take effect . The threshold imposed a requirement that an aggregate share of 85 % in voting stock is necessary for executing a replenishment . The threshold was implemented with the aim to compel the United States to participate in replenishment rounds . Though countries intended for the triggers to hold the United States to its commitments , the threshold ultimately provided the United States a de facto veto power over replenishment and capital increase negotiations due to its ability to bring replenishment negotiations to an impasse by threatening to withhold support . The U.S. has used this influence to further its long @-@ term foreign policy objectives and short @-@ term political and economic goals by imposing conditionality on replenishment negotiations . 
 = = Lending = = 
 The IDA lends to countries with the aim to finance projects that will develop infrastructure and improve education , healthcare , access to clean water and sanitation facilities , and environmental responsibility . It is considered to be the soft lending window of the World Bank , while the IBRD is considered to be the hard lending window . The association offers grants and loans with maturities ranging from 25 to 40 years , grace periods of 5 to 10 years , and interest rates of 2 @.@ 8 % or 1 @.@ 25 % depending on whether the borrower is a blend country and to which degree it is eligible . Regular IDA @-@ eligible borrowers may take advantage of no @-@ interest loans . Financial resources are allocated to eligible countries based on their success at implementing pro @-@ growth and a poverty @-@ reducing domestic policies . The IDA uses the World Bank 's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment ( <unk> ) development indicator to determine each country 's place in a resource allocation index . It then prioritizes its lending to those countries which are indicated to be most promising in terms of favorable policies and aid effectiveness . The IDA adopted the Crisis Response Window in 2007 to enable the rapid provision of emergency financing in response to crises . The association adopted the Immediate Response Mechanism in 2011 to provide IDA borrowers with immediate access to withdraw <unk> portions of their loans , should a crisis arise that meets the mechanism 's criteria . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Because African countries face some of the most severe poverty and underdevelopment , and because 39 of those countries are the IDA 's poorest member states , the association allocates approximately half of the IDA 's resources toward financing projects in those countries . As a result of its efforts to improve the region , the IDA has helped bring electricity to an additional 66 million Africans since 1997 , helped build or restore 240 @,@ 000 kilometers of paved roads , and helped enroll an additional 15 million African children in school since 2002 . The IDA was approved in May 2012 to provide $ 50 million USD worth of credit to the Women Entrepreneur Development Project as part of an effort to help women in Ethiopia participate in business as skilled employees or leaders . Although the positive outcomes of the IDA 's efforts in Africa had been historically slow , the large allocation of funding to African countries led to positive outcomes particularly within agriculture and infrastructure development efforts . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 The IDA 's efforts in Asia have been particularly successful . Numerous Asian countries have graduated from the IDA lending program , including the Philippines , China , South Korea , and Thailand . Of the association 's borrowing countries , approximately 20 are in Asia . The association 's efforts in South Asia have focused primarily on projects for education , healthcare , transportation , agriculture , and energy . Due to rapid growth in Asian countries ' populations , some pockets of poverty have emerged . To mitigate this effect , the IDA adopted an economic plan of action which established organizations to improve education and healthcare , with a focus on reducing poverty across Asian nations in ways that are compatible with local culture . 
 = Great Western Railway = 
 The Great Western Railway ( GWR ) was a British railway company that linked London with The Midlands , the south @-@ west and west of England and most of Wales . It was founded in 1833 , received its enabling Act of Parliament in 1835 and ran its first trains in 1838 . It was engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who chose a broad gauge of 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) but , from 1854 , a series of amalgamations saw it also operate 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard @-@ gauge trains ; the last broad @-@ gauge services were operated in 1892 . The GWR was the only company to keep its identity through the Railways Act 1921 , which amalgamated it with the remaining independent railways within its territory , and it was finally merged at the end of 1947 when it was nationalised and became the Western Region of British Railways . 
 The GWR was called by some " God 's Wonderful Railway " and by others the " Great Way Round " but it was famed as the " Holiday Line " , taking many people to English and Bristol Channel resorts in the West Country as well as the far south @-@ west of England such as Torquay in Devon and Minehead in Somerset and Newquay and St Ives in Cornwall . The company 's locomotives , many of which were built in the company 's workshops at Swindon , were painted a Brunswick green colour while , for most of its existence , it used a two @-@ tone " chocolate and cream " livery for its passenger coaches . Goods wagons were painted red but this was later changed to mid @-@ grey . 
 Great Western trains included long @-@ distance express services such as the Flying Dutchman , the Cornish Riviera Express and the Cheltenham Spa Express . It also operated many suburban and rural services , some operated by steam railmotors or autotrains . The company pioneered the use of larger , more economic goods wagons than were usual in Britain . It operated a network of road motor ( bus ) routes , was a part of the Railway Air Services , and owned ships , docks and hotels . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The Great Western Railway originated from the desire of Bristol merchants to maintain their city as the second port of the country and the chief one for American trade . The increase in the size of ships and the gradual silting of the River Avon had made Liverpool an increasingly attractive port and , with a rail connection to London under construction in the 1830s , it threatened Bristol 's status . The answer for Bristol was , with the co @-@ operation of London interests , to build a line of their own ; a railway built to unprecedented standards of excellence to out @-@ perform the lines being constructed to the northwest . 
 The company was founded at a public meeting in Bristol in 1833 and was incorporated by Act of Parliament in 1835 . Isambard Kingdom Brunel , then aged twenty @-@ nine , was appointed engineer . This was by far his largest contract to date and he made two controversial decisions . Firstly , he chose to use a broad gauge of 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) to allow for the possibility of large wheels outside the bodies of the rolling stock which could give smoother running at high speeds ; secondly he selected a route , north of the Marlborough Downs , which had no significant towns but which offered potential connections to Oxford and Gloucester . He surveyed the entire length of the route between London and Bristol himself , with the help of many , including his solicitor Jeremiah Osborne of Bristol law firm Osborne Clarke who on one occasion rowed Brunel down the River Avon himself to survey the bank of the river for the route . 
 George Thomas Clark played an important role as an engineer on the project , reputedly taking the management of two divisions of the route including bridges over the River Thames at Lower Basildon and <unk> and of Paddington Station . Involvement in major earth @-@ moving works seems to have fed Clark 's interest in geology and archaeology and he , anonymously , authored two guidebooks on the railway : one illustrated with lithographs by John Cooke Bourne ; the other , a critique of Brunel 's methods and the broad gauge . 
 The first 22 @.@ 5 miles ( 36 km ) of line , from Paddington station in London to Maidenhead Bridge station , opened on 4 June 1838 . When Maidenhead Railway Bridge was ready the line was extended to Twyford on 1 July 1839 and then through the deep Sonning Cutting to Reading on 30 March 1840 . The cutting was the scene of a railway disaster two years later when a goods train ran into a landslip ; ten passengers who were travelling in open trucks were killed . This accident prompted Parliament to pass the 1844 Railway Regulation Act requiring railway companies to provide better carriages for passengers . The next section , from Reading to Steventon crossed the Thames twice and opened for traffic on 1 June 1840 . A 7 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 12 km ) extension took the line to Faringdon Road on 20 July 1840 . Meanwhile , work had started at the Bristol end of the line , where the 11 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) section to Bath opened on 31 August 1840 . 
 On 17 December 1840 , the line from London reached a temporary terminus at Wootton Bassett Road west of Swindon and 80 @.@ 25 miles ( 129 km ) from Paddington . The section from Wootton Bassett Road to Chippenham was opened on 31 May 1841 , as was Swindon Junction station where the Cheltenham and Great Western Union Railway ( C & <unk> ) to Cirencester connected . That was an independent line worked by the GWR , as was the Bristol and Exeter Railway ( B & ER ) , the first section of which from Bristol to Bridgwater was opened on 14 June 1841 . The GWR main line remained incomplete during the construction of the 1 @.@ 83 miles ( 2 @.@ 95 km ) Box Tunnel , which was ready for trains on 30 June 1841 , after which trains ran the 152 miles ( 245 km ) from Paddington through to Bridgwater . In 1851 , the GWR purchased the Kennet and Avon Canal , which was a competing carrier between London , Reading , Bath and Bristol . 
 The GWR was closely involved with the C & <unk> and the B & ER and with several other broad @-@ gauge railways . The South Devon Railway was completed in 1849 , extending the broad gauge to Plymouth , whence the Cornwall Railway took it over the Royal Albert Bridge and into Cornwall in 1859 and , in 1867 , it reached Penzance over the West Cornwall Railway which originally had been laid with the 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge or " narrow gauge " as it was known at the time . The South Wales Railway had opened between Chepstow and Swansea in 1850 and became connected to the GWR by Brunel 's Chepstow Bridge in 1852 . It was completed to Neyland in 1856 , where a transatlantic port was established . 
 There was initially no direct line from London to Wales as the tidal River Severn was too wide to cross . Trains instead had to follow a lengthy route via Gloucester , where the river was narrow enough to be crossed by a bridge . Work on the Severn Tunnel had begun in 1873 , but unexpected underwater springs delayed the work and prevented its opening until 1886 . 
 = = = Brunel 's 7 @-@ foot gauge and the " gauge war " = = = 
 Brunel had devised a 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) track gauge for his railways in 1835 . He later added 1 ⁄ 4 inch ( 6 @.@ 4 mm ) , probably to reduce friction of the wheel sets in curves . This became the 7 ft 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @,@ 140 mm ) broad gauge . Either gauge may be referred to as " Brunel 's " gauge . 
 In 1844 , the broad @-@ gauge Bristol and Gloucester Railway had opened , but Gloucester was already served by the 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge lines of the Birmingham and Gloucester Railway . This resulted in a break of gauge that forced all passengers and goods to change trains if travelling between the south @-@ west and the North . This was the beginning of the " gauge war " and led to the appointment by Parliament of a Gauge Commission , which reported in 1846 in favour of standard gauge so the 7 @-@ foot gauge was prescribed by law ( Regulating the Gauge of Railways Act ) but only for the south @-@ west of England and Wales where connected to the GWR network . Other railways in Britain were to use standard gauge . In 1846 the Bristol and Gloucester was bought by the Midland Railway and it was converted to standard gauge in 1854 , which brought mixed @-@ gauge track to Temple Meads station – this had three rails to allow trains to run on either broad or standard gauge . 
 The GWR extended into the West Midlands in competition with the Midland and the London and North Western Railway . Birmingham was reached through Oxford in 1852 and Wolverhampton in 1854 . This was the furthest north that the broad gauge reached . In the same year the Shrewsbury and Birmingham Railway and the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway both amalgamated with the GWR , but these lines were standard gauge , and the GWR 's own line north of Oxford had been built with mixed gauge . This mixed gauge was extended southwards from Oxford to Basingstoke at the end of 1856 and so allowed through goods traffic from the north of England to the south coast ( via the London and South Western Railway – LSWR ) without transshipment . 
 The line to Basingstoke had originally been built by the Berks and Hants Railway as a broad @-@ gauge route in an attempt to keep the standard gauge of the LSWR out of Great Western territory but , in 1857 , the GWR and LSWR opened a shared line to Weymouth on the south coast , the GWR route being via Chippenham and a route initially started by the Wilts , Somerset and Weymouth Railway . Further west , the LSWR took over the broad @-@ gauge Exeter and Crediton Railway and North Devon Railway , also the standard @-@ gauge Bodmin and Wadebridge Railway . It was several years before these remote lines were connected with the parent LSWR system and any through traffic to them was handled by the GWR and its associated companies . 
 By now the gauge war was lost and mixed gauge was brought to Paddington in 1861 , allowing through passenger trains from London to Chester . The broad @-@ gauge South Wales Railway amalgamated with the GWR in 1862 , as did the West Midland Railway , which brought with it the Oxford , Worcester and Wolverhampton Railway , a line that had been conceived as another broad @-@ gauge route to the Midlands but which had been built as standard gauge after several battles , both political and physical . On 1 April 1869 , the broad gauge was taken out of use between Oxford and Wolverhampton and from Reading to Basingstoke . In August , the line from Grange Court to Hereford was converted from broad to standard and the whole of the line from Swindon through Gloucester to South Wales was similarly treated in May 1872 . In 1874 , the mixed gauge was extended along the main line to Chippenham and the line from there to Weymouth was narrowed . The following year saw mixed gauge laid through the Box Tunnel , with the broad gauge now retained only for through services beyond Bristol and on a few branch lines . 
 The Bristol and Exeter Railway amalgamated with the GWR on 1 January 1876 . It had already made a start on mixing the gauge on its line , a task completed through to Exeter on 1 March 1876 by the GWR . The station here had been shared with the LSWR since 1862 . This rival company had continued to push westwards over its Exeter and Crediton line and arrived in Plymouth later in 1876 , which spurred the South Devon Railway to also amalgamate with the Great Western . The Cornwall Railway remained a nominally independent line until 1889 , although the GWR held a large number of shares in the company . One final new broad @-@ gauge route was opened on 1 June 1877 , the St Ives branch in west Cornwall , although there was also a small extension at Sutton Harbour in Plymouth in 1879 . Part of a mixed gauge point remains at Sutton Harbour , one of the few examples of broad gauge trackwork remaining in situ anywhere . 
 Once the GWR was in control of the whole line from London to Penzance , it set about converting the remaining broad @-@ gauge tracks . The last broad @-@ gauge service left Paddington station on Friday , 20 May 1892 ; the following Monday , trains from Penzance were operated by standard @-@ gauge locomotives . 
 = = = Into the twentieth century = = = 
 After 1892 , with the burden of operating trains on two gauges removed , the company turned its attention to constructing new lines and upgrading old ones to shorten the company 's previously circuitous routes . The principal new lines opened were : 
 1900 : Stert and Westbury linking the Berks and Hants line with Westbury to create a shorter route to Weymouth for the Channel Islands traffic . 
 1903 : the South Wales and Bristol Direct Railway from Wootton Bassett to link up with the Severn Tunnel . 
 1904 : a diversion of the Cornish Main Line between Saltash and St Germans , eliminating the last wooden viaducts on the main line . 
 1906 : the Langport and Castle Cary Railway to shorten the journey from London to Penzance between Reading and Taunton . 
 1909 : the Birmingham and North Warwickshire which , combined with the Cheltenham and <unk> of 1906 , offered a new route from Birmingham via Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon to south Wales . 
 1910 : the Birmingham Direct Line built jointly with the Great Central Railway to give a shorter route from London to <unk> and the North . 
 1913 : the Swansea District Lines which allowed trains to Fishguard Harbour to avoid Swansea . Fishguard had been opened in an attempt to attract transatlantic liner traffic and provided a better facility for the Anglo @-@ Irish ferries than that at Neyland . 
 The generally conservative GWR made other improvements in the years before the World War I such as restaurant cars , better conditions for third class passengers , steam heating of trains , and faster express services . These were largely at the initiative of T. I. Allen , the Superintendent of the Line and one of a group of talented senior managers who led the railway into the Edwardian era : Viscount Emlyn ( Earl Cawdor , Chairman from 1895 to 1905 ) ; Sir Joseph Wilkinson ( general manager from 1896 to 1903 ) , his successor , the former chief engineer Sir James Inglis ; and George Jackson Churchward ( the Chief Mechanical Engineer ) . It was during this period that the GWR introduced road motor services as an alternative to building new lines in rural areas , and started using steam rail motors to bring cheaper operation to existing branch lines . 
 = = = One of the " Big Four " = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , the GWR was taken into government control , as were most major railways in Britain . Many of its staff joined the armed forces and it was more difficult to build and maintain equipment than in peacetime . After the war , the government considered permanent nationalisation but decided instead on a compulsory amalgamation of the railways into four large groups . The GWR alone preserved its name through the " grouping " , under which smaller companies were amalgamated into four main companies in 1922 and 1923 . 
 The new Great Western Railway had more routes in Wales , including 295 miles ( 475 km ) of former Cambrian Railways lines and 124 miles ( 200 km ) from the Taff Vale Railway . A few independent lines in its English area of operations were also added , notably the Midland and South Western Junction Railway , a line previously working closely with the Midland Railway but which now gave the GWR a second station at Swindon , along with a line that carried through @-@ traffic from the North via Cheltenham and Andover to Southampton . 
 The 1930s brought hard times but the company remained in fair financial health despite the Depression . The Development ( Loans , Guarantees and Grants ) Act 1929 allowed the GWR to obtain money in return for stimulating employment and this was used to improve stations including London Paddington , Bristol Temple Meads and Cardiff General ; to improve facilities at depots and to lay additional tracks to reduce congestion . The road motor services were transferred to local bus companies in which the GWR took a share but instead , it participated in air services . 
 A legacy of the broad gauge was that trains for some routes could be built slightly wider than was normal in Britain and these included the 1929 @-@ built " Super Saloons " used on the boat train services that conveyed transatlantic passengers to London in luxury . When the company celebrated its centenary during 1935 , new " Centenary " carriages were built for the Cornish Riviera Express , which again made full use of the wider loading gauge on that route . 
 = = = World War II and after = = = 
 With the outbreak of World War II in 1939 , the GWR returned to direct government control , and by the end of the war a Labour government was in power and again planning to nationalise the railways . After a couple of years trying to recover from the ravages of war , the GWR became the Western Region of British Railways on 1 January 1948 . The Great Western Railway Company continued to exist as a legal entity for nearly two more years , being formally wound up on 23 December 1949 . GWR designs of locomotives and rolling stock continued to be built for a while and the region maintained its own distinctive character , even painting for a while its stations and express trains in a form of chocolate and cream . 
 About 40 years after nationalisation the British railways were privatised and the old name was revived by Great Western Trains , the train operating company providing passenger services on the old GWR routes to South Wales and the South West , which subsequently became First Great Western as part of the FirstGroup but in September 2015 changed its name to Great Western Railway in order to ' to reinstate the ideals of our founder ' . The operating infrastructure , however , was transferred to Railtrack and has since passed to Network Rail . These companies have continued to preserve appropriate parts of its stations and bridges so historic GWR structures can still be recognised around the network . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The original Great Western Main Line linked London Paddington station with Temple Meads station in Bristol by way of Reading , Didcot , Swindon , Chippenham and Bath . This line was extended westwards through Exeter and Plymouth to reach Truro and Penzance , the most westerly railway station in England . Brunel and Gooch placed the GWR 's main locomotive workshops close to the village of Swindon and the locomotives of many trains were changed here in the early years . Up to this point the route had climbed very gradually westwards from London , but from here it changed into one with steeper gradients which , with the primitive locomotives available to Brunel , was better operated by types with smaller wheels better able to climb the hills . These gradients faced both directions , first dropping down through Wootton Bassett to cross the River Avon , then climbing back up through Chippenham to the Box Tunnel before descending once more to regain the River Avon 's valley which it followed to Bath and Bristol . 
 Swindon was also the junction for a line that ran north @-@ westwards to Gloucester then south @-@ westwards on the far side of the River Severn to reach Cardiff , Swansea and west Wales . This route was later shortened by the opening of a more direct east @-@ west route through the Severn Tunnel . Another route ran northwards from Didcot to Oxford from where two different routes continued to Wolverhampton , one through Birmingham and the other through Worcester . Beyond Wolverhampton the line continued via Shrewsbury to Chester and Birkenhead ; another route via Market Drayton enabled the GWR to reach Crewe . Operating agreements with other companies also allowed GWR trains to run to Manchester . South of the London to Bristol main line were routes from Didcot to Southampton via Newbury , and from Chippenham to Weymouth via Westbury . 
 A network of cross @-@ country routes linked these main lines , and there were also many and varied branch lines . Some were short , such as the 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) Clevedon branch line ; others were much longer such as the 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) Minehead Branch . A few were promoted and built by the GWR to counter competition from other companies , such as the Reading to Basingstoke Line to keep the London and South Western Railway away from Newbury . However , many were built by local companies that then sold their railway to their larger neighbour ; examples include the Launceston and Brixham branches . Further variety came from the traffic carried : holidaymakers ( St Ives ) ; . royalty ( Windsor ) ; or just goods traffic ( Carbis Wharf ) . 
 Brunel envisaged the GWR continuing across the Atlantic Ocean and built the SS Great Western to carry the railway 's passengers from Bristol to New York . Most traffic for North America soon switched to the larger port of Liverpool ( in LNWR territory ) but some transatlantic passengers were landed at Plymouth and conveyed to London by special train . Great Western ships linked Great Britain with Ireland , the Channel Islands and France . 
 = = = Key locations = = = 
 The railway 's headquarters were established at Paddington station . Its locomotives and rolling stock were built and maintained at Swindon Works but other workshops were acquired as it amalgamated with other railways , including the <unk> companies ' Stafford Road works at Wolverhampton , and the South Devon 's workshops at Newton Abbot . Reading Signal Works was established in buildings to the north of Reading railway station , and in later years a concrete manufacturing depot was established at Taunton where items ranging from track components to bridges were cast . 
 = = = Engineering features = = = 
 More than 150 years after its creation , the original main line has been described by an historian as one of the masterpieces of railway design . Working westwards from Paddington , the line crosses the valley of the River Brent on Wharncliffe Viaduct and the River Thames on Maidenhead Railway Bridge , which at the time of construction was the largest span achieved by a brick arch bridge . The line then continues through Sonning Cutting before reaching Reading after which it crosses the Thames twice more , on <unk> and <unk> bridges . Between Chippenham and Bath is Box Tunnel , the longest railway tunnel driven by that time . Several years later , the railway opened the even longer Severn Tunnel to carry a new line between England and Wales beneath the River Severn . 
 Some other notable structures were added when smaller companies were amalgamated into the GWR . These include the South Devon Railway sea wall , the Cornwall Railway 's Royal Albert Bridge , and Barmouth Bridge on the Cambrian Railways . 
 = = Operations = = 
 In the early years the GWR was managed by two committees , one in Bristol and one in London . They soon combined as a single board of directors which met in offices at Paddington . 
 The Board was led by a chairman and supported by a Secretary and other " officers " . The first Locomotive Superintendent was Daniel Gooch , although from 1915 the title was changed to Chief Mechanical Engineer . The first Goods Manager was appointed in 1850 and from 1857 this position was filled by James Grierson until 1863 when he became the first general manager . In 1864 the post of Superintendent of the Line was created to oversee the running of the trains . 
 = = = Passenger services = = = 
 Early trains offered passengers a choice of first- or second @-@ class carriages . In 1840 this choice was extended : passengers could be conveyed by the slow goods trains in what became third @-@ class . The 1844 Railway Regulation Act made it a legal requirement that the GWR , along with all other British railways , had to serve each station with trains which included third @-@ class accommodation at a fare of not more than one penny per mile and a speed of at least 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) . By 1882 , third @-@ class carriages were attached to all trains except for the fastest expresses . Another parliamentary order meant that trains began to include smoking carriages from 1868 . 
 Special " excursion " cheap @-@ day tickets were first issued in May 1849 and season tickets in 1851 . Until 1869 most revenue came from second @-@ class passengers but the volume of third @-@ class passengers grew to the extent that second @-@ class facilities were withdrawn in 1912 . The Cheap Trains Act 1883 resulted in the provision of workmen 's trains at special low fares at certain times of the day . 
 The principal express services were often given nicknames by railwaymen but these names later appeared officially in timetables , on <unk> carried on the locomotive , and on <unk> above the windows of the carriages . For instance , the late @-@ morning Flying Dutchman express between London and Exeter was named after the winning horse of the Derby and St Ledger races in 1849 . Although withdrawn at the end of 1867 , the name was revived in 1869 – following a request from the Bristol and Exeter Railway – and the train ran through to Plymouth . An afternoon express was instigated on the same route in June 1879 and became known as The Zulu . A third West Country express was introduced in 1890 , running to and from Penzance as The Cornishman . A new service , the Cornish Riviera Express ran between London and Penzance – non @-@ stop to Plymouth – from 1 July 1904 , although it ran only in the summer during 1904 and 1905 before becoming a permanent feature of the timetable in 1906 . 
 The Cheltenham Spa Express was the fastest train in the world when it was scheduled to cover the 77 @.@ 25 miles ( 124 @.@ 3 km ) miles between Swindon and London at an average of 71 @.@ 3 miles per hour ( 114 @.@ 7 km / h ) . The train was nicknamed the ' Cheltenham Flyer ' and featured in one of the GWR 's ' Books for boys of all ages ' . Other named trains included The Bristolian , running between London and Bristol from 1935 , and the Torbay Express , which ran between London and Kingswear . 
 Many of these fast expresses included special coaches that could be detached as they passed through stations without stopping , a guard riding in the coach to uncouple it from the main train and bring it to a stop at the correct position . The first such " slip coach " was detached from the Flying Dutchman at Bridgwater in 1869 . The company 's first sleeping cars were operated between Paddington and Plymouth in 1877 . Then on 1 October 1892 its first corridor train ran from Paddington to Birkenhead , and the following year saw the first trains heated by steam that was passed through the train in a pipe from the locomotive . May 1896 saw the introduction of first @-@ class restaurant cars and the service was extended to all classes in 1903 . Sleeping cars for third @-@ class passengers were available from 1928 . 
 Self @-@ propelled " steam railmotors " were first used on 12 October 1903 between Stonehouse and <unk> ; within five years 100 had been constructed . These trains had special retractable steps that could be used at stations with lower platforms than was usual in England . The railmotors proved so successful on many routes that they had to be supplemented by trailer cars with driving controls , the first of which entered service at the end of 1904 . From the following year a number of small locomotives were fitted so that they could work with these trailers , the combined sets becoming known as " autotrains " and eventually replacing the steam rail motors . Diesel railcars were introduced in 1934 . Some railcars were fully streamlined , some had buffet counters for long @-@ distance services , and others were purely for parcels services . 
 = = = Freight services = = = 
 Passenger traffic was the main source of revenue for the GWR when it first opened but goods were also carried in separate trains . It was not until the coal @-@ mining and industrial districts of Wales and the Midlands were reached that goods traffic became significant ; in 1856 the Ruabon Coal Company signed an agreement with the GWR to transport coal to London at special rates which nonetheless was worth at least £ 40 @,@ 000 each year to the railway . As locomotives increased in size so did the length of goods trains , from 40 to as many as 100 four @-@ wheeled wagons , although the gradient of the line often limited this . While typical goods wagons could carry 8 , 10 or ( later ) 12 tons , the load placed into a wagon could be as little as 1 ton . The many smaller consignments were sent to a local transhipment centre where they were re @-@ sorted into larger loads for the main segment of their journey . There were more than 550 " station truck " workings running on timetabled goods trains carrying small consignments to and from specified stations , and 200 " pick up " trucks that collected small loads from groups of stations . 
 The GWR provided special wagons , handling equipment and storage facilities for its largest traffic flows . For example , the coal mines in Wales sent much of their coal to the docks along the coast , many of which were owned and equipped by the railway , as were some in Cornwall that exported most of the china clay production of that county . The wagons provided for both these traffic flows ( both those owned by the GWR and the mining companies ) were fitted with end doors that allowed their loads to be tipped straight into the ships ' holds using wagon @-@ tipping equipment on the dockside . Special wagons were produced for many other different commodities such as gunpowder , aeroplanes , milk , fruit and fish . 
 Heavy traffic was carried from the agricultural and fishing areas in the south west of England , often in fast " perishables " trains , for instance more than 3 @,@ 500 cattle were sent from Grampound Road in the 12 months to June 1869 , and in 1876 nearly than 17 @,@ 000 tons of fish was carried from west Cornwall to London . The perishables trains running in the nineteenth century used wagons built to the same standards as passenger coaches , with vacuum brakes and large wheels to allow fast running . Ordinary goods trains on the GWR , as on all other British railways at the time , had wheels close together ( around 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) apart ) , smaller wheels and only hand brakes . In 1905 the GWR ran its first vacuum @-@ braked general goods train between London and Bristol using newly built goods wagons with small wheels but vacuum brakes . This was followed by other services to create a network of fast trains between the major centres of production and population that were scheduled to run at speeds averaging 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . Other railway companies also followed the GWR 's lead by providing their own vacuum @-@ braked ( or " fitted " ) services . 
 = = = Ancillary operations = = = 
 A number of canals , such as the Kennet and Avon Canal and the Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon Canal , became the property of the railway when they were purchased to remove competition or objectors to proposed new lines . Most of these continued to be operated although they were only a small part of the railway company 's business : in 1929 the canals took £ 16 @,@ 278 of receipts while freight trains earned over £ 17 million . ( £ 892 @,@ 000 and £ 932 million respectively in 2015 ) . 
 The Railways Act 1921 brought most of the large coal @-@ exporting docks in South Wales into the GWR 's ownership , such as those at Cardiff , Barry , and Swansea . They were added to a small number of docks along the south coast of England which the company already owned , to make it the largest docks operator in the world . 
 Powers were granted by Parliament for the GWR to operate ships in 1871 . The following year the company took over the ships operated by Ford and Jackson on the route between Neyland in Wales and Waterford in Ireland . The Welsh terminal was relocated to Fishguard Harbour when the railway was opened to there in 1906 . Services were also operated between Weymouth Quay and the Channel Islands from 1889 on the former Weymouth and Channel Islands Steam Packet Company routes . Smaller GWR vessels were also used as tenders at Plymouth Great Western Docks and , until the Severn Tunnel opened , on the River Severn crossing of the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway . 
 The first railway @-@ operated bus services were started by the GWR between <unk> railway station and The Lizard on 17 August 1903 . Known by the company as " road motors " , these chocolate @-@ and @-@ cream buses operated throughout the company 's territory on railway feeder services and excursions until the 1930s when they were transferred to local bus companies ( in most of which the GWR held a share ) . 
 The GWR inaugurated the first railway air service between Cardiff , Torquay and Plymouth in association with Imperial Airways . This grew to become part of the Railway Air Services . 
 = = Motive power and rolling stock = = 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 The GWR 's first locomotives were specified by Isambard Kingdom Brunel but proved unsatisfactory . Daniel Gooch , who was just 20 years old , was soon appointed as the railway 's Locomotive Superintendent and set about establishing a reliable fleet . He bought two locomotives from Robert Stephenson and Company which proved more successful than Brunel 's , and then designed a series of standardised locomotives . From 1846 these could be built at the company 's newly established railway workshops at Swindon . He designed several different 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge types for the growing railway , such as the Firefly 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2s and later Iron Duke Class 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 2s . In 1864 Gooch was succeeded by Joseph Armstrong who brought his standard @-@ gauge experience to the railway . Some of Armstrong 's designs were built as either broad or standard gauge just by fitting different wheels ; those needing tenders were given old ones from withdrawn broad @-@ gauge locomotives . 
 Joseph Armstrong 's early death in 1877 meant that the next phase of motive power design was the responsibility of William Dean who developed express 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 types rather than the single @-@ driver 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2s and 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 2s that had hauled fast trains up to that time . Dean retired in 1902 to be replaced by George Jackson Churchward , who introduced the familiar 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives . It was during Churchward 's tenure that the term " Locomotive Superintendent " was changed to " Chief Mechanical Engineer " ( CME ) . Charles Collett succeeded Churchward in 1921 . He was soon responsible for the much larger fleet that the GWR operated following the Railways Act 1921 mergers . He set about replacing the older and less numerous classes , and rebuilding the remainder using as many standardised GWR components as possible . He also produced many new designs using standard parts , such as the Castle and King classes . The final CME was Frederick Hawksworth who took control in 1941 , seeing the railway through wartime shortages and producing GWR @-@ design locomotives until after nationalisation . 
 Brunel and Gooch both gave their locomotives names to identify them , but the standard @-@ gauge companies that became a part of the GWR used numbers . Until 1864 the GWR therefore had named broad @-@ gauge locomotives and numbered standard @-@ gauge ones . From the time of Armstrong 's arrival all new locomotives – both broad and standard – were given numbers , including broad @-@ gauge ones that had previously carried names when they were acquired from other railways . Dean introduced a policy in 1895 of giving passenger tender locomotives both numbers and names . Each batch was given names with a distinctive theme , for example kings for the 6000 class and castles for the 4073 class . 
 The GWR first painted its locomotives a dark holly green but this was changed to middle chrome or Brunswick green for most of its existence . They initially had chocolate brown or Indian red frames but this was changed in the twentieth century to black . Name and number plates were generally of polished brass with a black background , and chimneys often had copper rims or " caps " . 
 Liveries through the years : 
 = = = Carriages = = = 
 GWR passenger coaches were many and varied , ranging from four- and six @-@ wheeled vehicles on the original broad @-@ gauge line of 1838 , through to bogie coaches up to 70 feet ( 21 m ) long which were in service through to 1947 and beyond . Vacuum brakes , bogies and through @-@ corridors all came into use during the nineteenth century , and in 1900 the first electrically lit coaches were put into service . The 1920s saw some vehicles fitted with automatic couplings and steel bodies . 
 Early vehicles were built by a number of independent companies , but in 1844 the railway started to build carriages at Swindon railway works , which eventually provided most of the railway 's rolling stock . Special vehicles included sleeping cars , restaurant cars and slip coaches . Passengers were also carried in railmotors , autotrains , and diesel railcars . Passenger @-@ rated vans carried parcels , horses , and milk at express speeds . Representative examples of these carriages survive in service today on various Heritage railways up and down the country . 
 Most coaches were generally painted in variations of a chocolate @-@ brown and cream livery , however they were plain brown or red until 1864 and from 1908 to 1922 . Parcels vans and similar vehicles were seldom painted in the two @-@ colour livery , being plain brown or red instead , which caused them to be known as " brown vehicles " . 
 = = = Wagons = = = 
 In the early years of the GWR its wagons were painted brown , but this changed to red before the end of the broad gauge . The familiar dark grey livery was introduced about 1904 . 
 Most early wagons were four @-@ wheeled open vehicles , although a few six @-@ wheeled vehicles were provided for special loads . Covered vans followed , initially for carrying cattle but later for both general and vulnerable goods too . The first bogie wagons appeared in 1873 for heavy loads , but bogie coal wagons were built in 1904 following on from the large four @-@ wheel coal wagons that had first appeared in 1898 . Rated at 20 tons ( 20 @.@ 3 tonnes ) these were twice the size of typical wagons of the period , but it was not until 1923 that the company invested heavily in coal wagons of this size and the infrastructure necessary for their unloading at their docks ; these were known as " Felix Pole " wagons after the GWR 's general manager who promoted their use . Container wagons appeared in 1931 and special vans for motor cars in 1933 . 
 When the GWR was opened no trains in the United Kingdom were fitted with vacuum brakes , instead handbrakes were fitted to individual wagons and trains also conveyed brake vans where a guard had control of a screw @-@ operated brake . The first goods wagons to be fitted with vacuum brakes were those that ran in passenger trains carrying perishable goods such as fish . Some ballast hoppers were given vacuum brakes in December 1903 , and general goods wagons were constructed with them from 1904 onwards , although unfitted wagons ( those without vacuum brakes ) still formed the majority of the fleet in 1948 when the railway was nationalised to become a part of British Railways . 
 All wagons for public traffic had a code name that was used in telegraphic messages . As this was usually painted onto the wagon it is common to see them referred to by these names , such as " Mink " ( a van ) , " Mica " ( refrigerated van ) , " Crocodile " ( boiler truck ) , and " Toad " ( brake van ) . 
 = = Track = = 
 For the permanent way Brunel decided to use a light bridge rail continuously supported on thick timber baulks , known as " baulk road " . Thinner timber transoms were used to keep the baulks the correct distance apart . This produced a smoother track and the whole assembly proved cheaper than using conventional sleepers for broad @-@ gauge track , although this advantage was lost with standard- or mixed @-@ gauge lines because of the higher ratio of timber to length of line . More conventional track forms were later used , although baulk road could still be seen in sidings in the first half of the twentieth century . 
 = = Signalling = = 
 Brunel developed a system of " disc and crossbar " signals to control train movements , but the people operating them could only assume that each train reached the next signal without stopping unexpectedly . The world 's first commercial telegraph line was installed along the 13 miles ( 21 km ) from Paddington to West Drayton and came into operation on 9 April 1839 . This later spread throughout the system and allowed stations to use telegraphic messages to tell the people operating the signals when each train arrived safely . A long list of code words were developed to help make messages both quick to send and clear in meaning . 
 More conventional semaphore signals replaced the discs and crossbars over time . The GWR persisted with the lower quadrant form , where a " proceed " aspect is indicated by lowering the signal arm , despite other British railways changing to an upper quadrant form . Electric light signals of the " searchlight " pattern were later introduced at busy stations ; these could show the same red / green or yellow / green aspects that semaphore signals showed at night . An " automatic train control " system was introduced from 1906 which was a safety system that applied a train 's brakes if it passed a danger signal . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The GWR is known admiringly to some as " God 's Wonderful Railway " , but jocularly to others as the " Great Way Round " as some of its earliest routes were not the most direct . The railway , however , promoted itself from 1908 as " The Holiday Line " as it carried huge numbers of people to resorts in Wales and south @-@ west England . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Cheap tickets were offered and excursion trains operated to popular destinations and special events such as the 1851 Great Exhibition . Later , GWR road motors operated tours to popular destinations not served directly by train , and its ships offered cruises from places such as Plymouth . Redundant carriages were converted to camp coaches and placed at country or seaside stations such as Blue Anchor and Marazion and hired to holidaymakers who arrived by train . 
 The GWR had operated hotels at major stations and junctions since the early days , but in 1877 it opened its first " country house hotel " , the Tregenna Castle in St Ives , Cornwall . It later added the Fishguard Bay Hotel in Wales and the Manor House at <unk> , Devon , to which it added a golf course in 1930 . 
 It promoted itself from 1908 as " The Holiday Line through a series of posters , postcards , jigsaw puzzles , and books . These included Holiday Haunts , describing the attraction of the different parts of the GWR system , and regional titles such as S. P. B. Mais 's Cornish Riviera and A. M. Bradley 's South Wales : The Country of Castles . Guidebooks described the scenery seen Through the Window of their trains . Other GWR books were designed to encourage an interest in the GWR itself . Published as " Books for Boys of All Ages " , these included The 10 : 30 Limited and Loco 's of the Royal Road . 
 The Great Western Railway effectively created the modern day tourist spots of the West Country and the southwest part of Wales that had been previously been very difficult to reach . The Bristol Channel resorts of Wales and the West Country such as Minehead or the cliffs of Exmoor had been very remote from other parts of England before the advent of the GWR . 
 = = = Art and media = = = 
 The GWR attracted the attention of the artists from an early date . John Cooke Bourne 's History and Description of the Great Western Railway was published in 1846 and contained a series of detailed lithographs of the railway that give readers a glimpse of what the line looked like in the days before photography . J. M. W. Turner painted his Rain , Steam and Speed - The Great Western Railway in 1844 after looking out of the window of his train on Maidenhead Railway Bridge , and in 1862 William Powell Frith painted The Railway Station , a large crowd scene on the platform at Paddington . The station itself was initially painted for Powell by W Scott Morton , an architect , and a train was specially provided by the GWR for the painting , in front of which a variety of travellers and railway staff form an animated focal point . 
 The GWR has featured in many television programmes , such as the BBC children 's drama series God 's Wonderful Railway in 1980 . It was also immortalised in Bob Godfrey 's animated film Great , which won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film of 1975 which tells the story of Brunel 's engineering accomplishments . In The Railway Series by the Rev. Wilbert Awdry , two of the North Western Railway 's engines , Duck , and Oliver , and a <unk> named Toad , are from the Great Western Railway , with Duck being especially proud of it . 
 = = = Heritage = = = 
 The GWR 's memory is kept alive by several museums such as <unk> – the museum of the GWR ( in the old Swindon railway works ) , and the Didcot Railway Centre , where there is an operating broad @-@ gauge train . Preserved GWR lines include those from Totnes to <unk> , Paignton to Kingswear , Bishops Lydeard to Minehead , and Kidderminster to Bridgnorth . Many other heritage railways and museums also have GWR locomotives or rolling stock in use or on display . 
 Numerous stations owned by Network Rail also continue to display much of their GWR heritage . This is seen not only at the large stations such as Paddington ( built 1851 , extended 1915 ) and Temple Meads ( 1840 , 1875 & 1935 ) but other places such as Bath Spa ( 1840 ) , Torquay ( 1878 ) , Penzance ( 1879 ) , Truro ( 1897 ) , and Newton Abbot ( 1927 ) . Many small stations are little changed from when they were opened , as there has been no need to rebuild them to cope with heavier traffic ; good examples can be found at Yatton ( 1841 ) , Frome ( 1850 , Network Rail 's last surviving Brunel @-@ style train shed ) , Bradford @-@ on @-@ Avon ( 1857 ) , and St Germans ( 1859 ) . Even where stations have been rebuilt , many fittings such as signs , manhole covers and seats can still be found with " GWR " cast into them . 
 The Great Western Main Line was considered as a potential UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2006 but rejected in 2011 The proposal comprised seven individual sites : Temple Meads ( including Brunel 's GWR offices , boardroom , train shed , the B & ER offices , and the viaduct over the River Avon ) ; Bath including the route from Twerton Tunnel to the Sydney Gardens ; <unk> and Box Tunnels ; the Swindon area including Swindon railway works and village ; Maidenhead Railway Bridge ; Wharncliffe Viaduct ; and Paddington station . 
 = = = Locomotives named Great Western = = = 
 Several locomotives have been given the name Great Western . The first was an Iron Duke class broad @-@ gauge locomotive built in 1846 , the first locomotive entirely constructed at the company 's Swindon locomotive works . This was withdrawn in 1870 , but in 1888 a newly built locomotive in the same class was given the same name ; this was withdrawn four years later when the broad gauge was taken out of use . A standard @-@ gauge <unk> class locomotive , number 3012 , was then given the name . The last GWR locomotive to carry the name was Castle class number <unk> , which continued to carry it in British Railways days . 
 The name later reappeared on some BR diesels . The first was <unk> which carried the name from 1979 until 1991 . Another Class 47 , this time <unk> , had the name bestowed on it in 2005 ; it is currently ( 2009 ) in operation with Riviera Trains . A High Speed Train power car , number <unk> , also carries the same name ; it is currently , and appropriately , a part of the First Great Western fleet . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Joseph Armstrong 
 Locomotive Superintendent to the Shrewsbury and Chester Railway and the Shrewsbury and Birmingham Railways from 1853 , he was responsible for the locomotive workshops at Wolverhampton . When they amalgamated with the GWR the following year he was given the title of Northern Division Locomotive Superintendent ( 1854 – 1864 ) , he then moved to Swindon as the chief Locomotive Superintendent ( 1864 – 1877 ) . 
 Isambard Kingdom Brunel 
 Chief Engineer to the GWR ( 1835 – 1859 ) and many of the broad @-@ gauge lines with which it amalgamated , also the standard @-@ gauge Taff Vale Railway . He was responsible for choosing the route of the railway and designing many of today 's iconic structures including Box Tunnel , Royal Albert Bridge , Maidenhead Railway Bridge , Paddington and Temple Meads stations . 
 George Jackson Churchward 
 Locomotive Superintendent ( 1902 – 1915 ) and Chief Mechanical Engineer ( 1915 – 1921 ) who instigated much standardisation of locomotive components . 
 Charles Collett 
 Chief Mechanical Engineer ( 1922 – 1941 ) . 
 William Dean 
 Locomotive Superintendent ( 1877 – 1902 ) . 
 Daniel Gooch 
 The GWR 's first Locomotive Superintendent ( 1837 – 1864 ) and its chairman ( 1865 – 1889 ) . He was responsible for the railway 's early locomotive successes , such as the Iron Duke Class , and for establishing Swindon railway works . 
 James Grierson 
 Goods Manager ( 1857 – 1863 ) , he then became the general manager ( 1863 – 1887 ) from which position he saw the railway through a period of expansion and the early gauge conversions . 
 Frederick Hawksworth 
 The last GWR Chief Mechanical Engineer ( 1941 – 1947 ) . 
 Henry Lambert 
 The general manager ( 1887 – 1896 ) responsible for managing the final gauge conversion in 1892 . 
 James Milne 
 General manager ( 1929 – 1947 ) who saw the GWR through World War II . 
 Sir Felix Pole 
 As general manager ( 1921 – 1929 ) he oversaw the Grouping of the South Wales railways into the GWR following the Railways Act 1921 , and promoted the use of 20 ton wagons to bring efficiencies to the railway 's coal trade . 
 Charles Spagnoletti 
 The GWR 's Telegraph Superintendent ( 1855 – 1892 ) patented the Disc Block Telegraph Instrument that was used to safely control the dispatch of trains . First used on the Metropolitan Railway in 1863 and the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway in 1864 , it was later used on many other lines operated by the company . 
 = <unk> = 
 A zduhać ( Cyrillic : <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ] ) and vetrovnjak ( <unk> , [ <unk> ] ) in Serbian tradition , and a dragon man in Bulgarian , Macedonian and Serbian traditions , were men believed to have an inborn supernatural ability to protect their estate , village , or region against destructive weather conditions , such as storms , hail , or torrential rains . It was believed that the souls of these men could leave their bodies in sleep , to intercept and fight with demonic beings imagined as bringers of bad weather . Having defeated the demons and taken away the stormy clouds they brought , the protectors would return into their bodies and wake up tired . 
 Notions associated with the zduhać , vetrovnjak , and dragon man , respectively , are not identical . The dragon man fought against female demons called ala , which led hail clouds over fields to destroy crops , and consumed the fertility of the fields . The zduhaći ( plural ) of an area usually fought together against the attacking zduhaći of another area who were bringing a storm and hail clouds above their fields . The victorious zduhaći would loot the yield of all agricultural produce from the territory of their defeated foes , and take it to their own region . The vetrovnjak , recorded in parts of western Serbia , fought against a bringer of bad weather imagined as a black bird . The zduhaći are recorded in Montenegro , eastern Herzegovina , part of Bosnia , and the Sandžak region of south @-@ western Serbia . The dragon men are recorded in eastern Serbia , Banat , western Bulgaria , and Macedonia . 
 = = <unk> and vjedogonja = = 
 In Montenegro , eastern Herzegovina , part of Bosnia , and the Sandžak region of south @-@ western Serbia , a man who was thought to be able to protect his estate , village , or region from bad weather was called a zduhać or a <unk> . These names have a number of variants , which can be with or without h , with v instead of h , with or without the ending <unk> , and with č instead of <unk> . According to philologist Franz <unk> , the Serbian word <unk> is cognate with the Old Slavonic <unk> ( <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) " the elements " , which stem from the Old Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) " element " . The latter name is the origin of the Modern Greek stikhio ( <unk> ) , denoting various kinds of spirits in Greek folklore , such as those fighting for the well @-@ being of their village or area against adverse spirits from elsewhere . According to linguists Petar <unk> and Norbert <unk> , <unk> stems from the Albanian <unk> " storm " . In any case , the form zduhać may have resulted from folk etymology through association with the Serbian duh " spirit " . 
 The notion that the human being consists of body and soul is found in traditional Slavic culture . There was a belief among the South Slavs that , in some people , the soul could leave the body and again return into it . The zduhać belonged to such people in Serbian tradition . It was thought that , after a zduhać fell asleep , his soul could fly out of his body , or " go into the winds " , as it was said in Montenegro . In some accounts , it exited the body in the form of a fly . The zduhać 's soul had the power to direct the motion of winds and clouds . If the body of the sleeping zduhać was rotated so that his head and feet changed places , or if he was carried away from where he fell asleep , his soul would not be able to return into his body , and the zduhać would die . 
 Although zduhaći ( plural ) could be women and children , most were adult men . Their supernatural power was thought to be inborn . In many regions it was regarded that the zduhaći were born with a caul — white or red , depending on the regional belief . The mother would dry the caul and sew into a piece of garment always worn by the child , such as a pouch attached under the child 's armpit . In the clan of Kuči , eastern Montenegro , the mother would preserve the caul hiding it from all eyes , and hand it to her son when he grew up . The caul was supposed to protect him when he flew as a zduhać . If the caul was destroyed , the child 's supernatural power would be lost . A birthmark of a zduhać in Herzegovina could be a tuft of hair growing on his shoulder or upper arm . In Montenegrin Littoral , the caul played no role in the birth of zduhaći , who were rather born on certain Fridays at a set hour . There was also a belief in Herzegovina that male children who were conceived on the eves of great feast days would become zduhaći . 
 A 19th @-@ century ethnographic account from eastern Herzegovina describes a way through which a man who was not born as a zduhać could become one . Forty days after he ceased praying to God and washing his face , the man should go to some level ground , before he drew a circle on the ground and sat in its centre . Soon the Devil would come and ask the man whether he was willing to join his army , and what form he wanted to be transformed into . When the man stated the desired form , the Devil would turn him into that , making him a zduhać . In the region of Semberija , northeast Bosnia , <unk> zduhać could pass his supernatural power on to his son . 
 The appearance of zduhaći was not much different from that of ordinary people , but they had some traits that set them apart . They were deep sleepers , very hard to wake up , often drowsy , pensive , thoughtful , and solemn . Their faces were often puffy , eyes shadowy . They were wise and shrewd , successful in whatever they were doing and resourceful in dealing with problems ; their households were prosperous . In Semberija , zduhaći were said to be good <unk> diviners , and to be able to communicate with domestic animals . The clan of <unk> from Montenegrin Littoral claimed that the zduhaći could hear any doings anywhere in the world ; if someone stepped on a zduhać 's foot , they could hear that too . The clan of Kuči held that the zduhaći were outstanding long jumpers . 
 Adverse weather such as a storm or hail could devastate crop fields and orchards , and thus jeopardize the livelihood of farmers in the affected area . A role of zduhaći , according to folk tradition , was to lead storms and hail clouds away from their family estates , villages , or regions , to save their crops . A zduhać could take the storms and hail clouds over the territory of another zduhać to destroy its crops . The other zduhać would fly up to confront the bringer of bad weather , and there would be a fight between the zduhaći . 
 They fought alone , or in bands composed of individuals from the same area . Thus it was thought that the zduhaći from eastern Bosnia fought together against those from Herzegovina and Montenegro . The zduhaći from Sandžak fought jointly against the Albanian zduhaći . On the Adriatic coast , battles were waged between a band of zduhaći from Herzegovina , Serbia , Montenegro , and northern Albania on one side , and a band of zduhaći from Apulia in southeast Italy on the other side . The latter were also called the transmarine zduhaći , as Apulia is situated across the Adriatic Sea from Montenegro . Each band had its leader . A man named Mato <unk> ( 1774 – 1870 ) , from the village of Korita in Herzegovina , was reputed the supreme commander of the Herzegovinian and Montenegrin zduhaći ; he was also a famous seer . 
 According to some accounts , zduhaći flew and fought mostly in spring when strong winds blew , and , as held in some regions , only during night . As recorded in Montenegro , the zduhaći " went into the winds " usually during the Nativity Fast ( 15 November – 24 December ) , when there was not much snow and the winds were forceful . They also flew frequently from mid @-@ February to the end of March . In some years , they were not active at all . 
 The zduhaći of a band would leave their bodies in sleep and gather at an appointed place , before flying into a battle . They used various weapons , such as spindles , beech buds , sharp splinters , leaves , stalks of straw , fluff , flakes , sand , long twigs , cornel stones , pine cones , eggshells , and other light objects . As believed in Herzegovina , zduhaći uprooted gigantic firs and oaks and fought with them . However , the most powerful zduhać weapon was held to be a stick of <unk> ( resinous wood burned to give light or used as kindling ) charred at both ends , or any charred splinter of wood . A zduhać who was hit with this weapon would surely die . People therefore avoided igniting the sticks at both ends , and they took care that no splinters were left half @-@ burned . 
 Beside the weapons , each zduhać carried a milk bucket and a peck measure ; an alternative for the latter could be a shovel or broom from a threshing floor . If a band of zduhaći succeeded to seize the peck measures from the enemy band , they would thereby transfer the crop yield from the area of their enemies to their own area . Seizing the milk buckets meant that the milk yield would be transferred . According to the clan of Kuči , zduhaći used their peck measures , milk buckets , and other containers to grab off the overall yield of the enemy territory . 
 The battles of zduhaći were furious . They were accompanied by forceful gales and whirlwinds which uprooted trees and whipped up dust . In Montenegro , it was considered dangerous to throw stones in the wind , because that might knock out an eye of a zduhać , who would kill the culprit . A fighting zduhać was supposed to retain his peck measure and milk bucket , while trying to seize these objects from an enemy zduhać ; he should hit and not get hit . The victorious band of zduhaći would loot the yield of all agricultural produce from the territory of their defeated foes . The harvest in the coming season would thus be excellent for the victors and poor for the defeated zduhaći . 
 After the battle , the soul of the zduhać would return into his body , and he would wake up weak and exhausted . If he was wounded , he would be sick for some time afterwards — before he recovered , or died if his wound was mortal . There are records of seriously ill men who claimed that they were wounded in zduhać battles . It was held in Montenegrin Littoral that a mortally wounded zduhać could still recuperate if he revenged himself on his <unk> before the eighth day of his wound expired . Pavel Rovinski , Russian philologist and ethnographer , recorded a story told to him by a man of the clan of Ceklin in southern Montenegro ( Rovinski also heard a similar story in Montenegrin Littoral ) : 
 There was a Ceklin zduhać who was so beaten by other zduhaći that he had to die , and there he was , dying . Various remedies were brought to him , but he accepted none , because all was in vain . Finally he had everybody ushered out of his house , except for one of his brothers , a famous hero ; all were also driven away from the door , to prevent eavesdropping . Then the dying man said to his brother : " I will surely die , if I am not substituted for ; and you can do it and save me , if you will have enough strength . " The brother , of course , promised that , and the sick man continued : " You will have to go tonight to Mount So @-@ and @-@ so , at three to four hours ' walking distance from here , most of the way lying through a dense forest . You will come beneath a stair @-@ like cliff and stop there , and a great fear will seize you . To encourage yourself , take your two pistols and a knife with the silver sheath . " " I will also take a musket , " added the brother , and the sick man said , " You may take that too , though only as an encouragement , as it will be of no use to you , but you must have the knife . " " I can go without any weapon , with a pocket knife , if it is against a single , and with a weapon I can go against a hundred , " interrupted the brother again . " Take it easy with your boldness , " resumed the sick man , " and by all means take the knife . When you come beneath the cliff , the sky will be cloudless , lit , and there will be a silence in the air ; then you will notice a wisp of cloud coming from the direction of Mount Rumija , and the wind will start to blow . The wisp will turn into an enormous storm cloud that will cover all the sky , and there will come a darkness such as you have never seen before ; the wind will blow , whistle , roar , and shriek , as you have also never heard before ; the hair will rise on your head so that it will lift your cap , and I fear that you may go mad from horror . And if you persevere , you will see three bulls falling down from the cloud on the earth : a light @-@ haired , a pied , and a dark @-@ haired bull . The latter two will start to beat the former , which is the weakest , because it is already wounded . Make sure to strike the two bulls with the knife ; but take care not to cut the light @-@ haired bull ; that would be the death of me , as it would be if the two bulls overcame the light @-@ haired bull . " 
 Having heard all of that , the brother took two pistols , poured more gunpowder , and sharpened the flints ; he put the pistols into his belt , placed the knife between them , and slung a musket over his shoulder . He set forth . He passed through the dark forest ; he came beneath the stair @-@ like cliff ; the moon and the stars were shining , so it was like a day ; a silence all around him , pleasant ; he sat down and lit his pipe . Before long a wisp of cloud showed from the direction of Mount Rumija ; there came a roar and bluster , and everything happened as the sick man said . His hair rose so that three times he jammed his cap down on his head . Finally , three bulls fell down from the storm cloud and started to fight ; all as it was said . He stabbed the pied bull in the neck with the knife ; it staggered and fell ; the light @-@ haired bull got encouraged . Then he stabbed the dark @-@ haired bull , and it slumped ; the light @-@ haired was finishing them off with its horns . This was not enough for him , and , fearing that the cut bulls could still rise up , he kept on striking them with the knife as long as there was a breath in their bodies . The storm cloud suddenly disappeared ; together with it , the light @-@ haired bull vanished . Again the moon and the stars shone ; again a silence and blessedness . He was going back home as if flying ; when he arrived he found his brother sitting by the hearth , placing logs on the fire , healthy as if he had never been sick . 
 An interpretation of the story about the Ceklin zduhać is given in an essay by literary theoretician <unk> <unk> . According to him , the story is a product of the symbolic scheme of the culture of Montenegrin Serbs . The story comprises a zduhać narration and a heroic narration . The former is based on the mythological beliefs in the zduhaći , which were strongest in Montenegro . The latter is based on the heroic ideology exalting death in battle , which was a predominant trait of the Montenegrin society . The zduhać and the famous hero symbolize , respectively , two systems of the Montenegrin culture . At its beginning , the story is placed in the framework of the first system , but it is realized with the means and on the ideological plane of the second system . The beaten zduhać , who is supposed to die , diverges from the mythological pattern , and he replaces himself with the hero . This results in an ironic twist . The fearless hero acts in fact as a butcher of bulls which do not even fight back . The apparently happy ending degrades the zduhać into a subject without identity . <unk> argues , using mostly Lacanian psychoanalysis , that there is a third , silent narration in the story — that of the death drive — which crumbles the other two narrations . 
 In a story recorded in the area of Cetinje , a zduhać was mortally wounded on Mount Lovćen in a battle against the transmarine zduhaći . The dying zduhać disclosed the way in which he could be saved , and one of his relatives acted according to the instructions . He went by night to a valley where he saw horses , oxen , rams , billy goats , men , and women . He passed by them in total silence , before he saw a black ox . He struck the ox with a wooden bar , and the animal roared tremendously . When he returned home , he found the zduhać sound and healthy . As believed in the region of Birač , eastern Bosnia , a mortally wounded zduhać could get well if he burned beech buds in a milk bucket , and <unk> himself with the smoke , using a spindle to wave the smoke toward himself . Before performing this rite , he should have publicly confessed that he was a zduhać . Most zduhaći would reputedly rather die than do that , because afterwards they could no more fly as zduhaći . As thought in Herzegovina , a man who did not want to be a zduhać anymore , should have confessed to a priest and promised that he would not fly anymore . 
 <unk> were regarded as a blessing for their home and village , as guardians of the prosperity and well @-@ being of their region , and as good , honest , just , and law @-@ obeying people . In the region of Birač , zduhaći were said to meet with angels " on the leaves of high and thick branches " . They were sometimes thought to have a prophetic gift . However , a zduhać could ally himself with the Devil , and use his innate power in accordance with the Devil 's directions . That zduhać was doomed to turn into a vampire , unless he confessed and repented . Some influential historical persons were believed to have been zduhaći , such as warrior and writer Marko <unk> , and Petar I Petrović @-@ Njegoš , who was the Prince @-@ Bishop of Montenegro from 1784 to 1830 . 
 Mahmud Bushatli , the Ottoman pasha of Skadar in northern Albania , was reputed a powerful zduhać in Montenegro . It was claimed that his mother carried him for three years . Bushatli was defeated and killed by the Montenegrins under Petar I , while attempting to subdue them in 1796 . Since that time , the crop yield in Montenegro and northern Albania was allegedly not as high as before . Bushatli was said to have fought for the crop yield against the transmarine zduhaći . Petar I was reported saying of him , " I regret his death although he was my biggest enemy . " After Bushatli was killed , his body was burned ; according to oral accounts , green flames rose from it . In South Slavic tradition , green could be associated with supernatural creatures , like witches and dragons . 
 An individual domestic animal could also be regarded as a zduhać , such as a shepherd dog , ox , bellwether , horse , or billy goat . If an animal habitually made vocal sounds in sleep , it was assumed to be a zduhać . Such an animal was cherished , and was not for sale . The spirit of the animal zduhać would leave its body in sleep and fight against the enemy zduhaći , to protect its own flock or herd . Only the fertility of the livestock depended on the outcome of the battles fought by the animal zduhaći ; they had no bearing on the crop yield . In the region of Užice , western Serbia , it was believed that storms and hail clouds were led by zduhaći who flew above them in the form of big birds . A black ox and a three @-@ year @-@ old rooster defended their village from them — especially the rooster , for which reason he was not killed for food , but kept as a home guardian . In folk spells for repelling hail clouds in Serbia , these clouds were called white cattle . This could be compared with the idea of the black ox as a defender from hail . 
 In some regions of southern Montenegro , such as the Bay of Kotor , <unk> , and Zagarač , and in parts of Herzegovina , a man who acted as a zduhać was called a vjedogonja or <unk> . There was a rule : if a child was born with a caul , the girl would become a <unk> " witch " , and the boy would become a vjedogonja . This could have been prevented by cutting the caul on a trough for feeding dogs , and throwing it away ; the child would then grow up into an ordinary person . While the zduhaći and vjedogonje ( plural ) protected their community from the threats coming from the outside , the witches were the enemy within , doing harm primarily to their own relatives and friends . A correspondence between the witches and the vjedogonje can be seen in a passage from The Mountain Wreath , a poetic drama by Petar II Petrović @-@ Njegoš , the plot of which takes place in 18th @-@ century Montenegro : 
 A man named Vukota said these words to Bishop Danilo , one of the main characters of The Mountain Wreath , who previously uttered a piercing vision speaking as if he was alone . The second and the third verses can be compared with an idiomatic expression whose literal sense is " to dash into a frenzied countenance " , meaning " to fall into a frenzied or crazed exaltation " . Vukota compared Bishop Danilo 's exaltation with that of a witch or a vjedogonja when their spirit flew out of their body . It was thought that the witches held an assembly each year on 1 March , and the vjedogonje mostly flew during the long autumn nights , especially when strong winds blew . After Vukota 's words , Bishop Danilo started as if from a dream . 
 The vjedogonje fought in regional bands , their weapons being huge boulders or gigantic trees which they uprooted with one hand . The leaders among them were those who had a tail and were hairy . A 19th @-@ century ethnographic account describes that " when a man regarded as a vjedogonja dies , they drive hawthorn spines under his nails , and cut the tendons beneath his knees with a knife whose sheath is black , so that he could not get out of his grave ( like a vampire ) . " 
 Petar I Petrović @-@ Njegoš preached among people against superstition . He strongly condemned the denunciation and persecution of women as witches . After one such incident in 1830 in south Montenegro , Petar I wrote an epistle , mentioning vjedogonje in a sentence : " Nowhere have I found nor has anyone told me that witches and vjedogonje exist , except in the blind and sad Serbian people , because it is blind and believes lies rather than Christ 's Gospel and Christ 's teachings and commands . " 
 In the folklore of Croats of <unk> <unk> , a region in northern Dalmatia , there were men called <unk> . They were believed to know past and future things . People paid them to cure the sick , which they did by saying prayers and making the sign of the cross all over the patient 's body . The <unk> were also thought to be able to inflict diseases on people , and to have evil eyes . They could not fly . 
 = = <unk> , vilovit , and oblačar = = 
 In the region of Mount <unk> in western Serbia , the man who protected the fields of his village from bad weather was called a vetrovnjak ; the name is derived from <unk> " wind " . At the onset of a storm , the vetrovnjak would fall into a trance @-@ like sleep . It was thought that his soul then flew skywards to fight against some black bird which led the storm and hail clouds . After he woke up , he had to rest for some time to restore his physical strength . It was believed that a vetrovnjak could take the bad clouds over the estate of a man with whom he was in a conflict . 
 In the region of <unk> , western Serbia , people told of the vilovit men , who would disappear at the sight of hail clouds , reappearing bloody and with torn clothes after the storm was over . Asked where they had been to , they would only answer that they had gone to fight against those who led the hail clouds toward their village . The adjective vilovit means " having a vila 's properties " or " vila @-@ like " . The name vila denotes Slavic nymphs or fairies , female anthropomorphic spirits of woods , mountains , clouds , and waters , who had magical powers . In the region of Tamnava , north @-@ western Central Serbia , the vilovit men were also called vetrenjaks . An early mention of vetrenjaks is found in a short story by Serbian writer Milovan Glišić , published in 1875 . In the story , men from <unk> and nearby villages talk about a battle their vetrenjaks fought on a hill to repel a hail storm brought by alien vetrenjaks . They uprooted oaks and beat each other with them , their bodies turning black and blue from the blows . The defenders were victorious and moved the storm to a mountain , away from their fields . 
 Serbian writer Janko <unk> was well acquainted with the folklore of Tamnava , where he worked as a teacher in a village . In his short story published in 1888 , an elderly woman talks to him about various supernatural beings , including her co @-@ villager Petar , a vetrenjak : " As soon as he perceives a greyish cloud and hears thunder , Petar leaves whatever he may be doing , and goes somewhere . He runs so fast that no biped can overtake him . After he passes the cloud , he comes back naked and blue as indigo . Then he has to stay in bed for a week . And do you know why he is like that ? He told me . The <unk> [ hanged and drowned people ] from surrounding villages drive the clouds toward our village , and Petar will not let hail beat us . He fights with them until he will overpower them , or they him ... [ Petar said ] ' We uproot oaks , as one would pull onion bulbs from the ground , and beat each other with them . ' " 
 A vetrenjak from the village of <unk> had reportedly claimed that he clashed with oxen and rams led by devils whose aim was to discharge hail over his village . Seeing hail clouds , people in Tamnava would shout , " Keep your cattle out of our crops ! " Thus they addressed hanged and drowned persons who were imagined to fly before the clouds and lead them . Farmers avoided leaving a harrow on the field , as they thought that the hail @-@ bringing devils could slam it on the head of the vetrenjak who defended the village . People behaved amicably toward vetrenjaks , but they warned their children to keep off from them , as these men had " business with devils " . In 2004 , ethnographers interviewed elderly people in a group of hamlets south @-@ west of the town of Valjevo , who defined the vetrenjak as a man able to direct the movement of clouds . When such a man died , the wind would suddenly start to blow and clouds would loom . The term vetrenjak also designated a man who could fly invisible , which he usually did by night . He was born with a caul which was thrown away and eaten by birds . 
 In the folklore of Serbs in the region of Syrmia , protection from hail was provided by the men called <unk> ; the name is derived from <unk> " cloud " . The oblačar would rush directly beneath a dark cloud , as soon as it appeared above the fields of his village . There , he would run to and fro , waving his arms or holding a stick raised in the direction of the cloud . He would not stop until he was completely exhausted and drenched . In this way , the oblačar fought against a gigantic serpentine demon called <unk> , which was thought to fly accompanied by its retinue in low dark clouds , spewing hail from its broad muzzle . If the cloud moved away from his village without discharging hail , it meant that the oblačar had overpowered the <unk> and its retinue . An oblačar in the village of <unk> annually received wheat from his co @-@ villagers as a reward for his struggle . 
 = = Dragon man = = 
 The men who defended their village from bad weather were referred to as dragons in eastern and southern Serbia , western Bulgaria , and Macedonia . In Serbia , they were also called <unk> " having a dragon 's properties " , from <unk> " dragon " . The mythological dragon was imagined as a fiery creature with wings , usually having a snake @-@ like shape ; he could also take the form of an eagle or a man . Each dragon had his own territory , within which he dwelt by a forest spring or stream , in the hollow trunk of a beech tree , or in a mountain cave . He was benevolent toward the humans , and he took care that his territory received the right amount of rain at the right time , for good growth of the crops . His arch @-@ enemy was a female demon named ala ( plural : ale ) , whose main activity was to lead storm and hail clouds over fields to destroy crops . The ale also consumed the fertility of the fields . Whenever he noticed an ala approaching , the dragon would fly up into the clouds to fight against the demon and chase her away . He shot fiery arrows and stones at her , which produced lightning and thunder . In the regions where people believed in the zduhaći , the dragon was a highly regarded mythological being , but he was not associated with the crops and their protection from demons . Similar was the case in other than western regions of Bulgaria . 
 The dragon man was believed to act similar to the mythological dragon : as soon as he saw bad weather approaching , which he knew was brought by an ala , he would leave whatever he was doing , and fly up to confront the demon . This he did by falling into a deep sleep , or entering a state similar to death , usually at the very spot where he happened to be at that time . His soul then left his body in the form of a snake or a lizard , and soared skywards . It was claimed that he was not breathing as long as his soul was absent from his body . The battle could last for a whole day , or even for several days , during which time the man lay unconscious , sweating profusely from the exertion of the fight . There was a danger that , during the course of the battle , the ala might approach the man 's body and harm him , which could be prevented by someone swinging a blade above him , or by sticking the blade at the lying man 's head . He should not be pushed or moved while in this state : if he was not in the same position as when he fell asleep , his soul would not be able to return into his body , and he would die . When he woke up after the battle with the ala , he was very tired . Apart from these characteristics , the dragon man was seen as an ordinary human . 
 There is a story about a dragon man from the village of <unk> , eastern Serbia , who saw an ala in a cloud while he was <unk> . He said to <unk> beside him , " I am going to sleep , and you swing a scythe above me , " before he lay down and fell asleep . A man who swung the scythe , however , inadvertently grazed him with the tip of the blade . When the dragon woke up , he told that he had been wounded by the ala he fought with , and lost a lot of blood . A dragon from the village of <unk> always kept with him a piece of a scythe blade or a knife . As soon as he perceived the imminent approach of bad weather , he would lie down on the ground and stick the blade above his head . It was thought that his spirit then soared into the clouds to deal with the ala . When he was drafted into the army , he fell asleep without a blade during a thunderstorm , and died . At a village near Tran in western Bulgaria , a man reputed to be a dragon would swoon when it started to thunder . After he came to , he would say , " How tired I am ! " This was thought to refer to the strenuous battle he fought in the clouds . 
 In Banat and some areas of eastern Serbia , the dragon men were referred to as alovit . This adjective is derived from the noun ala , and means " having supernatural or demonic properties " . It could be applied not only to humans , but also to dragons , snakes , horses , trees , armies , and rivers . An ala could be seen as a good creature in some regions , such as Banat , Mount Kopaonik in south Serbia , and the adjacent Župa basin with nearby areas , where she was believed to be connected to a territory , which she defended against attacks by the ale from other territories . This can be compared with the inter @-@ regional fights of the zduhaći . In villages of the Kruševac Municipality , when blessings were pronounced on Christmas Eve , the villagers would also say , " God , save our guardian ala . " People interpreted hail ravaging their crops as a defeat of their ala by an ala from elsewhere . The victorious ala would loot the crop yield of the ravaged area , and transfer it to her own territory . 
 At the sight of hail clouds , the alovit man would fall into a trance @-@ like sleep , before his soul issued from his body and flew up to the clouds . In the manner of an ala , his soul led the clouds over the fields of a neighbouring village . A man , who was thought to be alovit , was described as unusually tall , thin , and bony @-@ faced , with a long beard and moustache . When the weather was good , he worked and behaved like the others in his village , but as soon as dark clouds covered the sky , he would close himself in his house , put blinds on the windows , and remain alone for as long as the bad weather lasted . People also talked that he suffered from epilepsy . In the region of <unk> , the epileptics were said to be alovit — their souls went out of their bodies during epileptic fits and led hail clouds . 
 At the village of <unk> in Banat , a man named Ilija <unk> was regarded to be alovit ; the villagers talked that he had a tail . Whenever a thunderstorm came , his appearance changed — he fought with an ala . If the ala was overwhelming him , Ilija would lie down and sleep , and if he was overpowering her , the clouds would start to dissipate . There was a tale in the same village about an alovit man who would warn the villagers of the approach of a thunderstorm , before he took a wagon pole on his back and flew into the clouds . At the village of <unk> in Banat , people told of an alovit man who had four nipples . At the sight of hail clouds , he would mount his mare and disappear for several days . The latter two men would come back tired , bruised , and with torn clothes . As held in the central Serbian region of Gruža , men could become <unk> . As such , they would suddenly disappear during thunderstorms , and fly into the dark clouds to fight against ale . They were characterized as nimble , hot @-@ tempered , rash and very strong . At a village near Radomir in western Bulgaria , there was a dragon man who was said to have been physically crippled by an ala . 
 The dragon man was believed to be born with some physical peculiarity , such as a caul , little wings or membranes beneath his armpits , a tail or teeth ; or he was born an orphan . There were practices intended to preserve the supernatural power of the newborn dragon . In the region of Veles , Macedonia , twelve girls would pick cotton , spin yarn from it , weave a cloth from the yarn , made a shirt from the cloth , and finally dress the dragon boy in the shirt . As thought in the region of Leskovac , Serbia , such a boy would only then become able to defeat an ala , when three old women spun yarn , knitted a shirt , and dressed the child in it . All this had to be done in one day and one night , during which time the three women should not have spoken a single word . A similar custom was recorded in western Bulgaria , where it was also believed that the soul of the boy , while he slept in his cradle , left his body and walked around . If he was turned , he would die , as his soul could not return into his body . 
 According to a belief , the power of dragon boys was greatest at the time of their birth ; the younger they were , the greater power they had . In a folk tale from eastern Serbia , a group of dragons surrounded an ala , which broke away and flew into a watermill . There was a woman in the mill with her baby , who was a dragon boy ; he grabbed a stone and killed the ala with it . It was recorded in the region of Niš that a winged dragon boy , in his fights with ale , " takes a plough beam and immediately stops the ala , and hail ceases . " The mother of a dragon boy wanted to make him an ordinary child by cutting off the winglets beneath his armpits , but that section resulted in the boy 's death . As was thought in the Župa basin and nearby areas , no one but the mother should see a dragon boy during the first seventeen days of his life ; otherwise the child would die . If he survived , he would protect his village from hail , and at the age of seven he would fly away from home . It was also believed in Župa that the dragon men lived alone , without contacts with other humans . 
 Prophet Elijah was also regarded as a protector from the ale . As soon as he spotted an ala consuming the fertility of fields , he would summon dragons and harness them to his flying chariot . They then together attacked the demon , shooting fiery arrows at her . Instead of the dragons , the prophet could summon dragon men . They would then fall asleep , and their souls would rush to the thundering clouds to assist the prophet against the ale . A legend in the region of Leskovac has it that fighting the ale was originated by Prophet Elijah , when he , accompanied by a dragon boy , killed twelve of these demons . In the popular tradition of Slavic peoples , Prophet Elijah is a Christian replacement of the pagan Slavic thunder god Perun . 
 Some animals could also be regarded as <unk> , such as rams . It was said that a rooster , a gander , or a <unk> could grow a pair of little wings beneath their natural wings , thus becoming powerful dragons . A dragon rooster dug a hole beneath the threshold of his owner 's house . As soon as dark clouds appeared , the rooster would go into the hole , and his spirit would fly out from his body into the clouds to fight with ale . One day the owner killed the rooster , and immediately went mad . Another dragon rooster , with two combs , would fall to the ground and lie as if dead during thunderstorms . The Aesculapian snake ( <unk> in Serbian and <unk> in Bulgarian ) was regarded as a very beneficial animal . People avoided disturbing it in any way . The Aesculapian snake which inhabited a crop field or a vineyard was seen as its guardian . The snake was said to fly into the hail clouds and drive them away from its field or yard , or it dispersed the clouds by raising its head high in the air and hissing as strong as it could . In the region of Niš , the Aesculapian snakes were said to help the dragon boy in his fights against ale . If an Aesculapian snake attained a certain age , it would grow wings and become a dragon . 
 The dragon was regarded as a great lover and seducer of beautiful women , whom he visited by night , entering their houses down the chimney before turning into a man . The women who were visited by a dragon would after a while grow weak , pale and sunken @-@ faced . There were magical methods to repel the dragon from them . It was believed that the children born out of such liaisons were physically and mentally ill , and that they would not live long . In another belief , the dragon would come for his son amidst thunder and lightning , and fly away with him . In the region of Bitola , it was told that such children were born with a tail . After they grew wings , they flew into the sky , from where they shot witches with thunderbolts . There was a belief in the region of Leskovac that the dragon boys , fighters against ale born with the little wings , were offspring of dragons . At the village of Kruševo , Macedonia , people told of an old shepherd named Trail who was a son of a dragon . He was allegedly so strong that he could shatter cliffs , and when he shouted , his voice could be heard from miles away . 
 Old Slavic mythology knew of men who were born out of relationships between women and dragons . These men were endowed with prodigious strength and exceptional abilities . They could turn into a dragon and fly , which they usually did in crisis situations , like battles . Two such heroes are recorded in the Serbian epic poetry : Sekula <unk> and Zmaj <unk> Vuk ( " Fiery Dragon " Vuk ) . Both were late @-@ medieval nobles and warriors , to whom mythical attributes were attached in the poetry . Their transformation into a dragon is described in three ways : the hero dresses his " dragon shirt " ; he spreads his hidden wings ; or he lets his soul out from his body in the form of a winged snake . The transformation may not be explicitly stated , but implied by a statement which indicates that the hero flies . Russian epic hero <unk> <unk> is described as a son of a dragon ; in folk poems , he transforms into a <unk> , aurochs , wolf , and some other animals . In a couple of Serbian and Bulgarian folk poems , Saint Nicholas suddenly falls asleep , and while he sleeps , he saves ships from a storm . 
 In the popular tradition of Serbia , Bulgaria , and Macedonia , the ability to leave one 's own body was also possessed by some cunning women who practised magic for healing . A widespread custom of these women was to yawn repeatedly during healing rituals . This indicated the egress of their soul , which entered the sick person 's body to chase away disease @-@ causing demonic entities . The rituals were accompanied by spells , in some of which the cunning women referred to their soul as a greyhound : " Run away , <unk> , down gullies ... The soul of Vida is a greyhound — she overtakes the <unk> and chokes them . " ( An <unk> is a demonic entity , and Vida is the name of the cunning woman . ) 
 = = Related traditions = = 
 The idea about the men with the inborn ability to leave their bodies in a spirit form , has also been recorded in Slovene and Croat traditions . The spirit could turn into a bull , dog , bore , or some other animal . He intercepted bringers of bad weather , and fought with them to save the crops of his village . The men with this ability were designated by various names , such as vedomec in <unk> , mogut in <unk> , <unk> in Lika and Sinj , <unk> or <unk> in southern Dalmatia and the area around Dubrovnik , <unk> in Dalmatia , and <unk> in Istria . A vedomec fought against another vedomec , a mogut against another mogut , and so on , and the winner would take bad weather to the region of his defeated foe . All these men were marked by some peculiarity connected with their birth . There were also supernatural beings , such as <unk> and <unk> in Slovenia , and <unk> in Međimurje , who clashed with each other during thunderstorms over the plenty of their territories . 
 A <unk> or <unk> was a man born with a caul , who could leave his body in spirit transformed into an animal . He fought demonic men called <unk> ( werewolves ) and other evil agents . His victory meant that his village would have the abundance of all sorts of agricultural products . The <unk> was recorded in Istria , Gorski Kotar , the Kvarner Gulf , and parts of Slovenia . The benandanti were men born with a caul recorded in the region of Friuli in north @-@ eastern Italy . They periodically fought for the fertility of the fields against male and female witches . The táltos , recorded in Hungary , were men and women born with teeth or some other physical peculiarity . They periodically fought each other in the shape of animals or flames . Their battles were often accompanied by storms . The winner would ensure abundant harvest for his village . The benandanti and the táltos were initiated at a certain age into their vocation by an older member of the same group , who visited them in a vision . 
 In Greek folklore , a stikhio ( <unk> ) was a spirit that protected his territory against the adverse stikhio spirits from other territories . In Albanian tradition , a <unk> was a dragon @-@ man with enormous strength and the power to fly ; he was born with a caul . He saved his region from a <unk> or <unk> , a female serpentine demon . In Romanian folklore , there were no defenders against bad weather , which was produced by a gigantic flying serpentine creature called a <unk> or a <unk> . A <unk> could be controlled by an evil sorcerer called a <unk> , who was able to ride on that demon . The notion of a <unk> named a <unk> , who protected his village against attacks of <unk> from other villages , was marginally encountered in some places of Romanian Banat . 
 It was believed in southern Poland that clouds and hail were produced by creatures named <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> : they compressed fog into clouds , and fragmented ice with iron flails into hailstones . They were considered to be the spirits of infants who had died without baptism , or the spirits of drowned and hanged people . Such spirits were seen in Serbia as bringers of hail clouds ; they were addressed in folk spells , with which they were made to lead the clouds away from the village . According to other notions , <unk> were persons who flew into the sky during storms . They could fly in spirit , while they were in deep sleep , or they could fly in body and soul . The <unk> were friendly toward humans , often warning them about the approach of a storm or hail . They could direct the movement of clouds . 
 Individuals who could leave their body in spirit during sleep were called burkudzäutä among the Ossetians of the Caucasus , and they were called mazzeri in parts of Corsica . The burkudzäutä , mounted on animals or household objects , flew on a night between Christmas and New Year to <unk> , the land of the dead described as a great meadow . There they collected the seeds of agricultural plants and took them to their village , thus ensuring a rich harvest . The dead pursued and shot arrows at them as they flew back home . The wounded burkudzäutä would fall sick after the return , and some of them would die . The mazzeri of neighbouring villages fought each other in spirit on the night between 31 July and 1 August . The village of the defeated mazzeri would suffer more deaths during the next year . 
 In the eastern Baltic region of Livonia , people designated as werewolves went underground in the shape of dogs to fight against sorcerers who stole the shoots of the grain . If the werewolves failed to wrest the shoots , there would be famine . In Romania , strigoi were people born with a caul , which they donned upon reaching adulthood ; this made them invisible . They then travelled in animal form to the meadow at the end of the world . There they fought each other all night , becoming reconciled in the morning . The reason for the fight is not specified . The Circassians told that , on a certain night of the year , their sorcerers fought with the sorcerers of the Abkhaz people , trying to suck each other 's blood . 
 In West Europe , medieval sources describe women who fell into trance on certain nights , abandoning their bodies in the form of an invisible spirit or animal . They then travelled to a gathering led by a female divinity who bestowed prosperity and knowledge . The divinity , semi @-@ bestial or attended by animals , was known by various regional names , such as Holda , <unk> , Madonna Oriente , <unk> , <unk> , Dame <unk> , and Fairy Queen ( in Scotland ) . She could be derived from Celtic goddesses like Epona , the <unk> , and <unk> . In Sicily , women and girls had nocturnal meetings in spirit with the so @-@ called <unk> di <unk> " women from the outside " , which could be traced back to the ancient ecstatic cult of the Mothers of <unk> , of Cretan origin . 
 The <unk> were men from Ariège in the Pyrenees who could see and talk to the souls of the dead . The <unk> were women and girls in Georgia who plunged into a lethargy and travelled in spirit to the land of the dead , to communicate with them . 
 = = Theories on origin = = 
