 The zduhaći , the dragon men , and the related folkloric figures of Europe can be compared with Eurasian shamans , e.g. , the <unk> of the Lapps , as well as the shamans of the <unk> and Tungus in Siberia . They were all able to leave their body in spirit to fight against the enemies of their community . The shamans also fought against each other , usually in animal form , for reasons such as to procure for their side as much reindeer as possible . However , for a shaman 's soul to leave his body , he had to work himself into a state of ecstasy through a ceremony consisting of drumming , dancing , chanting , and even taking narcotics . All the zduhaći had to do was to fall asleep , although the unusual depth of their sleep indicates a state of ecstasy . There are detailed and eventful descriptions of the journey of the shaman 's soul , but no corresponding accounts exist in the case of the zduhaći . However , the zduhaći who left their bodies were said to have gone into the winds . This expression may contain an idea of a journey . Pavel Rovinski recorded the words he heard from his landlady in Montenegro on a windy night in March : " Listen , how they sing — the travellers ; they have gone high high ! Happy journey to them ! " 
 The crucial difference between the shamans and their European counterparts lies in the fact that the ecstasy of the former was public , while that of the latter was always private . Historian Carlo Ginzburg asserts that " [ t ] his divergence stands starkly against a homogeneous background . " Ginzburg regards all of them as mediators with the realm of the dead , who are the " ambiguous dispensers of prosperity " ; the ecstasy represents a temporary death . The accounts in which the figures fly or fight materially rather than in spirit , are attempts " to describe an ecstatic experience perceived as absolutely real " . Ginzburg argues , adopting a diffusionist approach , that the shamanistic elements of the European folkloric figures have their original source in the shamanism of Siberian nomads , and their diffusion was possibly mediated by the Scythians . Another possibility is that the shamanistic beliefs are derived from a common source . Their nucleus could have developed in a remote past from cultural interactions between the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ Europeans , speakers of the Proto @-@ Uralic language , and ancient populations of the Caucasus . A third possibility is derivation from structural characteristics of the human mind . This is suggested by the persistence of the shamanistic phenomena over a long period , and their dispersion over a large area in culturally disparate societies . These three possibilities are not mutually exclusive . 
 = = In literature = = 
 In the novel <unk> gora by Mihailo Lalić , set in Montenegro during the Second World War , there is a negative character , Kosto , nicknamed <unk> ( a local variant of zduhać . ) Kosto is described as an elderly man of great strength . He says that when he lived in America the Italian Mafiosi called him Il Mago , " magician " or " sorcerer " , which he translates as <unk> . His Colt revolver is called <unk> 's <unk> because it always hits its target . Kosto is killed by the main character of the novel in a brutal fight . 
 In a short story by Simo <unk> , titled " <unk> " , <unk> acts as the companion and translator for a French vicomte who goes to hunt bears near a mountainous village in Old Herzegovina ( part of Montenegro ) . One of their escort is Mićun , a burly young man from the village , who falls into a trance during a storm . The vicomte is given the explanation that Mićun , being a zduhać , leaves his body to fight in the clouds against alien zduhaći . After an hour or two , the zduhać wakes up exhausted . Another man of the escort asks him , " Was it good for us ? " to which Mićun answers affirmatively . The vicomte concludes the story by quoting Hamlet 's well @-@ known lines about the secret things of heaven and earth ( Hamlet , 1 @.@ 5 @.@ 188 – 89 ) . 
 = Resident Evil : Apocalypse = 
 Resident Evil : Apocalypse is a 2004 apocalyptic fiction action horror film directed by Alexander Witt , from a screenplay written by producer Paul W. S. Anderson . It is the second installment in the Resident Evil film series , which is based on the Capcom survival horror video game series Resident Evil . 
 Borrowing elements from the video games Resident Evil 2 , 3 : Nemesis , and Code : Veronica , Resident Evil : Apocalypse follows heroine Alice , who has escaped the underground Umbrella facility and must band with other survivors including Jill Valentine and escape Raccoon City alive . 
 The film opened to theaters on September 10 , 2004 . On a budget of $ 40 million , the film grossed $ 51 million domestically and $ 129 million worldwide , surpassing the box office gross of the previous installment . Resident Evil : Apocalypse received mostly negative reviews from critics , who praised the action sequences but criticized the plot . The film was released to DVD on December 28 , 2004 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A month after the contamination of The Hive seen in Resident Evil , the Umbrella Corporation unwisely sends in a research team to reopen the complex and investigate the incident , since no one survived except Alice and Matt Addison , and as Alice was experimented on , Matt was put into a mysterious " Nemesis Program " . When the team reprograms and opens the sealed blast doors , they are slaughtered by the massive crowd of infected . 
 With the infected released outside , they reach Raccoon City , spreading the infection among the general populace . Two days after the infection has spread to the surface , Umbrella , worried about possible worldwide contamination , quarantines Raccoon City and establishes a security perimeter around it , also evacuating all important Umbrella personnel out of the city . However , a girl named Angela Ashford ( Sophie <unk> ) , daughter of the Level 6 Umbrella researcher Dr. Charles Ashford ( Jared Harris ) , who is also the T @-@ virus creator , goes missing , after an Umbrella security car transporting her out of Raccoon City suffers a traffic accident . 
 Alice awakens in the deserted Raccoon City hospital attached to wiring , and after strapping herself out of the wiring , she manages to unlock her room and step outside . Finding no one in the hospital , she wanders outside to find the city a ghost town , infected . She arms herself with a shotgun from a police car and wanders around the city to look for supplies . She is constantly disturbed by a man who keeps showing up in visions , who was revealed to be experimenting on her ; she now has superhuman agility and strength . 
 While Umbrella is evacuating civilians at the Raven 's Gate Bridge , the only exit out of the town , disgraced police officer Jill Valentine ( Sienna Guillory ) , confers with Sargeant Payton Wells ( <unk> <unk> ) , her old ally , after hearing about the infection being true . However , the T @-@ virus infects a man having a heart attack , turning him into a zombie that bites Payton at the city gates . Umbrella 's supervisor and the head of the Raccoon City contamination operation , Timothy Cain ( Thomas Kretschmann ) , worried that the T @-@ virus has reached the gates , seals the exit and orders his soldiers to fire over the crowd 's heads , scaring them back into the city . 
 Elsewhere , Carlos Olivera ( Oded Fehr ) and other Umbrella soldiers link up with Special Tactics And Rescue Squad ( S.T.A.R.S. ) units to defend against an onslaught of zombies . Their positions are overrun , causing Carlos and his team to retreat with a bitten Yuri ( Stefen Hayes ) , who turns into a zombie and infects Carlos before being killed . Before Yuri becomes a zombie , however , Jill , Payton , and news reporter Terri Morales ( Sandrine Holt ) lock themselves in a church , where a panicked man is also hiding . Inspecting the church , Jill finds a priest who has been feeding other people to his zombified sister . Later on , they find the church is full of Lickers . The priest and the panicked man are killed , but Jill , Payton , and Terri are saved at the last minute by the heavily @-@ armed Alice . 
 In the meantime , Umbrella dispatches their Nemesis Program to kill all remaining S.T.A.R.S. operatives to test him . When Nemesis encounters a surviving citizen , L.J. ( Mike Epps ) , and members of S.T.A.R.S. , the latter two entities open fire on Nemesis . Nemesis guns the team down but spares L.J. ' s life when he drops his weapons . Meanwhile , Dr. Ashford has refused extraction , since Angela is missing , and soon discovers she is hiding in her school dormitory . He hacks into the city 's CCTV system , uses it to contact Alice and the other survivors , and offers to arrange their evacuation in exchange for their rescuing Angela . Alice , seeing no other escape , accepts the offer . 
 After Payton , Terri , and Jill hear the offer they relent , intending to seal themselves until backup arrives , but Alice explains her choice ; as the contamination cannot be put under control , a nuclear bomb will be dropped on Raccoon City , completely destroying it , and the media cover story will be a meltdown of the local nuclear power plant . Soon afterward , Payton shows signs of weakness from the T @-@ virus , and as this happens , Nemesis appears and shoots Payton dead . Alice separates and assaults him , but he is invincible to fight . She lures him to a local store , where she tries to fight him , but she is overwhelmed and forced into retreat . Jill and Terri make it to the school , and they pick up L.J. on the way . 
 Inside the school , they find Carlos and Nicholai ( Zack Ward ) acting on the same offer . After encounters with zombie dogs and infected children who kill Nicholai and Terri , Alice saves the group again , and they find Angela . Angela reveals she was injected with the T @-@ virus ; she was ill with a genetic disease and forced to walk on crutches . Dr. Ashford created the T @-@ virus to allow her to walk , and he created the anti @-@ virus because of the T @-@ virus ' potential for mutations , but the virus was then impounded and weaponized by Umbrella . Alice uses Terri 's video camera to record her story and injects Carlos with the anti @-@ virus carried by Angela , to keep her infection in check . 
 Dr. Ashford gives Alice the location of the extraction point at City Hall , where the helicopter waits . The group makes it to the rendezvous but is cornered by Major Cain , who has caught wind of Dr. Ashford 's intentions and is holding him prisoner . All but Alice are restrained , and seconds later Nemesis appears . The helicopter is actually Nemesis ' extraction before the bomb detonation . Major Cain commands Alice to fight Nemesis . Alice refuses , but when Cain kills Dr. Ashford in cold blood , she relents and fights Nemesis , impaling him on a pole . Defeating Nemesis , she realizes he is Matt Addison , her friend and one of the survivors in The Hive , as he was infected by a Licker , he started to mutate and was placed in the program . 
 Her stand and refusing to kill him rekindles a trace of Matt 's former humanity ; he and Alice join forces and attack the Umbrella forces . Meanwhile , Carlos and Jill cut themselves free from their bonds and join the fight . Nemesis is killed , protecting Alice from an exploding helicopter . Alice punished Major Cain by throwing him out of the helicopter to be devoured by a horde of encroaching zombies , including Dr. Ashford . As the survivors escape in the remaining chopper , the nuclear missile detonates over the City Hall . The helicopter is caught in the blast wave and crashes . As the helicopter falls , a metal pole comes loose and is flung towards Angela . Alice moves in front of Angela and is impaled , saving her but killing Alice . 
 Some hours after the explosion , Umbrella employees locate the helicopter 's crash site , deep in the Arklay Mountains . There , they find Alice 's body , badly burned ; the others are nowhere to be found . The media later shows that Terri 's footage has been shown to the press , but despite Carlos and Jill 's best efforts , Jill 's earlier suggestion about Umbrella 's media power comes true . Umbrella promotes a fake story about a nuclear power plant explosion near the city with ease , the infection is characterized as a hoax , and the media announces that Jill and Carlos are wanted by the police for questioning . 
 Three weeks later , in Umbrella 's research facility in Detroit , Alice awakens . Led by Umbrella scientist Dr. Sam Isaacs ( Iain Glen ) , the doctors begin questioning her . Soon , she recalls events from Raccoon City and before . She realizes that the doctor who appeared in her visions is Dr. Isaacs . She attacks him , fights her way out of the facility , and makes her way outside , only to be surrounded by more Umbrella guards holding her at gunpoint . Suddenly , Jill , Carlos , Angela , and L.J. pull up , disguised as Umbrella employees . Carlos shows the guards a written order placing her in his custody . Alice enters the vehicle , and Dr. Isaacs is shown saying , " Let them go " , to an Umbrella guard and then saying , " Program Alice activated " . A close @-@ up of Alice 's eye shows a flashing Umbrella logo , and she ignores them . The scene then pulls away from the car they are in and all the way out into space , where an Umbrella satellite is seen . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Resident Evil : Apocalypse was first discussed by Milla Jovovich and Paul W. S. Anderson while promoting Resident Evil ( 2002 ) . Anderson stated that he began writing the screenplay for the second film after completing the first . He revealed an idea to have Jill Valentine meeting up with Alice , however this idea was scrapped as he wanted two separate stories occurring at the same time . Anderson mentioned the film would go ahead if the first film was a success and promised that " the sequel will be even better " , stating that " there is more of the story to be told . " The sequel was officially greenlit by Sony in mid @-@ 2002 , however Anderson chose not to direct but rather stay on as the film 's producer and writer due to commitments to Alien vs. Predator ( 2004 ) . 
 Alexander Witt was hired by Sony to direct the sequel . Milla Jovovich confirmed her character would return in the sequel if the first film was successful , and when the film was greenlit , Jovovich officially signed on . In March 2002 , Eric Mabius ( who played Matt Addison in the first film ) , confirmed the story would revolve around his character becoming Nemesis . He also revealed he would portray the character and study his movements whilst playing Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis , however before production began he pulled out and Matthew G. Taylor was cast as Nemesis . It was reported that Gina Philips would appear as Claire Redfield and Natasha Henstridge as Jill Valentine , however both actresses left before production began . Sienna Guillory was cast to portray Jill Valentine and Oded Fehr was cast as Carlos Olivera , while Claire Redfield 's role was scrapped after Emily Bergl dropped the role . The role was later offered to Ali Larter in the film 's sequel Extinction ( 2007 ) . Jason Isaacs was originally intended to return and portray Dr. William Birkin , however passed on the role and the character 's name was changed to Dr. Isaacs , with Iain Glen being cast in the role . 
 Jack Noseworthy was originally rumored to portray Brad Vickers , however , this was later revealed as a rumor . Two weeks before production began , Jared Harris was cast as a new character called Dr. Ashford who developed and produced the T @-@ virus . 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 In March 2002 , it was revealed that the film borrowed plot elements from Resident Evil 2 and Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis , as the film 's subtitle was revealed as Resident Evil : Nemesis . It was also revealed that the film included new characters from the video game series , such as Jill Valentine , Claire Redfield , Carlos Olivera , Dr. William Birkin and Nemesis . In April 2003 , it was confirmed that the story began minutes after the end of the first film , where Alice is a survivor amongst the ruins of Raccoon City . 
 The film borrowed numerous elements from the game series , including re @-@ enactments of certain scenes , such as Alice running through a building with an Umbrella helicopter firing at her , up to the point where she drops her gun , falls , re @-@ grabs it and fires , which is reminiscent of the introductory cutscene of Resident Evil Code : Veronica . Another scene where Raccoon City is overrun by zombies and the police and Umbrella mercenaries are fighting back is reminiscent of the introduction of Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis . Other scenes involve the launching a missile to destroy Raccoon City and the attack at the graveyard . 
 The film references Resident Evil , with the crash site of the helicopter being located in the Arklay Forest near the Arklay Mountains , where the Resident Evil series began . Other similarities include Jill 's moves from the first game . The recording of Terri 's death is similar to Kenneth 's death . A white goddess statue can be seen in the church , with artwork of goddesses having a large role in the puzzles of the Resident Evil series . Whilst walking on the Arklay Overpass , Jill speculates that there is no way out , and that Ashford may just be watching them on the cameras , as if the whole thing were some sort of sick game . The games use a fixed camera perspective , which in most of the earlier games resembles a mounted camera 's perspective . Another similarity includes a scene where Jill finds a gun under a pew , mirroring the game when the player finds ammunition or weapons in certain areas . 
 The film references Resident Evil 2 when Alice visits the gun shop which is similar to Kendo 's Gun Shop . Angela Ashford 's character is based on Sherry Birkin , as they are both children , dressed in school uniforms , and in need of rescue . Both of their fathers are also researchers working for Umbrella . The Ashford name comes from the founders of Umbrella revealed in Resident Evil Code : Veronica . The film also references Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis with Jill wearing the same outfit . Nemesis is a character taken directly from the game , and the " STARS " are mentioned on numerous occasions . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Actors portraying zombies were trained at a zombie " boot camp " where they were coached to act as " zen " zombies and " liquid " zombies . Anderson and other crew members intended to make the zombies move faster but decided that it would be breaking a fundamental element of the games . The design for Nemesis was to include an actor in a suit ( Matthew G. Taylor ) with only special effects applied to certain parts of the character 's body , such as the eye . The Lickers were fully computer @-@ generated , though the use of physical puppets was originally considered . To avert issues faced during production , the CGI work of the Lickers began early . The film was filmed on location in Canada , with the film entering pre @-@ production stages in mid @-@ 2003 . Principal photography was slated to originally begin in July 2003 , before being bumped up to August 6 , 2003 . 
 The film was shot in Ontario , Canada , with Toronto and its surrounding suburbs being a stand @-@ in for Raccoon City . It was originally feared that production would be shut down due to the 2003 SARS outbreak in Toronto . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The film was planned for an October 31 , 2003 release , although was pushed back to September 10 , 2004 due to the 2003 SARS outbreak . In late 2003 , a teaser trailer was released titled Regenerate and was directed by Marcus Nispel . The preview was noted for being reminiscent of the Olay product <unk> advertisements and can be viewed in <unk> and Windows Media formats . In May 2004 it was revealed the trailer would actually be part of the film . Milla Jovovich 's official website later released promotional images that showed Alice in several scenes from the film . 
 The theatrical trailer was released on Yahoo ! Movies on July 7 , 2004 and prior to the film 's release , two albums for Resident Evil : Apocalypse were released . The first was the soundtrack which was released August 31 , 2004 and featured music from the film . The second was the film 's score , which was released in late 2004 and was composed by Jeff Danna and performed by the London Philharmonia Orchestra . A day before the film 's release , numerous props from the film were auctioned on the website Premiere Props . The film opened at number one in North America on September 10 , 2004 and received an estimated $ 23 @.@ 7 million on its opening weekend and $ 129 @,@ 394 @,@ 835 worldwide . 
 A novelization written by Keith R. A. DeCandido was published by Pocket Star on August 31 , 2004 . The novel is 288 pages long . DeCandido also wrote the novelizations for the first and third films . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 21 % based on 124 reviews . The site 's Critics Consensus reads , " Resident Evil : Apocalypse has lots of action , but not much in terms of plot or creativity . " Metacritic gives the film a score of 35 % based on 26 reviews . 
 Leonard Maltin rated the film a " BOMB " in his book Leonard Maltin 's Movie Guide , and called it a " <unk> follow @-@ up to Resident Evil that plays more like a remake . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film a score of half a star out of four , saying : " The movie is an utterly meaningless waste of time . There was no reason to produce it , except to make money , and there is no reason to see it , except to spend money . It is a dead zone , a film without interest , wit , imagination or even entertaining violence and special effects . [ ... ] Parents : If you encounter teenagers who say they liked this movie , do not let them date your children . " 
 Dave Kehr of The New York Times gave the film a positive review , saying : " Anderson 's screenplay provides a steady series of inventive action situations , and the director , Alexander Witt , makes the most of them . His work is fast , funny , smart and highly satisfying in terms of visceral impact . " M. E. Russell of The Oregonian said : " The bad news ? The movie is monumentally stupid . The good news ? It 's a fun kind of stupid . " Nathan Rabin of A.V. Club said that the film " takes too long to get going to qualify unequivocally as a good movie , but when Jovovich finally starts kicking zombified ass , it becomes good enough . " 
 Gregory Kirschling of Entertainment Weekly praised Jovovich but felt that " the rest of the cast is strictly straight @-@ to @-@ DVD . " Ben Kenigsberg of The Village Voice said the film is " not without its moments of elemental dread [ but ] also obviously padded , too long on action , and painfully short on irony . The satirical element still packs a minor jolt . " Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer said that " those who want something more substantial from a movie than a vid @-@ game script with centerfold appeal will not find it in this noisy , bone @-@ crushing survivalist flick . " 
 In 2009 , Time listed the film on their list of top ten worst video game movies . According to the DVD extras of Resident Evil : Extinction ( 2007 ) , Paul W. S. Anderson , the director of the first film and writer of the series , was critical of director Alexander Witt 's work . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD in North America on December 28 , 2004 . Releases on UMD and Blu @-@ ray Disc formats followed on April 19 , 2005 and January 16 , 2007 , respectively . The film was released in Australia and New Zealand on March 16 , 2005 and February 2005 in UK . The release included an audio commentary by the director Alexander Witt , producer Paul W. S. Anderson , and actress Milla Jovovich . The release included 20 deleted scenes with numerous outtakes and a featurette titled " Game Over : Resident Evil <unk> " . 6 other featurettes were included which covered behind the scenes of the film 's production . The blooper reel included on the DVD edition is not included on the Blu @-@ ray edition of the film . 
 Special " Resurrection Editions " of both Resident Evil ( 2002 ) and Resident Evil : Apocalypse were released in a two @-@ disc set on September 4 , 2007 . An exclusive sneak peek scene for Resident Evil : Extinction ( 2007 ) was included , along with several other bonus features including " Diary of an Apocalypse " and " The Evolution of Resident Evil : Bridge to Extinction " . 
 In 2013 , Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released a two @-@ disc set containing the first four films in the series . It was called The 4 Movie Resident Evil Collection . 
 = 2001 ( Dr. Dre album ) = 
 2001 is the second studio album by American rapper and producer Dr. Dre . It was released on November 16 , 1999 , by Interscope Records as the follow @-@ up to his 1992 debut album The Chronic . The record was produced primarily by Dr. Dre and Mel @-@ Man , as well as Lord Finesse , and features several guest contributions from fellow American rappers such as The D.O.C. , Hittman , Snoop Dogg , Kurupt , Xzibit , Nate Dogg , and Eminem . 2001 exhibits an expansion on his debut 's G @-@ funk sound and contains gangsta rap themes such as violence , promiscuity , drug use , street gangs , and crime . 
 The album debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 516 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It produced three singles that attained chart success and has been certified sextuple platinum in sales by the RIAA ; as of August 2015 the album has sold 7 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 2001 received mostly positive reviews from critics , many of whom praised the music although some found the lyrics objectionable . 
 = = Title = = 
 The title " Chronic 2000 " was the original title for former Death Row Records artist Dr. Dre 's anticipated second album , but Suge Knight took the title and used it for his album which forced Dre to retitle his album to 2001 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with The New York Times , Dr. Dre talked of his motivation to record the album and how he felt that he had to prove himself to fans and media again after doubts arose over his production and rapping ability . These doubts came from the fact that he had not released a solo studio album since The Chronic ( 1992 ) . He stated : 
 For the last couple of years , there 's been a lot of talk out on the streets about whether or not I can still hold my own , whether or not I 'm still good at producing . That was the ultimate motivation for me . Magazines , word of mouth and rap tabloids were saying I didn 't have it any more . What more do I need to do ? How many platinum records have I made ? O.K. , here 's the album – now what do you have to say ? 
 The album was intended to be released as a mixtape ; with tracks linked through interludes and turntable effects , but was then changed to be set up like a film . Dr. Dre stated , " Everything you hear is planned . It 's a movie , with different varieties of situations . So you 've got buildups , touching moments , aggressive moments . You 've even got a ' Pause for Porno . ' It 's got everything that a movie needs . " Speaking of how he did not record the album for club or radio play and that he planned the album simply for entertainment with comical aspects throughout , he commented " I 'm not trying to send out any messages or anything with this record . I just basically do hard @-@ core hip @-@ hop and try to add a touch of dark comedy here and there . A lot of times the media just takes this and tries to make it into something else when it 's all entertainment first . You shouldn 't take it too seriously . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Some of the lyrics on the album used by Dre have been noted to be penned by several ghostwriters . Royce da 5 ' 9 " was rumored to be a ghostwriter on the album . He was noted for writing the last track , " The Message " ; however , he is not credited by his legal name or alias in the liner notes . A track he recorded on the album , originally named " The Way I Be Pimpin ' " , was later retouched as " Xxplosive " ; this version has Dr. Dre rapping penned verses by Royce and featured Royce 's vocals on the chorus . Royce wrote several tracks such as " The Throne Is Mine " and " Stay In Your Place " which were later cut from the final track list . The tracks have been leaked later on several mixtapes , including <unk> . 
 The album 's production expanded on that of The Chronic , with new , sparse beats and reduced use of samples which were prominent on his debut album . Co @-@ producer Scott Storch talked of how Dr. Dre used his collaborators during recording sessions : " At the time , I saw Dr. Dre desperately needed something . He needed a fuel injection , and Dre utilized me as the nitrous oxide . He threw me into the mix , and I sort of tapped on a new flavor with my whole piano sound and the strings and orchestration . So I 'd be on the keyboards , and Mike [ Elizondo ] was on the bass guitar , and Dre was on the drum machine . " Josh Tyrangiel of Time has described the recording process which Dr. Dre employs , stating " Every Dre track begins the same way , with Dre behind a drum machine in a room full of trusted musicians . ( They carry beepers . When he wants to work , they work . ) He 'll program a beat , then ask the musicians to play along ; when Dre hears something he likes , he isolates the player and tells him how to refine the sound . " 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The album primarily featured co @-@ production between Dr. Dre and Mel @-@ Man and was generally well received by critics . AllMusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that Dr. Dre had expanded on the G @-@ funk beats on his previous album , The Chronic , and stated , " He 's pushed himself hard , finding new variations in the formula by adding ominous strings , soulful vocals , and reggae , resulting in fairly interesting <unk> " and went on to say , " Sonically , this is first @-@ rate , straight @-@ up gangsta . " 
 Entertainment Weekly ’ s Tom Sinclair depicted the album as " Chilly keyboard motifs gliding across gut @-@ punching bass lines , strings and synths swooping in and out of the mix , naggingly familiar guitar licks providing visceral punctuation " . NME described the production as " patented tectonic funk beats and mournful atmospherics " . PopMatters praised the production , stating that " the hip @-@ hop rhythms are catchy , sometimes in your face , sometimes subtle , but always a fine backdrop for the power of Dre 's voice . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times mentioned that the beats were " lean and immaculate , each one a pithy combination of beat , rap , melody and strategic silences " . 
 The album marked the beginning of Dr. Dre 's collaboration with keyboardist Scott Storch , who had previously worked with The Roots and is credited as a co @-@ writer on several of 2001 's tracks , including the hit single " Still D.R.E. " . Storch would later go on to become a successful producer in his own right , and has been credited as a co @-@ producer with Dr. Dre on some of his productions since . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The lyrics on the album received criticism and created some controversy . They include many themes associated with gangsta rap , such as violence , promiscuity , street gangs , drive @-@ by shootings , crime and drug usage . Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that the only subject matter on the album was " violence , drugs , pussy , bitches , dope , guns , and gangsters " and that these themes have become repetitive and unchanged in the last ten years . Critics noted that Dr. Dre had differed from his effort to " clean @-@ up his act " which he tried to establish with his 1996 single , " Been There , Done That " from Dr. Dre Presents ... The Aftermath . 
 NME mentioned that the album was full of " pig @-@ headed , punk @-@ <unk> , ' bitch ' <unk> along with requisite dollops of ho @-@ slapping violence , marijuana @-@ addled bravado and penis @-@ sucking wish fulfilment . " Massey noted that the lyrics were overly explicit but praised his delivery and flow : " His rhymes are quick , his delivery laid back yet full of punch . " The rhymes involve Dr. Dre 's return to the forefront of hip hop , which is conveyed in the singles " Still D.R.E. " and " Forgot About Dre " . Many critics cited the last track , " The Message " ; a song dedicated to Dr. Dre 's deceased brother , as what the album could have been without the excessively explicit lyrics , with Massey calling it " downright beautiful " and " a classic of modern rap " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Three singles were released from the album : " Still D.R.E. " , " Forgot About Dre " and " The Next Episode " . Other tracks " Fuck You " , " Let 's Get High " , " What 's the Difference " and " Xxplosive " were not officially released as singles but received some radio airplay which resulted in them charting in the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . " Still D.R.E. " was released as the lead single in October 1999 . It peaked at number 93 on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 32 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and reached number 11 on the Hot Rap Singles . It reached number six on the UK single charts in March 2000 . The song was nominated at the 2000 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group , but lost to The Roots and Erykah Badu 's " You Got Me " . 
 " Forgot About Dre " was released as the second single in 2000 and like the previous single , it was a hit on multiple charts . It reached number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 14 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number 3 on the Rhythmic Top 40 . It reached number seven on the UK single charts in June 2000 . The accompanying music video won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Rap Video in 2000 . The song won Dr. Dre and Eminem Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 2001 Grammy Awards . 
 " The Next Episode " was released as the third and final single in 2000 . It peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 11 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number 2 on the Rhythmic Top 40 . It peaked at number three on UK single charts in February 2001 . It was nominated at the 2001 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group , but the award went to another single from the same album to Dr. Dre and Eminem for " Forgot about Dre " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number 2 on the US Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 516 @,@ 000 copies . It also entered at number one on Billboard 's Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . The album was successful in Canada , where it reached number 2 on the charts . The record was mildly successful in Europe , reaching number 4 in the United Kingdom , number 7 in Ireland , number 15 in France , number 17 in the Netherlands and number 26 in Norway . It peaked at number 11 on the New Zealand album chart . Closing out the year of 2000 , the album was number 5 on the Billboard Top Albums and number one on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . It re @-@ entered the charts in 2003 , peaking on the UK Albums Top 75 at number 61 and on the Ireland Albums Top 75 at number 30 . The album was certified six times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on November 21 , 2000 . It is Dr. Dre 's best selling album , as his previous album , The Chronic , was certified three times platinum . As of August 2015 , the album has sold 7 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 2001 received critical acclaim from critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated , " 2001 isn 't as consistent or striking as Slim Shady , but the music is always brimming with character . " Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair praised the production , calling it " uncharacteristically sparse sound " from Dr. Dre and that it was as " addictive as it was back when over 3 million record buyers got hooked on The Chronic and Snoop Dogg 's Dre @-@ produced Doggystyle " and went on to commend Dr. Dre , stating , " If any rap producer deserves the title " composer " , it 's he . " NME mentioned that Dr. Dre didn 't expand the genre , but it was " powerful enough in parts , but not clever enough to give Will Smith the fear " . PopMatters writer Chris Massey declared that " Musically , 2001 is about as close to brilliant as any one gangsta rap album might possibly get . " Christopher John Farley of Time stated that " The beats are fresh and involving , and Dre 's collaborations with Eminem and Snoop Dogg have ferocity and wit . " Although he was ambivalent towards the album 's subject matter and guest rappers , Greg Tate of Spin was pleasantly surprised by " the most memorable MC 'ing on this album com [ ing ] from Dre himself , Eminem notwithstanding " and stated , " Whatever one 's opinion of the sexual politics and gun lust of Dre 's canon , his ongoing commitment to formal excellence and sonic innovation in this art form may one day earn him a place next to George Clinton , if not Stevie Wonder , Duke Ellington , or Miles Davis . " 
 In a negative review , Robert Christgau from The Village Voice found Dr. Dre 's lyrics <unk> misogynistic , writing " it 's a New Millennium , but he 's Still <unk> ... For an hour , with time out for some memorable Eminem tracks , Dre degrades women every way he can think of , all of which involve his dick . " Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot said Dr. Dre 's production boasted unique elements but " the endless gangsta babble , with its casual misogyny and flippant violence , " sounded flagrantly trite . AllMusic 's Erlewine talked of how the number of guest rappers affected the album , and questioned his reasons for collaborating with " pedestrian rappers " . He claimed that " the album suffers considerably as a result [ of these collaborations ] " . Erlewine criticized the lyrics , which he said were repetitive and full of " gangsta clichés " . Sinclair mentioned similar views of the lyrics , calling them " filthy " , but noted " none of [ this ] should diminish Dre 's achievement " . NME spoke of how the lyrics were too explicit , stating , " As the graphic grooves stretch out , littered with gunfire , bombings and ' <unk> over Compton , and the bitch @-@ beating baton is handed from Knock @-@ <unk> to Kurupt , 2001 reaches gangsta @-@ rap parody @-@ level with too many tracks coming off like porno @-@ Wu outtakes . " Massey referred to the lyrics as a " caricature of an ethos [ rather ] than a reflection of any true prevailing beliefs . " 
 In 2006 , Hip Hop Connection ranked 2001 number 10 on its list of the 100 Best Albums ( 1995 – 2005 ) in hip hop . In a 2007 's issue , XXL gave the album a retrospective rating of " XXL " , their maximum score . In Rolling Stone 's The Immortals – The Greatest Artists of All Time , where Dr. Dre was listed at number 54 , Kanye West talked of how the track " Xxplosive " inspired him : " ' Xxplosive ' , off 2001 , that 's [ where ] I got my entire sound from — if you listen to the track , it 's got a soul beat , but it 's done with those heavy Dre drums . Listen to ' This Can 't Be Life , ' a track I did for Jay @-@ Z 's Dynasty album , and then listen to ' Xxplosive ' . It 's a direct bite . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes . 
 All songs produced by Dr. Dre and Mel @-@ Man , except " The Message " produced by Lord Finesse . 
 Sample credits 
 " Lolo ( Intro ) " contains samples of " Deep Note " performed by James A. Moorer . 
 " Big Ego 's " contains samples of " Theme from The <unk> ! " performed by John Barry and " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " performed by Rose Royce . 
 " Xxplosive " contains samples of " Bumpy 's Lament " performed by Isaac Hayes and interpolates " Ain 't No Fun ( If the Homies Can 't Have None ) " performed by Snoop Dogg . 
 " What 's the Difference " contains samples of " <unk> Que Tu Crois " performed by Charles Aznavour . 
 " Bar One ( Skit ) " contains samples of " <unk> ' " performed by Cannonball Adderley . 
 " Light Speed " contains samples of " I 'm Still # 1 " performed by Boogie Down Productions . 
 " Forgot About Dre " contains samples of " The Climb " performed by No Doubt . 
 " The Next Episode " contains replayed elements of " The Edge " performed by David McCallum . 
 " Let 's Get High " contains samples of " <unk> ' " performed by The <unk> Band and " High " performed by <unk> . 
 " Bitch Niggaz " contains samples of " Top Billin ' " performed by Audio Two . 
 " The Car Bomb ( Skit ) " contains samples of " Time Is Passing " performed by Sun . 
 " Murder Ink " contains samples of " Halloween Theme " performed by John Carpenter and " Here Comes the <unk> " performed by Ini Kamoze . 
 " Ed @-@ <unk> ( Skit ) " contains samples of " Diamonds Are Forever " performed by Franck <unk> . 
 " Housewife " interpolates " Bitches Ain 't Shit " performed by Dr. Dre . 
 Additional notes 
 " The Watcher " contains additional vocals from Eminem and Knoc @-@ Turn 'al . 
 " What 's the Difference " contains additional vocals from Phish . 
 " Some L.A. Niggaz " contains uncredited vocals by Hittman . 
 " The Message " contains hidden vocals from Tommy Chong . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mei @-@ Ann Chen = 
 Mei @-@ Ann Chen ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Chén <unk> @-@ ān ; born 1973 ) is a Taiwanese American conductor currently serving as music director of the Chicago Sinfonietta and the Memphis Symphony Orchestra . She has been described as " one of the most dynamic young conductors in America " . Encouraged by her parents , Chen began playing violin and piano at a young age and later taught herself how to play the trumpet . By observing her conductor , she began to teach herself how to conduct and even collected batons . Chen attended the Walnut Hill School , a preparatory school affiliated with the New England Conservatory in Boston , Massachusetts , starting at age sixteen . She continued her undergraduate and advanced degree work at the Conservatory and became the first student to graduate from the institution with a double master 's degree in conducting and violin performance . Chen later obtained a Doctor of Musical Arts degree from the University of Michigan . 
 Chen became the Portland Youth Philharmonic 's fourth conductor in 2002 . During her five @-@ year tenure , the orchestra debuted at Carnegie Hall , earned an ASCAP award in 2004 for innovative programming , and began collaborating with the Oregon Symphony and Chamber Music Northwest . She also served as assistant conductor of the Oregon Symphony from 2003 to 2005 and as cover conductor for the Los Angeles Philharmonic . In 2005 , Chen became the first woman to win the Malko Competition , which recognizes young conductors . That same year she won the Taki Concordia Fellowship . Chen left the Philharmonic in 2007 , to become assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony . Chen served as assistant conductor of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra for its 2009 – 2010 season . She was appointed music director of the Memphis Symphony Orchestra ; her three @-@ year tenure began in September 2010 and was renewed for an additional three years in 2012 . Chen also began serving as music director for the Chicago Sinfonietta during its 2010 – 2011 season . 
 Throughout her career , Chen has appeared with the following symphonies throughout the United States and Canada : Alabama , Chautauqua , Chicago , Colorado , Columbus , Edmonton , Eugene , Florida , Fort Worth , Grand Teton Festival Orchestra , Honolulu , Kalamazoo , National ( Washington , D.C. ) , Pacific , Phoenix , Princeton , Rochester , Seattle , Toledo , and Toronto . Appearances outside North America include all the principal Danish orchestras , BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra , Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra , Graz Symphony , Norwegian Radio Orchestra , Taiwan National Symphony , Tampere Philharmonic Orchestra , and the Trondheim Symphony Orchestra . Chen has also participated in the National Conducting Institute ( Washington , D.C. ) as well as the American Academy of Conducting in Aspen , Colorado . During the 2011 – 2012 season , Chen will debut with the Jacksonville , Naples , Nashville , Pasadena , and Sarasota symphony orchestras , as well as the National Symphony of Mexico and the Netherlands Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Native to Taiwan , Mei @-@ Ann Chen wanted to be a conductor since she was ten years old . She began playing violin and piano starting at a young age with the support of her parents , and later taught herself to play the trumpet . However , Chen 's parents also discouraged her from pursuing conducting as they felt it would be a difficult career path for a woman . She was intrigued with the concept of making elaborate noise , particularly without the use of an instrument . Chen would observe her conductor closely and began to learn how to conduct on her own . She collected batons , believing that " different pieces needed different kinds of batons " . Chen left Kaohsiung to study music in Taipei . There , she lived with her aunt and served as assistant conductor of her school 's chorus . 
 In 1989 , Chen attended a concert in Taipei by the American Youth Orchestra , a touring ensemble of Boston 's New England Conservatory . Following the performance , Chen 's accompanist escorted her backstage , introduced her to the conductor and asked if she could play for him . Chen 's opportunity came the next morning when she played for conductor Benjamin Zander in a closed basement hotel bar and was offered a scholarship immediately . She performed with the American Youth Orchestra before being invited to attend the Walnut Hill School , a preparatory school linked to the New England Conservatory , two months later at age sixteen . She left her parents , who thought she would study to become a concert violinist , and for more than three years lived with a couple in Boston she referred to as her " American parents " ( Mark Churchill and <unk> Speaker Churchill , the latter of which was once a member of the Portland Junior Symphony ) . Chen continued her undergraduate and graduate work at the Conservatory . Speaker taught Chen , who also received violin instruction from James Buswell and Eric <unk> as well as conducting supervision from Frank Battisti and Richard <unk> . Chen became the first person to graduate from the New England Conservatory with a double master 's degree in conducting and violin performance and received two honors from the institution : the Chadwick Medal for outstanding undergraduate work and the Schuller Medal for " extraordinary contribution to musical life in the community " . 
 Chen remained in Boston for nine years until she attended the University of Michigan to obtain a Doctor of Musical Arts degree in conducting . There she studied with Kenneth <unk> and Martin Katz , served as music director of the campus orchestras , and also became conductor for the Arbor Opera Theater . Chen said she pursued the doctorate degree because she did not receive any job offers and she questioned whether that was due to her being " young , a woman , Asian , or the combination of all three . " 
 = = Career = = 
 In 2001 , while attending the University of Michigan , Chen guest conducted the Toledo Symphony Orchestra 's " Halloween <unk> " concert . That same year she was the youngest finalist in the Maazel @-@ Vilar Conductor 's Competition in Tokyo . Leonard Slatkin invited Chen in 2002 to conduct the National Symphony at the Kennedy Center in the National Conducting Institute . Chen received a fellowship to study at the Aspen Music Festival and School with David Zinman . The following year the American Symphony Orchestra League ( now known as the League of American Orchestras ) invited Chen to be showcased at the National Conductor Preview . 
 = = = Portland Youth Philharmonic = = = 
 Chen became the Portland Youth Philharmonic 's ( PYP ) fourth conductor in 2002 after being selected by a committee of " musically inclined " parents , a member of the orchestra , and representatives of the Oregon Symphony and Portland Opera . She conducted both the Philharmonic ensemble as well as the Conservatory Orchestra . One board member of the organization recalled that during her audition Chen very quickly captured the rapport of the orchestra and displayed " wonderful communication skills and genuineness " . 
 During her five @-@ year tenure with the organization , PYP debuted at Carnegie Hall , received its third ASCAP award in 2004 for innovating programming , and began collaborating with the Oregon Symphony ( Chen was the ensemble 's assistant conductor from 2003 to 2005 ) and Chamber Music Northwest . In April 2005 Chen became the first woman to win the Malko Competition , the " world 's most prestigious prize " for young conductors . She also won the Taki Concordia Fellowship in 2007 , an award established by Baltimore Symphony Orchestra music director Marin Alsop to support " promising " female conductors . Chen was presented the Sunburst Award from Young Audiences for her contribution to music education and was named " Educator of the Week " by <unk> . 
 While conductor of the Philharmonic , Chen set up a box in her office so that students could leave notes for her about themselves . One musician of the orchestra felt that Chen was " kind of formal " during rehearsal but felt " like a big sister " once practice ended . Chen has been described as a " firecracker : small , bright and full of ka @-@ boom " , and her enthusiasm at times caused her to lose her breath . One board member of the organization praised Chen 's attitude and felt that her lack of ego was a " rare quality in top symphony performers " . 
 Chen turned down a position with the Oregon Symphony to continue work at PYP , later recalling : 
 They became my kids , they were no way for me to give them up . So I made a very unusual decision . I gave up my professional position with the Oregon Symphony , I stayed with the youth orchestra . People thought that I was crazy that I stayed with a youth orchestra instead of pursuing a more professional opportunity . Because I told you my life story , and a youth orchestra changed my life and gave me the chance to fulfill my dreams , I feel working with young musicians is a way for me to give back . It changed my life and I would like to do my part to change other people 's lives . 
 In 2007 , she accompanied the orchestra on an international tour to Asia , where her parents saw her conduct for the first time . The Philharmonic offered a total of six performances between June 29 and July 17 in Kaohsiung , Tainan and Taipei , Taiwan as well as in Seoul and Ulsan , South Korea . Though Chen initially thought she would remain with the Philharmonic for ten years , she left in 2007 to become assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony . She said of her departure : " The musicians at PYP have become my kids . When I look back , these five years will always be the most memorable time of my musical career . " Guest conductors during the 2007 – 2008 season included Ken Selden , director of orchestral studies at Portland State University , former Seattle Symphony conductor Alastair Willis , along with former PYP conductors Huw Edwards and Chen herself . 
 = = = Baltimore , Memphis , Chicago = = = 
 Chen served as the Los Angeles Philharmonic 's cover conductor during her tenure with PYP . Following her departure , she became assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony for two seasons ( 2007 – 2009 ) . In April 2009 Chen withdrew her candidacy for music director of the Lexington Philharmonic Orchestra . Her next role was assistant conductor of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra for the 2009 – 2010 season , though she never led a subscription program and mostly conducted programs for children . Both positions were sponsored by the League of American Orchestras . Following successful auditions held in December 2006 , she was formerly appointed music director of the Memphis Symphony Orchestra in February 2010 , becoming the organization 's fourth . Chen 's three @-@ year tenure began in September 2010 . Chen 's contract was renewed for an additional three years in 2012 , extending her leadership through the 2015 – 2016 season . 
 In October 2010 Chen returned to the New England Conservatory to guest conduct the Philharmonia . Chen dedicated the concert to the late <unk> Speaker Churchill , and thanked Benjamin Zander and dean emeritus Mark Churchill for " making her career possible " . Chen began serving as music director for the Chicago Sinfonietta during its 2010 – 2011 season . Her belief that " multiculturalism , diversity and inclusion are increasingly global matters " is partly why she accepted a position with the Chicago Sinfonietta , one of the nation 's most diverse orchestras with a " strong focus on black and Latino musicians , composers and audience members " . Her four @-@ year contract with the Sinfonietta began on July 1 , 2011 . Chen plans to record a commercial album with the Sinfonietta in June 2012 and hopes to launch an international competition for rising musicians and composers . 
 Chen returned to Atlanta in October 2011 to guest conduct the symphony . She also returned to Portland in April 2012 to guest conduct the Oregon Symphony . 
 = = Interests = = 
 As a child Chen was interested in earth science . Chen finds satisfaction in " loud " and " elaborate " noises , particularly ones generated without musical instruments . Her favorite composer is Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ; other favorites include Ludwig van Beethoven , Leonard Bernstein , and Aaron Copland . Her favorite composition is Beethoven 's Symphony No. 5 , which she will be conducting during Chicago Sinfonietta 's 2011 – 2012 season . She likes Romantic music the most " because the music in this era was an expression of your life " . In addition to working with minority or unconventional artists , Chen prefers to incorporate classic compositions as well as new works into her repertoire . She enjoys reading detective stories , fiction or non @-@ fiction , and has shared that she would want to be a detective or a professor if she were not a conductor . She moved to Mud Island , Memphis in order to be close to nature , inspiration and the Cannon Center . 
 = Don Gault = 
 Donald J. Gault ( born August 30 , 1946 ) is a former American football quarterback who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) with the Cleveland Browns in 1970 . Over the course of his career , he played in two games , completed 2 of 19 passes for 67 yards , threw no touchdowns and three interceptions , and finished his career with a passer rating of 2 @.@ 2 . 
 Gault played college football at Hofstra University where he set many school passing records . After graduating , he was signed by the Browns . The team kept him on the roster from 1968 to 1972 , though he was only an active player in 1970 . He played in two games and started one , earning a victory despite a passer rating of zero . After the Browns released him in 1972 , he had offseason stints with the San Diego Chargers , Edmonton Eskimos , New York Jets , and New York Stars before retiring . 
 = = College career = = 
 Gault played high school football for John Adams High School in Queens , then played college football for the Hofstra Pride . After sitting out his freshman year , he was awarded the starting quarterback job as a sophomore in 1965 . In his third start for Hofstra , he completed 21 of 33 passes and threw for a school record 315 yards in a 35 @-@ 13 win over Kings Point Academy . A month later , he broke his own record and threw for 345 yards after completing 17 of 25 passes in a 42 @-@ 28 win over Temple . For the season he completed 158 passes for 20 touchdowns and 2 @,@ 134 yards . Gault 's junior year was considered to have been a disappointment due to ineffectiveness and a 2 @-@ 8 overall record , but his career passing yards through two full seasons set a school record . Gault 's senior season performances included a 325 @-@ yard , four touchdown performance , after which he was named to the weekly All @-@ East All @-@ Star football team . In his last collegiate game against C. W. Post College , he completed 11 of 20 passes for 220 yards in a 19 @-@ 0 win , giving Hofstra an 8 @-@ 2 record his senior year with seven of the eight wins being shutouts . 
 Over the course of his career , Gault broke school records for passing yards and completions in a season and career , but also had 22 interceptions in 30 career games . After his graduation , coach Howdy Myers said of him , " he has a quick release and can throw accurately both long and short . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Gault went undrafted in the 1968 NFL Draft , and was signed by the Cleveland Browns as a free agent . Heading into training camp , he was one of five quarterbacks looking for a roster spot , the others being Frank Ryan , Gary Lane , Dick Shiner , and fellow undrafted rookie Jim Alcorn . By the end of the preseason , Gault was cut from the active roster , and spent the 1968 season on the practice squad , but was noted as someone who could be the Browns ' future starting quarterback . Before the 1969 season began , Gault joined the military reserves . While training at Fort Dix from June to November , he played in the Continental Football League with the Jersey Jays . After his training ended , he returned to the team 's practice squad . He was placed on the active roster as a third @-@ string emergency quarterback in case the Browns needed him during the postseason . During the offseason , Gault worked as an insurance broker while remaining on the Browns roster . 
 The Browns had three quarterbacks on their roster entering the 1970 Cleveland Browns season in Gault , Bill Nelsen , and Mike Phipps . As training camp began , Browns coach Blanton Collier planned to use Gault in exhibition games , as he was throwing the ball well in practice during the summer . By the end of preseason , Gault was named to the active roster as the Browns retained all three quarterbacks , an uncommon move at the time . During the Browns ' second game against the San Francisco 49ers , starting quarterback Nelsen was injured , leading Gault to enter the game in the fourth quarter . He completed a pass to Gary Collins for 23 yards , threw an incompletion , and threw an interception to Dave Wilcox , allowing the 49ers to go on a game @-@ winning drive in a 34 @-@ 31 Browns loss . 
 Due to Nelsen 's injury , Gault was given the start in next week 's game against the Pittsburgh Steelers , facing off against fellow rookie and first overall draft pick , Terry Bradshaw . In his only career start , he completed one pass for 44 yards in 16 attempts , threw two interceptions , and finished the game with a 0 @.@ 0 passer rating . He also led the Browns to only three first downs during the first half , and as a result Phipps took over at quarterback ; the Browns went on to win the game , 15 @-@ 7 . Nelsen recovered from the injury the following week and turn back over for the Browns at quarterback ; Gault did not play another snap that season . Entering the 1971 season , Gault modified his throwing style after discussion with new head coach Nick Skorich , and was throwing better in training camp as a result . After training camp ended , however , he was placed on the practice squad , where he remained throughout the season . 
 In 1972 , the Browns drafted Brian Sipe , giving Gault competition for the third quarterback spot , which was noted as a main position battle in training camp for the Browns that season . At the end of training camp , Sipe won the job , and Gault was cut . He was picked up by the San Diego Chargers in late August . He competed with Wayne Clark for the backup quarterback job for a short time , and did not see any playing time for the Chargers before his release . He also spent time with the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League , but did not see any playing time with them . He later noted that he was unable to adjust to the game of Canadian football , as he was unable to throw a spiral due to the football being shorter and fatter . 
 The New York Jets signed Gault as a free agent in 1973 , and he was slated to compete with Al Woodall for the backup quarterback spot behind Joe Namath . At the end of preseason , he lost the backup spot to Woodall , and was released . The following year , Gault signed with the New York Stars of the new World Football League in April . After practicing with the team throughout the offseason , he was released in August , ending his professional career . 
 = Mozart in Italy = 
 Between 1769 and 1773 , the young Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and his father Leopold Mozart made three Italian journeys . The first , an extended tour of 15 months , was financed by performances for the nobility and by public concerts , and took in the most important Italian cities . The second and third journeys were to Milan , for Wolfgang to complete operas that had been commissioned there on the first visit . From the perspective of Wolfgang 's musical development the journeys were a considerable success , and his talents were recognised by honours which included a papal knighthood and memberships in leading philharmonic societies . 
 Leopold Mozart had been employed since 1747 as a musician in the Archbishop of Salzburg 's court , becoming deputy Kapellmeister in 1763 , but he had also devoted much time to Wolfgang 's and sister Nannerl 's musical education . He took them on a European tour between 1764 and 1766 , and spent some of 1767 and most of 1768 with them in the imperial capital , Vienna . The children 's performances had captivated audiences , and the pair had made a considerable impression on European society . By 1769 , Nannerl had reached adulthood , but Leopold was anxious to continue 13 @-@ year @-@ old Wolfgang 's education in Italy , a crucially important destination for any rising composer of the 18th century . 
 During the first tour , Wolfgang 's performances were well received , and his compositional talents recognised by commissions to write three operas for Milan 's Teatro Regio Ducal , each of which was a critical and popular triumph . He met many of Italy 's leading musicians , including the renowned theorist Giovanni Battista Martini , under whom he studied in Bologna . Leopold also hoped that Wolfgang , and possibly he himself , would obtain a prestigious appointment at one of the Italian Habsburg courts . This objective became more important as Leopold 's advancement in Salzburg became less likely ; but his persistent efforts to secure employment displeased the imperial court , which precluded any chance of success . The journeys thus ended not with a triumphant return , but on a note of disappointment and frustration . 
 = = Background = = 
 In November 1766 , the Mozart family returned to Salzburg after a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year " grand tour " of the major Northern European cities , begun when Wolfgang was seven and Nannerl twelve . This tour had largely achieved Leopold 's objective to demonstrate his children 's talents to the wider world and advance their musical education . A stay in Vienna beginning in 1767 proved less happy : an outbreak of smallpox , which led to the death of the Archduchess Maria Josepha of Austria , prevented the children from performing in the imperial court and forced the family to seek refuge in Bohemia , a move which did not prevent Wolfgang from contracting the disease . They returned to Vienna in January 1768 , but by now the children were no longer young enough to cause a sensation in their public concerts . Leopold fell out with the court impresario Giuseppe <unk> , and damaged his relations with the eminent court composer Christoph Willibald Gluck , through an over @-@ eagerness to secure a performance of Wolfgang 's first opera , La finta semplice . As a consequence he developed a reputation at court for being importunate and " pushy " . 
 After returning to Salzburg in January 1769 , Leopold considered the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Nannerl 's education to be virtually finished , and focused his efforts on Wolfgang . He decided to take the boy to Italy , which in its pre @-@ unification days was a collection of duchies , republics , and papal states , with the Kingdom of Naples in the south . For more than two centuries Italy had been the source of innovations in musical style , the home of church music , and above all the cradle of opera . In Leopold 's view , Wolfgang needed to absorb firsthand the music of Venice , Naples , and Rome , to equip himself for future commissions from Europe 's opera houses , " the late eighteenth @-@ century composers ' honeypots " according to Mozart 's biographer Stanley Sadie . Leopold wanted Wolfgang to immerse himself in the Italian language , to experience church music of the highest quality , and to extend his network of influential acquaintances . There was also the possibility , for both Wolfgang and Leopold , of securing positions in the northern Italian Habsburg courts . With these priorities in mind , Leopold decided that Nannerl and her mother should stay at home , a decision they resented but which made economic and practical sense . 
 In the months before their departure , Wolfgang composed prolifically , gaining the favour of Archbishop Siegmund Christoph von Schrattenbach , who , as Leopold 's employer , had to consent to the journey . Permission to travel , along with a gift of 600 florins , was granted in October . Wolfgang was awarded the honorary title of Konzertmeister ( court musician ) , with a hint that on his return this post would merit a salary . 
 = = First journey , December 1769 – March 1771 = = 
 = = = Journey to Milan = = = 
 On 13 December 1769 , Leopold and Wolfgang set out from Salzburg , armed with testimonials and letters that Leopold hoped would smooth their passage . Among the most important was an introduction to Count Karl Joseph Firmian of Milan , described as the " King of Milan " , an influential and cultivated patron of the arts . His support would be vital to the success of the entire Italian undertaking . 
 The pair travelled through Innsbruck , then due south to the Brenner Pass into Italy . They continued through Bolzano and <unk> to Verona and Mantua , before turning west towards Milan . Leopold 's financial plans for the journey were broadly the same as for the family 's grand tour — travel and accommodation costs were to be met by concert proceeds . This 350 @-@ mile ( 560 km ) winter journey to Milan occupied a difficult and unpleasant six weeks , with the weather forcing extended stops . Leopold complained in his letters home about unheated inn rooms : " ... freezing like a dog , everything I touch is ice " . Early concert receipts were modest ; according to Leopold , costs were running at around 50 florins a week . After having unwisely boasted about profits made from the grand tour , Leopold was now more cautious about revealing financial details . He tended to emphasise his expenses and minimise his takings , writing , for example : " ... On the whole we shall not make much in Italy ... one must generally accept admiration and bravos as payment . " 
 The longest pause was two weeks spent in Verona , where the press reported glowingly on Wolfgang 's concert of 5 January 1770 . Father and son attended a performance of Guglielmi 's Ruggiero , which Wolfgang wrote about dismissively in a letter to Nannerl . The boy also had his portrait painted by a local artist , Saverio dalla Rosa . This interlude was followed by a shorter stop in Mantua , where Wolfgang gave a concert at the Accademia Filarmonica , with a programme designed to test his abilities in performance , sight reading , and improvisation . According to a press review the audience was " dumbfounded " at this " miracle in music , one of those freaks that Nature causes to be born " . In Mantua , they suffered a snub from Prince Michael of Thurn und Taxis , who informed them through a servant that he had no desire to meet them . Historian Robert Gutman surmises that the Prince , aware of the <unk> affair in Vienna , wanted no dealings with musicians who did not know their place . By contrast , Count Arco , whose family were members of the Salzburg court , received them warmly . 
 The Mozarts arrived in Milan on 23 January and found comfortable lodgings in the monastery of San Marco , not far from Count Firmian 's palace . While they waited to see the Count , they attended Niccolò <unk> 's opera Cesare in Egitto . Firmian eventually welcomed them with generous hospitality and friendship , presenting Wolfgang with a complete edition of the works of Metastasio , Italy 's leading dramatic writer and librettist . Firmian also hosted a series of concerts attended by many of the city 's notables , including Archduke Ferdinand , a possible future patron for the young composer . For the last of these occasions , Wolfgang wrote a set of arias using Metastasio 's texts . These were so well received that Firmian commissioned Wolfgang to write the opening opera for the following winter 's carnival season in Milan , just as Leopold had hoped he might . Wolfgang would receive a fee of around 500 florins , and free lodgings during the writing and rehearsal . The Mozarts left Milan on 15 March , heading south towards Florence and Rome , committed to return in the autumn and taking with them fresh letters of recommendation from Firmian . 
 Up to this point in the tour Wolfgang appears to have done little composition . The Accademia Filarmonica concert in Mantua had included much improvisation but little of Wolfgang 's own music ; the only certain compositions from this phase of the tour are the arias composed for the final Firmian concert , which sealed his contract for the carnival opera . These are Se tutti i <unk> <unk> , K. 83 / <unk> , <unk> me , K. 77 / <unk> , and Ah più <unk> ... , K. 71 . The Symphony in G , K. 74 , evidently completed in Rome in April , may have been started in Milan . 
 = = = Milan to Naples = = = 
 The first stop on the southward journey was at Lodi , where Wolfgang completed his first string quartet , K. 80 / <unk> . After a few days in Parma , the Mozarts moved on to Bologna , a " centre for masters , artists and scholars " , according to Leopold . Their letter from Firmian introduced them to Count Pallavicini @-@ <unk> , a leading patron of the arts , who immediately arranged a concert for the local nobility in his palace . Among the guests was Giovanni Battista Martini , the leading musical theorist of his day and Europe 's most renowned expert in Baroque counterpoint . Martini received the young composer and tested him with exercises in fugue . Always with an eye upon Wolfgang 's future prospects in the courts of Europe , Leopold was anxious for engagement with the great master ; but time was short , so he arranged a return to Bologna in the summer for extended tuition . The pair left on 29 March , carrying letters from Pallavicini that might clear the way for an audience with Pope Clement XIV in Rome . Before they left , they made the acquaintance of the Czech composer Josef Mysliveček , whose opera La <unk> was being prepared for performance . Later in 1770 , Wolfgang would use the Mysliveček opera as a source of motives for his own opera Mitridate , re di Ponto and various symphonies . More broadly , it marked the beginning of a close association between Mysliveček and the Mozart family that lasted until 1778 . Wolfgang used his works repeatedly as models of compositional style . 
 The next day they arrived in Florence , where Pallavicini 's recommendation gained them a meeting at the Palazzo Pitti with the Grand Duke and future emperor Leopold . He remembered the Mozarts from 1768 in Vienna , and asked after Nannerl . In Florence they encountered the violinist Pietro Nardini , whom they had met at the start of their grand tour of Europe ; Nardini and Wolfgang performed together in a long evening concert at the Duke 's summer palace . Wolfgang also met Thomas Linley , an English violin prodigy and a pupil of Nardini 's . The two formed a close friendship , making music and playing together " not as boys but as men " , as Leopold remarked . Gutman reports that " a melancholy Thomas followed the Mozarts ' coach as they departed for Rome on 6 April " . The boys never met again ; Linley , after a brief career as a composer and violinist , died in a boating accident in 1778 , at the age of 22 . 
 After five days of difficult travel through wind and rain , lodged uncomfortably at inns Leopold described as disgusting , filthy , and bereft of food , they reached Rome . Pallavicini 's letters soon had their effect : meetings with the Count 's kinsman Lazaro <unk> Cardinal Pallavicino , Prince San Angelo of Naples , and Charles Edward Stuart , known as " Bonnie Prince Charlie " , Pretender to the throne of England . There was much sightseeing , and performances before the nobility . The Mozarts visited the Sistine Chapel , where Wolfgang heard and later wrote down from memory Gregorio Allegri 's famous Miserere , a complex nine @-@ part choral work that had not been published . Amid these activities , Wolfgang was busily composing . He wrote the <unk> K. 123 / <unk> and the aria Se <unk> , e speranza ( K. 82 / <unk> ) , and finished the G major symphony begun earlier . 
 After four busy weeks the Mozarts departed for Naples . Travellers on the route through the Pontine Marshes were frequently harassed by brigands , so Leopold arranged a convoy of four coaches . They arrived on 14 May . Armed with their letters of recommendation , the Mozarts were soon calling on the prime minister , <unk> Bernardo <unk> , and William Hamilton , the British ambassador , whom they knew from London . They gave a concert on 28 May , which brought in about 750 florins ( Leopold would not reveal the exact amount ) , and attended the first performance of Niccolò Jommelli 's opera Armida abbandonata at the Teatro di San Carlo . Wolfgang was impressed by both the music and the performance , though he felt it " too old @-@ fashioned and serious for the theatre " . Invited to write an opera for the next San Carlo season , he declined because of his prior commitment to Milan . When no summons to play at the royal court was forthcoming , Leopold eventually decided to leave Naples , after visits to Vesuvius , Herculaneum , Pompeii , and the Roman baths at Baiae . They departed by post @-@ coach for Rome on 25 June . 
 = = = Return from Naples = = = 
 The party made a rapid 27 @-@ hour return trip to Rome ; in the process , Leopold sustained a leg injury that troubled him for several months . Wolfgang was granted an audience with the Pope , and was made a knight of the Order of the Golden Spur . From Rome they made their way to the famous Santa Casa pilgrimage site at Loreto , and took the coastal road to Rimini — under military protection , because the road was subject to attacks from marauding pirates . From Rimini they moved inland , and reached Bologna on 20 July . 
 Leopold 's priority was to rest his leg . Wolfgang passed the time by composing a short minuet , K. 122 / <unk> , and a Miserere in A minor , K. 85 / <unk> . Meanwhile , the libretto for the Milan opera arrived ; Leopold had been expecting Metastasio 's La <unk> , but it was Mitridate , re di Ponto , by Vittorio <unk> @-@ Santi . According to the correspondence of Leopold , the composer Josef Mysliveček was a frequent visitor to the Mozart household while they were staying in Bologna . The musicologist Daniel E. Freeman believes that Mozart 's approach to the composition of arias changed fundamentally at this time , bringing his style into closer alignment with that of Mysliveček . 
 Leopold and Wolfgang moved into Count Pallavicini 's palatial summer residence on 10 August , and stayed for seven weeks while Leopold 's leg gradually improved and Wolfgang worked on the Mitridate recitatives . At the beginning of October , with Leopold more or less recovered , they moved back to Bologna , and Wolfgang , it is thought , began his period of study under Martini . On 9 October he underwent examination for membership in Bologna 's Accademia Filarmonica , offering as his test piece the antiphon <unk> primum regnum , K. 86 / <unk> . According to Gutman , under ordinary circumstances Wolfgang 's " floundering " attempt at this unfamiliar polyphonic form would not have received serious consideration , but Martini was at hand to offer corrections , and probably also paid the admission fee . Wolfgang 's membership was duly approved ; and the Mozarts departed for Milan shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Milan revisited , October 1770 – February 1771 = = = 
 The journey from Bologna to Milan was delayed by storms and floods , but Leopold and his son arrived on 18 October , ten weeks before the first performance of Mitridate . Wolfgang 's fingers ached from writing recitatives , and in any case he could not begin work on the arias until the singers were present , collaboration with the principal performers being the custom for composers of the time . As the singers assembled , problems arose . Quirino Gasparini , composer of an earlier version of Mitridate , tried to persuade the prima donna Antonia Bernasconi to use his settings for her arias , but met with failure . " Thank God " , Leopold wrote , " that we have routed the enemy " . However , the principal tenor , Guglielmo d <unk> , made repeated requests for his arias to be rewritten , and sang one of Gasparini 's settings in Act 3 , an insertion that survives in the published score of the opera . 
 Rehearsals began on 6 December . Wolfgang 's mastery of Italian diction was revealed as the recitatives were practised , and a run @-@ through of the instrumental score displayed his professionalism . Leopold wrote home : " An awful lot of this undertaking , blessed be God , is safely over , and , God be praised , once more with honour ! " On 26 December , at the Teatro Regio Ducal ( Milan 's great opera house at the time ) , Wolfgang directed the first public performance from the keyboard , dressed for the occasion in a scarlet coat lined with blue satin and edged with gold . The occasion was a triumph : the audience demanded encores and at the conclusion cried " <unk> il maestro ! " ( Long live the master ! ) . The opera ran for 22 performances , and the <unk> di Milano praised the work handsomely : " The young maestro di capella , who is not yet fifteen years of age , studies the beauties of nature , and represents them adorned with the rarest musical graces . " The arias sung by Bernasconi " vividly expressed the passions and touched the heart " . Subsequent reactions to the opera proved less effusive ; there are no records of further performances of Mitridate before its revival in Salzburg in 1971 . 
 Having fulfilled his major obligation for his first trip to Italy by completing the opera Mitridate , Wolfgang gave a concert at Firmian 's palace on 4 January 1771 . A few days later , news arrived that Wolfgang had been granted membership in the Accademia Filarmonica of Verona . On 14 January they departed for a two @-@ week sojourn in Turin , where they met many of the leading Italian musicians : the distinguished violinist Gaetano <unk> , his 15 @-@ year @-@ old prodigy pupil Giovanni Battista <unk> , and the composer Giovanni Paisiello whose opera Annibale in Torino Leopold declared to be magnificent . They returned to Milan for a farewell lunch with Firmian before their departure for Salzburg on 4 February . 
 = = = Journey home = = = 
 On their way back to Salzburg Leopold and Wolfgang stayed for a while at Venice , pausing on their way at Brescia to see an opera buffa . While in Venice , Leopold used his letters of introduction to meet the nobility and to negotiate a contract for Wolfgang to write an opera for the San Benedetto theatre . Wolfgang gave several concerts and perhaps played at Venice 's famed <unk> — former orphanages which became respected music academies . The Mozarts were received generously , but Leopold appeared dissatisfied . " The father seems a shade piqued " , wrote a correspondent to the Viennese composer Johann Adolph Hasse , adding : " ... they probably expected others to seek after them , rather than they after others " . Hasse replied : " The father , as I see the man , is equally discontent everywhere " . 
 Leaving Venice on 12 March , the Mozarts journeyed to Padua , where during a day of sightseeing Wolfgang was commissioned by Don Giuseppe Ximenes , Prince of Aragon , to compose an oratorio for the city . The history of La <unk> <unk> ( " The Liberation of <unk> " ) is obscure — it may not have been performed in Padua , or at all in Wolfgang 's lifetime . In Verona , a few days later , he received further commissions . Wolfgang was to compose a <unk> ( or one @-@ act opera ) to be performed in Milan in October 1771 for the wedding of the Archduke Ferdinand and his bride Princess Beatrice of Modena . At the same time the young composer was engaged to undertake another Milan carnival opera , for the 1772 – 73 season , at an increased fee . This created a conflict of dates which prevented Wolfgang from proceeding with the San Benedetto contract . Thereafter , father and son sped northward , arriving home in Salzburg on 28 March 1771 . 
 In his review of this first Italian journey , Maynard Solomon 's analysis of the meagre financial information provided by Leopold indicates that the Mozarts made a substantial profit — perhaps as much as 2 @,@ 900 florins . The pair had also been accorded wide recognition , moving among the highest Italian nobility . Aside from being honoured by the Pope , Wolfgang had been admitted to the academies of Bologna and Verona , and had studied with Martini . Solomon calls the tour Leopold 's " finest hour and ... perhaps his happiest " . 
 = = Second journey , August – December 1771 = = 
 In August 1771 Leopold and Wolfgang set out once more for Milan , to work on the <unk> — which had by this time evolved into the full @-@ length opera Ascanio in Alba . On arrival they shared their lodgings with violinists , a singing @-@ master , and an oboist : a ménage that was , as Wolfgang wrote <unk> to Nannerl , " ... delightful for composing , it gives you plenty of ideas ! " Working at great speed , Wolfgang finished Ascanio just in time for the first rehearsal on 23 September . 
 Ascanio was expected to be the lesser of the works for the wedding celebration , second to Hasse 's opera Ruggiero . However , the 72 @-@ year @-@ old Hasse was out of touch with current theatrical tastes , and although his opera was praised by the Dowager Empress Maria Theresa , its overall reception was lukewarm , especially compared to the triumphant success of Ascanio . Leopold expressed delight at this turn of events : " The archduke has recently ordered two copies " , he wrote home . " All the noblemen and other people constantly address us in the street to congratulate Wolfgang . In short ! I 'm sorry , Wolfgang 's Serenata has so crushed Hasse 's opera that I can 't describe it . " Hasse was gracious about his eclipse , and is said to have remarked that the boy would cause all others to be forgotten . 
 The Mozarts were free to leave Milan early in November , but they stayed another month because Leopold hoped that the success of Ascanio would lead to an appointment for Wolfgang from a royal patron . He apparently solicited Archduke Ferdinand on 30 November , and his request was passed on to the imperial court in Vienna . It is possible that Leopold 's <unk> in Vienna over La finta semplice still rankled , or that word of his crowing over Hasse 's failure had reached the Empress . For whatever reason , Maria Theresa 's reply to the archduke was unequivocal , describing the Mozarts as " useless people " whose appointment would debase the royal service , and adding that " such people go around the world like beggars " . Leopold never learned this letter 's contents ; by the time it reached Milan the Mozarts had left , disappointed but still hopeful . " The matter is not over ; I can say that much " , Leopold wrote as he and Wolfgang made their way home . 
 Despite the hectic schedule during this short visit , Wolfgang still found time to write his Symphony in F , K. 112 ( No. 13 ) . He contrived a further symphony from the Ascanio overture , by adding a finale to the two existing movements . Another symphony , K. 96 / <unk> , in C major , is sometimes allocated to this visit to Milan , but it is not certain when ( or indeed whether ) Wolfgang actually wrote it . 
 = = Upheaval in Salzburg = = 
 The day after Leopold and Wolfgang arrived back in Salzburg the court was thrown into turmoil by the death of Archbishop Schrattenbach . This created problems for Leopold , who had unresolved issues with the court . Part of his salary during the second Italian visit had been stopped , and Leopold wished to petition for its payment , and to pursue the matter of Wolfgang 's salary as a Konzertmeister , which Schrattenbach had indicated might be paid on Wolfgang 's return from the first Italian journey . There was also the matter of succession to the post of Salzburg 's Kapellmeister , to be available soon on the pending retirement of the incumbent , Giuseppe Lolli , who was over 70 years old ; Leopold , who had followed Lolli as Vice @-@ Kapellmeister , might normally have felt confident of succeeding him to the higher post . Decisions on these matters would now be made by the new archbishop , whose policies and attitudes were unknown . 
 On 14 March 1772 , amid various political machinations , Count Hieronymus von Colloredo was elected to the archbishopric as a compromise candidate acceptable to the imperial court in Vienna . Although unpopular among <unk> , this appointment appeared at first to be to the Mozarts ' advantage : Leopold 's withheld salary was paid , and on 31 August Colloredo authorised the payment of Wolfgang 's Konzertmeister salary . However , the new archbishop began to look for someone outside the Salzburg court to be his new Kapellmeister . Eventually , he chose the Italian Domenico <unk> , who was several years younger than Leopold . Realising that his chances of promotion had probably been irrevocably lost , Leopold turned his hopes for a comfortable old age towards Wolfgang , giving new urgency to the third Italian journey which began in October 1772 . 
 = = Third journey , October 1772 – March 1773 = = 
 In October 1772 Leopold and Wolfgang returned to Milan to work on the carnival opera that had been commissioned at the end of the first journey . The text was Lucio Silla , revised by Metastasio from an original by Giovanni de <unk> . Wolfgang found himself in the familiar routine of composing rapidly while coping with problems such as the late arrival of singers and the withdrawal of the principal tenor due to illness . Leopold reported on 18 December that the tenor had arrived , that Wolfgang was composing his arias at breakneck speed , and that rehearsals were in full swing . The first performance , on 26 December , was chaotic : its start was delayed two hours by the late arrival of Archduke Ferdinand , there were quarrels among the principal performers , and the running time was extended by the insertion of ballets ( a common practice of the time ) , so the performance was not over until two o 'clock the following morning . Despite this , subsequent performances were well received . Leopold wrote on 9 January 1773 that the theatre was still full , and that the premiere of the season 's second opera , Giovanni Paisiello 's <unk> nel Mogul , had been postponed to allow Wolfgang 's piece a longer run — 26 performances in all . Such success for the new work seems to have been fleeting ; but during the next few years the libretto was reset by several different composers , including Wolfgang 's London mentor Johann Christian Bach . 
 Leopold , unaware of the Empress 's views , continued to pursue an appointment for Wolfgang by applying to Grand Duke Leopold I of Tuscany , the Empress 's third son . The application was strongly supported by Count Firmian , and Leopold , in a coded letter home , said he was quite hopeful . While the Mozarts waited for a reply , Wolfgang composed a series of " Milanese " string quartets ( K. 155 / 134a to K. 160 / <unk> ) , and the famous motet <unk> , <unk> , K. 165 . Leopold resorted to deception to explain his extended stay in Milan , claiming to be suffering from severe rheumatism that prevented his travelling . His ciphered letters to his wife Anna Maria assure her that he is in fact well , but urge her to spread the story of his indisposition . He waited through most of January and all of February for the Grand Duke 's reply . The negative response arrived on 27 February . It is not known whether the Grand Duke was influenced by his mother 's opinion of the Mozart family , but his rejection effectively ended Leopold 's hope of an Italian appointment for Wolfgang . The Mozarts had no choice now but to return to Salzburg , leaving Milan on 4 March and reaching home nine days later . Neither father nor son visited Italy again . 
 = = Evaluation = = 
 Maynard Solomon summarises the Italian journeys as a great triumph , but suggests that from Leopold 's standpoint they also incorporated a great failure . The Mozarts had certainly profited financially , and Wolfgang had developed artistically , into a recognised composer . Although the Mozarts ' reception had not been uniformly cordial — they had been cold @-@ shouldered by the Neapolitan court and the Prince of Thurn and Taxis had snubbed them — the Italians had generally responded with enthusiasm . Wolfgang had been received and knighted by the Pope ; he had been granted membership in leading philharmonic societies and had studied with Italy 's greatest music scholar , Giovanni Martini . Above all , he had been accepted as a practitioner of Italian opera by a leading opera house , completing three commissions that resulted in acclaimed performances . Other compositions resulted from the Italian experience , including a full @-@ scale oratorio , several symphonies , string quartets , and numerous minor works . 
 The failure was Leopold 's inability , despite his persistence , to secure a prestigious appointment either for himself or for Wolfgang . Leopold was evidently unaware of the negative light in which he was generally viewed ; he did , however , perceive that there was some intangible barrier to his Italian ambitions , and eventually recognised that he could not overcome whatever forces were arrayed against him . In any event , Wolfgang 's Italian triumphs proved short @-@ lived ; despite the critical and popular successes of his Milan operas , he was not invited to write another , and there were no further commissions from any of the other centres he had visited . With all hopes of an Italian court appointment gone , Leopold sought to secure the family 's future by other means : " We shall not go under , for God shall help us . I have already thought out some plans . " 
 Wolfgang was qualified by his skills at the keyboard and violin , and by his compositional experience , for a post as Kapellmeister ; but at 17 he was too young . He therefore remained in Colloredo 's employ at the Salzburg court , increasingly discontent , until his dismissal from the Archbishop 's retinue during its stay in Vienna , in 1781 . Leopold , <unk> from his rank of vice @-@ Kapellmeister , remained with the court until his death in 1787 . 
 = Domnall Gerrlámhach = 
 Domnall Gerrlámhach ( died 1135 ) , also known as Domnall Gerrlámhach Ua Briain , Domnall mac <unk> , and Domnall Ua Briain , was an obscure twelfth @-@ century Uí Briain dynast and King of Dublin . He was one of two sons of Muirchertach Ua Briain , High King of Ireland . Domnall 's father appears to have installed him as King of Dublin in the late <unk> or early twelfth century , which suggests that he was his father 's successor @-@ designate . Although Domnall won a remarkable victory in the defence of the Kingdom of Dublin in the face of an invasion from the Kingdom of Leinster in 1115 , he failed to achieve the successes of his father . After his final expulsion from Dublin at hands of Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair , King of Connacht , and the death of his father , Domnall disappears from record until his own death in 1135 . He was perhaps survived by two sons . 
 = = Background = = 
 Domnall was one of two recorded sons of Muirchertach Ua Briain , High King of Ireland ( died 1119 ) ; the other being <unk> ( died 1129 ) . Domnall was a member of the Uí Briain , a branch of the Dál Cais , descended from the eponymous Brian Bóruma mac Cennétig , High King of Ireland ( died 1014 ) . Domnall 's mother was his father 's wife , <unk> Forgaill , daughter of <unk> Ua <unk> , King of Airgíalla . The Annals of Tigernach accord Domnall the epithet <unk> ( " short @-@ armed " ) which may indicate — if the term is taken literally — that he suffered some sort of deformity . 
 Muirchertach Ua Briain was one of three sons of Toirdelbach Ua Briain , High King of Ireland ( died 1086 ) , a man who secured control of the Kingdom of Munster in the 1060s before gaining the high @-@ kingship of Ireland less than a decade later . In 1175 , in an act of overlordship over the Kingdom of Dublin , Toirdelbach Ua Briain appointed Muirchertach Ua Briain King of Dublin , following a precedent set by Diarmait mac Maíl na mBó , King of Leinster ( died 1072 ) , a previous claimant to the Irish high @-@ kingship who had done the same to his own eldest son , Murchad ( died 1070 ) , in 1052 . When Toirdelbach Ua Briain finally died in 1086 , his sons bitterly contested the kingship of Munster before Muirchertach Ua Briain succeeded in securing it for himself . By 1091 , the latter appears to have regained control of the Dublin , only to lose it to Gofraid Crobán , King of the Isles ( died 1095 ) , who united it with the Kingdom of the Isles . Gofraid 's reign in Ireland was short @-@ lived , as Muirchertach Ua Briain forced him from Dublin in 1094 . After the Gofraid 's death the following year , Muirchertach Ua Briain appointed his own nephew , Domnall mac Taidc ( died 1115 ) , as King of the Isles . Uí Briain influence in the Isles was similarly short @-@ lived , however , as Domnall mac Taidc was apparently forced from the region , and Magnús Óláfsson , King of Norway seized control of not only the Isles , but perhaps even Dublin itself , before falling in battle in 1103 . Later in 1111 , Domnall mac Taidc temporarily seized the kingship of the Isles in an act that appears to have been opposed by his aforesaid uncle . The reasons for Domnall mac Taidc 's exit from the Isles are uncertain . Although he may have been forcibly ejected by the Islesmen , he may well have returned to Ireland to take advantage of Muirchertach Ua Briain 's rapidly failing health . 
 = = Kingship of Dublin = = 
 In 1114 , the power of a now gravely ill Muirchertach Ua Briain 's began to waver . The kingship of Munster was temporarily seized by Muirchertach Ua Briain 's half @-@ brother , Diarmait Ua Briain ( died 1118 ) . The record of a grant to Christ Church Cathedral , in which Domnall is styled " King of Ireland " , appears to suggest that he attempted to assert a claim to the kingship as well . In fact , Mac <unk> 's Book specifically states that Domnall was installed in the kingship of Dublin by his father in 1114 . Although Muirchertach Ua Briain 's problems were lessened with the death Domnall mac Taidc in 1115 , within the year the co @-@ Kings of Leinster — Donnchad mac Murchada ( died 1115 ) and Conchobar Ua Conchobair <unk> , King of Uí <unk> ( died 1115 ) — took advantage of his own decline , and attempted to gain control of Dublin by way of a major assault upon the town . In fact , Domnall 's father and grandfather had excluded the Kingdom of Leinster from overlordship of Dublin for the last forty years ; and whilst Conchobar was an unremitting opponent of Muirchertach Ua Briain , Donnchad was married to Domnall mac Taidc 's sister , and further possessed a claim of his own to the kingship Dublin , as both his father and grandfather — the aforesaid Murchad and Diarmait mac Maíl na mBó — had held it during their careers . 
 The prospect of enduring overlordship from nearby Leinster , as compared to the more distant and anaemic overlordship of Munster , appears to have compelled the Dubliners to oppose the Leinstermen . The ensuing battle itself is recorded by both the Annals of Ulster and the Annals of Inisfallen , which reveal that it was Domnall himself who marshalled the forces of Munster to victory . Considering Munster 's weakened state , his triumph in Dublin was remarkable achievement . Unfortunately for Donnchad , however , he lost his life in the encounter ; and according to the thirteenth @-@ century <unk> Giraldus Cambrensis ( died 1220 × 23 ) , the Dubliners added insult to injury by burying his corpse with that of a dog as a show of contempt to the Leinstermen . There is uncertainty as to when Domnall originally gained the kingship of Dublin . His father could have installed him as such upon assuming the Irish high @-@ kingship , or perhaps following the aforesaid ousting of Gofraid Crobán in 1094 — although it is not impossible that Domnall mac Taidc was installed as king at this point instead . Another possibility is that Domnall had been appointed king not long before his victory over the Leinstermen , or else not long afterwards . Whatever the case , the evidence of Domnall 's kingship indicates that Muirchertach Ua Briain was the third consecutive claimant to the high @-@ kingship to appoint an intended successor to the kingship of Dublin . 
 Although Muirchertach Ua Briain recovered enough to regain power in Munster within the year , Dublin was later lost to Donnchad 's kinsman and Leinster successor , Diarmait mac Énna meic Murchada , King of Leinster , who died there in 1117 . Meanwhile , as Muirchertach Ua Briain 's power continued to evaporate , the authority of Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair , King of Connacht ( died 1156 ) ever increased . In 1118 , several sources , such as the Annals of Loch Cé , the Annals of the Four Masters , Chronicon Scotorum , and the Annals of Tigernach , indicate that Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair gained control of Dublin . In fact , the later source specifies that he had driven Domnall from the kingship once and for all , revealing that Domnall had regained the kingship following Diarmait mac Énna 's death in 1117 . Although this source also relates that hostages from the " northern half of Ireland " were recovered from Dublin by Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair , a statement perhaps indicative of the power that Domnall managed to preserve over northern realms once firmly under his father 's suzerainty , at his height Domnall 's father had been one of the most successful Uí Briain monarchs , and Domnall was unable to match his accomplishments . Domnall 's victory in Dublin marked the beginning of the end of Munster domination of Norse @-@ Gaelic Dublin . Before the frail Muirchertach Ua Briain finally died in 1119 , he was forced to resign the kingship of Munster in favour of his half @-@ brother . When the latter died in 1118 , Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair had the realm partitioned between Tadc Mac <unk> in the Kingdom of Desmond , and the sons of Diarmait Ua Briain in the Kingdom of Thomond . Domnall himself was excluded from the kingship . 
 = = Death = = 
 Thereafter Domnall disappears from record until his death , as an old man at Lismore , dated by the Annals of the Four Masters to 1135 . The annal @-@ entry itself describes him as a one @-@ time lord of Leinster , which could be evidence that he had tried to seize Leinster at some point in his career . The Annals of Tigernach apparently also record Domnall 's death , although the annal @-@ entry identifies him as a grandson of Muirchertach Ua Briain . Long afterwards in 1157 , Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn , King of Cenél nEógain ( died 1166 ) , a contender to the Irish high @-@ kingship , invaded the partitioned Munster and forced the submission of Diarmait Mac <unk> , and further drove out Toirdelbach mac Diarmata Uí Briain — the son of Domnall 's aforesaid uncle , Diarmait Ua Briain — and replaced him with another Uí Briain dynast , Conchobar mac Domnaill Uí Briain , King of Ormond . The latter was likely a brother of Lughaid mac Domnaill Uí Briain who was slain in the battle of <unk> <unk> in 1151 . Both men — Conchobar and Lughaid — could well have been sons of Domnall himself , although another candidate may be his like @-@ named first cousin , Domnall mac Taidc . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Italian battleship Littorio = 
 Littorio was the lead ship of her class of battleship and she served in the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) during World War II . She was named after the <unk> ( " Littorio " in Italian ) , in ancient times the bearer of the Roman fasces , which was adopted as the symbol of Italian Fascism . Littorio and her sister Vittorio Veneto were built in response to the French battleships Dunkerque and Strasbourg . They were Italy 's first modern battleships , and the first 35 @,@ 000 @-@ ton capital ships of any nation to be laid down under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . Littorio was laid down in October 1934 , launched in August 1937 , and completed in May 1940 . 
 Shortly after her commissioning , Littorio was badly damaged during the British air raid on Taranto on 11 November 1940 , which put her out of action until the following March . Littorio thereafter took part in several sorties to catch the British Mediterranean Fleet , most of which failed to result in any action , the notable exception being the Second Battle of Sirte in March 1942 , where she damaged several British warships . Littorio was renamed Italia in July 1943 after the fall of the Fascist government . On 9 September 1943 , the Italian fleet was attacked by German bombers while it was on its way to internment . During this action , which saw the destruction of her sister Roma , Italia herself was hit by a Fritz X radio @-@ controlled bomb , causing significant damage to her bow . As part of the armistice agreement , Italia was interned at Malta , Alexandria , and finally in the Great Bitter Lake in the Suez Canal , where she remained until 1947 . Italia was awarded to the United States as a war prize and scrapped at La Spezia in 1952 – 54 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Littorio and her sister Vittorio Veneto were designed in response to the French Dunkerque @-@ class battleships . Littorio was 237 @.@ 76 meters ( 780 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall , had a beam of 32 @.@ 82 m ( 107 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 6 m ( 31 ft ) . She was designed with a standard displacement of 40 @,@ 724 long tons ( 41 @,@ 377 t ) , a violation of the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) restriction of the Washington Naval Treaty ; at full combat loading , she displaced 45 @,@ 236 long tons ( 45 @,@ 962 t ) . The ship was powered by four Belluzo geared steam turbines rated at 128 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 95 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam was provided by eight oil @-@ fired Yarrow boilers . The engines provided a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) and a range of 3 @,@ 920 mi ( 6 @,@ 310 km ; 3 @,@ 410 nmi ) at 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Littorio had a crew of 1 @,@ 830 to 1 @,@ 950 over the course of her career . 
 Littorio 's main armament consisted of nine 381 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) 50 @-@ caliber Model 1934 guns in three triple turrets ; two turrets were placed forward in a superfiring arrangement and the third was located aft . Her secondary anti @-@ surface armament consisted of twelve 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) / 55 Model 1934 / 35 guns in four triple turrets amidships . These were supplemented by four 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 Model 1891 / 92 guns in single mounts ; these guns were old weapons and were primarily intended to fire star shells . Littorio was equipped with an anti @-@ aircraft battery that comprised twelve 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) / 50 Model 1938 guns in single mounts , twenty 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 54 guns in eight twin and four single mounts , and sixteen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / 65 guns in eight twin mounts . A further twelve 20 mm guns in twin mounts were installed in 1942 . She received an EC 3 bis radar set in August 1941 , an updated version in April 1942 — which proved to be unsuccessful in service — and finally the EC 3 ter model in September 1942 . 
 The ship was protected by a main armored belt that was 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick with a second layer of steel that was 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main deck was 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) thick in the central area of the ship and reduced to 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in less critical areas . The main battery turrets were 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick and the lower turret structure was housed in barbettes that were also 350 mm thick . The secondary turrets had 280 mm thick faces and the conning tower had 260 mm ( 10 in ) thick sides . Littorio was fitted with a catapult on her stern and equipped with three IMAM Ro.43 reconnaissance float planes or Reggiane Re.2000 fighters . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Littorio was laid down at the Ansaldo shipyards in Genoa on 28 October 1934 to commemorate the Fascist Party 's March on Rome in 1922 . Her sister Vittorio Veneto was laid down the same day . Changes to the design and a lack of armor plating led to delays in the building schedule , causing a three @-@ month slip in the launch date from the original plan of May 1937 . Littorio was launched on 22 August 1937 , during a ceremony attended by many Italian dignitaries . She was sponsored by Signora Teresa <unk> <unk> , the wife on an Ansaldo employee . After her launch , the fitting out period lasted until early 1940 . During this time , Littorio 's bow was modified to lessen vibration and reduce wetness over the bow . Littorio ran a series of sea trials over a period of two months between 23 October 1939 and 21 December 1939 . She was commissioned on 6 May 1940 , and after running additional trials that month , she transferred to Taranto where she — along with Vittorio Veneto — joined the 9th Division under the command of Rear Admiral Carlo Bergamini . 
 On 31 August – 2 September 1940 , Littorio sortied as part of an Italian force of five battleships , ten cruisers , and thirty @-@ four destroyers to intercept British naval forces taking part in Operation Hats and Convoy <unk> , but contact was not made with either group due to poor reconnaissance and no action occurred . A similar outcome resulted from the movement against British Operation " MB.5 " on 29 September - 1 October ; Littorio , four other battleships , eleven cruisers , and twenty @-@ three destroyers had attempted to intercept the convoy carrying troops to Malta . 
 = = = Attack on Taranto = = = 
 On the night of 10 – 11 November , the British Mediterranean Fleet launched an air raid on the harbor in Taranto . Twenty @-@ one Swordfish torpedo bombers launched from the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious attacked the Italian fleet in two waves . The Italian base was defended by twenty @-@ one 90 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns and dozens of smaller 37 mm and 20 mm guns , along with twenty @-@ seven barrage balloons . The defenders did not possess radar , however , and so were caught by surprise when the <unk> arrived . Littorio and the other battleships were also not provided with sufficient anti @-@ torpedo nets . The first wave struck at 20 : 35 , followed by the second about an hour later . 
 The planes scored three hits on Littorio , one hit on Caio Duilio , and one on Conte di Cavour . Of the torpedoes that struck Littorio , two hit in the bow and one struck the stern ; the stern hit destroyed the rudder and shock from the explosion damaged the ship 's steering gear . The two forward hits caused major flooding and led her to settle by the bows , with her decks awash up to her main battery turrets . She could not be brought into dock until 11 December due to a fourth , unexploded torpedo discovered under her keel ; removing the torpedo proved to be a painstaking task , as any shift in the magnetic field around the torpedo might detonate its magnetic detonator . Repairs lasted until 11 March 1941 . 
 = = = Convoy operations = = = 
 After repairs were completed , Littorio participated in an unsuccessful sortie to intercept British forces on 22 – 25 August . A month later , she led the attack on the Allied convoy in Operation Halberd on 27 September 1941 . The British force escorting the convoy included the battleships Rodney , Nelson , and Prince of Wales ; Italian reconnaissance reported the presence of a powerful escort , and the Italian commander , under orders not to engage unless he possessed a strong numerical superiority , broke off the operation and returned to port . On 13 December , she participated in another sweep to catch a convoy to Malta , but the attempt was broken off after Vittorio Veneto was torpedoed by a British submarine . Three days later , she steamed out to escort Operation M42 , a supply convoy to Italian and German forces in North Africa . By late @-@ 1941 , British success at breaking the Enigma code made it increasingly difficult for Axis convoys to reach North Africa . The Italians therefore committed their battle fleet to the convoy effort to better protect the transports . The next day , she took part in the First Battle of Sirte . Littorio , along with the rest of the distant covering force , engaged the escort of a British convoy heading for Malta that happened to run into the M42 convoy late in the day . Littorio opened fire at extreme range , around 35 @,@ 000 yards ( 32 @,@ 000 m ) , but she scored no hits . Nevertheless , the heavy Italian fire forced the British force to withdraw under cover of a smokescreen and the M42 convoy reached North Africa without damage . 
 On 3 January 1942 , Littorio was again tasked with convoy escort , in support of Operation M43 ; she was back in port by 6 January . On 22 March , she participated in the Second Battle of Sirte , as the flagship for an Italian force attempting to destroy a British convoy bound for Malta . After the fall of darkness , several British destroyers made a close @-@ range attack on Littorio , but heavy fire from her main and secondary guns forced the destroyers to retreat . As the destroyers withdrew , one of them hit Littorio with a single 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) shell , which caused minor damage to the ship 's fantail . During the battle , Littorio hit and seriously damaged the destroyers HMS Havock and Kingston . She also hit the cruiser Euryalus but did not inflict significant damage . Kingston returned to Malta for repairs , where she was later destroyed during a bombing raid . Muzzle blast from Littorio 's rear turret set one of her floatplanes on fire , though no serious damage to the ship resulted . She fired a total of 181 shells from her main battery in the course of the engagement . Though the Italian fleet was unable to directly attack the convoy , it forced the transports to scatter and many were sunk the next day by air attack . 
 Three months later , on 14 June , Littorio participated in the interception of the Operation Vigorous convoy to Malta from Alexandria . Littorio , Vittorio Veneto , four cruisers and twelve destroyers were sent to attack the convoy . The British quickly located the approaching Italian fleet and launched several night air strikes in an attempt to prevent them from reaching the convoy , though the aircraft scored no hits . While searching for the convoy the next day , Littorio was hit by a bomb dropped by a B @-@ 24 Liberator ; the bomb hit the roof of turret no . 1 but caused negligible damage to the rangefinder hood and barbette , along with splinter damage to the deck . The turret nevertheless remained serviceable and Littorio remained with the fleet . At 14 : 00 , the Italians broke off the chase and returned to port ; shortly before midnight that evening , Littorio was struck by a torpedo dropped by a British Wellington bomber , causing some 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) of water to flood the ship 's bow . Her crew counter @-@ flooded 350 long tons ( 360 t ) of water to correct the list . The ship was able to return to port for repairs , and in the meantime , the threat from Vittorio Veneto forced the British convoy to abort the mission . Repair work lasted until 27 August . She remained in Taranto until 12 December , when the fleet was moved to La Spezia . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Littorio was inactive for the first six months of 1943 due to severe fuel shortages in the Italian Navy . Only enough fuel was available for Littorio , Vittorio Veneto and their recently commissioned sister Roma , but even then the fuel was only enough for emergencies . On 19 June 1943 , an American bombing raid targeted the harbor at La Spezia and hit Littorio with three bombs . She was renamed Italia on 30 July after the government of Benito Mussolini fell from power . On 3 September , Italy signed an armistice with the Allies , ending her active participation in World War II . Six days later , Italia and the rest of the Italian fleet sailed for Malta , where they would be interned for the remainder of the war . While en route , the German Luftwaffe ( Air Force ) attacked the Italian fleet using Dornier Do 217s armed with Fritz X radio @-@ controlled bombs . One Fritz X hit Italia just forward of turret no . 1 ; it passed through the ship and exited the hull , exploding in the water beneath and causing serious damage . Roma was meanwhile sunk in the attack . 
 Italia and Vittorio Veneto were then moved , first to Alexandria , Egypt , and then to the Great Bitter Lake in the Suez Canal in Egypt on 14 September ; they remained there until the end of the war . On 5 February 1947 , Italia was finally permitted to return to Italy . In the Treaty of Peace with Italy , signed five days later on 10 February , Italia was allocated as a war prize to the United States . She was stricken from the naval register on 1 June 1948 and broken up for scrap at La Spezia . 
 = Typhoon Andy ( 1982 ) = 
 Typhoon Andy , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Iliang , was an intense tropical cyclone that made landfall in Taiwan . Andy formed along the northern edge of the monsoon trough south of Guam on July 22 , 1982 . It became a tropical storm the next day , although this system was initially poorly organized . Andy moved steadily west during the first few days of its life . After looping south of Guam , the cyclone moved northwest and strengthened . Andy turned westward near the 18th parallel on July 25 . The system became a strong typhoon for a prolonged period on July 27 and July 28 while attaining a peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . However , the typhoon struck southern Taiwan on July 29 . Continuing westward through the Formosa Strait , the storm made its final landfall in southern China on July 30 and dissipated inland two days later . 
 During its formative stages , the typhoon brought high waves to Guam , resulting in one death . Twelve families were also left homeless . After passing near Taiwan , Andy brought strong winds , which resulted in 13 deaths . Government offices , schools and airports were closed . At least 60 fishing boats in harbors were badly damaged or wrecked due to strong winds . A total of 300 <unk> poles were brought down ; consequently , nearly a quarter of Taiwan residents lost power at the height of the storm . After moving ashore in China , Andy brought heavy rains to nearby Hong Kong . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Andy originated from a monsoon trough south of Guam in tandem with Typhoon Bess . Despite strong wind shear , three areas of disturbed weather soon developed . The westernmost of the three drifted westward and remained poorly defined . Late on July 21 , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued for the middle system following a drop in barometric pressure and an increase in organization . Around this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the cyclone . On July 22 , the JMA upgraded the system into a tropical storm . During the evening hours of July 22 , Hurricane Hunters found winds of 65 to 70 km / h ( 40 to 45 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Based on this , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) classified the system as a tropical storm and named it Andy . Despite the initial overall lack of organization , Andy slowly gained strength . However , the low @-@ level circulation was initially poorly defined and difficult to find via weather satellite imagery . While passing around 160 km ( 100 mi ) south of Guam , the JMA upped Andy into a severe tropical storm . After performing a small loop , Andy accelerated northwest south of a subtropical ridge . According to the JMA , Andy attained typhoon intensity midday on July 24 . 
 For the ensuing 24 hours , intensification was slight . Thereafter , Andy turned west and entered a more favorable environment for intensification . On July 25 , the JMA placed the intensity of the storm at 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) . After briefly leveling off in intensity , Andy continued to gain strength , and during the morning hours of July 26 , the JMA reported winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . The next day , the JMA estimated that Andy reached peak intensity , with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , and subsequently noted that Andy attained its minimum barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 25 inHg ) . Later that day , the JTWC estimated a peak intensity of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . 
 Shortly after its peak , Andy began to slowly weaken . At 1200 UTC on July 28 , the JTWC reduced the intensity of the typhoon to 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) . However , on July 29 , the JMA lowered the intensity of the cyclone to 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , even though the JTWC kept the intensity over 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) until landfall , which occurred later that day along the southeastern quadrant of Taiwan . Despite briefly emerging into the Formosa Strait , the JMA downgraded Andy into a severe tropical storm just before landfall in Southern China . On July 30 , the JTWC stopped watching Andy inland over the mountains terrain of southeastern China . Two days later , the JMA followed suit . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 While strengthening , Typhoon Andy passed near Guam , generating 7 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 1 m ( 25 to 30 ft ) waves along south @-@ facing beaches . An 11 @-@ year @-@ old boy died in Naval Station after the waves swept him off of rocks . Three " huge " waves struck the shoreline near <unk> , which destroyed several homes off of their foundation . Along many nearby villages , scattered damage was noted . At least nine villages were without power for varying amounts of time . In all , 12 people were left homeless . 
 While affecting Taiwan , Typhoon Andy snapped trees and toppled billboards , in addition to generating high waves . In some places , rainfall reached 300 mm ( 12 in ) . Coastal areas were hardest hit . Along the southern portion of the island , 300 power poles were downed , making damage reports difficult for the United Press International to obtain . At the height of the storm , a quarter of the nation 's 18 million residents were left without power . Eight people were killed in storm @-@ related accidents , including a man and a women who died when a car flipped in the central portion of the country . Furthermore , four members of a fishing party were swept out to sea and drowned and an elderly man was blown off a roof as he tried to fix leaks in it . Another 11 @-@ year @-@ old boy was swept into the sea and was presumed to have perished while watching waves near the southeastern city of Taitung , though his 16 @-@ year @-@ old companion who was also watching the waves was swept away , but was later rescued . In all , 13 people were killed by Typhoon Andy in Taiwan . In Taipei , broken trees and signboards fell on streets due to strong winds . Government offices , schools and airports were closed . At least 60 fishing boats in harbors were badly damaged or wrecked in the wind . Elsewhere , a 23 @-@ man crew was forced to abandon a 5 @,@ 393 short tons ( 4 @,@ 890 t ) ship off the northern Philippines . Overall , no major damage was observed and no major flooding was reported . After making its final landfall in China , 205 @.@ 3 mm ( 8 @.@ 08 in ) of rain was measured in Hong Kong . 
 = The Spy Who Loved Me ( film ) = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me ( 1977 ) is the tenth spy film in the James Bond series , and the third to star Roger Moore as the fictional secret agent James Bond . Curd Jürgens and Barbara Bach co @-@ star . It was directed by Lewis Gilbert and the screenplay was written by Christopher Wood and Richard Maibaum . 
 The film takes its title from Ian Fleming 's novel The Spy Who Loved Me , the tenth book in the James Bond series , though it does not contain any elements of the novel 's plot . The storyline involves a reclusive megalomaniac named Karl Stromberg , who plans to destroy the world and create a new civilisation under the sea . Bond teams up with a Russian agent , Anya Amasova , to stop Stromberg . 
 It was shot on location in Egypt ( Cairo , Luxor ) and Sardinia , Costa Smeralda ( Italy ) , with underwater scenes filmed at the Bahamas ( Nassau ) , and a new soundstage being built at Pinewood Studios for a massive set which depicted the interior of a supertanker . The Spy Who Loved Me was well @-@ received by critics . The soundtrack composed by Marvin Hamlisch also met with success . The film was nominated for three Academy Awards amid many other nominations and novelised in 1977 by Christopher Wood as James Bond , The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 = = Plot = = 
 British and Soviet ballistic @-@ missile submarines are mysteriously disappearing . James Bond — MI6 agent 007 — is summoned to investigate . On the way to his briefing , he escapes an ambush by Soviet agents in Austria , killing their leader during a downhill ski chase . The plans for a highly advanced submarine tracking system are being offered in Egypt . There , he encounters Major Anya Amasova — KGB agent Triple X — his rival to recover the microfilm plans . They travel across Egypt together , encountering Jaws – a tall assassin with steel teeth – along the way . Bond and Amasova reluctantly team up after a truce is agreed by their respective British and Soviet superiors . They identify the person responsible for the thefts as the shipping tycoon , scientist and anarchist Karl Stromberg . 
 While travelling by train to Stromberg 's base in Sardinia , Bond saves Amasova from Jaws , and their cooling rivalry turns to affection . Posing as a marine biologist and his wife , they visit Stromberg 's base and discover that he had launched a mysterious new supertanker , the Liparus , nine months previously . As they leave the base , Jaws , and Naomi , an assassin in an attack helicopter , chase them but Bond and Amasova escape underwater when his car – a Lotus Esprit from Q Branch – converts into a submarine . Jaws escapes while Naomi is killed . Bond finds out that the Liparus has never visited any known port or harbour . Amasova discovers that Bond killed her lover in Austria ( at the beginning of the movie ) , and she vows to kill Bond once their mission ends . 
 Bond and Amasova examine Stromberg 's underwater Atlantis base from an American submarine , and confirm that he is operating the stolen tracking system . The Liparus captures the submarine . Stromberg sets his plan in motion : the simultaneous launching of nuclear missiles from British and Soviet submarines to destroy Moscow and New York City . This would trigger a global nuclear war , which Stromberg would survive in Atlantis , and subsequently a new civilisation would be established underwater . He leaves for Atlantis with Amasova . Bond escapes and frees the captured British , Russian and American submariners and they battle the Liparus 's crew . Bond reprograms the submarines to fire missiles at each other , saving Moscow and New York City . The victorious submariners escape the sinking Liparus on the American submarine . 
 The submarine is ordered to destroy Atlantis but Bond insists on rescuing Amasova first . He confronts and kills Stromberg but again encounters Jaws , whom he drops into a shark tank . However , Jaws fatally bites the shark and escapes . Bond and Amasova flee in an escape pod as Atlantis is sunk . Amasova reminds Bond that she has vowed to kill him as she picks up Bond 's gun . Then , she admits to having forgiven him and the two embrace . The Royal Navy recovers the pod , and the two spies are seen in an intimate embrace through its port window , much to the consternation of their British and Soviet superiors on the ship . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond 007 : A British MI6 agent assigned to investigate the theft of two submarines . 
 Barbara Bach as Anya Amasova / Agent Triple X : A Soviet KGB agent also investigating the theft . Her attraction to Bond is cut short when she learns he killed her lover . Bach was cast only four days before principal photography began , and performed her audition expecting just a role in the film , not one of the protagonists . 
 Curd Jürgens ( billed as " Curt Jurgens " in the credits ) as Karl Stromberg : The main villain , a megalomaniac planning to trigger World War III and destroy the world , then recreate a new civilisation underwater . Jürgens ' casting was a suggestion of director Lewis Gilbert , who had worked with him before . 
 Richard Kiel as Jaws : Stromberg 's seemingly indestructible juggernaut of a henchman , afflicted with gigantism and having a set of metal teeth . He would reprise the role in the subsequent Bond film , Moonraker . 
 Caroline Munro as Naomi : Stromberg 's personal pilot and a would @-@ be assassin . Munro 's casting was inspired by an advertisement campaign she had made . 
 Walter Gotell as General Gogol : The head of the KGB and Anya 's boss . Gotell 's debut in the role ; he had previously appeared as Morzeny in From Russia with Love and would reprise the role of Gogol in the next five films . 
 Bernard Lee as M : The head of MI6 . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q / Major Boothroyd : MI6 's head of research and development . He supplies Bond with unique vehicles and gadgets , most notably the Lotus Esprit that converts into a submarine . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : M 's secretary . 
 Geoffrey Keen as Frederick Gray : The British Minister of Defence . Keen 's Bond debut ; he would appear in the role in the next five films . 
 Milton Reid as Sandor : Stromberg 's henchman . 
 Robert Brown as Vice @-@ Admiral Hargreaves : Flag Officer , Submarines of Royal Navy ; Brown would later play M in Octopussy , A View to a Kill , The Living Daylights and Licence to Kill . 
 George Baker as Captain Benson : A British naval officer stationed at the Royal Navy 's Faslane Naval Base in Scotland . Baker had previously appeared in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . 
 The assistant director for the Italian locations , Victor <unk> , had a cameo as a man drinking his wine as Bond 's Lotus emerges from the beach . As an in @-@ joke , he would return in similar appearances in another two Bond films shot in Italy , Moonraker and For Your Eyes Only . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me in many ways was a pivotal film for the Bond franchise , and was plagued since its conception by many problems . The first was the departure of Bond producer Harry Saltzman , who was forced to sell his half of the Bond film franchise in 1975 for £ 20 million . Saltzman had branched out into several other ventures of dubious promise and consequently was struggling through personal financial reversals unrelated to Bond . This was exacerbated by the twin personal tragedies of his wife 's terminal cancer and many of the symptoms of clinical depression in himself . 
 Another troubling aspect of the production was the difficulty in obtaining a director . The producers approached Steven Spielberg , who was in post @-@ production of Jaws , but ultimately decided to wait to see " how the fish picture turns out " . The first director attached to the film was Guy Hamilton , who directed the previous three Bond films as well as Goldfinger , but he left after being offered the opportunity to direct the 1978 film Superman , although Richard Donner took over the project . Eon Productions would later turn to Lewis Gilbert , who had directed the earlier Bond film You Only Live Twice . 
 With a director finally secured , the next hurdle was finishing the script , which had gone through several revisions by numerous writers . The initial villain of the film was Ernst Stavro Blofeld ; however Kevin McClory , who owned the film rights to Thunderball forced an injunction on Eon Productions against using the character of Blofeld , or his international criminal organisation , SPECTRE , which delayed production of the film further . The villain would later be changed from Blofeld to Stromberg so that the injunction would not interfere with the production . Christopher Wood was later brought in by Lewis Gilbert to complete the script . Although Fleming had requested that no elements from his original book be used , the novel features two thugs named Sol Horror and Sluggsy Morant . Horror is described as having steel @-@ capped teeth , while Sluggsy had a clear bald head . These characters would be the basis for the characters of Jaws and Sandor , respectively . 
 Since Ian Fleming permitted Eon to use only the name of his novel and not the actual novel , Fleming 's name was moved for the first time from above the film 's title to above " James Bond 007 " . His name reverted to the traditional location for Moonraker , the last Eon Bond film based on a Fleming novel before 2006 's Casino Royale . However , the credit style first used in The Spy Who Loved Me has been used on all Eon Bond films since For Your Eyes Only , including Casino Royale . 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Broccoli commissioned a number of writers to work on the script , including Stirling Silliphant , John Landis , Ronald Hardy , Anthony Burgess , and Derek Marlowe . In the second volume of his autobiography , Burgess claims to have worked on an early treatment for the movie . The British television producer Gerry Anderson also stated that he provided a film treatment ( although originally planned to be Moonraker ) much similar to what ended up as The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 Eventually , Richard Maibaum provided the screenplay , and at first he tried to incorporate ideas from all of the other writers into his script . Maibaum 's original script featured an alliance of international terrorists attacking SPECTRE 's headquarters and deposing Blofeld , before trying to destroy the world for themselves to make way for a New World Order . However , this was shelved . 
 After Gilbert was reinstated as director , he decided to bring in another writer , Christopher Wood . Gilbert also decided to fix what he felt the previous Roger Moore films were doing wrong , which was writing the Bond character too much the way Sean Connery played him , and instead portray Bond closer to the books — " very English , very smooth , good sense of humour " . Broccoli asked Wood to create a villain with metal teeth , Jaws , inspired by a brace @-@ wearing henchman named Horror in Fleming 's novel . 
 Broccoli agreed to Wood 's proposed changes , but before he could set to work there were more legal complications . In the years since Thunderball , Kevin McClory had set up two film companies and was trying to make a new Bond film in collaboration with Sean Connery and novelist Len Deighton . McClory got wind of Broccoli 's plans to use SPECTRE , an organisation that had first been created by Fleming while working with McClory and Jack Whittingham on the very first attempt to film Thunderball , back even before it was a novel , in the late 1950s . McClory threatened to sue Broccoli for alleged copyright infringement , claiming that he had the sole right to include SPECTRE and its agents in all films . Not wishing to extend the already ongoing legal dispute that could have delayed the production of The Spy Who Loved Me , Broccoli requested Wood remove all references to Blofeld and SPECTRE from the script . 
 In the film , Stromberg 's scheme to destroy civilisation by capturing Soviet and British nuclear submarines and have them fire intercontinental ballistic missiles at two major cities is actually a recycled plot from Gilbert 's previous Bond film , You Only Live Twice , which involved stealing space capsules to start a war between the Soviets and the Americans . The similarity was apparent in the climax ; both films involved an assault on a heavily fortified enemy that had taken refuge behind steel shutters . 
 The scheme in which the villain wishes to destroy mankind to create a new race or new civilisation was also used in Moonraker , the next film after The Spy Who Loved Me . In Moonraker , the villain Hugo Drax had an obsession with starting human civilisation over again on Earth , using specially chosen " superior human specimens " based in space . The film Moonraker was also written by Christopher Wood . 
 Tom Mankiewicz , who worked on the three preceding Bond films , claims he was called in to do an extensive rewrite of the script . Mankiewicz says he did not receive credit , because Broccoli was limited to the number of non @-@ English in key positions he could employ on the films to obtain Eady Levy assistance . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Tom Mankiewicz claims that Catherine Deneuve wanted to play the female lead and was willing to cut her normal rate from $ 400 @,@ 000 per picture to $ 250 @,@ 000 , but Broccoli would not pay above $ 80 @,@ 000 . 
 The film was shot at the Pinewood Studios in London , Porto <unk> in Sardinia ( Hotel Cala di Volpe ) , Egypt ( Karnak , Mosque of Ibn Tulun , Gayer @-@ Anderson Museum , Abu Simbel temples ) , Malta , Scotland , Hayling Island UK , Okinawa , Switzerland and Mount Asgard on Baffin Island in the then northern Canadian territory of Northwest Territories ( now located in Nunavut ) . 
 As no studio was big enough for the interior of Stromberg 's supertanker , and set designer Ken Adam did not want to repeat what he had done with SPECTRE 's volcano base in You Only Live Twice — " a workable but ultimately wasteful set " — construction began in March 1976 of a new sound stage at Pinewood , the 007 Stage , at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 8 million . To complement this stage , Eon also paid for building a water tank capable of storing approximately 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 gallons ( 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 litres ) . The soundstage was so huge that cinematographer Claude Renoir found himself unable to effectively light it due to his deteriorating eyesight , and so Stanley Kubrick visited the production , in secret , to advise on how to light the stage . For the exterior , while Shell was willing to lend an abandoned tanker to the production , the elevated insurance and safety risks caused it to be replaced with miniatures built by Derek Meddings ' team and shot in the Bahamas . Stromberg 's shark tank was also filmed in the Bahamas , using a live shark in a saltwater swimming pool . Adam decided to do experiments with curved shapes for the scenery , as he felt all his previous setpieces were " too linear " . This was demonstrated with the Atlantis , which is a dome and curved surfaces outside , and many curved objects in Stromberg 's office inside . For Gogol 's offices , Adam wanted an open space to contrast M 's enclosed headquarters , and drew inspiration from Sergei Eisenstein to do a " Russian crypt @-@ like " set . 
 The main unit began its work in August 1976 in Sardinia . Don McLaughlan , then head of public relations at Lotus Cars , heard that Eon were shopping for a new Bond car . He drove a prototype Lotus Esprit with all Lotus branding taped over , and parked it outside the Eon offices at Pinewood studios ; on seeing the car Eon asked Lotus to borrow both of the prototypes for filming . Initial filming of the car chase sequence resulted in disappointing action sequences . While moving the car between shoots , Lotus test driver Roger Becker impressed with his handling of the car and for the rest of filming on Sardinia , Becker became the stunt driver . 
 In October , the second unit travelled to Nassau to film the underwater sequences . To perform the car becoming a submarine , seven different models were used , one for each step of the transformation . One of the models was a fully mobile submarine equipped with an engine built by Miami @-@ based Perry Submarines . The car seen entering the sea was a mock @-@ up shell , propelled off the jetty by a compressed air cannon . During the model sequences , the air bubbles seen appearing from the vehicle were created by Alka @-@ Seltzer tablets . 
 In September , production moved to Egypt . While the Great Sphinx of Giza was shot on the location , lighting problems caused the pyramids to be replaced with miniatures . While construction of the Liparus set continued , the second unit headed by John Glen departed for Mount Asgard , where in July 1976 they staged the film 's pre @-@ credits sequence . Bond film veteran Willy Bogner captured the action , staged by stuntman Rick Sylvester , who earned $ 30 @,@ 000 for the stunt . This stunt cost $ 500 @,@ 000 – the most expensive single movie stunt at that time . 
 The production team returned briefly to the UK to shoot at the Faslane submarine base before setting off to Spain , Portugal and the Bay of Biscay where the supertanker exteriors were filmed . On 5 December 1976 , with principal photography finished , the 007 Stage was formally opened by former Prime Minister Harold Wilson . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme song " Nobody Does It Better " was composed by Marvin Hamlisch , written by Carole Bayer Sager , and performed by Carly Simon . It was the first theme song in the series to be titled differently from the name of the film , although the title is in the lyrics . It was nominated for Best Song but lost to " You Light Up My Life " . 
 The song met immediate success and is featured in numerous films , including Mr. & Mrs. Smith ( 2005 ) , Little Black Book , Lost in Translation , and Bridget Jones : The Edge of Reason ( 2004 ) . In 2004 , it was honoured by the American Film Institute as the 67th greatest song as part of their 100 Years Series . 
 The soundtrack to the film was composed by Marvin Hamlisch , who filled in for veteran John Barry , who was unavailable to work in the United Kingdom because of tax reasons . The soundtrack , in comparison to other Bond films of the time , is more disco @-@ oriented and included a new disco rendition of " The James Bond Theme " titled " Bond 77 " ; several pieces of classical music were also included in the score . For instance , while feeding a duplicitous secretary to a shark , Stromberg plays Bach 's " Air on the G String " , which was famous for accompanying disappointed characters in Hamlet cigar commercials . He then plays the opening string section of the second movement , Andante , of Mozart 's Piano Concerto No. 21 as his hideout Atlantis rises from the sea . The score also includes two pieces of popular film music scored by Maurice Jarre . The Doctor Zhivago theme , which is played on Anya 's music box during the pre @-@ credit sequence , and the theme from Lawrence of Arabia , which appears as background music during a desert sequence . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Spy Who Loved Me opened with a Royal Premiere attended by Princess Anne at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 7 July 1977 . It grossed $ 185 @.@ 4 million worldwide , with $ 46 million in the United States alone . On 25 August 2006 , the film was re @-@ released at the Empire Leicester Square Cinema for one week . It was again shown at the Empire Leicester Square 20 April 2008 when Director Lewis Gilbert attended the first digital screening of the film . 
 Eon executive Charles <unk> said that at a screening attended by Charles , Prince of Wales , during the Union Jack @-@ parachute scene " I have never seen a reaction in the cinema as there was that night . You couldn 't help it . You could not help but stand up . Even Prince Charles stood up . " It is Roger Moore 's favourite Bond film , and many reviewers consider it the best instalment to star the actor . Christopher Null praised the gadgets , particularly the Lotus Esprit car . James Berardinelli of Reelviews said that the film is " suave and sophisticated " , and Barbara Bach proves to be an ideal Bond girl – " attractive , smart , sexy , and dangerous " . Brian Webster stated the special effects were " good for a 1979 [ sic ] film " , and Marvin Hamlisch 's music , " memorable " . Danny Peary described The Spy Who Loved Me as " exceptional ... For once , the big budget was not wasted . Interestingly , while the sets and gimmicks were the most spectacular to date , Bond and the other characters are toned down ( there 's a minimum of slapstick humour ) so that they are more realistic than in other Roger Moore films . Moore gives his best performance in the series ... [ Bond and Anya Amasova ] are an appealing couple , equal in every way . Film is a real treat – a well acted , smartly cast , sexy , visually impressive , lavishly produced , powerfully directed mix of a spy romance and a war @-@ mission film . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times considered the film formulaic and " half an hour too long , thanks to the obligatory shoot- ' em @-@ up conclusion , ... nevertheless the dullest sequence here " but praised Moore 's performance and the film 's " share of self @-@ mockery " , which she found refreshing . 
 The Times placed Jaws and Stromberg as the sixth and seventh best Bond villains ( respectively ) in the series in 2008 , and also named the Esprit as the second best car in the series ( behind the Aston Martin DB5 ) . 
 Marvin Hamlisch was nominated for several awards such as the Academy Award for Best Song , Original Music Score , the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score , Grammy Award for Best Score for a Motion Picture and the BAFTA Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music ( " Nobody Does It Better " ) in 1978 . The film was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Art Direction ( Ken Adam , Peter Lamont and Hugh Scaife ) and a BAFTA for Best Production Design / Art Direction 
 The end credits state " James Bond Will Return in For Your Eyes Only " , but following the success of Star Wars , the originally planned For Your Eyes Only was dropped in favour of the space @-@ themed Moonraker for the next film . Most critics received the film positively : Rotten Tomatoes sampled 47 reviewers and judged 79 % of the reviews to be positive . 
 = = Novelization = = 
 When Ian Fleming sold the film rights to the James Bond novels to Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli , he gave permission only for the title The Spy Who Loved Me to be used . Since the screenplay for the film had nothing to do with Fleming 's original novel , Eon Productions , for the first time , authorised a novelisation based upon the script . This would also be the first regular Bond novel published since Colonel Sun nearly a decade earlier . Christopher Wood , who co @-@ authored the screenplay , was commissioned to write the book titled James Bond , The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 The novelisation and the screenplay , although both written by Wood , are somewhat different . In the novelisation , SMERSH is still active and after James Bond . Their role begins during the pre @-@ title . After the mysterious death of <unk> , SMERSH appears yet again , this time capturing and torturing Bond for the whereabouts of the microfilm that retains plans for a submarine tracking system ( Bond escapes after killing two of the interrogators ) . The appearance of SMERSH conflicts with a number of Bond stories , including the film The Living Daylights ( 1987 ) , in which a character remarks that SMERSH has been defunct for over 20 years . It also differs from the latter half of Fleming 's Bond novels in which SMERSH is said to have been put out of operation . Members of SMERSH from the novelisation include Amasova and her lover Sergei <unk> as well as Colonel @-@ General <unk> , a character from Fleming 's novel From Russia , with Love who has since become the head of SMERSH . In the book , Jaws remains attached to the magnet that Bond dips into the tank , as opposed to the film where Bond releases Jaws into the water . 
 = = Sale of props = = 
 The Lotus Esprit — capable of transforming from car to submarine in the movie — was purchased for £ 616 @,@ 000 at a London auction in October 2013 by Elon Musk , who plans to rebuild the vehicle and attempt to make the fictional dual @-@ purpose car be an actual dual @-@ purpose car ( underwater and on land ) . 
 = FC Barcelona = 
 Futbol Club Barcelona ( Catalan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , commonly known as Barcelona and familiarly as Barça , is a professional football club , based in Barcelona , Catalonia , Spain . 
 Founded in 1899 by a group of Swiss , English and Catalan footballers led by Joan Gamper , the club has become a symbol of Catalan culture and Catalanism , hence the motto " Més que un club " ( More than a club ) . Unlike many other football clubs , the supporters own and operate Barcelona . It is the second most valuable sports team in the world , worth $ 3 @.@ 56 billion , and the world 's second richest football club in terms of revenue , with an annual turnover of € 560 @.@ 8 million . The official Barcelona anthem is the " Cant del Barça " , written by Jaume <unk> and Josep Maria <unk> . 
 Domestically , Barcelona has won 24 La Liga , 28 Copa del Rey , 11 Supercopa de España , 3 Copa Eva Duarte and 2 Copa de la Liga trophies , as well as being the record holder for the latter four competitions . In international club football , Barcelona has won five UEFA Champions League titles , a record four UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , a shared record five UEFA Super Cup , a record three Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup and a record three FIFA Club World Cup trophies . Barcelona was ranked first in the IFFHS Club World Ranking for 1997 , 2009 , 2011 , 2012 and 2015 and currently occupies the third position on the UEFA club rankings . The club has a long @-@ standing rivalry with Real Madrid ; matches between the two teams are referred to as El Clásico . 
 Barcelona is one of the most supported teams in the world , and has the largest social media following in the world among sports teams . Barcelona 's players have won a record number of Ballon d 'Or awards ( 11 ) , as well as a record number of FIFA World Player of the Year awards ( 7 ) . In 2010 , the club made history when three players who came through its youth academy ( Messi , Iniesta and Xavi ) were chosen as the three best players in the world in the FIFA Ballon d 'Or awards , an unprecedented feat for players from the same football school . 
 Barcelona is one of three founding members of the Primera División that have never been relegated from the top division , along with Athletic Bilbao and Real Madrid . In 2009 , Barcelona became the first Spanish club to win the continental treble consisting of La Liga , Copa del Rey , and the UEFA Champions League , and also became the first football club to win six out of six competitions in a single year , completing the sextuple in also winning the Spanish Super Cup , UEFA Super Cup and FIFA Club World Cup . In 2011 , the club became European champions again and won five trophies . This Barcelona team , which reached a record six consecutive Champions League semi @-@ finals and won 14 trophies in just four years under Pep Guardiola , is considered by some in the sport to be the greatest team of all time . In June 2015 , Barcelona became the first European club in history to achieve the continental treble twice . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings of FC Barcelona ( 1899 – 1922 ) = = = 
 On 22 October 1899 , Hans Gamper placed an advertisement in Los Deportes declaring his wish to form a football club ; a positive response resulted in a meeting at the Gimnasio <unk> on 29 November . Eleven players attended — Walter Wild ( the first director of the club ) , Lluís d <unk> , Bartomeu <unk> , Otto Kunzle , Otto Maier , Enric Ducal , Pere Cabot , Carles Pujol , Josep <unk> , John Parsons , and William Parsons — and Foot @-@ Ball Club Barcelona was born . 
 FC Barcelona had a successful start in regional and national cups , competing in the Campionat de Catalunya and the Copa del Rey . In 1902 , the club won its first trophy , the Copa <unk> , and participated in the first Copa del Rey , losing 1 – 2 to <unk> in the final . Hans Gamper — now known as Joan Gamper — became club president in 1908 , finding the club in financial difficulty after not winning a competition since the Campionat de Catalunya in 1905 . Club president on five separate occasions between 1908 and 1925 , he spent 25 years in total at the helm . One of his main achievements was ensuring Barça acquire its own stadium and thus generate a stable income . 
 On 14 March 1909 the team moved into the Camp de la Indústria , a stadium with a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 . To celebrate their new surroundings , the club conducted a logo contest the following year . Carles Comamala won the contest , and his suggestion became the crest that the club still wears – with some minor changes – as of the present day . 
 With the new stadium , Barcelona participated in the inaugural version of the Pyrenees Cup , which , at the time , consisted of the best teams of Languedoc , Midi and Aquitaine ( Southern France ) , the Basque Country and Catalonia ; all were former members of the Marca <unk> region . The contest was the most prestigious in that era . From the inaugural year in 1910 to 1913 , Barcelona won the competition four consecutive times . Carles Comamala played an integral part of the four @-@ time champion , managing the side along with <unk> and Jack Greenwell . The latter became the club 's first full @-@ time coach in 1917 . The last edition was held in 1914 in the city of Barcelona , which local rivals Espanyol won . 
 During the same period , the club changed its official language from Castilian to Catalan and gradually evolved into an important symbol of Catalan identity . For many fans , participating in the club had less to do with the game itself and more with being a part of the club 's collective identity . On 4 February 1917 , the club held its first testimonial match to honour Ramón Torralba , who played from 1913 to 1928 . The match was against local side Terrassa : Barcelona won 6 – 2 . 
 Gamper simultaneously launched a campaign to recruit more club members , and by 1922 , the club had more than 20 @,@ 000 , who helped finance a new stadium . The club then moved to the new Les Cortes , which they inaugurated the same year . Les Cortes had an initial capacity of 30 @,@ 000 , and in the 1940s it was expanded to 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Gamper recruited Jack Greenwell as the first full @-@ time manager in Barcelona 's history . After this hiring , the club 's fortunes began to improve on the field . During the Gamper @-@ led era , Barcelona won eleven <unk> de Catalunya , six Copa del Rey and four Pyrenees Cups and enjoyed its first " golden age " . 
 = = = Rivera , Republic and Civil War ( 1923 – 1957 ) = = = 
 On 14 June 1925 , in a spontaneous reaction against Primo de Rivera 's dictatorship , the crowd in the stadium jeered the Royal March . As a reprisal , the ground was closed for six months and Gamper was forced to relinquish the presidency of the club . This coincided with the transition to professional football , and , in 1926 , the directors of Barcelona publicly claimed , for the first time , to operate a professional football club . On 3 July 1927 , the club held a second testimonial match for Paulino Alcántara , against the Spanish national team . To kick off the match , local journalist and pilot Josep <unk> dropped the ball onto the pitch from his airplane . In 1928 , victory in the Spanish Cup was celebrated with a poem titled " Oda a Platko " , which was written by a member of the Generation of ' 27 , Rafael Alberti , inspired by the heroic performance of the Barcelona goalkeeper , Franz Platko . On 23 June 1929 , Barcelona won the inaugural Spanish League . A year after winning the championship , on 30 July 1930 , Gamper committed suicide after a period of depression brought on by personal and financial problems . 
 Although they continued to have players of the standing of Josep <unk> , the club now entered a period of decline , in which political conflict overshadowed sports throughout society . Attendance at matches dropped as the citizens of Barcelona were occupied with discussing political matters . Although the team won the Campionat de Catalunya in 1930 , 1931 , 1932 , 1934 , 1936 and 1938 , success at a national level ( with the exception of the 1937 disputed title ) evaded them . 
 A month after the Spanish Civil War began in 1936 , several players from Barcelona enlisted in the ranks of those who fought against the military uprising , along with players from Athletic Bilbao . On 6 August , Falangist soldiers near Guadarrama murdered club president Josep Sunyol , a representative of the pro @-@ independence political party . He was dubbed the martyr of <unk> , and his murder was a defining moment in the history of FC Barcelona and Catalan identity . In the summer of 1937 , the squad was on tour in Mexico and the United States , where it was received as an ambassador of the Second Spanish Republic . The tour led to the financial security of the club , but also resulted in half of the team seeking asylum in Mexico and France , making it harder for the remaining team to contest for trophies . 
 On 16 March 1938 , Barcelona came under aerial bombardment from the Italian Air Force , causing more than 3 @,@ 000 deaths , with one of the bombs hitting the club 's offices . A few months later , Catalonia came under occupation and as a symbol of the " undisciplined " Catalanism , the club , now down to just 3 @,@ 486 members , faced a number of restrictions . All signs of regional nationalism , including language , flag and other signs of separatism were banned throughout Spain . The Catalan flag was banned and the club were prohibited from using non @-@ Spanish names . These measures forced the club to change its name to Club de Fútbol Barcelona and to remove the Catalan flag from its crest . 
 In 1943 , Barcelona faced rivals Real Madrid in the semi @-@ finals of Copa del Generalísimo ( now the Copa del Rey ) . The first match at Les Corts was won by Barcelona 3 – 0 . Real Madrid comfortably won the second leg , beating Barcelona 11 – 1 . According to football writer Sid Lowe , " There have been relatively few mentions of the game [ since ] and it is not a result that has been particularly celebrated in Madrid . Indeed , the 11 – 1 occupies a far more prominent place in Barcelona 's history . " It has been alleged by local journalist Paco Aguilar that Barcelona 's players were threatened by police in the changing room , though nothing was ever proven . 
 Despite the difficult political situation , CF Barcelona enjoyed considerable success during the 1940s and 1950s . In 1945 , with Josep Samitier as coach and players like César , Ramallets and Velasco , they won La Liga for the first time since 1929 . They added two more titles in 1948 and 1949 . In 1949 , they also won the first Copa Latina . In June 1950 , Barcelona signed László Kubala , who was to be an important figure at the club . 
 On a rainy Sunday of 1951 , the crowd left Les Corts stadium after a 2 – 1 win against Santander by foot , refusing to catch any trams , and surprising the Francoist authorities . The reason was simple : at the same time , a tram strike was taking place in Barcelona , receiving the support of blaugrana fans . Events like this made CF Barcelona represent much more than just Catalonia and many progressive Spaniards saw the club as a staunch defender of rights and freedoms . 
 Coach Ferdinand <unk> and László Kubala led the team to five different trophies including La Liga , the Copa del Generalísimo , the Copa Latina , the Copa Eva Duarte , and the Copa Martini Rossi in 1952 . In 1953 , the club won La Liga and the Copa del Generalísimo again . 
 = = = Club de Fútbol Barcelona ( 1957 – 1978 ) = = = 
 With Helenio Herrera as coach , a young Luis Suárez , the European Footballer of the Year in 1960 , and two influential Hungarians recommended by Kubala , Sándor Kocsis and Zoltán <unk> , the team won another national double in 1959 and a La Liga and Fairs Cup double in 1960 . In 1961 , they became the first club to beat Real Madrid in a European Cup play @-@ off . However , they lost 2 – 3 to Benfica in the final . 
 The 1960s were less successful for the club , with Real Madrid monopolising La Liga . The completion of the Camp Nou , finished in 1957 , meant the club had little money to spend on new players . The 1960s saw the emergence of Josep Maria <unk> and Carles Rexach , and the club won the Copa del Generalísimo in 1963 and the Fairs Cup in 1966 . Barcelona restored some pride by beating Real Madrid 1 – 0 in the 1968 Copa del Generalísimo final at the Bernabéu in front of Franco , with coach Salvador Artigas , a former republican pilot in the civil war . With the end of Franco 's dictatorship in 1974 , the club changed its official name back to Futbol Club Barcelona and reverted the crest to its original design , including the original letters once again . 
 The 1973 – 74 season saw the arrival of Johan Cruyff , who was bought for a world record £ 920 @,@ 000 from Ajax . Already an established player with Ajax , Cruyff quickly won over the Barcelona fans when he told the European press that he chose Barcelona over Real Madrid because he could not play for a club associated with Francisco Franco . He further endeared himself when he named his son Jordi , after the local Catalan Saint George . Next to champions like Juan Manuel <unk> , Carles Rexach and Hugo Sotil , he helped the club win the 1973 – 74 season for the first time since 1960 , defeating Real Madrid 5 – 0 at the Santiago Bernabéu along the way . He was crowned European Footballer of the Year in 1973 during his first season with Barcelona ( his second Ballon d 'Or win ; he won his first while playing for Ajax in 1971 ) . Cruyff received this prestigious award a third time ( the first player to do so ) in 1974 , while he was still with Barcelona . 
 = = = Núñez and the stabilisation years ( 1978 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In 1978 , Josep Lluís Núñez became the first elected president of FC Barcelona , and , since then , the members of Barcelona have elected the club president . The process of electing a president of FC Barcelona was closely tied to Spain 's transition to democracy in 1974 and the end of Franco 's dictatorship . The new president 's main objective was to develop Barcelona into a world @-@ class club by giving it stability both on and off the pitch . His presidency was to last for 22 years , and it deeply affected the image of Barcelona , as Núñez held to a strict policy regarding wages and discipline , letting go of such players as Maradona , Romário and Ronaldo rather than meeting their demands . 
 On 16 May 1979 , the club won its first Cup Winners Cup by beating Fortuna Düsseldorf 4 – 3 in Basel in a final watched by more than 30 @,@ 000 travelling blaugrana fans . The same year , Núñez began to invest in the club 's youth program by converting La Masia to a dormitory for young academy players from abroad . The name of the dormitory would later become synonymous with the youth program of Barcelona . 
 In June 1982 , Diego Maradona was signed for a world record fee of £ 5 million from Boca Juniors . In the following season , under coach Luis , Barcelona won the Copa del Rey , beating Real Madrid . However , Maradona 's time with Barcelona was short @-@ lived and he soon left for Napoli . At the start of the 1984 – 85 season , Terry Venables was hired as manager and he won La Liga with noteworthy displays by German midfielder Bernd Schuster . The next season , he took the team to their second European Cup final , only to lose on penalties to Steaua București during a dramatic evening in Seville . 
 Around this time , tensions began to arise between what was perceived as president Núñez 's dictatorial rule and the nationalistic support group , Boixos Nois . The group , identified with a left @-@ wing separatism , repeatedly demanded the resignation of Núñez and openly defied him through chants and banners at matches . At the same time , Barcelona experienced an eruption in skinheads , who often identified with a right @-@ wing separatism . The skinheads slowly transferred the Boixos Nois ' ideology from liberalism to fascism , which caused division within the group and a sudden support for Núñez 's presidency . Inspired by British hooligans , the remaining Boixos Nois became violent , causing havoc leading to large @-@ scale arrests . 
 After the 1986 FIFA World Cup , Barcelona signed the English top @-@ scorer Gary Lineker , along with goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta , but the team could not achieve success , as Schuster was excluded from the team . Terry Venables was subsequently fired at the beginning of the 1987 – 88 season and replaced with Luis Aragonés . The season finished with the players rebelling against president Núñez , in an event known as the Hesperia mutiny , and a 1 – 0 victory at the Copa del Rey final against Real Sociedad . 
 = = = = Dream Team = = = = 
 In 1988 , Johan Cruyff returned to the club as manager and he assembled the so @-@ called Dream Team . He used a mix of Spanish players like Pep Guardiola , José Mari <unk> and Txiki <unk> while signing international players such as Ronald Koeman , Michael Laudrup , Romário and Hristo Stoichkov . 
 It was ten years after the inception of the youth program , La Masia , when the young players began to graduate and play for their first team . One of the first graduates , who would later earn international acclaim , was previous Barcelona coach Pep Guardiola . Under Cruyff 's guidance , Barcelona won four consecutive La Liga titles from 1991 to 1994 . They beat Sampdoria in both the 1989 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup final and the 1992 European Cup final at Wembley , with a free kick goal from Dutch international Ronald Koeman . They also won a Copa del Rey in 1990 , the European Super Cup in 1992 and three Supercopa de España trophies . With 11 trophies , Cruyff became the club 's most successful manager at that point . He also became the club 's longest consecutive serving manager , serving eight years . Cruyff 's fortune was to change , and , in his final two seasons , he failed to win any trophies and fell out with president Núñez , resulting in his departure . On the legacy of Cruyff 's football philosophy and the passing style of play he introduced to the club , future coach of Barcelona Pep Guardiola would state , " Cruyff built the cathedral , our job is to maintain and renovate it . " 
 Reacting to Cruyff 's departure , an independent protest group was organised by Armand <unk> , Joan Laporta and Alfons <unk> . The objective of the group , called L <unk> Blau , was to oppose the presidency of Núñez , which they regarded as a corruption of the club 's traditional values . Laporta would later take over the presidency of Barcelona in 2003 . 
 Cruyff was briefly replaced by Bobby Robson , who took charge of the club for a single season in 1996 – 97 . He recruited Ronaldo from his previous club , PSV and delivered a cup treble , winning the Copa del Rey , UEFA Cup Winners Cup and the Supercopa de España . Despite his success , Robson was only ever seen as a short @-@ term solution , while the club waited for Louis van Gaal to become available . 
 Like Maradona , Ronaldo only stayed a short time before he left for Internazionale . However , new heroes emerged , such as Luís Figo , Patrick Kluivert , Luis Enrique and Rivaldo , and the team won a Copa del Rey and La Liga double in 1998 . In 1999 , the club celebrated its <unk> , winning the Primera División title , and Rivaldo became the fourth Barcelona player to be awarded European Footballer of the Year . Despite this domestic success , the failure to emulate Real Madrid in the Champions League led to van Gaal and Núñez resigning in 2000 . 
 = = = Exit Núñez , enter Laporta ( 2000 – 2008 ) = = = 
 The departures of Núñez and van Gaal were hardly noticed by the fans when compared to that of Luís Figo , then club vice @-@ captain . Figo had become a cult hero , and was considered by Catalans to be one of their own . However , Barcelona fans were distraught by Figo 's decision to join arch @-@ rivals Real Madrid , and , during subsequent visits to the Camp Nou , Figo was given an extremely hostile reception . Upon his first return , a piglet 's head and a full bottle of whiskey were thrown at him from the crowd . The next three years saw the club in decline , and managers came and <unk> van Gaal was replaced by Llorenç Serra Ferrer who , despite an extensive investment in players in the summer of 2000 , presided over a mediocre league campaign and a humiliating first @-@ round Champions League exit , and was eventually dismissed late in the season . Long @-@ serving coach Carles Rexach was appointed as his replacement , initially on a temporary basis , and managed to at least steer the club to the last Champions League spot on the final day of the season . Despite better form in La Liga and a good run to the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League , Rexach was never viewed as a long @-@ term solution and that summer Louis van Gaal returned to the club for a second spell as manager . What followed , despite another decent Champions League performance , was one of the worst La Liga campaigns in the club 's history , with the team as low as 15th in February 2003 . This led to van Gaal 's resignation and replacement for the rest of the campaign by Radomir Antić , though a sixth @-@ place finish was the best that he could manage . At the end of the season , Antić 's short @-@ term contract was not renewed , and club president Joan Gaspart resigned , his position having been made completely untenable by such a disastrous season on top of the club 's overall decline in fortunes since he became president three years prior . 
 After the disappointment of the Gaspart era , the combination of a new young president , Joan Laporta , and a young new manager , former Dutch and Milan star Frank Rijkaard , saw the club bounce back . On the field , an influx of international players , including Ronaldinho , Deco , Henrik Larsson , Ludovic Giuly , Samuel Eto 'o , and Rafael Márquez , combined with home grown Spanish players , such as Carles Puyol , Andrés Iniesta , Xavi and Víctor Valdés , led to the club 's return to success . Barcelona won La Liga and the Supercopa de España in 2004 – 05 , and Ronaldinho and Eto 'o were voted first and third , respectively , in the FIFA World Player of the Year awards . 
 In the 2005 – 06 season , Barcelona repeated their league and Supercup successes . The pinnacle of the league season arrived at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in a 3 – 0 win over Real Madrid . It was Frank Rijkaard 's second victory at the Bernabéu , making him the first Barcelona manager to win there twice . Ronaldinho 's performance was so impressive that after his second goal , which was Barcelona 's third , some Real Madrid fans gave him a standing ovation . In the Champions League , Barcelona beat the English club Arsenal in the final . Trailing 1 – 0 to a 10 @-@ man Arsenal and with less than 15 minutes remaining , they came back to win 2 – 1 , with substitute Henrik Larsson , in his final appearance for the club , setting up goals for Samuel Eto 'o and fellow substitute Juliano Belletti , for the club 's first European Cup victory in 14 years . 
 Despite being the favourites and starting strongly , Barcelona finished the 2006 – 07 season without trophies . A pre @-@ season US tour was later blamed for a string of injuries to key players , including leading scorer Eto 'o and rising star Lionel Messi . There was open feuding as Eto 'o publicly criticized coach Frank Rijkaard and Ronaldinho . Ronaldinho also admitted that a lack of fitness affected his form . In La Liga , Barcelona were in first place for much of the season , but inconsistency in the New Year saw Real Madrid overtake them to become champions . Barcelona advanced to the semi @-@ finals of the Copa del Rey , winning the first leg against Getafe 5 – 2 , with a goal from Messi bringing comparison to Diego Maradona 's goal of the century , but then lost the second leg 4 – 0 . They took part in the 2006 FIFA Club World Cup , but were beaten by a late goal in the final against Brazilian side Internacional . In the Champions League , Barcelona were knocked out of the competition in the last 16 by eventual runners @-@ up Liverpool on away goals . 
 Barcelona finished the 2007 – 08 season third in La Liga and reached the semi @-@ finals of the UEFA Champions League and Copa del Rey , both times losing to the eventual champions , Manchester United and Valencia , respectively . The day after a 4 – 1 defeat to Real Madrid , Joan Laporta announced that Barcelona B coach Pep Guardiola would take over Frank Rijkaard 's duties on 30 June 2008 . 
 = = = Guardiola era ( 2008 – 2012 ) = = = 
 FC Barcelona B youth manager Pep Guardiola took over Frank Rijkaard 's duties at the conclusion of the season . Guardiola brought with him the now famous tiki @-@ taka style of play he had been taught during his time in the Barcelona youth teams . In the process , Guardiola sold Ronaldinho and Deco and started building the Barcelona team around Xavi , Andrés Iniesta and Messi . 
 Barça beat Athletic Bilbao 4 – 1 in the 2009 Copa del Rey Final , winning the competition for a record @-@ breaking 25th time . A historic 2 – 6 victory against Real Madrid followed three days later and ensured that Barcelona became La Liga champions for the 2008 – 09 season . Barça finished the season by beating the previous year 's Champions League winners Manchester United 2 – 0 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome to win their third Champions League title and completed the first ever treble won by a Spanish team . The team went on to win the 2009 Supercopa de España against Athletic Bilbao and the 2009 UEFA Super Cup against Shakhtar Donetsk , becoming the first European club to win both domestic and European Super Cups following a treble . In December 2009 , Barcelona won the 2009 FIFA Club World Cup , and became the first football club ever to accomplish the sextuple . Barcelona accomplished two new records in Spanish football in 2010 as they retained the La Liga trophy with 99 points and won the Spanish Super Cup trophy for a ninth time . 
 After Laporta 's departure from the club in June 2010 , Sandro Rosell was soon elected as the new president . The elections were held on 13 June , where he got 61 @.@ 35 % ( 57 @,@ 088 votes , a record ) of total votes . Rosell signed David Villa from Valencia for € 40 million and Javier Mascherano from Liverpool for € 19 million . 
 At the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa , Barcelona players that had graduated from the club 's La Masia youth system would play a major role in Spain becoming world champions . On 11 July , seven players who came through the academy participated in the final , six of which were Barcelona players whom started the match , with Iniesta scoring the winning goal against the Netherlands . 
 In November 2010 , Barcelona defeated their main rival , Real Madrid 5 – 0 in El Clásico . In the 2010 – 11 season , Barcelona retained the La Liga trophy , their third title in succession , finishing with 96 points . In April 2011 , the club reached the Copa del Rey final , losing 1 – 0 to Real Madrid at the Mestalla Stadium in Valencia . In May , Barcelona defeated Manchester United in the 2011 Champions League Final 3 – 1 held at Wembley Stadium , a repeat of the 2009 final , winning their fourth European Cup . In August 2011 , La Masia graduate Cesc Fàbregas was bought from Arsenal and he would help Barcelona defend the Spanish Supercup against Real Madrid . The Supercup victory brought the total number of official trophies to 73 , matching the number of titles won by Real Madrid . 
 Later the same month , Barcelona won the UEFA Super Cup after defeating Porto 2 – 0 thanks to goals from Lionel Messi and Cesc Fàbregas . This extended the club 's overall number of official trophies to 74 , surpassing Real Madrid 's total amount of official trophies . The UEFA Super Cup victory also marked another impressive achievement as Pep Guardiola won his 12th trophy out of 15 possible in only three years at the helm of the club , becoming the all @-@ time record holder of most titles won as a coach at FC Barcelona . 
 In December , Barcelona won the FIFA Club World Cup for a record second time since its establishment , by beating the Brazilian 2011 Copa Libertadores holders , Santos , 4 – 0 in the final thanks to two goals from Lionel Messi and goals from Xavi and Fàbregas . As a result , the overall trophy haul during the reign of Guardiola was further extended and saw Barcelona win their 13th trophy out of 24 possible in four years , continuing their high @-@ quality performance in recent world football competitions . 
 In the 2011 – 12 season , Barcelona lost the semi @-@ finals of the UEFA Champions League against Chelsea . Right afterward , coach Pep Guardiola , who had been on a rolling contract and had faced criticism over his recent tactics and squad selections , announced that he would step down as manager on 30 June and be succeeded by assistant Tito Vilanova . Guardiola finished his tenure with Barça winning the Copa del Rey final 3 – 0 , bringing the tally to 14 trophies that Barça had won under his coaching . 
 = = = Recent history ( 2012 – ) = = = 
 It was announced in summer of 2012 that Tito Vilanova , assistant manager at FC Barcelona , would take over from Pep Guardiola as manager . Following his appointment , Barcelona went on an incredible run that saw them hold the top spot on the league table for the entire season , recording only two losses and amassing 100 points . Their top scorer once again was Lionel Messi , who scored 46 goals in the League , including two hat @-@ tricks . On 11 May 2013 Barcelona were crowned as the Spanish football champions for the 22nd time , still with four games left to play . Ultimately Barcelona ended the season 15 points clear of rivals Real Madrid , despite losing 2 – 1 to them at the beginning of March . They reached the semifinal stage of both the Copa del Rey and the Champions League , going out to Real Madrid and Bayern Munich respectively . On 19 July , it was announced that Vilanova was resigning as Barcelona manager because his throat cancer had returned , and he would be receiving treatment for the second time after a three @-@ month medical leave in December 2012 . 
 On 22 July 2013 , Gerardo ' Tata ' Martino was confirmed as manager of FC Barcelona for the 2013 – 14 season . Barcelona 's first official games under Martino were the home and away legs of the 2013 Spanish Supercup , which Barça won 1 – 1 on away goals . On 23 January 2014 , Sandro Rosell resigned as president by the admissibility of the complaint for alleged misappropriation following the transfer of Neymar . Josep Maria Bartomeu replaced him to finish the term in 2016 . 
 In April 2014 , FIFA banned the club from buying players for the next two transfer windows following the violation of the FIFA 's rules about the transfer of footballers aged under 18 . A statement on FIFA 's website read " With regard to the case in question , FC Barcelona has been found to be in breach of art . 19 of the Regulations in the case of ten minor players and to have committed several other concurrent infringements in the context of other players , including under Annexe 2 of the Regulations . The Disciplinary Committee regarded the infringements as serious and decided to sanction the club with a transfer ban at both national and international level for two complete and consecutive transfer periods , together with a fine of CHF 450 @,@ 000 . Additionally , the club was granted a period of 90 days in which to regularise the situation of all minor players concerned . " FIFA rejected an appeal in August but the pending appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport allowed Barcelona to sign players during the summer of 2014 . 
 On 17 May , in a game where they needed to defeat Atlético Madrid ( who had eliminated them from the UEFA Champions League in the quarterfinals earlier in the year ) to be crowned champions of La Liga for the 23rd time , they drew after Atlético defender Diego <unk> headed in the equalizer in the 49th minute , giving Atlético the championship . 
 Two days later , it was announced that Luis Enrique would return to Barcelona as head coach , after he agreed to a two @-@ year deal . He was recommended by sporting director Andoni Zubizarreta , his former national teammate . Following Enrique 's arrival , Barcelona broke their transfer record when they paid Liverpool F.C. between € 81 to € 94 million for striker Luis Suárez , who was serving a four @-@ month ban from all football @-@ related activity imposed by the FIFA Disciplinary Committee after biting Italian defender Giorgio <unk> during his appearance for Uruguay in a World Cup group stage match . 
 In late December , Barcelona 's appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport was unsuccessful and the original transfer ban was reinstated , leaving the club unable to utilise the 2015 winter and summer transfer windows . On 5 January 2015 , <unk> was sacked by the board after 4 years as director of football . The next month , Barcelona announced the formation of a new Football Area Technical Commission , made up of vice @-@ president Jordi Mestre , board member Javier <unk> , Carles Rexach and <unk> <unk> . 
 Barcelona won the treble in the 2014 – 2015 season , winning La Liga , Copa del Rey and UEFA Champions League titles , and became the first European team to have won the treble twice . On 17 May , the club clinched their 23rd La Liga title after defeating Atlético Madrid . This was Barcelona 's seventh La Liga title in the last ten years . On 30 May , the club defeated Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final at Camp Nou . On 6 June , Barcelona won the UEFA Champions League final with a 3 – 1 win against Juventus , which completed the treble , the club 's second in 6 years . Barcelona 's attacking trio of Messi , Suárez and Neymar , dubbed MSN , scored 122 goals in all competitions , the most in a season for an attacking trio in Spanish football history . 
 On 11 August , Barcelona started the 2015 – 16 season winning a joint record fifth European Super Cup by beating Sevilla FC 5 – 4 in the 2015 UEFA Super Cup . They ended the year with a 3 – 0 win over Argentine club River Plate in the 2015 FIFA Club World Cup Final on 20 December to win the trophy for a record third time , with Suárez , Messi and Iniesta the top three players of the tournament . The FIFA Club World Cup was Barcelona 's 20th international title , a record only matched by Egyptian club Al Ahly SC . By scoring 180 goals in 2015 in all competitions , Barcelona set the record for most goals scored in a calendar year , breaking Real Madrid 's record of 178 goals scored in 2014 . 
 On 4 January 2016 , Barcelona 's transfer ban ended . The same day , they registered 77 players across all categories and ages , and both last summer signings Arda Turan and Aleix Vidal became eligible to play with the first team . On 10 February , qualifying for the sixth Copa del Rey final in the last eight seasons , Luis Enrique 's Barcelona broke the club 's record of 28 consecutive games unbeaten in all competitions set by Guardiola 's team in the 2010 – 11 season , with a 1 – 1 draw with Valencia in the second leg of the 2015 – 16 Copa del Rey . With a 5 – 1 win at Rayo Vallecano on 3 March , Barcelona 's 35th match unbeaten , the club broke Real Madrid 's Spanish record of 34 games unbeaten in all competitions from the 1988 – 1989 season . After Barça reached 39 matches unbeaten , the run has ended on 2 April 2016 with a 2 – 1 defeat to Real Madrid at Camp Nou . On 14 May 2016 , Barcelona won their sixth La Liga title in eight seasons with a 3 – 0 win in the final day of the season at Granada CF . 
 = = Support = = 
 The nickname <unk> for a Barcelona supporter is derived from the Catalan cul ( English : arse ) , as the spectators at the first stadium , Camp de la Indústria , sat with their culs over the stand . In Spain , about 25 % of the population is said to be Barça sympathisers , second behind Real Madrid , supported by 32 % of the population . Throughout Europe , Barcelona is the favourite second @-@ choice club . The club 's membership figures have seen a significant increase from 100 @,@ 000 in the 2003 – 04 season to 170 @,@ 000 in September 2009 , the sharp rise being attributed to the influence of Ronaldinho and then @-@ president Joan Laporta 's media strategy that focused on Spanish and English online media . 
 In addition to membership , as of 2015 there are 1 @,@ 267 officially registered fan clubs , called penyes , around the world . The fan clubs promote Barcelona in their locality and receive beneficial offers when visiting Barcelona . Among the best supported teams globally , Barcelona has the highest social media following in the world among sports teams , with over 90 million Facebook fans as of February 2016 . The club has had many prominent people among its supporters , including Pope John Paul II , who was an honorary member , and former prime minister of Spain José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero . FC Barcelona has the second highest average attendance of European football clubs only behind Borussia Dortmund . 
 = = Club rivalries = = 
 = = = El Clásico = = = 
 There is often a fierce rivalry between the two strongest teams in a national league , and this is particularly the case in La Liga , where the game between Barcelona and Real Madrid is known as El Clásico . From the start of national competitions the clubs were seen as representatives of two rival regions in Spain : Catalonia and Castile , as well as of the two cities . The rivalry reflects what many regard as the political and cultural tensions felt between Catalans and the Castilians , seen by one author as a re @-@ enactment of the Spanish Civil War . 
 During the dictatorships of Miguel Primo de Rivera ( 1923 – 1930 ) and especially of Francisco Franco ( 1939 – 1975 ) , all regional cultures were suppressed . All of the languages spoken in Spanish territory , except Spanish ( Castilian ) itself , were officially banned . <unk> the Catalan people 's desire for freedom , Barça became ' More than a club ' ( Més que un club ) for the Catalans . According to Manuel Vázquez Montalbán , the best way for the Catalans to demonstrate their identity was by joining Barça . It was less risky than joining a clandestine anti @-@ Franco movement , and allowed them to express their dissidence . During Franco 's regime , however , the blaugrana team was granted profit due to its good relationship with the dictator at management level , even giving two awards to him . 
 On the other hand , Real Madrid was widely seen as the embodiment of the sovereign oppressive centralism and the fascist regime at management level and beyond : Santiago <unk> , the former club president for whom their stadium is named , fought on the Nationalist side during the Spanish Civil War . However , during the Spanish Civil War , members of both clubs such as Josep Sunyol and Rafael Sánchez Guerra suffered at the hands of Franco supporters . 
 During the 1950s the rivalry was exacerbated further when there was a controversy surrounding the transfer of Alfredo di Stéfano , who finally played for Real Madrid and was key to their subsequent success . The 1960s saw the rivalry reach the European stage when they met twice in a controversial knock @-@ out round of the European Cup , with Madrid receiving unfavourable treatment from the referee . In 2002 , the European encounter between the clubs was dubbed the " Match of The Century " by Spanish media , and Madrid 's win was watched by more than 500 million people . 
 = = = El derbi <unk> = = = 
 Barça 's local rival has always been Espanyol . Blanc @-@ i @-@ <unk> , being one of the clubs granted royal patronage , was founded exclusively by Spanish football fans , unlike the multinational nature of Barça 's primary board . The founding message of the club was clearly anti @-@ Barcelona , and they disapprovingly saw FC Barcelona as a team of foreigners . The rivalry was strengthened by what <unk> saw as a provocative representative of Madrid . Their original ground was in the affluent district of Sarrià . 
 Traditionally , Espanyol was seen by the vast majority of Barcelona 's citizens as a club which cultivated a kind of compliance to the central authority , in stark contrast to Barça 's revolutionary spirit . Also in the 1960s and 1970s , while FC Barcelona acted as an integrating force for Catalonia 's new arrivals from poorer regions of Spain expecting to find a better life , Espanyol drew their support mainly from sectors close to the regime such as policemen , military officers , civil servants and career fascists . 
 In 1918 Espanyol started a counter @-@ petition against autonomy , which at that time had become a pertinent issue . Later on , an Espanyol supporter group would join the <unk> in the Spanish Civil War , siding with the fascists . Despite these differences in ideology , the derbi has always been more relevant to Espanyol supporters than Barcelona ones due to the difference in objectives . In recent years the rivalry has become less political , as Espanyol translated its official name and anthem from Spanish to Catalan . 
 Though it is the most played local derby in the history of La Liga , it is also the most unbalanced , with Barcelona overwhelmingly dominant . In the <unk> <unk> league table , Espanyol has only managed to end above Barça on three occasions from 81 seasons ( 1928 – 2016 ) and the only all @-@ Catalan Copa del Rey final was won by Barça in 1957 . Espanyol has the consolation of achieving the largest margin win with a 6 – 0 in 1951 , while Barcelona 's biggest win was 5 – 0 on six occasions ( in 1933 , 1947 , 1964 , 1975 , 1992 and 2016 ) . Espanyol achieved a 2 – 1 win against Barça during the 2008 – 09 season , becoming the first team to defeat Barcelona at Camp Nou in their treble @-@ winning season . 
 = = = Rivalry with A.C. Milan = = = 
 Barcelona 's rival in European football is Italian club A.C. Milan . The team against which Barcelona has played the most matches ( 19 ) , it is also the second most played match in European competitions after Bayern Munich – Real Madrid ( 22 ) . Two of the most successful clubs in Europe , Milan has won seven European Cups to Barça 's five , while both clubs have won a record five European Super Cups . Barcelona and Milan have won other continental titles , which make them the first and third most decorated teams in world football , with 20 and 18 titles respectively . 
 Barcelona leads the Head @-@ To @-@ Head record with eight wins and five defeats . The first encounter between the two clubs was in the 1959 – 60 European Cup . They faced off in the round of 16 and Barça won the tie on a 7 – 1 aggregate score ( 0 – 2 in Milan and 5 – 1 in Barcelona ) . While Milan had never knocked Barcelona out of the European Cup , they 've beaten Johan Cruyff 's Dream Team 4 – 0 in the 1994 UEFA Champions League Final , despite being the underdogs . In 2013 , however , Barcelona made a " historic " comeback from a 0 – 2 first leg defeat in the round of 16 of the 2012 – 13 UEFA Champions League , winning 4 – 0 at the Camp Nou . 
 = = Finances and ownership = = 
 In 2010 , Forbes evaluated Barcelona 's worth to be around € 752 million ( USD $ 1 billion ) , ranking them fourth after Manchester United , Real Madrid and Arsenal , based on figures from the 2008 – 09 season . According to Deloitte , Barcelona had a recorded revenue of € 366 million in the same period , ranking second to Real Madrid , who generated € 401 million in revenue . In 2013 , Forbes magazine ranked Barcelona the third most valuable sports team in the world , behind Real Madrid and Manchester United , with a value of $ 2 @.@ 6 billion . In 2014 , Forbes ranked them the second most valuable sports team in the world , worth $ 3 @.@ 2 billion , and Deloitte ranked them the world 's fourth richest football club in terms of revenue , with an annual turnover of € 484 @.@ 6 million . 
 Along with Real Madrid , Athletic Bilbao and Osasuna , Barcelona is organised as a registered association . Unlike a limited company , it is not possible to purchase shares in the club , but only membership . The members of Barcelona , called socis , form an assembly of delegates which is the highest governing body of the club . As of 2016 the club has 140 @,@ 000 socis . 
 = = Records = = 
 Xavi presently holds the team record for most number of total games played ( 767 ) and the record number of La Liga appearances ( 505 ) , Carles Puyol comes second with 593 in all competitions and 392 in the League . 
 Barcelona 's all @-@ time highest goalscorer in all competitions ( including friendlies ) is Lionel Messi with 482 goals , surpassing Paulino Alcántara 's record ( 369 goals ) held for 87 years , as well as being the highest goalscorer in official competitions with 453 goals . He is also the record goalscorer for Barcelona in European ( 86 goals ) and international club competitions ( 91 goals ) , and the record league scorer with 312 goals in La Liga . Alongside Messi , three other players have managed to score over 100 league goals at Barcelona : César ( 192 ) , László Kubala ( 131 ) and Samuel Eto 'o ( 108 ) . Josep Samitier is the club 's highest goalscorer in the Copa del Rey , with 65 goals . 
 László Kubala holds La Liga record of most goals scored in one match , with seven goals against Sporting de Gijón in 1952 . Lionel Messi , with five goals against Bayer Leverkusen in 2012 , has the Champions League record . Eulogio Martínez became Barça 's top goalscorer in a cup game , when he scored seven goals against Atlético Madrid in 1957 . 
 Barcelona goalkeepers have won a record number of Zamora trophies ( 20 ) , with Antoni Ramallets and Víctor Valdés winning a record five each . Valdés had a ratio of 0 @.@ 832 goals @-@ conceded @-@ per @-@ game , a La Liga record , and he also holds the record for longest period without conceding a goal ( 896 minutes ) in all competitions for Barcelona . Claudio Bravo has the record of best unbeaten start in a season in La Liga history ( 754 minutes ) . 
 Barcelona 's longest serving manager is Jack Greenwell , with nine years in two spells ( 1917 – 1924 ) and ( 1931 – 1933 ) , and Pep Guardiola is the club 's most successful manager ( 14 trophies in 4 years ) . The most successful Barcelona players are Andrés Iniesta and Messi ( 28 trophies ) , surpassing Xavi ( 25 trophies ) . 
 Barcelona 's Camp Nou is the largest stadium in Europe . The club 's highest home attendance was 120 @,@ 000 in a European Cup quarter @-@ final against Juventus on 3 March 1986 . The modernisation of Camp Nou during the 1990s and the introduction of all @-@ seater stands means the record will not be broken for the foreseeable future as the current capacity of the stadium is 99 @,@ 354 . 
 El Barça de les <unk> Copes is the first team in Spanish football to have won five trophies in a single season ( 1951 – 1952 ) . Barcelona is the only club to have played in every season of European competitions since they started in 1955 . On 18 December 2009 , alongside being the only Spanish club to achieve the continental treble , Barcelona became the first ever football team to complete the sextuple . On July 2014 , Barcelona signed Luis Suárez from Liverpool F.C. for about £ <unk> , the highest transfer fee in the Club 's history . In 2016 , the club set a Spanish record for most consecutive games unbeaten in all competitions ( 39 ) . 
 Barcelona 's La Masia is ranked by the International Centre for Sports Studies ( <unk> ) as the academy that produces more top @-@ level players than any other academy in the world . 
 = = Crest and colours = = 
 The club 's original crest was a quartered diamond @-@ shaped crest topped by the Crown of Aragon and the bat of King James , and surrounded by two branches , one of a laurel tree and the other a palm . In 1910 the club held a competition among its members to design a new crest . The winner was Carles Comamala , who at the time played for the club . Comamala 's suggestion became the crest that the club wears today , with some minor variations . The crest consists of the St George Cross in the upper @-@ left corner with the Catalan flag beside it , and the team colours at the bottom . 
 The blue and red colours of the shirt were first worn in a match against Hispania in 1900 . Several competing theories have been put forth for the blue and red design of the Barcelona shirt . The son of the first president , Arthur Witty , claimed it was the idea of his father as the colours were the same as the Merchant Taylor 's School team . Another explanation , according to author Toni <unk> , is that the colours are from Robespierre 's First Republic . In Catalonia the common perception is that the colours were chosen by Joan Gamper and are those of his home team , FC Basel . The club 's most frequently used change colours have been yellow and orange . An away kit featuring the red and yellow stripes of the flag of Catalonia has also been used . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors = = = 
 Prior to the 2011 – 2012 season , Barcelona had a long history of avoiding corporate sponsorship on the playing shirts . On 14 July 2006 , the club announced a five @-@ year agreement with UNICEF , which includes having the UNICEF logo on their shirts . The agreement had the club donate € 1 @.@ 5 million per year to UNICEF ( 0 @.@ 7 percent of its ordinary income , equal to the UN International Aid Target , cf . ODA ) via the FC Barcelona Foundation . The FC Barcelona Foundation is an entity set up in 1994 on the suggestion of then @-@ chairman of the Economical @-@ Statutory Committee , Jaime Gil @-@ <unk> . The idea was to set up a foundation that could attract financial sponsorships to support a non @-@ profit sport company . In 2004 , a company could become one of 25 " Honorary members " by contributing between £ 40 @,@ 000 – 60 @,@ 000 ( £ 55 @,@ 400 – 83 @,@ 100 ) per year . There are also 48 associate memberships available for an annual fee of £ 14 @,@ 000 ( £ 19 @,@ 400 ) and an unlimited number of " patronages " for the cost of £ 4 @,@ 000 per year ( £ 5 @,@ 500 ) . It is unclear whether the honorary members have any formal say in club policy , but according to the author Anthony King , it is " unlikely that Honorary Membership would not involve at least some informal influence over the club " . 
 Barcelona ended their refusal of corporate sponsorship prior to the commencement of the 2011 – 12 season , signing a five @-@ year , € 150 million deal with Qatar Sports Investments , that meant the Qatar Foundation was on the club 's shirt for the 2011 – 12 and 2012 – 13 seasons , then replaced by Qatar Airways for the 2013 – 14 season , the deal allowing for a commercial sponsor logo to replace the charity logo , two years into the six @-@ year deal . Deal with Qatar Airways was extended for one more year in 2016 . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 Barcelona initially played in the Camp de la Indústria . The capacity was about 6 @,@ 000 , and club officials deemed the facilities inadequate for a club with growing membership . 
 In 1922 , the number of supporters had surpassed 20 @,@ 000 and by lending money to the club , Barça was able to build the larger Camp de Les Corts , which had an initial capacity of 20 @,@ 000 spectators . After the Spanish Civil War the club started attracting more members and a larger number of spectators at matches . This led to several expansion projects : the grandstand in 1944 , the southern stand in 1946 , and finally the northern stand in 1950 . After the last expansion , Les Corts could hold 60 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 After the construction was complete there was no further room for expansion at Les Corts . Back @-@ to @-@ back La Liga titles in 1948 and 1949 and the signing of László Kubala in June 1950 , who would later go on to score 196 goals in 256 matches , drew larger crowds to the games . The club began to make plans for a new stadium . The building of Camp Nou commenced on 28 March 1954 , before a crowd of 60 @,@ 000 Barça fans . The first stone of the future stadium was laid in place under the auspices of Governor Felipe <unk> <unk> and with the blessing of Archbishop of Barcelona Gregorio Modrego . Construction took three years and ended on 24 September 1957 with a final cost of 288 million pesetas , 336 % over budget . 
 In 1980 , when the stadium was in need of redesign to meet UEFA criteria , the club raised money by offering supporters the opportunity to inscribe their name on the bricks for a small fee . The idea was popular with supporters , and thousands of people paid the fee . Later this became the centre of controversy when media in Madrid picked up reports that one of the stones was inscribed with the name of long @-@ time Real Madrid chairman and Franco supporter Santiago Bernabéu . In preparation for the 1992 Summer Olympics two tiers of seating were installed above the previous roofline . It has a current capacity of 99 @,@ 354 making it the largest stadium in Europe . 
 There are also other facilities , which include : 
 Ciutat Esportiva Joan Gamper ( FC Barcelona 's training ground ) 
 Masia @-@ Centre de <unk> Oriol Tort ( Residence of young players ) 
 Mini Estadi ( Home of the reserve team ) 
 Palau Blaugrana ( FC Barcelona indoor sports arena ) 
 Palau Blaugrana 2 ( Secondary indoor arena of FC Barcelona ) 
 Pista de Gel ( FC Barcelona ice rink ) 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Domestic competitions = = = 
 La Liga 
 Winners ( 24 ) : 1928 – 29 , 1944 – 45 , 1947 – 48 , 1948 – 49 , 1951 – 52 , 1952 – 53 , 1958 – 59 , 1959 – 60 , 1973 – 74 , 1984 – 85 , 1990 – 91 , 1991 – 92 , 1992 – 93 , 1993 – 94 , 1997 – 98 , 1998 – 99 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Copa del Rey 
 Winners ( 28 ) – record : 1909 – 10 , 1911 – 12 , 1912 – 13 , 1919 – 20 , 1921 – 22 , 1924 – 25 , 1925 – 26 , 1927 – 28 , 1941 – 42 , 1950 – 51 , 1951 – 52 , 1952 – 53 , 1956 – 57 , 1958 – 59 , 1962 – 63 , 1967 – 68 , 1970 – 71 , 1977 – 78 , 1980 – 81 , 1982 – 83 , 1987 – 88 , 1989 – 90 , 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 , 2008 – 09 , 2011 – 12 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Supercopa de España 
 Winners ( 11 ) – record : 1983 , 1991 , 1992 , 1994 , 1996 , 2005 , 2006 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 
 Copa Eva Duarte 
 Winners ( 3 ) – record : 1948 , 1952 , 1953 
 Copa de la Liga 
 Winners ( 2 ) – record : 1982 – 83 , 1985 – 86 
 = = = European competitions = = = 
 European Cup / UEFA Champions League 
 Winners ( 5 ) : 1991 – 92 , 2005 – 06 , 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2014 – 15 
 European Super Cup / UEFA Super Cup 
 Winners ( 5 ) – shared record : 1992 , 1997 , 2009 , 2011 , 2015 
 European Cup Winners ' Cup / UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winners ( 4 ) – record : 1978 – 79 , 1981 – 82 , 1988 – 89 , 1996 – 97 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup 
 Winners ( 3 ) – record : 1955 – 58 , 1958 – 60 , 1965 – 66 
 = = = Worldwide competitions = = = 
 FIFA Club World Cup 
 Winners ( 3 ) – record : 2009 , 2011 , 2015 
 = = Players = = 
 Spanish teams are limited to three players without EU citizenship . The squad list includes only the principal nationality of each player ; several non @-@ European players on the squad have dual citizenship with an EU country . Also , players from the ACP countries — countries in Africa , the Caribbean , and the Pacific that are signatories to the <unk> Agreement — are not counted against non @-@ EU quotas due to the <unk> ruling . 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 24 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Current technical staff = = = 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Board members = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Jordi <unk> , Barça , 75 años de historia del Fútbol Club Barcelona , 1974 . 
 = Best Day Ever = 
 " Best Day Ever " is the 20th episode of the fourth season and the 80th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . The episode was written by Nate Cash , Tuck Tucker , and Steven Banks , and was directed by Larry Leichliter . Cash and Tucker also functioned as storyboard directors . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 10 , 2006 . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In the episode , SpongeBob is determined to have a perfect day . But much to his disappointment , however , the day refuses to go at all as he planned . Each of his friends has a different problem of his / her own , so he sets out to help them while spoiling his own agendas . As soon as SpongeBob realizes that he has forfeited ( and sacrificed ) his perfect day to help his friends , they rally around him with their thanks and congratulations . Eventually , SpongeBob realizes that he has had his best day ever after all . 
 The episode features an eponymous song titled " The Best Day Ever " written by Tom Kenny and Andy Paley . A soundtrack album called SpongeBob SquarePants : The Best Day Ever was released on September 12 , 2006 . " Best Day Ever " pulled an average of 6 @.@ 7 million viewers upon release . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 SpongeBob 's " Best Day Ever " fails to turn out as he planned when he is forced to postpone his activities to help his friends with their problems . He wanted to work at the Krusty Krab , but it was condemned because of a nematode infestation ; he inadvertently lures the nematodes away using his nose as a flute . Then , he planned to practice some karate with Sandy , but she was unable to because there is a leak in her <unk> . SpongeBob , believing it to be a trick , fixes it accidentally by stopping the leak with one of his adhesive karate gloves . Next , he wanted to go <unk> with Patrick , but Patrick ends up breaking his net , so SpongeBob gives him his old net , which quickly breaks as well . SpongeBob ends up giving Patrick his new high tech net . SpongeBob waits impatiently to use the net but decides to leave for his next planned activity . 
 SpongeBob 's final activity for the day is to go to Squidward 's clarinet recital . However , once he meets up with Squidward , he says that he cannot play in the concert because the reed of his clarinet is " shot " . Determined not to miss out on this activity as he had done with the other ones , SpongeBob pulls out one of his teeth to replace the reed . SpongeBob attempts to enter the building , but the usher refuses to let him in unless he has a ticket . He tries various methods of sneaking in , but at last he is let in because he is on the VIP list ( Mrs. Puff had said his name in one of his attempts ) . He gets in right as the concert ends . 
 SpongeBob gets mad that everything had gone entirely wrong and takes the stage to give an elaborate speech about how his " Best Day Ever " has been ruined . However , Mr. Krabs , Patrick , Sandy and Squidward tell him about how he helped them with their problems and that his " Best Day Ever " was about them rather than " perfect days " . To make it up to him , they hold a production in which SpongeBob performs his song , " The Best Day Ever " to complete his day with Patrick , Sandy , Squidward and Mr. Krabs co @-@ starring along in it . After a few hours , SpongeBob is still singing , but the others are tired and sleepy , and the audience has all departed . When Squidward asks Mr. Krabs how long they have to keep up the performance , Mr. Krabs replies , " Just ' til his little heart gives out , Squidward . Just ' til his little heart gives out . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Best Day Ever " was written by Nate Cash , Tuck Tucker and Steven Banks , with Larry Leichliter serving as animation director . Cash and Tucker also functioned as storyboard directors . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 10 , 2006 . 
 The featured song " The Best Day Ever " was composed by Tom Kenny , SpongeBob 's voice actor , and Andy Paley . The song was originally a part of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie soundtrack that was released on November 9 , 2004 . Originally , Kenny and Paley were writing the songs " The Best Day Ever " and " Under My Rock " on what would become The Best Day Ever album . However , at the same time , the team of the 2004 feature film needed two extra filler tracks for the film soundtrack . Eventually , Stephen Hillenburg , the series creator and director of the film , heard the songs and decided to put it on the film 's soundtrack . " The Best Day Ever " was played during the closing credits of the film which was never planned until the toward . 
 The episode was part of the 24 @-@ hour SpongeBob marathon called " The Best Day Ever Marathon " . Starting at 8 pm EDT , the event counted down the best 100 episodes of the series as chosen by viewers on Nick.com and TurboNick . Tom Ascheim , the executive vice president and general manager for Nickelodeon Television , said " We 've received a tremendous response from almost 4 million fans who have voted online for their favorite SpongeBob episodes and we 'll reward them with our biggest SpongeBob event ever . " The marathon led up to the premiere of this episode . The marketing method was primarily organised by Frank <unk> . Ascheim explained that Nickelodeon uses modern technology to generate interest in television shows . He believes that allowing viewers to choose the episodes shown contributes to the show 's high ratings . 
 Best Buy stores across the United States introduced a " Best Day Ever " -themed Best Buy <unk> that doubles as a DVD @-@ ROM packed with music videos , video game previews and more . In addition , " Best Day Ever " -themed activities were held at the Nickelodeon Family Suites Hotel by Holiday Inn including a themed party called the Bikini Bottom Bash . Throughout the month of November , the hotel released a " Best Day Ever " package to its guests starting at $ 369 . 
 On January 9 , 2007 , the episode became available on the series ' fourth season DVD compilation . The " Best Day Ever " shorts called " A Random Act of SpongeBob " were released as a bonus feature on the DVD . The shorts are " Crossing the Street " , " Anything for Baby " , " Flowers for Sandy " , " Me Money " , and " Pie " . " Best Day Ever " was also included on SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside season one through five episodes . The DVD was released on September 22 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On Friday , November 10 , 2006 , an average of 4 @.@ 4 million viewers tuned in between 6 : 30 am and 10 pm EDT to watch " The Best Day Ever Marathon " . The marathon earned the network its most @-@ watched and highest @-@ rated total programming day in its history , averaging 1 @.@ 9 / 4 @.@ 4 million total viewers . The premiere of the " Best Day Ever " special attracted 6 @.@ 7 million total viewers , with an average of 12 @.@ 0 / 4 @.@ 0 million kids 2 @-@ 11 , 12 @.@ 8 / 2 @.@ 6 million kids 6 @-@ 11 , according to Neilsen data . 
 The " SpongeBob Best Day Ever " , an online game , went live on November 9 . It generated 1 @.@ 3 million gameplay sessions and more than 867 @,@ 000 unique visitors in three days . The full @-@ length music video for " Best Day Ever " generated more than 1 @.@ 4 million streams , with 471 @,@ 000 unique visitors , making it the No. 2 video on TurboNick from November 6 to 12 . During the same time period , " Best Day Ever " ' s promotion video on TurboNick had 370 @,@ 000 streams and was ranked within the top 10 videos of the broadband channel . 
 = = Album = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants : The Best Day Ever is a concept soundtrack album by the voice cast members of SpongeBob SquarePants . Written by Kenny and musician and producer Andy Paley , it features musical cameos by Brian Wilson , Tommy Ramone , Flaco Jiménez , and others . The Best Day Ever album was released on September 12 , 2006 to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The album The Best Day Ever was written by SpongeBob 's voice actor , Tom Kenny , and producer Andy Paley . Featuring 27 tracks , it was influenced by the 1960s pop music . The record 's numerous skits refer to a freeform radio station called <unk> . Kenny 's inspiration for the song " My <unk> Whiteys " was " underwear humor " . Kenny said " Underwear humor is always a surefire laugh @-@ getter with kids [ ... ] Just seeing a character that odd wearing really prosaic , normal , Kmart , three @-@ to @-@ a @-@ pack underwear is a funny drawing [ ... ] We thought it was funny to make a really lush , beautiful love song to his underwear . " 
 In addition to the cast , the Beach Boys ' Brian Wilson , NRBQ 's Al Anderson , Joey <unk> , Tom Ardolino , and Terry Adams , and Tommy Ramone of the Ramones were musical guest artists . Kenny said , on the musical cameos , that " We thought they would spread some magic dust on it . And although this is just a weird little cartoon record , I didn 't want to have today 's equivalent of Kajagoogoo or Men Without Hats on it . " He opined that " the people we got " are " kind of timeless . " Other musicians who contributed to the album were Dave Allen , Don Allen , Mandy Barnett , Jerry <unk> , Mike Bolger , Corky Hale , Lisa Hammon , Flaco Jiménez , James King , Tommy Morgan , <unk> Palmer , Herb Peterson , Nino Tempo , Mike Uhler , and Jeremy Wakefield . 
 Brian Wilson provided backing vocals for the song " Doin ' the Krabby Patty " . Originally , Kenny and Paley were working on a " Brian Wilson @-@ esque " song with " Brian Wilson @-@ esque " background vocals on it . Kenny said " and at the last minute , we had this opportunity to reach out to him and ask if he 'd do it [ ... ] But Brian 's people said he was going on to Hawaii the next day with his wife and kids , and then going on the road . " Eventually , Kenny got a call from Wilson saying that " I loved the idea . " Elvis Presley 's guitarist James Burton performed the guitar in the song " You Will Obey " . Kenny said " One of our hidden Easter eggs that hopefully more than three people in the world will get is during the guitar solo when Plankton says ' Take it , James ' , which was what Elvis said in every one of those concert movies . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The album received mostly positive reviews . AllMusic gave the album a score of 4 out of 5 . In his review for the IGN , Spence D. gave the album a 7 / 10 score rating it as " good " . He said , " parents who grew up in the late ' 50s and ' 60s will get a kick out of the musical tributes to the music of those eras and perhaps listen along with their kids during a family fun time extravaganza . " Geoffrey Himes of the Baltimore City Paper said " How do little kids respond to this record ? I wouldn 't know ; there aren 't any little kids in my house . You don 't have to be a parent to enjoy the killer hooks and lush harmonies on this disc . All you need is the courage to ignore the raised eyebrows of your friends . " Kerwin So of Common Sense Media gave the album a score of 4 / 5 . However , So claimed that the album is full of consumerism and said " Parents need to know that although the physical packaging of this CD contains a lot of advertisements for other SpongeBob products , the songs themselves contain very positive content and steer clear of commercialism . " 
 Chris Willman of the Entertainment Weekly opined that the album is " not quite a teenage symphony to God . " He called the song " My <unk> Whiteys " " the most obvious nod to the Pet Sounds sound . " According to him , " [ the ] two of the best songs are garage @-@ rock anthems " which includes " Under My Rock " and " You Will Obey " . Willman said that Plankton 's performance in the latter " sounds like a little like Eric Burdon , from the Animals , turned fascist . " He gave it an " A- " rating and recommended it for ages " 4 to ... 94 ! " In a 2014 review , The A.V. Club ranked The Best Day Ever album No. 3 in their list of " 13 novelty albums recorded by TV characters " . The publication called it " a charming throwback " when " TV character novelty albums have faded away in recent years . " 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Tom Kenny and Andy Paley . 
 Source : 
 = = = Chart positions = = = 
 = M @-@ 8 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 8 is a 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan lying within the cities of Detroit and Highland Park . Much of it is the Davison Freeway , the nation 's first urban depressed freeway , which became a connector between the Lodge ( M @-@ 10 ) and the Chrysler ( Interstate 75 , I @-@ 75 ) freeways . 
 Named for an English immigrant to the area , Davison Avenue was originally the only street connecting across Highland Park to Detroit . It was rebuilt by the city and Wayne County as a freeway during World War II . The roadway was transferred to the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 1993 and numbered as M @-@ 8 . Subsequent changes by the state rebuilt the freeway and extended the M @-@ 8 designation to connect to the Jeffries Freeway ( I @-@ 96 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 8 starts on the western end at an interchange with I @-@ 96 in Detroit . Davison Avenue continues west of this interchange forming a service drive for the freeway while M @-@ 8 uses a short section of freeway to connect between I @-@ 96 and Davison Avenue . This short freeway segment runs easterly to Livernois Avenue where the trunkline transitions into Davison Avenue . East of this transition , the roadway turns northeasterly running through residential areas of Detroit . The trunkline meets M @-@ 10 / Lodge Freeway on the border between Detroit and Highland Park , a city surrounded by Detroit . Northeast of this interchange , M @-@ 8 becomes the Davison Freeway , running depressed below the level of the cross streets . There are interchanges for M @-@ 1 / Woodward Avenue and Oakland Avenue before meeting the Chrysler Freeway ( I @-@ 75 ) on the eastern border of Highland Park . The Davison Freeway continues northeasterly in Detroit north of Hamtramck . The freeway ends between Gallagher and Newbern avenues . M @-@ 8 continues to Conant Street where the designation ends . Davison Avenue continues past Mound Road where it turns back due east until it ends at Van Dyke Street next to the Mt . Olivet Cemetery . 
 MDOT 's 2007 traffic surveys counted the average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of the number of vehicles using a section of roadway on any given day of the year . An average of 38 @,@ 000 vehicles used the western section of M @-@ 8 along Davison Avenue in 2007 each day ; the eastern segment carried 37 @,@ 300 vehicles . The section of freeway in between carried in excess of 50 @,@ 000 vehicles a day in 2007 between M @-@ 10 and I @-@ 75 . Of this traffic , 1 @,@ 900 trucks and other commercial vehicles used the trunkline . 
 = = History = = 
 Davison Avenue predates both the Davison Freeway and the M @-@ 8 state trunkline designation in the area . The roadway was named for <unk> Davison , an English immigrant and one of the early settlers of the area . The street was the only one of the 30 parallel streets in Highland Park that crossed through the city from border to border and connected with Detroit streets . This road was heavily congested , approaching gridlock during rush hour by 1940 . A traffic survey showed that 96 % of the traffic using the street was crossing Highland Park with no destination in the city . A proposal to rebuild the street as a six @-@ lane , limited @-@ access highway was approved by the Highland Park City Council on March 17 , 1941 . The council also appropriated $ 100 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 5 @.@ 75 million in 2015 ) for the construction with Wayne County and the remaining $ 3 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 195 million in 2015 ) paid by state and federal government appropriations . 
 The freeway construction required a half @-@ block of right @-@ of @-@ way on the south side of Davison Avenue and the demolition of 69 homes to accommodate the 12 – 17 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 2 m ) of excavation along the 1 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) project . Another 63 homes were moved . The outbreak of World War II accelerated the construction schedule after the project was given priority due to the defense plants near the roadway . The freeway opened for traffic without a dedication ceremony at 4 : 00 p.m. on November 25 , 1942 . Travel times across Highland Park dropped from 15 minutes to around 3 – 4 minutes after the freeway opened . The roadway was the first urban , depressed freeway in the United States . The concrete for the road bed was cured underwater by flooding , creating an extremely hard and durable surface which lasted for more than 50 years ( some requiring dynamite for its eventual removal ) . 
 In 1968 , the freeway was extended eastward a few blocks through a junction with the newly opened Chrysler Freeway ( I @-@ 75 ) to its present @-@ day eastern terminus near Conant Street . The state requested additional Interstate Highway System mileage that year as well , and in the proposals submitted was a request to extend the Davison to I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 94 . These plans to transfer the freeway to state control and extend it were dropped in the 1970s after opposition to another freeway in Detroit . The plans would have extended it west to the Jeffries and east to a Van Dyke Freeway ( extended M @-@ 53 ) . Upon its transfer to state control in 1993 , it had previously been a county @-@ maintained freeway , the Davison Freeway was designated as M @-@ 8 . Three years later , the Davison was closed for a year and a half to reconstruct it to Interstate Highway standards with an additional through travel lane and a wider left shoulder for improved safety and traffic handling as well as a new interchange with Woodward Avenue . The reconstructed freeway was reopened on October 8 , 1997 by Governor John Engler . 
 In 2001 , M @-@ 8 was extended to include the two @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) segment of Davison Avenue between the freeway 's western terminus and Davison Avenue 's junction with I @-@ 96 ( Jeffries Freeway ) . Except for a M @-@ 8 shield on the Lodge Freeway 's Davison Avenue exit signs , the non @-@ freeway portion of M @-@ 8 remains unsigned , including at the Davison Avenue exit from the Jeffries where new Clearview signs were erected as part of a large I @-@ 96 reconstruction project in 2005 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire highway is in Wayne County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Son of a Gun ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " Son of a Gun " is the third episode of the first season of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 10 , 1993 . The teleplay was written by James Yoshimura based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and the episode was directed by Nick Gomez . In the episode , recurring character Officer Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) is shot while on duty , and his close friend Crosetti takes the investigation personally . 
 " Son of a Gun " was originally supposed to be the fourth episode of the first season , but was broadcast third when the episode " Night of the Dead Living " was moved to the end of the season . The shooting of a police officer , as well as other aspects of the script , were directly inspired by real @-@ life events chronicled in David Simon 's non @-@ fiction book , Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . The episode included guest appearances by actors Luis Guzmán , Paul Schulze and Edie Falco , who played Thormann 's wife . It also marked the first of five appearances by Washington Bullets team sports announcer Mel Proctor , and the first appearance by actor Walt MacPherson , who would later be cast as recurring character Detective Roger Gaffney . 
 " Son of a Gun " was seen by 6 @.@ 52 million households in its original broadcast , continuing a downward trend in ratings since the premiere of Homicide : Life on the Street . " Son of a Gun " lost viewership in part due to competition from a live Oprah Winfrey 90 @-@ minute interview with pop singer Michael Jackson on ABC . The episode , along with the rest of the first and second seasons of Homicide : Life on the Street was released on DVD in the United States on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) informs the detectives that Officer Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) has been shot in the head , and he orders an immediate investigation . Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) and Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) arrive at the hospital to find the doctors working frantically on Thormann ; Crosetti , a close friend of Thormann , becomes very emotional . Crosetti comforts Thormann 's wife Eva ( Edie Falco ) , but is privately told by Dr. Eli <unk> ( Sean Whitesell ) that Thormann may be blind or mentally disabled , even if he survives . Crosetti begs Gee to give him the case and , even though Gee believes he is too emotionally involved , he gives in when Crosetti tries to make him feel guilty by showing him his previous gunshot wounds . When an investigation at the crime scene turns up nothing , Lewis catches Crosetti praying with a rosary in the locker room . Crosetti convinces a skeptical Lewis to pray with him for help in the investigation . 
 Meanwhile , Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) and Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) continue their investigation into the murder of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Adena Watson . They repeatedly comb through the crime scene and conduct arrests and interrogations throughout the neighborhood , but they fail to find anything new . A frustrated Bayliss snaps at Pembleton , prompting Pembleton to request a new partner , but Gee refuses and remains confident Bayliss will solve the Watson case . Elsewhere , while Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) prepares for a date with medical examiner Blythe ( Wendy Hughes ) , he complains to his neighbor Lorenzo Molera ( Luis Guzmán ) about noise he is making while doing his carpenter work . The two end up bonding over beers , with both confiding in each other about their ex @-@ wives . Inside Molera 's room is a coffin he built for a customer , which Bolander insists is bad luck . Bolander 's date with Blythe goes well , but he nervously rejects an invitation back to her apartment when he receives a call about a murder . The call brings him back to Molera , who has been found dead inside his coffin . Bolander tells the investigating police that Molera died of " a broken heart " . Inspired by his deceased neighbor , Bolander returns to Blythe and asks to come inside after all . 
 While investigating a murder involving a hitman , Howard ( Melissa Leo ) and Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) question Miles <unk> ( Paul Schulze ) , who serves as an arbitrator between hitmen and their customers . <unk> gives up several of his clients , including Calpurnia Church ( Mary Jefferson ) , a woman suspected of murdering five husbands for insurance money . Although Church denies killing anybody , the detectives find enough evidence to close many outstanding cases . Lewis , who had previously been investigating the Church case , believes his prayer with Crosetti led to her arrest . This is further upheld when Crosetti receives an anonymous call claiming a man named Alfred Smith shot Thormann . While searching for Smith , Crosetti meets a man named Charles Flavin ( Larry E. Hull ) who said he saw Smith shoot Thormann and will testify to it in court . The episode ends with Crosetti sitting with an unconscious Thormann in the hospital and listening to jazz music , which the two friends used to discuss frequently . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Son of a Gun " was written by James Yoshimura based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and was directed by Nick Gomez . It was the first Homicide : Life on the Street episode written by Yoshimura , who would serve as a writer and eventually supervising producer throughout the entirety of the series . The episode featured a blending of hard @-@ edged emotion and amusing character comedy , the combination of which would become common in future Yoshimura @-@ penned episodes . It was originally supposed to be the fourth episode of the first season of Homicide : Life on the Street , but was broadcast third when the episode " Night of the Dead Living " was moved to the end of the season . NBC programmers were worried that the latter episode , which takes place entirely within the detective 's squad room , was too deliberately paced for a series still trying to win viewers . However , as a result of the move , the Adena Watson investigation has suddenly advanced far further than it last stood in the previous episode , " Ghost of a Chance . " 
 The episode continues the story arc of the Adena Watson murder case , which was introduced in the final scene of series premiere " Gone for Goode " and dominates much of the Homicide : Life on the Street first season . The Watson case was based on the real @-@ life 1988 Baltimore slaying of Latonya Kim Wallace , which is chronicled in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the 1991 David Simon non @-@ fiction book about a Baltimore Police Department , which was adapted into the Homicide series . The investigation into Calpurnia Church was inspired by the real @-@ life case of Geraldine Parrish , which was featured in Simon 's book . Parrish was accused of killing five husbands for insurance money and was eventually convicted for three of their deaths . The shooting of Officer Thormann was also adapted from true @-@ life events in Simon 's book , although Homicide writers added the twist of Crosetti taking the case personally based on his close friendship with the victim . 
 Edie Falco made a guest appearance in " Son of a Gun " as Officer Thormann 's wife Eva . Fontana cast Falco after watching her performance in Laws of Gravity , a 1992 film also directed by Nick Gomez . Fontana said of her , " She 's an actress who 's unadorned by any embroidery . She does everything with such simplicity and honesty , it 's breathtaking . " Falco was a struggling actor at the time , and said her salary from one Homicide episode paid for one month 's worth of rent . Fontana cast Falco as a regular in his HBO series Oz based on her work in the Homicide episodes . 
 " Son of a Gun " was also the first of five Homicide : Life on the Street episodes featuring Mel Proctor , then the home team sports announcer for the Washington Bullets , as recurring reporter character Grant Besser . Actor Walt MacPherson made a brief appearance as a uniformed police officer who finds an earring at the Adena Watson crime scene and offers it to Bayliss as possible evidence . MacPherson would return in the third season as the recurring character Detective Roger Gaffney , but there is no indication whether or not the beat cop he played in " Son of a Gun " was the same character . The line spoken by Lewis , " Murderers lie because they have to , witnesses lie because they think they have to , and everyone else lies for the sheer joy of it " , is almost a verbatim line from Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . The line represents a three @-@ rule theorem about police work Simon created after following a Baltimore Police Department homicide unit for one year while writing his book . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Son of a Gun " continues a common motif repeated throughout the first season of Crosetti discussing various conspiracy theories about the assassination of Abraham Lincoln , the 16th president of the United States . Crosetti said he believes the killing was arranged by the highest ranks of the Confederate States of America . Crosetti 's fascination with the Lincoln assassination was based on Tom Fontana 's real @-@ life obsession with it . A number of songs are featured throughout the episode , including " Going ' Around in Circles " by Jules Taub , " Telephone Blues " by Sam Ling and George Smith , " Something I Dreamed Last Night " by Sammy Fain , Jack <unk> and Herbert Magidson , and " It 's So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday " by Freddie Perren and Christine <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Son of a Gun " was seen by 6 @.@ 52 million viewers , ranking third in its time slot among major television networks . The episode received a 7 rating / 10 share , which continued a downward trend in Homicide ratings since the January 31 post @-@ Super Bowl series premiere , " Gone for Goode " . " Son of a Gun " lost ratings in large part due to a live Oprah Winfrey 90 @-@ minute interview with pop singer Michael Jackson , which aired on ABC and was seen by 36 @.@ 59 million people , the fourth @-@ highest total recorded by an entertainment program at the time since 1960 . Yaphet Kotto said of the scheduling , " " Heck , on that night , even I was watching Oprah instead of our show . " Homicide also lost in its time slot to a cast reunion of The Andy Griffith Show , which aired on CBS and attracted 11 @.@ 36 million viewers . 
 Lon Grahnke of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called the episode " outstanding " and gave it his highest possible rating of four stars . Nicholas Read of The Gazette praised " Son of a Gun " for its realism ; regarding the episode 's portrayal of Thormann 's injuries , Read said , " For U.S. network television , it 's pretty disturbing stuff . ... The series isn 't afraid to show ( it ) in as graphic a way as network television will allow . " Alex Strachan of The Vancouver Sun said it was among the " sharpest , most gruelling episodes " of Homicide . Bruce <unk> particularly complimented the performances of Jon Polito and Edie Falco , who she said " played brilliantly " in her guest role . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Son of a Gun " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = Thor ( film ) = 
 Thor is a 2011 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Paramount Pictures . It is the fourth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The film was directed by Kenneth Branagh , written by Ashley Edward Miller & Zack Stentz and Don Payne , and stars Chris Hemsworth , Natalie Portman , Tom Hiddleston , Stellan Skarsgård , Colm Feore , Ray Stevenson , Idris Elba , Kat Dennings , Rene Russo and Anthony Hopkins . The film tells the story of Thor , the crown prince of Asgard , who is exiled from his homeland to Earth . While there , he forms a relationship with Jane Foster , a scientist . However , Thor must stop his adopted brother Loki , who intends to become the new king of Asgard . 
 Sam Raimi first developed the concept of a film adaptation of Thor in 1991 , but soon abandoned the project , leaving it in " development hell " for several years . During this time , the rights were picked up by various film studios until Marvel Studios signed Mark Protosevich to develop the project in 2006 , and planned to finance it and release it through Paramount Pictures . Matthew Vaughn was originally assigned to direct the film for a tentative 2010 release . However , after Vaughn was released from his holding deal in 2008 , Branagh was approached and the film 's release was rescheduled into 2011 . The main characters were cast in 2009 , and principal photography took place in California and New Mexico from January to May 2010 . The film was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 Thor premiered on April 17 , 2011 , in Sydney , Australia and was released on May 6 , 2011 , in the United States . The film was a financial success and received positive reviews from film critics . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray sets were released on September 13 , 2011 . A sequel , Thor : The Dark World , was released on November 8 , 2013 . A third film , Thor : Ragnarok is set to be released on November 3 , 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 965 AD , Odin , king of Asgard , wages war against the Frost Giants of Jotunheim and their leader Laufey , to prevent them from conquering the nine realms , starting with Earth . The Asgardian warriors defeat the Frost Giants and seize the source of their power , the Casket of Ancient Winters . 
 In the present , Odin 's son Thor prepares to ascend to the throne of Asgard , but is interrupted when Frost Giants attempt to retrieve the Casket . Against Odin 's order , Thor travels to Jotunheim to confront Laufey , accompanied by his brother Loki , childhood friend Sif and the Warriors Three : Volstagg , Fandral , and Hogun . A battle ensues until Odin intervenes to save the Asgardians , destroying the fragile truce between the two races . For Thor 's arrogance , Odin strips his son of his godly power and exiles him to Earth as a mortal , accompanied by his hammer Mjolnir , now protected by an enchantment that allows only the worthy to wield it . 
 Thor lands in New Mexico , where astrophysicist Dr. Jane Foster , her assistant Darcy Lewis , and mentor Dr. Erik Selvig , find him . The local populace finds Mjolnir , which S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Phil Coulson soon commandeers before forcibly acquiring Jane 's data about the wormhole that delivered Thor to Earth . Thor , having discovered Mjolnir 's nearby location , seeks to retrieve it from the facility that S.H.I.E.L.D. quickly constructed but he finds himself unable to lift it , and is captured . With Selvig 's help , he is freed and resigns himself to exile on Earth as he develops a romance with Jane . 
 Loki discovers that he is actually Laufey 's son , adopted by Odin after the war ended . A weary Odin falls into the deep " <unk> " to recover his strength . Loki seizes the throne in Odin 's stead and offers Laufey the chance to kill Odin and retrieve the Casket . Sif and the Warriors Three , unhappy with Loki 's rule , attempt to return Thor from exile , convincing Heimdall , gatekeeper of the Bifröst — the means of traveling between worlds — to allow them passage to Earth . Aware of their plan , Loki sends the Destroyer , a seemingly indestructible automaton , to pursue them and kill Thor . The warriors find Thor , but the Destroyer attacks and defeats them , prompting Thor to offer himself instead . Struck by the Destroyer and near death , Thor 's sacrifice proves him worthy to wield Mjolnir . The hammer returns to him , restoring his powers and enabling him to defeat the Destroyer . Kissing Jane goodbye and vowing to return , he and his fellow Asgardians leave to confront Loki . 
 In Asgard , Loki betrays and kills Laufey , revealing his true plan to use Laufey 's attempt on Odin 's life as an excuse to destroy Jotunheim with the Bifröst Bridge , thus proving himself worthy to his adoptive father . Thor arrives and fights Loki before destroying the Bifröst Bridge to stop Loki 's plan , stranding himself in Asgard . Odin awakens and prevents the brothers from falling into the abyss created in the wake of the bridge 's destruction , but Loki allows himself to fall when Odin rejects his pleas for approval . Thor makes amends with Odin , admitting he is not ready to be king ; while on Earth , Jane and her team search for a way to open a portal to Asgard . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , Selvig has been taken to a S.H.I.E.L.D. facility , where Nick Fury opens a briefcase and asks him to study a mysterious cube @-@ shaped object , which Fury says may hold untold power . An invisible Loki prompts Selvig to agree , and he does . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chris Hemsworth as Thor : 
 The crown prince of Asgard , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name . Director Kenneth Branagh and Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige chose Hemsworth after a back @-@ and @-@ forth process in which the 27 @-@ year @-@ old actor was initially dropped from consideration and then given a second chance to read for the part . Hemsworth stated that he gained 20 pounds for the role by eating non @-@ stop and revealed that " It wasn 't until Thor that I started lifting weights , it was all pretty new to me . " Regarding his take of the character , Hemsworth said , " We just kept trying to humanize it all , and keep it very real . Look into all the research about the comic books that we could , but also bring it back to ' Who is this guy as a person , and what 's his relationship with people in the individual scenes ? ' " About approaching Thor 's fighting style , he remarked , " First , we looked at the comic books and the posturing , the way [ Thor ] moves and fights , and a lot of his power seems to be drawn up through the ground . We talked about boxers , you know , Mike Tyson , very low to the ground and big open chest and big shoulder swings and very sort of brutal but graceful at the same time , and then as we shot stuff things became easier . " 
 Natalie Portman as Jane Foster : 
 A scientist and Thor 's love interest . Marvel Studios stated in an announcement that the character was updated from the comics ' initial portrayal for the feature adaptation . When asked why she took the role , Portman replied , " I just thought it sounded like a weird idea because Kenneth Branagh 's directing it , so I was just like , ' Kenneth Branagh doing Thor is super @-@ weird , I 've gotta do it . ' " Portman stated that she really wanted to do a big effects film that emphasized character , and getting to do it with Branagh was a new way of approaching it , relative to Star Wars . Regarding her preparation for the role Portman remarked , " I signed on to do it before there was a script . And Ken , who 's amazing , who is so incredible , was like , ' You can really help create this character ' . I got to read all of these biographies of female scientists like Rosalind Franklin who actually discovered the DNA double helix but didn 't get the credit for it . The struggles they had and the way that they thought – I was like , ' What a great opportunity , in a very big movie that is going to be seen by a lot of people , to have a woman as a scientist ' . She 's a very serious scientist . Because in the comic she 's a nurse and now they made her an astrophysicist . Really , I know it sounds silly , but it is those little things that makes girls think it 's possible . It doesn 't give them a [ role ] model of ' Oh , I just have to dress cute in movies ' " . 
 Tom Hiddleston as Loki : 
 Thor 's adoptive brother and nemesis based on the deity of the same name . Hiddleston was chosen after previously working with Branagh on Ivanov and Wallander . Initially Hiddleston auditioned to play Thor but Branagh decided his talent would be better harnessed playing Loki . Hiddleston stated that " Loki 's like a comic book version of Edmund in King Lear , but nastier . " Hiddleston stated that he had to keep a strict diet before the start of filming because " Ken [ Branagh ] wants Loki to have a lean and hungry look , like Cassius in Julius Caesar . Physically , he can 't be posing as Thor " . Hiddleston looked at Peter O 'Toole as inspiration for Loki as well explaining , " Interestingly enough , [ Kenneth Branagh ] said to look at Peter O 'Toole in two specific films , The Lion in Winter and Lawrence of Arabia . What 's interesting about ... his performance [ as King Henry ] is you see how damaged he is . There 's a rawness [ to his performance ] ; it 's almost as if he 's living with a layer of skin peeled away . He 's grandiose and teary and , in a moment , by turns hilarious and then terrifying . What we wanted was that emotional volatility . It 's a different acting style , it 's not quite the same thing , but it 's fascinating to go back and watch an actor as great as O 'Toole head for those great high hills " . 
 Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig : 
 A scientist doing research in New Mexico who encounters Thor . Skarsgård stated that he was not initially familiar with the comic book version of Thor . As to why he took the part , Skarsgård remarked , I " chose Thor because of [ director ] Kenneth Branagh . The script was nice and we got to rehearse and talk to the writers and do some collaborating in the process to make it fit us . So I had a very happy time on it . What I always try to do is immediately do something I just haven 't done so I get variation in my life . I 've made about 90 films and if I did the same thing over and over again I would be bored by now . I try to pick different films , I go and do those big ones and having done that I can usually afford to go and do some really small obscure films and experiment a little " . 
 Colm Feore as Laufey : 
 King of the Frost Giants and Loki 's biological father , based on the mythological being of the same name , who in myth was actually Loki 's mother . Feore stated it took five hours for his makeup to be applied . About his character Feore remarked , " I am the King of Frost Giants . And if you 've seen any of the Frost Giants , you know that I am , of course , the Napoleon of Frost Giants . We 've got some massive , fabulous guys who dwarf me and come in at around eight @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half feet , nine feet . But , no . Can 't you tell by the commanding presence ? I am the boss " . He said the Shakespearean training he shared with Hopkins and director Branagh helped keep production moving briskly , saying that " during the breaks , Tony , myself and Ken would be talking in Shakespearean shorthand about what the characters were doing , what we thought they may be like , and how we could focus our attention more intelligently . These were discussions that took no more than a few minutes between takes , but they allowed Ken , Tony and [ me ] to understand each other instantly without Ken taking an hour away to explain to the actors exactly what was going on . So that was enormously helpful . " 
 Ray Stevenson as Volstagg : 
 A member of the Warriors Three ; a group of three Asgardian adventurers who are among Thor 's closest comrades , known for both his hearty appetite and wide girth . Stevenson previously worked with Kenneth Branagh in the 1998 film The Theory of Flight , and with Marvel Studios as the titular character in Punisher : War Zone . Stevenson wore a fat suit for the role , stating , " I 've tried the suit on , and what they 've done is kind of sex him up : he 's sort of slimmer but rounder . " . Stevenson said , " He 's got every bit of that <unk> verve and vigor , and a bit of a beer gut to suggest that enormous appetite , but he 's not the sort of <unk> @-@ shaped figure he is in the comics . He 's Falstaff with muscles . I 've got this amazing foam @-@ injected <unk> that flexes with me . " 
 Idris Elba as Heimdall : 
 The all @-@ seeing , all @-@ hearing Asgardian sentry of the <unk> bridge , based on the mythological deity of the same name . Elba said Branagh 's involvement was a major incentive to take the role : " [ Branagh ] called me up personally and said , ' I know this isn 't a big role , but I would really love to see you play it . ' It 's Kenneth Branagh . I was like , ' Definitely ' " . About the role Elba remarked , " I did green screen for the first time ! I wouldn 't like to do a whole movie of green screen , though . You kind of forget the plot a little — like being in a Broadway play and doing it over and over and forgetting your line halfway through " . Elba stated he has made a four @-@ picture commitment with Marvel Studios . Elba 's casting prompted a proposed boycott by the Council of Conservative Citizens and a debate amongst comic book fans , some insisting it was wrong for a black man to play a Nordic god . In response Elba called the debate " ridiculous " . 
 Kat Dennings as Darcy Lewis : 
 A political science major who is Jane Foster 's intern . Dennings described her character as Foster 's " little helper gnome " . Dennings stated that her role was expanded during the rehearsal process . Dennings explained , " She 's kind of like a cute , clueless , little puppy or maybe a hamster . There wasn 't much on the page for the Darcy role to begin with and I didn 't even see a script before I took the job so I didn 't really know who Darcy was at first . But she really evolved — she 's so much fun now even . She 's very Scooby @-@ Doo if that makes sense . She 's always three steps behind and reacting to what 's happening with these great expressions ... She gets things wrong and doesn 't care . " 
 Rene Russo as Frigga : 
 The wife of Odin , queen of Asgard , mother of Thor and adoptive mother of Loki , based on the mythological deity of the same name . Russo stated in March 2011 interview that she has signed on for possible sequels , joking that , " Eventually they 'll kick me out , so who knows how many I 'll do " . 
 Anthony Hopkins as Odin : 
 The ruler of Asgard , father of Thor , and adoptive father of Loki , based on the mythological deity of the same name . In an interview Hopkins stated he knew nothing of the comic . About the film he said , " It 's a superhero movie , but with a bit of Shakespeare thrown in " . Hopkins stated , " I 'm very interested in that relationship between fathers and sons " , and that , " My father 's relationship with me was cold . He was a hot @-@ blood character but to me , cold . When I was young , he expressed his disappointment because I was bad in school and all of that . He didn 't mean any harm , but I felt I could never meet up to his expectations . " Hopkins expressed that he found a personal resonance in the Odin role , saying , " He 's a stern man . He 's a man with purpose . I play the god who banishes his son from the kingdom of Asgard because he screwed up . He 's a hot @-@ headed , temperamental young man ... probably a chip off of the old block but I decide he 's not really ready to rule the future kingdom , so I banish him . I 'm harsh and my wife complains and I say , ' That is why I 'm king . ' He 's ruthless , take @-@ it @-@ or @-@ leave @-@ it . Women are much more forgiving ; men are not so forgiving . I know in my life , my karma is , ' If you don 't like it , tough , move on . ' And I move on . I 'm a little like Odin myself " . In May 2016 , Mel Gibson stated he was offered the role but turned it down . 
 Tadanobu Asano as Hogun : 
 A member of the Warriors Three , primarily identified by his grim demeanor and as the only member who is not an Æsir . Ray Stevenson said of Asano 's character , " He doesn 't speak much but when he does , everybody shuts up . But also in the healing room where everyone licks their wounds , he 's the guy who just goes about his business " . 
 Josh Dallas as Fandral : 
 A member of the Warriors Three , characterized as an irrepressible swashbuckler and romantic . Stuart Townsend was initially cast after Zachary Levi was forced to vacate the role due to a scheduling conflict . However , days before filming began , Townsend was replaced by Dallas citing " creative differences " . Dallas said he believed that Fandral " would like to think of himself a philanderer . He would like to think of himself , I was saying , as the R. Kelly of Asgard . He 's a lover , not a fighter " . Dallas mentioned that Errol Flynn was an inspiration for the character stating , " He was a big inspiration for the character and for me . I watched a lot of his movies and kind of got that into my bones . I tried to bring out that little bit of Flynn @-@ ness in it . Flynn had a lot of that boyish charm that Fandral 's got .... " 
 Jaimie Alexander as Sif : 
 A warrior and Thor 's childhood friend based on the mythological deity of the same name . Alexander was best known for her portrayal of Jessi XX on the ABC Family series Kyle XY . Alexander said that she was familiar with Marvel Comics before having taken the part , having grown up with four brothers . Alexander said the part required hours a day in the gym , though training is not unfamiliar to her , explaining she was one of few girls on her <unk> , Texas , high @-@ school wrestling team . Alexander described her character as " one of the guys " and that , " She 's a very talented , skilled warrior and can stand on her own against any villain in the film " . About her relationship with Thor she stated , " She is very loyal to Thor and cares a lot about protecting him and protecting Asgard " . 
 Clark Gregg reprises his role as S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Phil Coulson from Iron Man and Iron Man 2 . Adriana Barraza plays diner owner Isabella Alvarez and Maximiliano Hernández plays S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jasper Sitwell . Actors Joseph Gatt , Joshua Cox and Douglas Tait portray Frost Giants . Stan Lee and J. Michael Straczynski have cameo appearances as pick @-@ up truck drivers . Samuel L. Jackson has an uncredited cameo as Nick Fury , director of S.H.I.E.L.D. Jeremy Renner has an uncredited cameo as Clint Barton . Dakota Goyo and Ted <unk> play Thor and Loki , respectively , as children . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Sam Raimi originally envisioned the idea for Thor after making Darkman ( 1990 ) ; he met Stan Lee and pitched the concept to 20th Century Fox , but they did not understand it . Thor was abandoned until April 1997 , when Marvel Studios was beginning to expand rapidly . The film gained momentum after the success of X @-@ Men ( 2000 ) . The plan was for Thor to be made for television . UPN was in talks for airing it ; excited by the prospect , they pushed for a script and approached Tyler Mane to play Thor . In May 2000 , Marvel Studios brought Artisan Entertainment to help finance it as a film , but by June 2004 the project still had yet to be patronised by a studio . Sony Pictures Entertainment finally purchased the film rights , and in December 2004 David S. Goyer was in negotiations to write and direct . In 2005 , though there were talks between Goyer and Marvel , it was revealed that Goyer was no longer interested , though at this point the film was still set to be distributed through Sony Pictures . 
 Mark Protosevich , a fan of the Thor comic book , agreed to write the script in April 2006 , and the project moved to Paramount Pictures , after it acquired the rights from Sony . That year the film was announced to be a Marvel Studios production . In December 2007 , Protosevich described his plans for it " to be like a superhero origin story , but not one about a human gaining super powers , but of a god realizing his true potential . It 's the story of an Old Testament god who becomes a New Testament god " . In August 2007 Marvel Studios signed Matthew Vaughn to direct the film . Vaughn then rewrote Protosevich 's script in order to bring down the budget to $ 150 million , as Protosevich 's first draft would have cost $ 300 million to produce . He intended to start filming in late 2008 and after the success of Iron Man , Marvel Studios announced that they intended to release Thor on June 4 , 2010 , with Iron Man 2 being used to introduce the character of Thor . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Vaughn was released when his holding deal expired in May 2008 , at which point Marvel set Protosevich to work on a new draft and began searching for a new director . Guillermo del Toro entered talks to direct the film . Del Toro was a fan of Jack Kirby 's work on the comics , and said that he loved the character of Loki , but wished to incorporate more of the original Norse mythology into the film , including a " really dingy Valhalla , [ with ] Vikings and mud " . However , del Toro ultimately turned down Thor to direct The Hobbit . By September 2008 D. J. Caruso had been discussing taking on the project , though he did not read the script . Later that month , it was revealed that Kenneth Branagh had entered into negotiations to direct , and in December 2008 , Branagh confirmed that he had been hired . He described it as " a human story right in the center of a big epic scenario . " Branagh stated that he hoped to begin filming in January 2010 and Marvel Studios set back the release date of the film from its scheduled July 16 , 2010 date to June 17 , 2011 , almost a full year later . They later moved the release date to May 20 , 2011 , to distance the film 's release from that of Captain America : The First Avenger , another Marvel Studios film that was scheduled to be released on July 22 , 2011 . In October 2008 , Daniel Craig was offered the role , but ultimately turned it down , citing his commitments to the James Bond franchise . 
 In February 2009 , Samuel L. Jackson , who had briefly portrayed Nick Fury at the end of the film Iron Man , signed on to reprise the role in Thor as part of an unprecedented nine @-@ picture deal with Marvel Studios . However , in an April 2010 interview , Jackson stated that he would not be appearing in Thor . When asked why not Jackson explained , " I have no idea . I 'm not in charge of making those kinds of decisions . I thought I was ; they said I was in the trades , and I was like , ' Ooh ! I got a job ! ' I called my agent he said , ' <unk> , you 're not in it . ' I was like , ' Well shit , they need to pay me if they 're gonna put my name in it . ' " Later in the month , Jackson revealed that he would be filming a scene for Thor to serve as " connective tissue " for The Avengers . Also in February , a casting call went out looking for actors with certain physical attributes to audition for the role of Thor . 
 In May 2009 , Chris Hemsworth was in negotiations to portray the title role after a back @-@ and @-@ forth process in which the 25 @-@ year @-@ old actor was refused early on , then given a second chance to read for the part . Hemsworth 's brother , Liam also auditioned for the role , but was passed on by Marvel Studios head Kevin Feige . The next day , Marvel announced that Tom Hiddleston , who had worked with Branagh before and had initially been considered to portray the lead role , had been cast as Loki . In June 2009 , Feige confirmed that both Hemsworth and Hiddleston had signed on . Feige mentioned that the film would take place on both modern day Earth and Asgard but Thor 's human host , Dr. Donald Blake , would not be included . In July 2009 , Marvel announced that Natalie Portman would portray Jane Foster . Jaimie Alexander and Colm Feore were reported to have joined the cast in September , with Alexander portraying Sif and Feore 's role unrevealed , though it was thought to be a villain . In an interview with Swedish news site <unk> <unk> , Stellan Skarsgård stated that he had joined the cast , though he did not specify his role . By late October Anthony Hopkins had been cast as Odin in the film . The following month , Marvel announced that they had cast the Warriors Three ; Fandral was to be played by Stuart Townsend , Hogun was to be played by Tadanobu Asano and Volstagg was to be played by Ray Stevenson . Idris Elba was announced to have joined the cast , portraying Heimdall . Natalie Portman revealed that Kat Dennings would be involved in the project , portraying Darcy , a coworker of Portman 's Jane Foster . 
 In December 2009 , Rene Russo was cast as Frigga , Thor 's stepmother and Odin 's wife . Later that month , actors Joseph Gatt , Troy Brenna , and Joshua Cox had been cast in the film , though none of their roles were revealed . In January 2010 , Adriana Barraza had joined the film 's cast , in a supporting capacity . Only days before filming began , Stuart Townsend was replaced by Joshua Dallas as Fandral , citing " creative differences " . When Spider @-@ Man 4 's production stalled , Paramount and Marvel Entertainment pushed up the release of Thor by two weeks to the then vacated date of May 6 , 2011 . 
 The Science & Entertainment Exchange introduced Marvel Entertainment , Kenneth Branagh , " the screenwriter , and a few people on the design and production side of things " to three physicists ( Sean Carroll , Kevin Hand , and Jim Hartle ) , as well as physics student Kevin Hickerson , to provide a realistic science background for the Thor universe . The consultation resulted in a change in Jane Foster 's profession , from nurse to particle physicist , and the terminology ( Einstein @-@ Rosen bridge ) to describe the Bifrost Bridge . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In October 2008 , Marvel Studios signed a long @-@ term lease agreement with Raleigh Studios to photograph their next four films — Iron Man 2 , Thor , Captain America : The First Avenger and The Avengers — at Raleigh 's Manhattan Beach , California facility . Production Weekly reported that filming on Marvel 's Thor was scheduled to begin in Los Angeles mid @-@ January , then move to Santa Fe , New Mexico from March until late @-@ April . Principal photography began on January 11 , 2010 . A few days after filming began , it was reported that Clark Gregg had signed on to reprise his role from Iron Man and Iron Man 2 as Agent Coulson . In February , Paramount Pictures entered negotiations with Del Mar , California to use a 300 @-@ yard stretch of beach to film a scene for Thor involving six horses running down the terrain . Paramount said this coastline was ideal because its gradual slope of sand down to the waterline creates excellent reflective opportunities on film . On March 15 , 2010 production of Thor moved to <unk> , New Mexico , where an old @-@ fashioned Western film town was extensively modified for the shoot . 
 Branagh , a fan of the comic book since childhood , commented on the challenge of bridging Asgard and the modern world : " Inspired by the comic book world both pictorially and compositionally at once , we 've tried to find a way to make a virtue and a celebration of the distinction between the worlds that exist in the film but absolutely make them live in the same world . It 's about finding the framing style , the color palette , finding the texture and the amount of camera movement that helps celebrate and express the differences and the distinctions in those worlds . If it succeeds , it will mark this film as different .... The combination of the primitive and the sophisticated , the ancient and the modern , I think that potentially is the exciting fusion , the exciting tension in the film " . 
 By April , the prospect for filming parts of Thor in Del Mar , California had fallen through . Paramount Pictures sent a letter informing the city that it has instead chosen an undisclosed Northern California location to film a beachfront scene for the film . The letter cited cost concerns with moving production too far away from its headquarters . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The film ended principal photography on May 6 , 2010 and entered the " post @-@ production " phase . It was reported in February 2010 that France @-@ based BUF Compagnie would be the lead visual effects house working on the film . Digital Domain worked on the visual effects as well . Branagh stated that BUF , who developed the effects for the race through space was much inspired by Hubble photography and other images of deep space . Branagh stated he sent paintings from classic studies by J. M. W. Turner to Digital Domain when creating Jotunheim . Peter Butterworth , VFX supervisor and co @-@ founder of Fuel VFX , said the most challenging task was interpreting what the Bifröst would look like , " You can 't Google what these things look like — they are totally imagined and within the heads of the stakeholders . So to extract that and interpret it for the big screen was an interesting challenge creatively . Technically , probably creating fluid simulations that could be art @-@ directed and used for both the Bifröst and Odin 's chamber shots . Part of the difficulty with solving these is that we had to ensure they would work in stereo . In the film , Odin enters what is known as the " <unk> " in his chamber to regenerate . Butterworth stated , " For Odin 's Chamber , we developed a dome and curtain of light rays that hover over Odin 's bed . This dome of light suggests harnessed power and energy that revitalizes him as he sleeps . We took a lot of reference from the natural world such as the corona of the sun and gave the sleep effect plenty of volume and space " . 
 The film was released in a 3 @-@ D version . In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Branagh stated that the 3 @-@ D process initially made him cringe but " We came to feel that in our case 3 @-@ D could be the very good friend of story and character for a different kind of experience " . Although 2 @-@ D was used for principal photography , producer Kevin Feige stated that the " special effects for the film were conceived and executed from the beginning in 3 @-@ D " . 
 In October 2010 , casting calls went out for bit players to appear in an undisclosed number of reshoots . 
 In March 2011 , scenes involving Adriana Barraza were removed from the theatrical cut of the film during the editing process . Kenneth Branagh sent a letter of apology explaining the reasons for the cut and desire to work with Barraza again in the future . In response Barraza stated , " It saddens me because the movie is great and because I was acting alongside some tremendous actors that I admire very much , but I understand the nature of films , and it 's not the first or last time that scenes will be cut " . Barraza appears in only one scene in the film 's theatrical cut . In that same month , Douglas Tait revealed that he performed for motion capture of the Frost Giants . On his hiring , Tait said " I am 6 ' 5 " and have a lean , athletic build , and they hired guys who were 6 ' 7 " and taller , and weighed over 250 pounds . When the film was being edited , they wanted to make them even bigger and move faster . They auditioned people again and Kenneth Branagh chose me to perform the motion capture movements of the Frost Giants " . 
 In April 2011 , the IMAX Corporation , Paramount Pictures and Marvel Entertainment announced that they have finalized an agreement to release the film on digital IMAX 3D screens . The release marked the continuation of the partnership between the companies , which started on Iron Man 2 . 
 The post @-@ credits scene in which Skarsgård 's Erik Selvig comes face @-@ to @-@ face with Samuel L. Jackson 's Nick Fury was directed by Joss Whedon , who directed Marvel 's The Avengers ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's score was written by composer Patrick Doyle , a frequent collaborator of Branagh . Doyle described Thor as " the most commercially high profile film I have done since Frankenstein " , adding that the composing process had the challenge of trying to find a tone that fit the duality of Asgard and Earth . Thus Doyle and Branagh had frequent discussions on the musical direction , with the director suggesting a contemporary feel and having a balance between the music and " grand images [ that ] were not in any way <unk> " , and the composer in turn implementing " a strong sense of melody , which he responds to in my work " . As Doyle declared that his own Celtic background made him familiar with Norse mythology , an old Celtic folk song also provided the inspiration for Thor 's leitmotif . A soundtrack album was released by Buena Vista Records in April 2011 . 
 The film also features a song by the Foo Fighters , " Walk " , in both a scene where a powerless Thor shares some boilermakers with Selvig in a roadhouse , and the film 's closing credits . Marvel president Kevin Feige stated that " Walk " was a last minute addition , that the crew felt had " these eerie appropriate lyrics and themes " upon hearing it . Branagh in particular thought that " these lyrics about learning to walk again " were appropriate " of [ a ] movie about redemption , learning to be a hero . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The world premiere of Thor took place on April 17 , 2011 , at the Event Cinemas theatre in George Street , Sydney . The U.S. premiere took place on May 2 , 2011 , at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles , California . The event was hosted by Isaiah Mustafa and streamed live on Marvel 's official website . The film premiered on April 21 , 2011 , in Australia , and on May 6 , 2011 , in the United States . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In July 2010 Marvel Studios held a Thor panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International during which Kenneth Branagh and Chris Hemsworth , Natalie Portman , Kat Dennings , Tom Hiddleston , and Clark Gregg discussed the film and showed some clips from it . A few days later , this footage was leaked on the internet . The first television advertisement was broadcast during Super Bowl XLV on the Fox network in the United States . The rate for advertising during the game was approximately $ 3 million per 30 @-@ second spot . Marvel Studios and Acura launched a joint viral marketing promotion at the 2011 Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo . Other official promotional partners included Burger King , Dr. Pepper , 7 Eleven , and Visa . In May 2011 Marvel Entertainment 's President of Print , Animation and Digital , Dan Buckley , and Marvel Comics Editor @-@ In @-@ Chief , Axel Alonso , rang the NYSE closing bell in celebration of the theatrical release of Thor . 
 A post @-@ credits scene in the film Iron Man 2 showed Coulson reporting the discovery of a large hammer in the desert . Rick Marshall of MTV News believed it to be the weapon Mjöllnir belonging to Thor , writing , " It continues the grand tradition of connecting the film to another property in development around the Marvel movie universe . " In the commentary track of Iron Man 2 ' home media , Iron Man 2 's director , Jon Favreau , stated that " this is a scene from [ the set of ] Thor " . 
 Marvel Animation announced a 26 @-@ episode animated series in November 2008 , to air in late 2010 before the release of Marvel Studios ' film . The company released an animated direct @-@ to @-@ video film , Thor : Tales of Asgard , to coincide with the live @-@ action film . 
 A video game titled Thor : God of Thunder based on the film was developed by Sega using the voices and likenesses of actors Chris Hemsworth , Tom Hiddleston and Jaimie Alexander , and was released on May 3 , 2011 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In July 2011 , Marvel Studios and Paramount Pictures announced the release of Thor on Blu @-@ ray 3D , Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD . The discs were released on September 13 , 2011 in three editions : a single @-@ disc DVD , a 2 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray @-@ DVD combo pack , and a 3 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray / DVD / 3D combo pack . All sets come with deleted scenes and a " Road to The Avengers featurette . The 2 @-@ disc and 3 @-@ disc packs includes a digital copy , the first in a series of Marvel One @-@ Shots , The Consultant , and 7 behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes . 
 Branagh said that the DVD includes at least 20 minutes of deleted scenes . Branagh stated the footage contains " things like the Asgardian parents , Odin and Frigga , played by the beautiful Rene Russo , there 's some beautiful scenes in there that I think people will enjoy . And certainly Thor and Loki interacting in different ways that just fill in a little bit of a back story , that was part of our rehearsal and research . " In its first week of release , Thor took the number one spot on Blu @-@ ray / DVD sales chart and topped Home Media Magazine 's rental chart for the week . 
 The film was also collected in a 10 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on April 2 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Thor earned $ 181 @.@ 0 million in North America and $ 268 @.@ 3 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 449 @.@ 3 million . It was also the 15th highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The film opened in North America on May 6 , 2011 in 3 @,@ 955 theaters with $ 25 @.@ 5 million ( including $ 3 @.@ 3 million from midnight screenings in about 1 @,@ 800 theaters ) and went on to earn $ 65 @.@ 7 million during its opening weekend taking the number one spot . $ 6 @.@ 2 million of the gross came from 214 IMAX 3D theaters . 3D presentations at a then @-@ record 2 @,@ 737 locations accounted for 60 % of the gross . It became the tenth highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 in North America and the highest @-@ grossing comic @-@ book film from May – August 2011 . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 The film opened solely in Australia on April 21 , 2011 , generating $ 5 @.@ 8 million and placing second behind Universal Pictures ' Fast Five . The film 's box office was just 1 % more than Iron Man opening in Australia in 2008 , Marvel 's most popular release at the time . The following week , Thor opened in 56 markets and took in $ 89 @.@ 2 million through the weekend . In total earnings , its highest @-@ grossing countries after North America were the UK ( $ 22 @.@ 5 million ) , Australia ( $ 20 @.@ 1 million ) and Mexico ( $ 19 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 77 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 266 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " A dazzling blockbuster that tempers its sweeping scope with wit , humor , and human drama , Thor is mighty Marvel entertainment . " Metacritic assigned a weighted average score of 57 / 100 based on reviews from 40 film critics , a mixed score on their scale . 
 Richard Kuipers of Variety stated , " Thor delivers the goods so long as butt is being kicked and family conflict is playing out in celestial dimensions , but is less thrilling during the Norse warrior god 's rather brief banishment on Earth " . Megan Lehmann of The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " The hammer @-@ hurling god of thunder kicks off this superhero summer with a bang " . In the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Richard Roeper liked the film " Thanks in large part to a charming , funny and winning performance from Australian actor Chris Hemsworth in the title role , Thor is the most entertaining superhero debut since the original Spider @-@ Man " . 
 Conversely , Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave it a negative review stating , " Thor is a failure as a movie , but a success as marketing , an illustration of the ancient carnival tactic of telling the rubes anything to get them into the tent " . A.O. Scott of The New York Times also disliked the film , calling it " an example of the programmed triumph of commercial calculation over imagination " . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times had mixed feelings , describing the film as " an aesthetic stand @-@ off between predictable elements and unexpected ones " . Turan praised the performances of Hemsworth , Hopkins , and Elba , but found the special effects inconsistent and the Earth storyline derivative . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequels = = 
 = = = Thor : The Dark World = = = 
 A sequel , Thor : The Dark World , directed by Alan Taylor , was released on November 8 , 2013 . Hemsworth and Hiddleston reprise their roles as Thor and Loki , respectively , along with others from the first film . Christopher Eccleston joins the cast as the Dark Elf <unk> . 
 = = = Thor : Ragnarok = = = 
 Thor : Ragnarok is scheduled to be released on November 3 , 2017 , directed by Taika Waititi . Stephany Folsom will write the screenplay , with Kevin Feige again producing . Hemsworth , Hiddleston , Alexander , Hopkins and Elba will reprise their roles as Thor , Loki , Sif , Odin , and Heimdall , respectively , while Mark Ruffalo will appear as Bruce Banner / Hulk reprising his role from previous MCU films . Cate Blanchett , Tessa Thompson , Jeff Goldblum and Karl Urban join the cast as Hela , Valkyrie , Grandmaster , and <unk> , respectively . 
 = Pope Theodore II = 
 Pope Theodore II ( Latin : Theodorus II ; 840 – December 897 ) was pope for twenty days in December 897 . His short reign occurred during a period of partisan strife in the Catholic Church , which was entangled with a period of feudal violence and disorder in central Italy . His main act as pope was to annul the " Cadaver Synod " of the previous January , therefore reinstating the acts and ordinations of Pope Formosus , which had themselves been annulled by Pope Stephen VI . He also had the body of Formosus recovered from the river Tiber and reburied with honour . He died in office in late December 897 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Towards the end of the ninth century , due to the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire the Catholic Church had to rely upon powerful European nobles for support . Pope Stephen V approached Arnulf of Carinthia to protect Rome from " pagan and evil Christians " . After he refused , Stephen V had to rely upon Guy III of Spoleto instead . Guy agreed to protect Rome as long as he was named as the Holy Roman Emperor , to which Stephen V acceded . After Stephen V 's death , Pope Formosus was elected . Formosus and Guy were reluctant allies , and Guy forced Formosus to crown him emperor again and to name his son , Lambert , as co @-@ emperor and successor . Formosus did so , but after Guy 's death , he lobbied Arnulf to rescue Rome from the <unk> . Arnulf agreed , and Formosus subsequently appointed him as the Holy Roman Emperor in 894 . Both Arnulf and Formosus died within a few years of the coronation , and the new pope , Stephen VI , crowned Lambert as the new emperor shortly thereafter . 
 In January 897 , Stephen VI held what is known as the " Cadaver Synod " . He had the body of Formosus exhumed from St. Peter 's Basilica and dressed in pontifical vestments . The dead pope was charged with " perjury , violating the canons prohibiting the translation of bishops , and coveting the papacy . " Formosus ' defence was provided by a deacon , but he was found guilty of all the charges . The synod annulled all of Formosus ' acts and ordinations . Formosus ' body was reburied in a common grave , and then thrown in the river Tiber . Supporters of Formosus rebelled , and seven months after the synod , Stephen VI was deposed , and died soon after in prison . His replacement , Pope Romanus is generally assumed to have been pro @-@ Formosus , but he was only pope for four months before he was deposed and made a monk . 
 = = Theodore II 's reign = = 
 Little is known of Theodore 's background ; he is recorded as being born a Roman , and the son of Photios I of Constantinople , who was the Patriarch of Constantinople . His brother Theodosius ( or <unk> ) was also a bishop . He was ordained as a priest by Stephen V. The exact dates of his papal reign are unknown , but modern sources generally agree that he was pope for twenty days during December 897 . Flodoard , a tenth @-@ century French chronicler , only credited Theodore with a twelve @-@ day reign , while in his history of the popes , Alexis @-@ François Artaud de <unk> listed Theodore 's reign as being twenty days , from 12 February to 3 March 898 . 
 Like his predecessor , Theodore was a supporter of Formosus . Some historians believe that Romanus had been deposed because he had not acted to restore Formosus ' honour quickly enough , though others suggest that he was removed by supporters of Stephen VI . In either case , Theodore immediately threw himself into the task of undoing the " Cadaver Synod " . He called his own synod , which annulled the rulings set out by Stephen VI . In so doing , he restored the acts and ordinations of Pope Formosus , including the restoration of a large number of clergy and bishops to their offices . Theodore also ordered Formosus ' body to be recovered from the harbour of Portus , where it had been secretly buried , and restored to the original grave at St. Peter 's Basilica . Like Romanus before him , Theodore bestowed a privilege upon the See of Grado , and had a coin minted , bearing the name of Lambert on the obverse , and " <unk> . Petrus " and " <unk> . " on the reverse . 
 Flodoard cast Theodore in a positive light , describing him as " beloved of the clergy , a friend of peace , temperate , chaste , affable and a great lover of the poor . " He died in office , though the cause of his death is unknown . In her book The Deaths of the Popes , Wendy Reardon suggests that Theodore " died suddenly from unknown ' foul play ' ( most likely poisons ) " . Horace Kinder Mann offers a different suggestion in his papal history , noting that it is possible that Popes who were " infirm or even older than [ ... ] their predecessors " might have been elected intentionally . Theodore was buried at St. Peter 's Basilica , but his tomb was destroyed during the demolition of the old basilica in the seventeenth century . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Theodore 's death , both Pope John IX and Sergius III claimed to have been elected pope ; the latter was excommunicated and driven from the city , though he did later become pope in 904 . John IX held synods reaffirming that of Theodore II , and he further banned the trial of people after their death . In turn , Sergius III later annulled the synods of Theodore II and John IX , and reinstated the validity of the " Cadaver Synod " . 
 = Monday ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Monday " is the fourteenth episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 28 , 1999 . It was written by Vince Gilligan and John Shiban , directed by Kim Manners , and featured guest appearances by Carrie Hamilton and Darren E. Burrows . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Monday " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 2 , being watched by 16 @.@ 7 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , the world is trapped in a time loop , and only one woman , named Pam ( Carrie Hamilton ) , seems to know . Each day the events that happen differ slightly . A bank robbery is committed over and over again until finally the eventual bombing of the building is prevented . Somehow , Mulder and Scully are trapped in the middle of it all . 
 " Monday , " inspired by The Twilight Zone episode titled " Shadow Play , " required the cast and crew to shoot the same scene several times . Because of this , director Kim Manners attempted to make each camera angle interesting . Actress Carrie Hamilton was cast to play Pam , and Darren E. Burrows , a former regular on the comedy show Northern Exposure , was cast to play her boyfriend Bernard . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) bleeding out from a gunshot wound while Scully tends to him . They are revealed to be hostages in a bank holdup , and Scully attempts to reason with their captor ( Darren E. Burrows ) , only to have him reveal a bomb strapped to his chest . The police begin to storm the building , prompting the gunman to detonate the bomb , seemingly killing them all . 
 Mulder then wakes , unharmed , to find that his water bed has sprung a leak , his alarm clock is broken , and he needs to pay his landlord for water damage . To do so , he is forced to go to the bank , instead of going to the meeting with his partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and various other FBI officials . When he arrives , the same gunman , named Bernard , arrives and nervously attempts to rob the bank , shooting Mulder in the process . The teller sets off the bank 's silent alarm and police cars come rushing to the scene . Scully arrives and once again attempts to help her partner as he lies dying , but events go the same way - the police rush the building , Bernard detonates the bomb , and everybody dies . 
 Suddenly , the action starts over . Mulder wakes to find that his water bed has sprung a leak , his alarm clock is broken , and he needs to pay his landlord for water damage . To the audience , time itself is stuck in a loop . Everyone is oblivious to the repetition of events except for one person , Pam ( Carrie Hamilton ) , Bernard 's girlfriend . Over multiple iterations of the events , Pam does everything in her power to save the agents , including trying to prevent them from entering the bank , trying to inform them of the time loop , and even begging Skinner not to let the police into the building . Because however she has a low intellect she is unable to stop things . It is implied that she has lived these events many times , as she refers to having had Mulder ask her the same question over fifty times . There are subtle changes in the events , and Mulder and Scully 's conversation is worded differently each time , but the results are always the same : Bernard detonates the bomb , usually after shooting Mulder , and they all die . 
 The time loop continues ad nauseam , though each time Pam speaks to Mulder , he comes closer to being able to remember her . She is finally able to convince him that events are repeating themselves , and before he is killed by the blast , Mulder begins repeating " he 's got a bomb " to himself , in an attempt to recall it the next time around . In the following iteration of the day Mulder finds himself repeating the phrase in the bank , and acting on his hunch , calls Scully and then confronts Bernard before he begins the holdup , changing events on a fundamental level . Scully , acting on Mulder 's phone call , brings Pam into the Bank . Mulder and Pam convince Bernard to give up and walk out with Pam . The sirens of the approaching Police response become audible and Bernard becomes agitated and attempts to shoot Mulder , but Pam throws herself in front of Mulder as he fires . As she lies dying , she admits , " This never happened before . " Bernard collapses to his knees , horrified by what he has done , and is peacefully arrested . The bomb blast averted , time continues as normal . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing , casting , and filming = = = 
 The episode was written under " extreme pressure " during the show 's brief Christmas hiatus . Many critics have noted similarities between " Monday " and the 1993 comedy film Groundhog Day . Vince Gilligan and John Shiban , the writers of the episode , however , credit a 1961 episode of The Twilight Zone titled " Shadow Play . " Gilligan later noted that , " the funny thing about ' Monday ' is people seemed to really like it a lot , but people always sorta [ sic ] smiled and said you 're sort of ripping off Groundhog Day aren 't you ? [ ... ] And I 'd say , we 're not ripping off Groundhog Day , we 're ripping off The Twilight Zone . " A similar plot device was used in the Stargate : SG @-@ 1 episode " Window of Opportunity " , in which the characters of Jack O 'Neill and Teal 'c are the only individuals who remain aware of the time loop . 
 Casting director Rick Millikan was tasked with finding a suitable actress to play Pam , the would @-@ be bank robber 's girlfriend . Millikan expressed the difficulty in casting the role , saying , " you had to feel sorry for this woman 's terrible , unbelievable plight — basically she 's trapped in a living hell — without at any time thinking she 's insane . " The role eventually went to actress Carrie Hamilton , who Millikan and the producers unanimously agreed was the perfect choice . This was one of Hamilton 's last roles , as she died from cancer three years later at the age of 38 . For the part of Bernard , Millikan cast Darren Burrows , a former regular on the comedy show Northern Exposure . Millikan later said that his acting was , " beautiful . " 
 Director Kim Manners , realizing the monotony of some of the scenes , such as Mulder waking up after each successive explosion , attempted to make each camera angle interesting . He diagrammed every camera angle and move to make the scenes visually appealing and hold the viewers ' attention . First assistant director Bruce Carter examined the script and created a complex timeline to make shooting easier . It took him two weeks to break all the episode 's elements into their exact timings , but Carter considered it a success . He later said , " It was one of the things I was proudest of all year . " 
 To create the bank needed for the episode , Ilt Jones and the location department staff found a former bank and current animation school and film production house on Fourth and Main Street in downtown Los Angeles . The building was completely renovated , complete with fake ATMs , columns , desks , and double @-@ glazed windows . All of the items inside of the bank were bought from a bank @-@ supply catalogue by set decorator Tim Stepeck . During the hold @-@ up scene outside the bank , a four @-@ block area was sealed off to allow cameras to film . A total of eleven cameras , some at different speeds , were used . Some of the cameras made it onto the film , but they were erased during post @-@ production . 
 = = = Props and make @-@ up = = = 
 Much of the episode relied on props . The water bed , which was purchased by Morris Fletcher earlier in the sixth season episode " Dreamland " while in Mulder 's body , proved to be the hardest prop to locate . Stepeck searched Los Angeles and was unable to find a suitable bed . He had to order the bed from a specialized furniture store in San Francisco . Mulder 's paycheck and envelope were created after several calls to the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington , D.C. The checks were made to be as realistic as possible without looking too convincing . During the hold @-@ up scene outside the bank , the police cruisers were all turned off , because the combined noise of the cars would drown out dialogue . To ensure their flashing lights , car coordinator Danny Briggs installed battery chargers in the cars . 
 To give Pam the proper look , the makeup department , headed by Cheri Montesanto @-@ <unk> , applied mascara under Hamilton 's eyes and then smudged it to give her a " haunted " look . Pam 's stringy and multi @-@ hued hairstyle was Hamilton 's creation . Dena Green , the hair department head , was tasked with creating an exact wig replica to be worn by Hamilton 's stunt double . 
 In this episode , we see a thick black book on the shelf above Mulder 's bed . The book is a classic textbook on general relativity : Gravitation by Charles Misner , Kip Thorne , and John Wheeler . Thorne is the author of a review paper asking whether the laws of physics outlaw time loops completely . Agent Scully 's undergraduate thesis was about the physics of time in relativity . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Monday " first aired in the United States on February 28 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 16 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on June 13 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 90 million viewers , making it the second most @-@ watched episode that week , behind Friends . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " How do you stop the unstoppable from happening ? Tonight , Mulder may die trying . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received consistently positive reviews . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode a positive review , writing " One of the strengths of ' Monday ' is in showing us Scully 's evolution and how her experiences with Mulder allow her to embrace , albeit reluctantly , ideas that are not grounded in science . " Den of Geek writer Juliette Harrisson named the episode the " finest stand @-@ alone episode " of the sixth season and wrote , " Time loops , if dragged on for too long , can become tedious , but in small doses they can be hilariously funny or achingly poignant . This episode is definitely the latter , as the downtrodden girlfriend of a bank robber is forced to witness the deaths of her boyfriend , Mulder , Scully and a large group of innocent people die over and over again until finally she breaks the loop by dying herself [ ... ] The onus of saving everyone being largely on the shoulders of an unknown woman effectively brings in a change of pace and a welcome breath of fresh air . " Earl Cressey from DVD Talk called " Monday " one of the " highlights of season six . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " and called it " a script which balances humor , structural brilliance , and compassion in equal measure . " Handlen compared and contrasted the episode to Groundhog Day , noting that , while both feature a character who is able to restart a day , in " Monday " , the characters have the benefit of free will and can change factors : " Every Monday to her has certain basic requirements : boyfriend with bomb , bank robbery , the FBI agents [ … ] and the earth @-@ shattering Kaboom . Aside from that , nothing is certain . " Handlen concluded that the episode managed to be both " a very funny hour " , as well as possess serious " sadness " . 
 Jordan Farley from SFX magazine named the episode the eighth of the " Top Groundhog Days " episodes . Farley applauded the show 's gall to seemingly kill one of the leads in the teaser and appreciated the entry 's mix of humor — during the scenes with Mulder and his water bed — and its alternative scenarios in the bank . Natalie Prado from Just Press Play gave the episode an A – and wrote , " The episode is well @-@ written and tense . As an audience , we become increasingly frustrated that the two people that we know can solve the problem are unaware that it exists , which makes the payoff when they finally find a way out much more satisfying . There are a few leaps in logic , especially towards the end , but overall it ’ s solid and enjoyable . " Jamie Jeffords , writing for the Dallas Morning News , awarded the episode four out of five stars and praised Hamilton 's performance , saying , " What makes ' Monday ’ is the performance of Hamilton [ ... ] When she is killed in the end , she almost possesses a quiet glee when she realizes her death never happened before , so maybe it is over now . Her performance is haunting . Very powerful . " Michigan Daily writer Melissa Runstrom , in a review of the sixth season , said " Monday " was " well made and entertaining . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris called the episode " ingenious and heart @-@ wrenching , " and noted that David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson 's acting was the best of the season . Furthermore , she praised Kim Manners ' directing style , calling the same scenes shot in different ways " new " . UGO Networks listed the episode as number 95 in a countdown of the " 100 Greatest Moments in Time Travel " . 
 = P.N.03 = 
 P.N.03 , short for Product Number Zero Three , is a 2003 third @-@ person shooter video game developed and published by Capcom for the Nintendo GameCube . Set in a science @-@ fictional space colony compound , the game stars Vanessa Z. Schneider , a mercenary controlled by the player to combat berserk robots . The game was directed by Shinji Mikami as part of the Capcom Five . To avoid similarities with Devil May Cry and Resident Evil , the P.N.03 team emphasized defensive and rhythmic maneuvers and a " delicate " , " feminine " game world . 
 P.N.03 was developed on a tight schedule in an attempt to offset Capcom 's poor fiscal year . However , the game received mixed reviews and failed commercially . Several critics found the game repetitive and unintuitive . They were divided on its gameplay mechanics : some disliked its controls — specifically the inability to move and shoot simultaneously — while others compared it favorably to golden age arcade games . Mikami repurposed ideas from P.N.03 in his 2010 game Vanquish . 
 = = Plot and gameplay = = 
 P.N.03 is a science @-@ fiction third @-@ person shooter . In the game , the player controls Vanessa Z. Schneider , a freelance mercenary who works on colonized planets . She is contracted by a mysterious client to destroy Computerized Armament Management System ( CAMS ) robots that have gone berserk . Robots of this type had been responsible for the deaths of Vanessa 's parents . To combat the CAMS , Vanessa wears " Aegis suits " , powered exoskeletons that allow her to fire energy beams from her palms and to perform powerful attacks called " energy drives " . Energy drives , which deplete the energy meter , grant temporary invulnerability to Vanessa and damage multiple enemies . At checkpoints , the player uses points earned from defeated robots to purchase Aegis suits , suit upgrades and energy drives . The player may play " trial missions " ( randomly generated levels ) between missions to score extra points . 
 The CAMS attack in set patterns , and their next moves are indicated by visual and aural cues . The player avoids these attacks via evasive spins , rolls and other maneuvers . Vanessa cannot move while attacking , and so the player must often use the environment as cover . Defeated enemies sometimes drop items that replenish health and energy or that trigger a combo timer , which multiplies the points earned from enemies destroyed consecutively . Each mission takes place in a series of rooms that contain a fixed number of enemies and may include a boss robot . At the end of a mission , the player receives a score based on the number of rooms explored and enemies destroyed . 
 Late in the game , Vanessa discovers a clone of herself in a CAMS facility but is forced to abandon her when the building 's self @-@ destruct sequence is initiated . After destroying the CAMS central core , Vanessa encounters a digital projection of the client , whose appearance is identical to her own . She speculates that she is a clone of the client , but the client counters that none of their memories may be real . Vanessa debates whether to continue her work as a mercenary as the game ends . 
 = = Development = = 
 In November 2002 , Capcom announced the Capcom Five , a group of video games developed by Capcom Production Studio 4 and overseen by Resident Evil creator Shinji Mikami . Among these titles was P.N.03 , directed by Mikami . Capcom conceived the Capcom Five to bring new intellectual property to the industry , which the company viewed at the time as stagnant . According to producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi , the P.N.03 team 's goal was to make a game both " fun to watch and fun to play " . The team focused on the game 's audiovisuals , action , and speed , and they tried to balance the " tension experienced on the battlefield and the exhilaration of taking out the enemies " . Mikami wanted P.N.03 to evoke the same feelings as classic Nintendo games . While the staff felt the background graphics were important , they prioritized excitement in the game world . 
 During the planning stage , P.N.03 was originally a wargame referred to as the " robot war game " . Five days into development , the staff created a preliminary demonstration of the graphics . Mikami was unsatisfied with this prototype and decided to rework the project as a third @-@ person shooting game . The director wanted to name the game Jaguar to reflect Vanessa 's cat @-@ like agility . However , other staff members disliked the name : some claimed that it failed to describe the game , while others thought that White Jaguar was a better title . Mikami chose P.N.03 as a hint to the game 's plot . 
 Early coverage of P.N.03 by GameSpot and IGN highlighted the game 's acrobatics and shooting . P.N.03 's gameplay was initially similar to that of Devil May Cry : Vanessa attacked with two pistols and performed acrobatic moves like Devil May Cry 's protagonist , Dante . Feeling that it resembled Devil May Cry too closely , Mikami altered the game to reward players for performing defensive moves . Mikami wanted Vanessa to use guns , but the developers were unable to complete the animated graphics for weapons in time for release . The guns were substituted by energy bolts fired from the character 's hands . In an effort to meet yearly sales goals , Capcom developed P.N.03 quickly and released it in March 2003 . Many of Capcom 's releases for the year had underperformed . Viewtiful Joe , another Capcom Five title , was delayed into the next fiscal year to decrease the possible sales that had to be offset . After leaving Capcom , Mikami later incorporated ideas he intended for P.N.03 into the 2010 title Vanquish . 
 Kobayashi aimed to avoid conventions established in Resident Evil , such as that series ' dark , masculine world . With P.N.03 , Kobayashi wanted to portray a " white " world with " feminine , delicate lines " . To that end , the staff applied a minimalist approach to the visuals , used " fine drawn lines " , and emphasized " visibility and creativity " in the game world . To maintain the game 's " delicate image " , the developers tried to make the visuals easy to view and understand . The team crafted the gameplay to avoid " button mashing " ; instead , players were meant to observe enemy attack patterns and think before acting . Mechanical designer Shou Sakai tried to craft " things that would stick in [ the player 's ] mind " . Because of the tight development schedule , 3D models had to be created immediately after their designs were completed . Sakai described the lack of time as the " toughest part " of the process . 
 Mikami was indifferent to the main character 's gender . During the early creation process , he left the decision to his staff , who ultimately chose a female character . Because P.N.03 takes place in a space colony , Mikami wanted Vanessa 's country of origin to be ambiguous . To that end , she was given a combination of French , German , and English names . Vanessa 's movements were animated freehand , without motion capture technology . The designers posed Vanessa crouched on her hands and knees to resemble a jaguar , as an homage to the Jaguar title . The staff integrated rhythmic motions to her maneuvers to emulate dancing and to make her appear stylish . Kobayashi wanted Vanessa to be a " cool and sexy mercenary with a tough exterior that hides her dark past . " In retrospect , he was proud of the character 's style and movements . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Capcom Five were first announced as games exclusive to the Nintendo GameCube ; however , Capcom later ported most of the titles to other consoles . At the end of 2002 , the company confirmed that P.N.03 would be released in 2003 as a GameCube exclusive . In January 2003 , the company slated the game for a March release in Japan but retracted the exclusivity announcement . At a press conference prior to the 2003 Electronic Entertainment Expo , however , Capcom reaffirmed that P.N.03 would be available only for the GameCube . In the end , P.N.03 was the only Capcom Five title to remain exclusive to the system . 
 P.N.03 was the first of the Capcom Five to be released . Before the game 's debut in Japan , Capcom distributed playable demos to stores and released screenshots to the media . Upon P.N.03 's release , Capcom shipped 25 @,@ 000 copies to Japanese retailers . Under 11 @,@ 000 units were sold , which made the game Japan 's 26th best @-@ selling title during the last week of March 2003 . These low sales failed to help Capcom meet its yearly sales goals . The North American localization was announced in July 2003 . Few aspects of the game were changed for the North American market . Capcom advertised a free T @-@ shirt as a pre @-@ order incentive in North America . Promotional sunglasses modeled after Vanessa 's were also released . 
 = = Reception = = 
 P.N.03 failed commercially and received mixed reviews , with scores of 64 % and 63 on review aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's three reviewers characterized the game as shallow , repetitive and devoid of plot and character development . Mark MacDonald of the magazine criticized Vanessa 's inability to move and shoot at the same time . By contrast , the reviewer for Edge wrote , " P.N.03 may be rather short and its premise simple , but grace under fire has rarely been done better . " The writer favorably compared its gameplay to that of Space Invaders , in that the game " rewards skill above all else and mastery brings huge satisfaction " . The reviewer cited Vanessa as one of the game 's high points . In a 2009 retrospective review , the Edge magazine staff echoed its previous praise of P.N.03 but acknowledged the game 's awkward control mechanics . The staff commented that Vanessa 's potentially fluid movement is difficult to execute , but that the challenge of mastering the control scheme is part of the game 's charm . 
 GamePro 's Mike Weigand called the game " a long , intense , thumb @-@ busting shooter that tests trigger fingers and patience levels . " He found the environments and enemies repetitive , but he cited " strong aesthetics " and " a slick reward system " as redemptive features . Weigand summarized that , while the game lacks depth , it may be recommended to " those who crave a shoot @-@ em @-@ up with old @-@ school inflections " . Paul Byrnes of GMR found P.N.03 to be a " boring and repetitive " missed opportunity . He felt that it lacked flow , thanks in large part to Vanessa 's " clumsily staccato " movements and inability to move and shoot simultaneously . Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner wrote that P.N.03 's setting , animations and protagonist give it an " undeniable allure " of freshness and originality . However , he disliked the game 's control system and wrote that " blowing away robots gets old rather quickly " . Reiner called P.N.03 's length , which he estimated to be four hours , its " most disappointing aspect " . 
 Greg Kasavin of GameSpot wrote that " you 'll almost certainly be unimpressed with the repetitive and cumbersome action at the heart of [ P.N.03 ] . " He disliked the game 's separation into brief , discrete sections ; and , while he saw the game 's design as a reference to that of older games , he found that P.N.03 lacked the " extremely precise controls and smooth , colorful graphics " of the titles that inspired it . Kasavin summarized it as " a short , uninspired game that 's yet another would @-@ be imitator of Capcom 's own Devil May Cry . " Matt Casamassina of IGN wrote that players will " want to like " the game , but that its " design flaws and sloppy execution " are impossible to overlook . He found it to be shallow and repetitive , and he wrote that its fast pace and " unresponsive control setup " combine to place the game " at war with itself . " However , he believed that P.N.03 is " not a disaster — merely a disappointment " , and that it sits " solidly in average country . " In a 2012 retrospective from Eurogamer , Chris Schilling called the game the outcast of Shinji Mikami 's work , criticizing its plot and calling its control scheme its " biggest obstacle " . He later added " if at times its appeal can be hard to pin down , that doesn 't mean it should be so easily forgotten " , mentioning the satisfaction of beating the bosses in the game . 
 = Tool ( band ) = 
 Tool is an American rock band from Los Angeles , California . Formed in 1990 , the group 's line @-@ up includes drummer Danny Carey , guitarist Adam Jones , and vocalist Maynard James Keenan . Since 1995 , Justin Chancellor has been the band 's bassist , replacing their original bassist Paul D 'Amour . Tool has won three Grammy Awards , performed worldwide tours , and produced albums topping the charts in several countries . 
 The band emerged with a heavy metal sound on their first studio album , Undertow ( 1993 ) , and later became a dominant act in the alternative metal movement , with the release of their second album , Ænima in 1996 . Their efforts to unify musical experimentation , visual arts , and a message of personal evolution continued , with Lateralus ( 2001 ) and the most recent album , 10 @,@ 000 Days ( 2006 ) , gaining the band critical acclaim , and commercial success around the world . 
 Due to Tool 's incorporation of visual arts and very long and complex releases , the band is generally described as a style @-@ transcending act and part of progressive rock , psychedelic rock , and art rock . The relationship between the band and today 's music industry is ambivalent , at times marked by censorship , and the band 's insistence on privacy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1988 – 92 ) = = = 
