 There are few written records of traditional Welsh foods ; recipes were instead held within families and passed down orally between the women of the family . The lack of records was highlighted by Mati Thomas in 1928 , who made a unique collection of 18th century " Welsh Culinary Recipes " as an award winning Eisteddfod entry . 
 Those with the skills and inclination to write Welsh recipes , the upper classes , conformed to English styles and therefore would not have run their houses with traditional Welsh cuisine . Upper @-@ class households would take on any English fashions , even adopting English names . The traditional cookery of Wales originates from the daily meals of peasant folk , unlike other cultures where meals often started in the kitchens of the gentry and would be adapted . 
 Historically the King of the Welsh people would travel , with his court , in a circuit , demanding tribute in the form of food from communities they visited as they went . The tribute was codified in the Laws of Hywel Dda , showing that people lived on beer , bread , meat and dairy products , with few vegetables beyond cabbages and leeks . The laws show how much value was put on different parts of Welsh life at the time , for example that wealth was measured in cattle ; they also show that the court included hunters , who would be restricted to seasonal hunting sessions . 
 Towards the start of the 11th century , Welsh society started to build settlements . Food would be cooked in a single cauldron over an open fire on the floor , it would likely be reheated and topped up with fresh ingredients over a number of days . Some dishes could be cooked on a <unk> , a flat stone which could be placed above a fire to heat it evenly . 
 Gerald of Wales , chaplain to Henry II , wrote after an 1188 tour of Wales , " The whole population lives almost entirely on oats and the produce of their herds , milk , <unk> and butter . You must not expect a variety of dishes from a Welsh kitchen , and there are no highly @-@ seasoned <unk> to whet your appetite . " The medieval Welsh used thyme , savory , and mint in the kitchen , but in general herbs were much more likely to be used for medicinal purposes than culinary ones . 
 Towards the end of the 18th century , Welsh land owners divided up the land to allow for tenant @-@ based farming . Each small holding would include vegetable crops , as well as a cow , pigs and a few chickens . The 18th and 19th centuries were a time of unrest for the Welsh people . The Welsh food riots began in 1740 , when colliers blamed the lack of food on problems in the supply , and continued throughout Wales as a whole . The worst riots happened in the 1790s after a grain shortage , which coincided with political upheaval in the form of forced military service and high taxes on the roads , leaving farmers unable to make a profit . As a result of riots by colliers in the mid 1790s , magistrates in Glamorgan sold the rioters corn at a reduced price . At the same time they also requested military assistance from the government to stop further rioting . Due to the close @-@ knit nature of the poor communities , and the slightly higher status of the farmers above the labourers , the rioters generally blamed the farmers and corn merchants , rather than the gentry . 
 The majority of food riots had ended by 1801 , and there were certain political undertones to the actions , though lack of leadership meant that little came of it . By the 1870s , 60 % of Wales was owned by 570 families , most of whom did no farming . Instead , they employed workers , who were forced to vote Tory or lose their jobs . 
 Around the end of the 19th century , the increase in coal mining and steel works around Wales led to the immigration of Italian workers . The workers brought families who integrated their culture into Welsh society , bringing with them Italian ice cream and Italian cafes , now a staple of Welsh society . 
 In the 1960s , isolated communities were unable to access produce that the majority of Britain would such as peppers or aubergines . Artisan Welsh produce was limited or non @-@ existent , farms rarely made their own cheese , and Welsh wine was of poor quality . By the 1990s , historical Welsh foods were going through a revival . Farmers ' markets became more popular , Welsh organic vegetables and farm @-@ made cheese started to appear in supermarkets . Other modern Welsh characteristics are more subtle , such as supermarkets offering salty butters and laverbread or butchers labelling beef skirt as ' cawl meat ' . 
 Restaurants are promoting the quality of Welsh ingredients , encouraging people to purchase Welsh produce and creating new dishes using them . This has meant that Welsh products can find their way into the higher @-@ priced delicatessens of London or North America . However , the regular diet of Welsh people has been more influenced by India , China and America . The most popular dish is chicken tikka masala , followed by burgers or chow mein . As a result of the popularity of these sorts of foods , Wales has the highest fat consumption in Britain , and therefore the highest levels of obesity . 
 = = Regional variations = = 
 There are some variations in the foods that are eaten around the different areas of Wales . These variations trace their roots back to medieval cooking . Ingredients were historically limited by what could be grown ; the wetter climate in highland areas meant that crops were restricted to oats , whilst the more fertile lowland areas allowed the growth of barley or wheat . Coastal inhabitants were more likely to include seafood or seaweed in their meals , whilst those living inland would supplement their farmed cereals with the seeds of land weeds to ensure there was enough to eat . 
 The invasions of the Romans and Normans also had an effect on the fertile areas which were conquered . The people there learned more " sophisticated eating habits " . Conversely those who remained in wilder areas kept the traditional approaches to cooking ; tools such as the pot crane continued to be used as late as the 20th century . 
 The only region that has a significant difference from the rest of Wales is the Gower peninsula , whose lack of land transport links left it isolated . Instead it was strongly influenced by Somerset and Devon on the other side of the Bristol Channel . Dishes such as <unk> and ingredients such as pumpkin , rare elsewhere in Wales , became commonplace in Gower . 
 = = Produce = = 
 Welsh food can be better traced though the history of its foodstuffs than through the dishes themselves . 
 = = = Meat and fish = = = 
 There a number of local Welsh breeds of cow , including the Welsh Black , a breed which dates back to at least 1874 . Cattle farming accounts for the majority of agricultural output in Wales — in 1998 the production of beef contributed 23 % of Welsh agricultural output , whilst in 2002 25 % of agricultural output was in the production of dairy products . Welsh beef has a European Union Protected Geographical Indicator , so it must be wholly reared and slaughtered in Wales . 
 Pigs were the primary meat eaten by early Welsh folk , which could be preserved easily by salting . By 1700 , there were a number of different Welsh breeds of pig , with long snouts and thin backs , generally light coloured , but some were dark or spotted . Today , pigs in Wales are either farmed intensively , using the white Welsh pig or <unk> pig , or extensively , where Saddleback pig , Welsh pig or crossbreeds are farmed . 
 The Welsh uplands were most suited to grazing animals such as sheep and goats , and the animals became associated with Wales . Sheep @-@ farming on a large scale was introduced by Cistercian monks , largely for wool , but also for meat . By the start of the 16th century Welsh mutton was popular in the rest of the UK . Once modern synthetic fibres became more popular than wool , Welsh sheep were raised almost exclusively for meat . Towards the end of the 20th century , there were more than 11 million sheep in Wales . The most popular breed of sheep is the Welsh Mountain sheep which is notably smaller than other breeds but better @-@ suited to the Welsh landscape and only rears one lamb , rather than the lowland breeds which rear two or more ; the mountain sheep are regarded as having more flavoursome meat . Welsh farmers have started using scientific methods , such as artificial insemination or using ultrasound to scan a sheep 's depth of fat , to improve the quality of their meat . 
 Coastal areas of Wales , and those near rivers , produce many different forms of fish and shellfish . Traditional fishing methods , such as wade netting for salmon , remained in place for 2 @,@ 000 years . Welsh coracles , simple boats made of a willow frame and covered in animal hides , were noted by Romans and were still in use in the 20th century . Once landed , fish would generally be wind @-@ <unk> and smoked , or cured with salt . 
 Herring , a fish which takes well to salting , became a well established catch ; the busiest harbour was Aberystwyth , which reportedly took up to 1 @,@ 000 barrels of herring in a single night in 1724 . Many other villages also fished for herring , generally between late August and December . Herring , along with mackerel , trout , salmon and sea trout , were the main fishes found in Welsh cuisine . Salmon was abundant and therefore a staple for the poor . Trout , which would dry out quickly when cooked , would be wrapped in leek leaves for cooking , or covered in bacon or oatmeal . Many fish would be served with fennel , which grew wild in abundance in Wales . 
 Lobster fishing was done on a small scale especially in Cardigan Bay , but was reserved almost exclusively for export . Welsh fisherman would be more likely to eat the less profitable crabs . Cockles have been harvested since Roman times and are still harvested in a traditional manner with a hand rake and scraper . Cockle picking still happens in the Gower peninsula , but due to the difficulty in getting licences and reduced yield , villages near the Carmarthen Bay no longer gather them . 
 = = = Dairy products = = = 
 As cattle were the basis of Celtic wealth , butter and cheese were generally made from cows ' milk . The Celts were amongst the earliest producers of butter in Britain , and for hundreds of years after the Romans left the country butter was the primary cooking medium and basis for sauces . Salt was an important ingredient in Welsh butter , but also in early Welsh cheeses , which would sit in brine during the <unk> process . 
 The Welsh were also early adopters of roasting cheese . An early incarnation of Welsh rarebit was being made in medieval times , and by the middle of the 15th century Rarebit was considered a national dish . The acid soil of Wales meant that the milk produced by their cattle created a soft cheese , which was not as good for roasting , so Welsh people would trade for harder cheeses such as Cheddar . 
 The best known Welsh cheese is Caerphilly , named in 1831 but made long before that . Originally a method for storing excess milk until it could be brought to market , it was a moist cheese that would not last very long . Production of the cheese was halted due to milk rationing after World War II , although it was still made in England . There , the cheese was produced very quickly and sold early in its maturation process , creating a dryer cheese . In the 1970s , production of Caerphilly returned to Wales and over the following few decades a variety of new cheeses have also been produced in Wales . 
 = = = Cereals = = = 
 As far back as the Iron Age , Welsh folk were using wild cereals to create a coarse bread . By the time the Romans invaded , Celtic skills with bread had progressed to the point that white or brown breads could be produced . The Roman invasion led to many Welsh people moving to the less hospitable uplands , where the only cereal crops which could be grown were oats , barley and rye . Oat and barley breads were the main breads eaten in Wales up until the 19th century , with rye bread created for medicinal purposes . Oats were used to bulk out meat or meat and vegetable stews , also known as pottage . 
 The Welsh also created a dish called <unk> , finely ground oatmeal soaked in water for a long time before boiling until it solidified . This <unk> styled dish became so popular outside Wales that it got a new name , <unk> , as the English couldn 't pronounce the original . A similar dish , <unk> , was made with less finely ground oatmeal , making a coarser product . 
 = = = Vegetables = = = 
 Celtic law made specific provision with regards to cabbages and leeks , stating that they should be enclosed by fences for protection against wandering cattle . The two green vegetables were the only ones mentioned specifically in the laws , though uncultivated plants were still likely to be used in their cooking . The leek went on to be so important to Welsh cuisine — found in many symbolic dishes including cawl and Glamorgan sausage — that it became the country 's national vegetable . 
 Potatoes were slow to be adopted amongst Welsh folk , despite being introduced to the UK in the 16th century ; only in the early 18th century did they become a Welsh staple , due to grain failures . Once the potato did become a staple , it was quickly found in Welsh dishes such as cawl , and traditions grew around their use . One tradition , which was still in place at the start of World War II , was that villagers could plant an 80 @-@ yard ( 73 @-@ metre ) row of potatoes in a neighbouring farmer 's field for each labourer the household could provide at the time of harvest . 
 = = Welsh dishes = = 
 Whilst there are a large number of dishes that can be considered Welsh due to their ingredients , there are some which are quintessentially Welsh . Dishes such as cawl , Welsh rarebit , laverbread , Welsh cakes , bara brith ( literally " speckled bread " ) or the Glamorgan sausage have all been regarded as symbols of Welsh food . 
 <unk> , pronounced in a similar way to the English word " cowl " , can be regarded as Wales ' national dish . Dating back to the 11th century , originally it was a simple broth of meat ( most likely bacon ) and vegetables , it could be cooked slowly over the course of the day whilst the family was out working the fields . It could be made in stages , over a number of days , first by making a meat stock , then by adding the vegetables on the following day . Once cooked , the fat could be skimmed from the top of the pot , then it would be served as two separate dishes , first as a soup , then as a stew . Leftovers could be topped up with fresh vegetables , sometimes over the course of weeks . During the 18th and 19th centuries , the amount of meat used in the broth was minimal ; instead it was bulked out with potatoes . Today , cawl would be much more likely to include beef or lamb for the meat , and may be served with plain oatmeal dumplings or currant dumplings known as trollies . Traditionally cawl would be eaten with a " specially @-@ carved wooden spoon " and eaten from a wooden bowl . 
 The predilection of the Welsh for roasted cheese led to the dish of Welsh rarebit , or Welsh rabbit , seasoned melted cheese poured over toasted bread . The cheese would need to be a harder one , such as <unk> or similar . Referred to as Welsh rabbit as early as 1725 , the name is not similar to the Welsh term <unk> <unk> . Welsh folk rarely ate rabbit due to the cost and as land owners would not allow rabbit hunting , so the term is more likely a slur on the Welsh . The name evolved from rabbit to rarebit , possibly to remove the slur from Welsh cuisine or due to simple reinterpretation of the word to make menus more pleasant . 
 <unk> , or Bara <unk> , is a Welsh speciality . It is made by cooking <unk> seaweed slowly over the course of up to ten hours until it becomes a puree known as laver . The seaweed can also be cooked with oatmeal to make laverbread . It can be served with bacon and cockles as a breakfast dish , or fried in to small patties . Today , laverbread is commercially produced by washing in water , cooking for about 5 hours before chopping , salting and packaging . 
 The Glamorgan sausage is a Welsh vegetarian sausage . It contains no meat or skin , instead it is made with cheese , generally Caerphilly , but sometimes cheddar , along with leek or spring onion . This mixture is then coated in breadcrumbs and rolled into a sausage shape before cooking . Glamorgan sausages date back to at least the early 19th century , at which point the sausages would have contained pork fat . 
 Welsh cakes , or <unk> ar y maen meaning " cakes on the stone " , are small round spiced cakes , traditionally cooked on a <unk> , but more recently on a griddle . Once cooked , they can be eaten hot or cold , on their own or topped either with sugar or butter . The dough which is mixed with raisins , <unk> and sometimes currants , is similar to shortbread , meaning they can have the consistency of biscuits when cooked on the griddle , and slightly more like a cake when cooked in the oven . 
 Bara brith is a fruit loaf originating from rural Wales , where they used a mortar and pestle to grind the fresh sweet spices . Historically it was made with yeast and butter , though recently it is likely to be made with bicarbonate of soda and margarine . The fruit included would be dried raisins , currants and candied peel , which would be soaked in cold tea before cooking . Generally served sliced with butter during afternoon tea , it is often known as Welsh tea bread . Bara Brith translates to " speckled bread " , but it is also known as <unk> <unk> in South Wales , where <unk> are included in the recipe , or as torta negra when Welsh settlers brought it to Argentina . 
 = = Beverages = = 
 Wine and beer , especially of the home @-@ made varieties , were central to socialising in Wales , as they were in England . This remained the case even when tea gained popularity in England , supplanting the home @-@ made alcohol . Beer is now the national drink of Wales , although Welsh beers never gained the status of other British beers , such as stout or English ales . This was in part due to the breweries keeping promotion of their products to a minimum so as not to upset the temperance movement in Wales . 
 The temperance movement remained a strong influence though , and when new breweries were set up , the outcry led to the Welsh Sunday Closing Act in 1881 , an act that forced the closure of public houses in Wales on a Sunday . Wales ' passion for beer remained ; the Wrexham Lager Beer Company opened in 1881 , as the first lager producer in Britain . The <unk> Brewery made a deal with the local tin works and became the first brewery in Europe to put beer in cans . 
 The Welsh also have a history of producing whisky , in a similar manner to other Celtic people such as the Irish or Scottish but on a smaller scale . Distillation began for commercial purposes before 1750 , by families who went on to emigrate to America and help found the Kentucky Whiskey industry . Always a niche industry , by the late 19th century , the main whisky production in Wales was at <unk> near Bala , Gwynedd . The distillery was bought by Scottish whisky companies and closed in 1910 when they were attempting to establish brands in England . In 1998 the Welsh Whisky Company , now known as Penderyn , was formed and whisky production began at Penderyn , Rhondda Cynon Taf in 2000 . Penderyn single malt whisky was the first whisky commercially produced in Wales for a century and went on sale in 2004 . The company also produces Merlyn Cream <unk> , Five Vodka and Brecon Gin . 
 Welsh vineyards were first planted by Romans , but in the 1970s , modern vineyards were planted in South Wales with the intention of creating Welsh wine . Despite a slow start , by 2005 Wales had 20 vineyards , producing 100 @,@ 000 bottles a year , primarily white wines , but also a few reds . According to the Wine Standards Board , by September 2015 , there were 22 operational vineyards in Wales. and there were almost 40 hectares ( 99 acres ) of vines planted in Wales . 
 By 2005 the Welsh bottled water industry was worth as much as £ 100m . Popular brands include Brecon Carreg , Tŷ Nant , Princes Gate and Pant Du . 
 = = Eating out = = 
 The number of restaurants in Wales has significantly increased since the 1960s , when the country had very few notable places to eat out . Today , Wales is no longer considered a " gastronomic desert " ; as of 2016 , it has five Michelin starred restaurants and other award systems such as TripAdvisor and the AA have included Welsh restaurants in their lists . The most significant increase in restaurants has been at the high end , but there has been growth and improvement in quality across the whole range of Welsh eateries . 
 Many Welsh restaurants attempt to showcase their " Welshness " , but few include historic Welsh dishes besides cawl . Instead , they showcase their Welsh ingredients , creating new dishes from them . There has also been a rise in Asian cuisine in Wales , especially that of Indian , Chinese , Thai , Indonesian and Japanese , with a preference for spicier foods . Finally there has been a significant rise in " <unk> " , as there has around the United Kingdom , with the first in the country credited as the The Walnut Tree in <unk> <unk> . 
 = Tintin in America = 
 Tintin in America ( French : Tintin en Amérique ) is the third volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . Commissioned by the conservative Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle for its children 's supplement Le Petit Vingtième , it was serialised weekly from September 1931 to October 1932 before being published in a collected volume by Éditions du Petit Vingtième in 1932 . The story tells of young Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy who travel to the United States , where Tintin reports on organised crime in Chicago . Pursuing a gangster across the country , he encounters a tribe of Blackfoot Native Americans before defeating the Chicago crime syndicate . 
 Following the publication of Tintin in the Congo , Hergé conducted research for a story set in the United States , desiring to reflect his concerns regarding the treatment of Native communities by the U.S. government . Bolstered by a publicity stunt , Tintin in America was a commercial success in Belgium and was soon republished in France . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Cigars of the Pharaoh , and the series became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . In 1945 , Tintin in America was re @-@ drawn and coloured in Hergé 's ligne @-@ claire style for republication by Casterman , with further alterations made at the request of his American publisher for a 1973 edition . The story was adapted for a 1991 episode of the Ellipse / Nelvana animated series The Adventures of Tintin . Critical reception of the work has been mixed , with commentators on The Adventures of Tintin arguing that although it represents an improvement on the preceding two instalments , it still reflects many of the problems that were visible in them . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In 1931 , Tintin , a reporter for Le Petit Vingtième , goes with his dog Snowy on an assignment to Chicago , Illinois , to report on the city 's organised crime syndicate . He is kidnapped by gangsters and brought before mobster boss Al Capone , whose criminal enterprises in the Congo were previously thwarted by Tintin . With Snowy 's help , Tintin subdues his captors , but the police reject his claims , and the gangsters escape . After surviving attempts on his life , Tintin meets Capone 's rival Bobby Smiles , who heads the Gangsters Syndicate of Chicago . Tintin is <unk> by Smiles ' attempt to hire him , and after Tintin orchestrates the arrest of his gang , Smiles escapes and heads west . 
 Tintin pursues Smiles to the Midwestern town of Redskin City . Here , Smiles convinces a tribe of Blackfoot Native Americans that Tintin is their enemy , and when Tintin arrives , he is captured and threatened with execution . After escaping , Tintin discovers a source of underground petroleum . The U.S. army then forces the Natives off their land , and oil companies build a city on the site within 24 hours . Tintin evades a lynch mob and a wildfire before discovering Smiles ' remote hideaway cabin ; after a brief altercation , he captures the gangster . 
 Returning to Chicago with his prisoner , Tintin is praised as a hero , but gangsters kidnap Snowy and send Tintin a ransom note . Tracing the kidnappers to a local mansion , Tintin hides in a suit of armour and frees Snowy from the dungeon . The following day , Tintin is invited to a cannery , but it is a trap set by gangsters , who trick him into falling into the meat @-@ grinding machine . Tintin is saved when the machine workers go on strike and then apprehends the mobsters . In thanks , he is invited to a banquet in his honour , where he is kidnapped and thrown into Lake Michigan to drown . Tintin survives by floating to the surface , but gangsters posing as police capture him . He once again overwhelms them , and hands them over to the authorities . Finally , Tintin 's success against the gangsters is celebrated by a ticker @-@ tape parade , following which he returns to Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Georges Remi — best known under the pen name Hergé — was the editor and illustrator of Le Petit Vingtième ( " The Little Twentieth " ) , a children 's supplement to Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , a conservative Belgian newspaper based in Hergé 's native Brussels . Run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez , the paper described itself as a " Catholic Newspaper for Doctrine and Information " and disseminated a far @-@ right , fascist viewpoint . According to Harry Thompson , such political ideas were common in 1930s Belgium , and Hergé 's milieu was permeated with conservative ideas revolving around " patriotism , Catholicism , strict morality , discipline , and naivety " . 
 In 1929 , Hergé began The Adventures of Tintin comic strip for Le Petit Vingtième , about the exploits of fictional young Belgian reporter Tintin . Having been fascinated with the outdoor world of Scouting and the way of life he called " Red Indians " since boyhood , Hergé wanted to set Tintin 's first adventure among the Native Americans in the United States . However , Wallez ordered him to set his first adventure in the Soviet Union as a piece of anti @-@ socialist propaganda for children ( Tintin in the Land of the Soviets ) and the second had been set in the Belgian Congo to encourage colonial sentiment ( Tintin in the Congo ) . 
 Tintin in America was the third story in the series . At the time , the Belgian far right was deeply critical of the United States , as it was of the Soviet Union . Wallez — and to a lesser degree Hergé — shared these opinions , viewing the country 's capitalism , consumerism , and mechanisation as a threat to traditional Belgian society . Wallez wanted Hergé to use the story to denounce American capitalism and had little interest in depicting Native Americans , which was Hergé 's primary desire . As a result , Tintin 's encounter with the natives took up only a sixth of the narrative . Hergé sought to demystify the " cruel savage " stereotype of the Natives that had been widely perpetuated in western films . His depiction of the Natives was broadly sympathetic , yet he also depicted them as gullible and naïve , much as he had depicted the Congolese in the previous Adventure . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Hergé attempted greater research into the United States than he had done for the Belgian Congo or Soviet Union . To learn more about Native Americans , Hergé read Paul <unk> and René <unk> 's 1928 book Mœurs et histoire des Indiens <unk> @-@ Rouges ( " Customs and History of the Redskin Indians " ) and visited Brussels ' ethnographic museum . As a result , his depiction of the Blackfoot Native Americans was " essentially accurate " , with artefacts such as tipis and traditional costume copied from photographs . To learn about Chicago and its gangsters , he read Georges Duhamel 's 1930 book Scènes de la vie future ( " Scenes from Future Life " ) . Written in the context of the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , Duhamel 's work contained strong anti @-@ consumerist and anti @-@ modernist sentiment , criticising the U.S. ' s increased mechanisation and standardisation from a background of European conservatism ; this would have resonated with both Wallez and Hergé 's viewpoints . Many elements of Tintin in America , such as the abattoir scene , were adopted from Duhamel 's descriptions . 
 Hergé was also influenced by a special edition of radical <unk> magazine Le Crapouillot ( The Mortar Shell ) that was published in October 1930 . Devoted to the United States , it contained a variety of photographs that influenced his depiction of the country . Hergé used its images of skyscrapers as a basis for his depiction of Chicago and adopted its account of Native Americans being evicted from their land when oil was discovered there . He was particularly interested in the articles in the magazine written by reporter Claude Blanchard , who had recently travelled the U.S. He reported on the situation in Chicago and New York City and met with Native Americans in New Mexico . Blanchard 's article discussed the gangster George Moran , whom literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès believed provided the basis for the character Bobby Smiles . 
 Hergé 's depiction of the country was also influenced by American cinema , and many of his illustrations were based on cinematic imagery . Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier thought that Tintin 's arrest of Smiles had been influenced by the Buffalo Bill stories , and that the idea of the gangsters taking Tintin away in their car came from Little Caesar . 
 One of the individuals that Hergé could have learned about through Blanchard 's article was the Chicago @-@ based American gangster Al Capone . In the preceding story , Tintin in the Congo , Capone had been introduced as a character within the series . There , he was responsible for running a diamond smuggling racket that Tintin exposed , setting up for further confrontation in Tintin in America . Capone was one of only two real @-@ life individuals to be named in The Adventures of Tintin , and was the only real @-@ life figure to appear as a character in the series . In the original version , Hergé avoided depicting him directly , either illustrating the back of his head , or hiding his face behind a scarf ; this was altered in the second version , in which Capone 's face was depicted . It is not known if Capone ever learned about his inclusion in the story , although during initial serialisation he would have been preoccupied with his trial and ensuing imprisonment . 
 = = = Original publication , 1931 – 32 = = = 
 Tintin 's in America began serialisation in Le Petit Vingtième on 3 September 1931 , under the title of Les Aventures de Tintin , reporter , à Chicago ( The Adventures of Tintin , Reporter , in Chicago ) . The use of " Chicago " over " America " reflected Wallez 's desire for the story to focus on a critique of American capitalism and crime , for which the city was internationally renowned . Part way through serialisation , as Tintin left Chicago and headed west , Hergé changed the title of the serial to Les Aventures de Tintin , reporter , en Amérique ( The Adventures of Tintin , Reporter , in America ) . The dog Snowy was given a diminished role in Tintin in America , which contained the last instance in the Adventures in which Tintin and Snowy have a conversation where they are able to understand each other . In the banquet scene , a reference is made to a famous actress named Mary <unk> , an allusion to the real @-@ life actress Mary Pickford . That same scene also featured a prototype for the character of Rastapopoulos , who was properly introduced in the following Cigars of the Pharaoh story . 
 The strip 's serialisation coincided with the publication of another of Hergé 's comics set in the United States : Les aventures de " Tim " l <unk> au Far @-@ West ( The Adventures of Tim the Squirrel Out West ) , published in sixteen instalments by the Brussels department store L 'Innovation . Produced every Thursday , the series was reminiscent of Hergé 's earlier Totor series . Alongside these stories , Hergé was involved in producing his weekly Quick and Flupke comic strip and drawing front covers for Le Petit Vingtième , as well as providing illustrations for another of Le Vingtième Siècle 's supplements , Votre " Vingtième " Madame , and undertaking freelance work designing advertisements . In September 1931 , part way through the story 's serialisation , Hergé took a brief holiday in Spain with two friends , and in May 1932 was recalled to military service for two weeks . On 20 July 1932 , Hergé married Germaine Kieckens , who was Wallez 's secretary . Although neither of them were entirely happy with the union , they had been encouraged to do so by Wallez , who demanded that all his staff marry and who personally carried out the wedding ceremony . After a honeymoon in Vianden , Luxembourg , the couple moved into an apartment in the rue Knapen , Schaerbeek . 
 As he had done with the prior two Adventures , Wallez organised a publicity stunt to mark the culmination of Tintin in America , in which an actor portraying Tintin arrived in Brussels . It proved the most popular yet . In 1932 , the series was collected and published in a single volume by Les Éditions de Petit Vingtième , coinciding with their publication of the first collected volume of Quick and Flupke . A second edition was produced in France by Éditions <unk> @-@ Cœurs @-@ Vaillants in 1934 , while that same year Casterman published an edition , the first of The Adventures of Tintin that they released . In 1936 , Casterman asked Hergé to add several new colour plates to a reprint of Tintin in America , which he agreed to . They also asked him to replace the cover with one depicting a car chase , but he refused . 
 = = = Second version , 1945 = = = 
 In the 1940s , when Hergé 's popularity had increased , he redrew many of the original black @-@ and @-@ white Tintin adventures in colour using the ligne claire ( " clear line " ) drawing style he had developed , so that they visually fitted in with the newer Tintin stories . Tintin in America was reformatted and coloured in 1945 and saw publication in 1946 . 
 Various changes were made in the second edition . Some of the social commentary regarding the poor treatment of Native Americans by the government was toned down . The name of the Native tribe was changed from the <unk> <unk> ( " Tied Toes " ) to the Pieds Noirs ( " Black Feet " ) . Perhaps because Al Capone 's power had diminished in the intervening years , Hergé depicted Capone 's scarred face in the 1945 version . He removed the reference to Mary <unk> from the ceremonial dinner scene and deleted two Chinese hoodlums who tried to eat Snowy . References to Belgium were also removed , allowing the story to have a greater international appeal . 
 = = = Later alterations and releases = = = 
 When the second version of the story was translated into English by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper , they made a number of alterations to the text . For instance , Monsieur Tom <unk> , whose name was a pun on tomahawk , was renamed Mr. Maurice <unk> , and the <unk> factory was renamed <unk> Corp. Other changes were made to render the story more culturally understandable to an Anglophone readership ; whereas the factory originally sold its mix of dogs , cats , and rats as hare pâté — a food uncommon in Britain — the English translation rendered the mix as salami . In another instance , garlic , pepper , and salt were added to the mixture in the French version , but this was changed to mustard , pepper , and salt for the English version , again reflecting British culinary tastes . 
 In 1957 , Hergé considered sending Tintin back to North America for another adventure featuring the indigenous people . He decided against it , instead producing Tintin in Tibet . Although Tintin in America and much of Hergé 's earlier work displayed anti @-@ American sentiment , he later grew more favourable to American culture , befriending one of the country 's most prominent artists , Andy Warhol . Hergé himself would first visit the United States in 1971 , accompanied by his second wife Fanny Rodwell , and meet Edgar Red Cloud , the great grandson of the warrior chief Red Cloud . With a letter of recommendation from his friend Father Gall , he was invited to indulge his childhood desire to meet with real " Red Indians " — members of the Oglala Lakota on their Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota — and take part in a pow wow . 
 American publishers of Tintin in America were uneasy regarding the scene in which the Blackfoot Natives are forcibly removed from their land . Hergé nevertheless refused to remove it . For the 1973 edition published in the U.S. , the publishers made Hergé remove African @-@ American characters from the book , and redraw them as Caucasians or Hispanics , because they did not want to encourage racial integration among children . That same year , the original black @-@ and @-@ white version was republished in a French @-@ language collected volume with Tintin in the Land of the Soviets and Tintin in the Congo , the first part of the Archives Hergé collection . In 1983 , a facsimile of the original was published by Casterman . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier opined that Hergé had made " another leap forward " with Tintin in America , noting that while it still " rambles on " , it is " more tightly plotted " than its predecessors . They believed that the illustrations showed " marked progress " and that for the first time , several of the frames could be seen as " individual pieces of art " . Believing that it was the first work with the " intangible epic quality " they thought characterised The Adventures of Tintin , they awarded it two out of five stars . They considered Bobby Smiles to be " the first great villain " of the series , and also thought that an incompetent hotel detective featured in the comic was an anticipation of Thomson and Thompson , while another character , the drunken sheriff , anticipated Captain Haddock . The Lofficiers believed that Hergé had successfully synthesised all of the " classic American myths " into a single narrative that " withstands comparison with the vision of America " presented in Gustave Le Rouge and Gustave <unk> 's La <unk> Des <unk> ( The Billionaires ' Conspiracy ) . They were of the opinion that Hergé 's depiction of the exploitation of Native Americans was an " astonishing piece of narrative " . 
 Harry Thompson considered the story to be " little more than a tourist ramble " across the U.S. , describing it as only " marginally more sophisticated " than its predecessors . He nevertheless thought that it contained many indicators of " greater things " , remarking that Hergé 's sympathy for the Natives was " a revolutionary attitude " for 1931 . Thompson also opined that the book 's " highlight " was on page 29 of the 1945 version , in which oil is discovered on Native land , following which they are cleared off by the U.S. army , and a complete city is constructed on the site within 24 hours . Biographer Benoît Peeters praised the strip 's illustrations , feeling that they exhibited " a quality of lightness " and showed that Hergé was fascinated by the United States despite the anti @-@ Americanism of his milieu . He nevertheless considered it " in the same mode " as the earlier Adventures , calling it " a collection of clichés and snapshots of well @-@ known places " . Elsewhere , Peeters commented that throughout the story , Tintin rushes around the country seeing as much as possible , likening him to the stereotypical American tourist . 
 Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline believed Tintin in America to be " more developed and detailed " than the prior Adventures , representing the cartoonist 's " greatest success " in a " long time " . Opining that the illustrations were " superior " due to Hergé 's accumulated experience , he nevertheless criticised instances where the story exhibited directional problems ; for instance , in one scene , Tintin enters the underground tunnel , but Assouline notes that while he is supposed to be travelling downward , he is instead depicted climbing up stairs . Such directional problems were also criticised by Michael Farr , who nevertheless thought the story " action @-@ packed " , with a more developed sense of satire and therefore greater depth than Soviets or Congo . He considered the depiction of Tintin climbing along the ledge of the skyscraper on page 10 to be " one of the most remarkable " illustrations in the entire series , inducing a sense of vertigo in the reader . He also opined that the depiction of the Blackfoot Natives being forced from their land was the " strongest political statement " in the series , illustrating that Hergé had " an acute political conscience " and was not the advocate of racial superiority that he has been accused of being . Comparing the 1932 and 1945 versions of the comic , Farr believed that the latter was technically superior , but had lost the " freshness " of the original . 
 Literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès of Stanford University thought that in Tintin in America , Hergé had intentionally depicted the wealthy industrialists as being very similar to the gangsters . He noted that this negative portrayal of capitalists continued into later Adventures of Tintin with characters such as Basil <unk> in The Broken Ear . He considered this indicative of " a more ambivalent stance " to the right @-@ wing agenda that Hergé had formerly adhered to . Another literary critic , Tom McCarthy , concurred , believing that Tintin in America exhibited Hergé 's " left @-@ wing counter tendency " through attacking the racism and capitalist mass production of the U.S. McCarthy believed that the work exposed social and political process as a " mere charade " , much as Hergé had previously done in Tintin in the Land of the Soviets . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Tintin in America was adapted into a 1991 episode of The Adventures of Tintin television series by French studio Ellipse and Canadian animation company Nelvana . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the character of Tintin was voiced by Thierry Wermuth . 
 In 2002 , French artist Jochen <unk> published a socio @-@ political satire based on Tintin in America titled TNT en Amérique . It consisted of a replica of Hergé 's book with most of the images blocked out with black ink ; the only images left visible are those depicting violence , commerce , or divinity . When interviewed as to this project , <unk> stated that his pervasive use of black was a reference to " the censure , to the night , the obscurity ( the evil ) , the mystery of things not entirely revealed " . 
 = Romney Literary Society = 
 The Romney Literary Society ( also known as the Literary Society of Romney ) existed from January 30 , 1819 , to February 15 , 1886 , in Romney , West Virginia . Established as the Polemic Society of Romney , it became the first organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The society was founded by nine prominent men of Romney with the objectives of advancing literature and science , purchasing and maintaining a library , and improving educational opportunities . 
 The society debated an extensive range of scientific and social topics , often violating its own rules which banned religious and political subjects . Even though its membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region , and the organization greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . 
 The society 's library began in 1819 with the acquisition of two books ; by 1861 , it had grown to contain approximately 3 @,@ 000 volumes on subjects such as literature , science , history , and art . The organization also sought to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community . " In 1820 , as a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . In 1846 , the society constructed a building which housed the Romney Classical Institute and its library , both of which fell under the society 's supervision . The institute was administered by noted Presbyterian Reverend William Henry Foote . Following a dispute with the society , Foote founded a rival school in Romney , known as the Potomac Seminary , in 1850 . 
 The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute continued to grow in influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . The contents of the society 's library were plundered by Union Army forces , and only 400 of the library 's volumes could be recovered following the war 's end in 1865 . Reorganized in 1869 , the society took a leading role in Romney 's civil development during Reconstruction . Between 1869 and 1870 , it completed construction of Literary Hall , where the society held meetings and reassembled its library . The organization used its influence to secure the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind for the town of Romney , and offered the school its former Romney Classical Institute campus . The schools opened on September 29 , 1870 . Interest in the society waned during its final years , and its last recorded meeting was held in 1886 . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 The Romney Literary Society was organized on January 30 , 1819 , by nine prominent men of Romney in the office of Dr. John Temple , a reputable physician in the community . The society was formed with the purpose " of taking into consideration the propriety of financing a Society , having for its object the advancement of Literature and Science , the purchase of a Library by and for the use of its members ; and their further improvement by discussing before the Society such questions as shall be selected under its directors . " With its establishment , the Romney Literary Society became the first organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The nine men at the society 's first meeting were Thomas Blair , David Gibson , James P. Jack , Samuel Kercheval , Jr . , Nathaniel Kuykendall , Charles T. Magill , James M. Stephens , John Temple , and William C. Wodrow . According to historian Hu Maxwell , these men elected Kuykendall as chairman and Magill as secretary of a committee which was charged with the drafting of a constitution for the society . 
 On February 4 , 1819 , the committee delivered its draft of the constitution and the society adopted the document , which provided that the organization should be known as the Polemic Society of Romney . The society 's constitution also specified that the officers should consist of a president , secretary , and treasurer , each of whom was to be selected by a ballot vote . The constitution further stipulated that each member was to pay dues of 50 cents per month , and that the society had the authority to levy further financial contributions from its members as it deemed necessary . The funds collected were to cover the society 's operating costs , and the remaining funds were to be used in purchasing books for the library . Under the constitution , the society 's meetings were to be held weekly . Following each meeting 's business session , a debate or other literary exercises were to be held consisting of topics of general interest of the members . No political or religious discussions were to take place during the debates unless they were of an abstract nature or in general terms . Profane language and " spirituous liquors " were also forbidden from the society 's meetings , with each offense being punishable with a fine of one dollar . The society 's first elected officers were Charles T. Magill as president , William C. Wodrow as secretary , and John Temple as treasurer . 
 = = Early debates = = 
 The society 's next meeting was held on February 13 , 1819 in the old Hampshire County Courthouse , where the first matter for debate was " Resolved : That a representative should be governed by instructions from his constituents . " Following the debate , the decision was rendered in favor of the affirmative . The second meeting , which was held on February 19 of that year at the Romney Academy , debated the question , " Is an education acquired at the public school or [ is ] a private tutor to be preferred ? " and the society favored the public school . At this second meeting , the first money appropriated by the society was paid to the doorkeeper for a sum of 25 cents . Also at this second meeting , the treasurer was instructed to purchase a book for use by the secretary , three candlesticks , one pair of <unk> , and three pounds of candles . On February 26 , the society argued the question , " Is a system of banking advantageous to a community ? " The debate ended under the decision that a system of banking was advantageous . The following meeting on March 6 debated a question far more psychological in nature , which was an abstract question of religion : " Can the human mind , by its own reflection , arrive at the conclusion that the soul is immortal ? " The society decided in the negative . The society also debated and decided in the negative the question , " Is a protective tariff detrimental to the interests of the country ? " 
 One of the society 's more spirited debates occurred in May 1822 over the question , " Is it to the interest of the people of Hampshire to encourage the canalling of the Potomac ? " While no records of the arguments survive , the society decided that the canalling of the Potomac River would be detrimental to the interests of Hampshire County . The debate took place before the construction of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal along the Maryland shore of the Potomac River to the north of Hampshire County . The society 's consensus was that a canal on the Potomac would destroy the business of teamsters who hauled merchandise from the east along the Northwestern Turnpike . For this reason , the society and local population of Romney also objected to the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad . To ensure confidentiality , the society passed a bylaw that enforced a fine of five dollars on any member who published either his own or another member 's speeches delivered before the society . As a result of this bylaw , no speeches were ever published . The society adopted a new constitution in 1824 . 
 = = Growth and influence = = 
 Over the first ten years of the society 's existence , the organization grew in membership and held meetings at least twice a month , and usually four times a month . The society debated an extensive range of subjects including scientific , religious , political , and social topics , often violating the constitution 's rules banning religious and political subjects . The society 's debates were often acrimonious and regularly spilled beyond the confines of the meetings and into the community . Between January 30 , 1819 and January 22 , 1830 , the society 's membership rolls reached 52 members ; although as few as 15 members attended the bimonthly meetings , and no more than 17 members were ever present at a meeting . 
 Even though the Romney Literary Society 's membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region . For this reason , the society greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . No records of the society 's proceedings , works , or membership enrollments spanning the period between January 22 , 1830 and 1861 are extant . During this period , the society counted among its members Angus William McDonald , John Baker White , and Robert White . 
 = = Library collection = = 
 In order to fulfill one of its primary purposes of establishing a library for its members , the Romney Literary Society gradually began to acquire volumes for such a use . The society 's library began with the April 23 , 1819 appropriation for the purchase of two books : Plutarch 's Parallel Lives and Emer de Vattel 's The Law of Nations . On July 2 , 1819 , the balance of available funds in the treasurer 's account was two dollars and forty @-@ six cents , but by October 23 , there were sufficient funds to purchase the following volumes : Charles Rollin 's Ancient History , Lewis ' Roman History , and William Robertson 's History of the Reign of Charles the Fifth . 
 No more volumes were purchased until the end of 1820 , when the society acquired the works of Livy , Tacitus , and John Marshall 's Life of Washington . Three months later , the society purchased a bookcase for its growing collection . In April 1821 , the society further expanded its library with the acquisitions of Nathaniel Hooke 's Roman History , from the Building of Rome to the Ruin of the Commonwealth , the works of Herodotus , Travels in Greece , Modern Europe , David Ramsay 's History of the United States , and the works of Benjamin Franklin . 
 In 1821 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act incorporating the organization as the " Library Society of Romney . " The society found the assembly 's charter unsatisfactory , as it specified several changes to the organization that the society had not asked for , including the change in its name . The members regarded their society as a " literary " society and not a " library " one . The society requested that the assembly amend its charter , and after several delays and debates over the new charter , the Virginia General Assembly passed a new act on February 4 , 1823 , in which the organization was rebranded as " The Literary Society of Romney . " The society maintained this long form name throughout the duration of its existence , although it was locally known as the " Romney Literary Society . " 
 Within the span of ten years , the society 's small library grew to contain approximately 3 @,@ 000 volumes on literature , science , history , and art . These were bound in <unk> and stamped with the seal of the society . The minutes from the society 's bimonthly meetings listed the books purchased and the methods by which they were acquired . According to the Federal Writers ' Project in their Historic Romney 1762 – 1937 ( 1937 ) , the book selections and their acquisition " indicate that these men possessed real literary judgment and business ability . " 
 By resolutions of the society , the use of the library was for the society 's members , and was further extended to " ministers of the gospel of all denominations gratis . " Certain citizens of Romney were also granted access to the library , and enjoyed similar privileges as its members . 
 = = Academic patronage = = 
 From the organization 's foundation , the Romney Literary Society gradually began to recognize that the local subscription school systems provided only elementary and often fragmentary education and no longer satisfied the academic needs of the Romney community . The society periodically engaged in lengthy deliberations on which theories of educational advancement and popular education were preferable . Shortly after its establishment , the society commenced a movement to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community . " In 1820 , as a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . Under the guidance , leadership , and strict discipline of Dr. Henry Johnston , Romney Academy became widely renowned for its courses in " higher classics . " His successor and society member William Henry Foote introduced courses in theology , and the school 's enrollment grew to include students preparing for ministry . As the school became more renowned in the South Branch Potomac River valley , pupils came from further and further away . Thomas and Samuel Mulledy were among the early instructors at the academy , both of whom later served as presidents of Georgetown University in Washington , D.C. 
 By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its facilities in the old stone school building behind the Hampshire County Courthouse . To remedy this , the society instituted a campaign to raise funds for a new school building . On January 6 , 1832 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized the society to raise an endowment of $ 20 @,@ 000 in a lottery for educational purposes . Following a ten @-@ year lapse , the society made arrangements with James Gregory of Jersey City and Daniel McIntyre of Philadelphia to finance a lottery " for raising a sum of money not exceeding twenty thousand dollars , for the purpose of erecting a suitable building for their accommodation , the purchase of library and Philosophical apparatus . " The lottery was to be conducted over a period of ten years , and sums of $ 750 , $ 1 @,@ 000 , and $ 1 @,@ 500 were to be raised in semiannual installments . The society was successful in raising funds , and in 1845 the society solicited bids for the construction of a new building to house both the academy , the society , and the society 's library . The society also used the lottery funds to pay for books for the academy . 
 On February 12 , 1844 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act authorizing the society to denote the balance of the moneys raised by the lottery to the Romney Academy . The assembly further enacted another legislative act on December 12 , 1846 , authorizing the Romney Literary Society to " establish at or near the town of Romney a Seminary of Learning for the instruction of youth in various branches of science and literature ; and the Society map appropriate to the same such portion of the property which it now has or may acquire , as it may deem expedient . " That same year , a new brick neoclassical building was constructed east of Romney , and the society , its library , and Romney Academy relocated to the new facility . The second story of the new building was utilized by the society , with one hall for meetings and the other hall for the society 's library . According to Maxwell , " few schools in the state of Virginia at that time had access to better libraries . " The new institute building and grounds cost the society about $ 8 @,@ 000 . Following its move to the new building , the academy was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute and its activities fell under the supervision of the society . The institute was operated under the principalship of Foote from 1846 until 1849 . 
 In 1849 , the society presented a new code and system of bylaws for the government of the Romney Classical Institute , which reserved to the society the power to appoint assistant teachers , fix the amount of salaries , and provide the conditions and manners of payment and reimbursement . Foote differed with the society over these matters , and he ultimately declined to accept the new bylaws and resigned his leadership position in October 1849 ; in 1850 , he established a rival institution known as the Potomac Seminary . Rather than falling under the patronage of the society , Foote 's new institution fell under the control of the Presbyterian church . Following Foote 's departure , the society selected Professor E. J. Meany to head the Romney Classical Institute . Despite the schism , the society also provided financial support from the lottery to the Potomac Seminary . 
 According to a " catalogue of the members and library " published on June 1 , 1849 , there were 20 registered members on the rolls who paid $ 3 each per year to the society 's library fund ; there were also eight library members who were admitted under certain regulations of the society and who paid the same fees . Members who had use of the library were provided keys and were allowed access to the library at any time . The town 's clergymen and the principal of the Romney Classical Institute were the only non @-@ members who were extended privileges to the library . The 1849 " catalogue " listed Alfred P. White as the society 's librarian and E. J. Meany remained the principal of the institute . After 1853 , the society possessed a permanent fund of $ 12 @,@ 000 , which yielded $ 720 per year , one half of which was devoted to the support of the Romney Classical Institute . 
 = = American Civil War and hiatus = = 
 The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute flourished and continued to grow in importance and influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . Following the war 's outbreak , many of the society 's members and the institute 's professors and older students joined the Confederate States Army and marched to war . During the war , the society suffered extensive losses . The Romney Classical Institute building and its library were considered legitimate plunder by Union Army forces . The society 's library was emptied and three @-@ fourths of its volumes were either scattered or destroyed . The most valuable of these volumes were never recovered following the war 's end . Its records of proceedings between 1830 and 1861 , the period during which the society engaged in most of its notable literary and philanthropic works , were also destroyed during the war . 
 Following the war 's end , only 400 out of the library 's nearly 3 @,@ 000 volumes could be recovered , with only 200 of those books remaining on the library 's shelves . Between 10 and 20 of the library 's recovered volumes only contained three to four of their original books . The value of the recovered volumes was degraded , as many were damaged or broken . The society members that returned home to Romney were too war @-@ weary to revive the society when they discovered the ruins of the Romney Classical Institute and its library , which had been an expensive endeavor to accumulate and took almost a half @-@ century of labor to amass . The Romney Classical Institute was not restored and was in effect disestablished on account of the war . 
 = = Revival = = 
 Following the war , the residents of Romney set about repairing public buildings and reestablishing the town 's antebellum institutions , including the Romney Literary Society . The society remained on a hiatus until May 15 , 1869 when a meeting was held by nine members , as only nine original members had responded to the call for reorganization . These nine members tasked with rebuilding the society were James L. Armstrong , David Entler , William Harper , John C. Heiskell , Andrew Wodrow Kercheval , Samuel R. Lupton , James Parsons , Alfred P. White , and Robert White . These men sought to collect what remained of the library 's books and engaged in a campaign to recruit new members , which resulted in the enrollment of 20 younger men over a period of a few years . Many of the men who had been members in 1861 had died during the war , and the recruitment of new members was essential to the revival of the society . Among the new members elected between 1869 and 1886 were John Collins Covell , Samuel Lightfoot Flournoy , Henry Bell Gilkeson , Howard Hille Johnson , and Christian Streit White . The society , with renewed vigor , took a lead role in Romney 's civil development during the Reconstruction Era . 
 Between 1869 and 1870 , the society completed construction of a new two @-@ story brick building on Lot 56 at the corner of West Main and North High Streets known as Literary Hall , where it could hold its meetings and reassemble the remaining volumes from its original library . Literary Hall was built upon the former location of the shuttered Bank of the South Branch of the Potomac . In addition to the 400 volumes that were initially recovered following the war , the society recovered several more volumes from its original library , and set about purchasing new books ; the restored library was reopened with about 700 volumes . 
 = = West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind = = 
 Around the time of the society 's reorganization in 1869 , the state of West Virginia considered the establishment of a school for the deaf and the blind . The society resolved to secure the new state institution for Romney . On April 12 , 1870 , the society passed a resolution by which the members agreed to deed , free of cost , the buildings and grounds of the Romney Classical Institute . 
 On April 20 , 1870 , the society sent Andrew Wodrow Kercheval and Robert White as representatives to the then @-@ state capital Wheeling to present their formal offer of " the grounds and buildings of the Romney Classical Institute ... to the Board of Regents , free of debt , and in good repair " on the condition that the proposed school be located in Romney . Clarksburg and Parkersburg also made offers of potential campuses to the state . The offer was made to the Board of Regents of the West Virginia Institute for the Deaf , Dumb , and Blind , as it was then known , and the society 's proposal was accepted by the regents after a brief period of deliberation . The society 's offer was the only one that included a building upon the grounds . 
 It was discovered by the society that in order to follow through with their proposition , it was necessary to raise more than $ 1 @,@ 000 , which was ostensibly a difficult task during the Reconstruction Era in Romney . On July 11 , 1870 , the Board of Regents passed a resolution necessitating the subscription of between $ 1 @,@ 200 and $ 1 @,@ 300 to facilitate the transaction . One hundred and eighteen individuals and firms responded to the board 's request with a total subscription of $ 1 @,@ 383 @.@ 60 . To make good on its offer , the society also made an appropriation of $ 320 on July 11 for the purpose of repairing and restoring the former Romney Classical Institute and grounds so that they were satisfactory before they were transferred to the regents . Shortly thereafter , the old institute building and 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) of property were formally transferred to the state of West Virginia . 
 On September 29 , 1870 , the institute , which was later known as the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , opened its doors in the old Romney Classical Institute building with 25 deaf and five blind students . Following its disestablishment in 1916 , the adjacent Potomac Academy ( formerly Potomac Seminary ) grounds were also incorporated into the campus of the Schools for the Deaf and Blind . 
 = = Final years = = 
 During a period of ten years spanning from 1870 to 1880 , much of Romney 's intellectual life centered on Literary Hall . During this time , the society met only occasionally and there were no records of meetings between March 1872 and April 1878 . The post @-@ war period of revival was short @-@ lived , as the death of the older members caused interest in the society to wane . The society 's meetings occurred less often , and the last recorded meeting of the society was held on February 15 , 1886 . During the society 's second existence , Literary Hall was used as a meeting space by the Freemasons and the Order of the Eastern Star , and the organizations continued to inhabit the hall following the society 's disestablishment until its 1974 purchase by attorney Ralph Haines . Also a local historian , Haines restored Literary Hall and used it as his law office and museum . Literary Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1979 and , as of 2004 , it is occasionally open to the public . The society 's remaining records , dating as early as 1819 , remain on display there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In describing the efforts of the Romney Literary Society , historian Hu Maxwell , in his History of Hampshire County , West Virginia From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present ( 1897 ) , stated that " the work accomplished by these few energetic citizens of Romney is astonishing . " Maxwell further asserted , " No other one thing in the history of the town has had such lasting results for good . " The society left many lasting impacts upon the town of Romney during its existence and beyond , which included the foundation of a library ; the academic and financial support and patronage of the Romney Academy , Romney Classical Institute , and the Potomac Seminary ; the civic leadership during the Reconstruction Era ; and the influence and assistance in securing the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . According to Maxwell , without the efforts of the society , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind could not have been secured for Romney , and would have likely been located elsewhere in the state . 
 = Bill Stein = 
 William Allen " Bill " Stein ( born January 21 , 1947 in Battle Creek , Michigan ) is a retired professional baseball player and manager . His playing career spanned 17 seasons , 14 of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) with the St. Louis Cardinals ( 1972 – 73 ) , the Chicago White Sox ( 1974 – 76 ) , the Seattle Mariners ( 1977 – 1980 ) , and the Texas Rangers ( 1981 – 85 ) . Over his career in the majors Stein batted .267 with 122 doubles , 18 triples , 44 home runs , and 311 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 959 games played . Stein played numerous fielding positions over his major league career , including third base , second base , first base , left field , right field , and shortstop . He also spent significant time as a pinch hitter . 
 = = Bio = = 
 Stein was drafted out of Southern Illinois University during the 1969 Major League Baseball draft by the St. Louis Cardinals . He made his professional debut that season in their minor league organization . On September 6 , 1972 , Stein made his MLB debut with the Cardinals . During the 1973 season , St. Louis traded him to the California Angels , who just a few months later , traded him to the Chicago White Sox . Stein was selected by the Seattle Mariners from the White Sox in the 1976 Major League Baseball expansion draft . He came to his final team , the Texas Rangers , by way of free agency . After his playing career , Stein managed in the New York Mets minor league organization for four seasons ( 1988 – 1991 ) . He managed the non @-@ affiliated Bend Bucks in 1991 , and joined the Clinton Giants in 1992 , who were minor league affiliates of the San Francisco Giants at the time . He also managed the independent league Tyler <unk> in 1994 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stein was born on January 21 , 1947 , in Battle Creek , Michigan . Stein attended Brevard Community College when he was drafted by the Baltimore Orioles during the 33rd round of the 1968 Major League Baseball draft . Stein did not sign with the Orioles . He began attending Southern Illinois University in 1969 . As a member of the school 's baseball team , he batted .396 and was named an All @-@ American by the American Baseball Coaches Association . Stein was drafted by the St. Louis Cardinals during the fourth round of the 1969 Major League Baseball draft . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 In 1969 , Stein began his professional baseball career in the St. Louis Cardinals minor league organization . The Cardinals assigned him to the Tulsa Oilers , who were their Triple @-@ A affiliates at the time . With the Oilers , Stein batted .295 with 24 runs scored , 54 hits , 11 doubles , five triples , one home run , and 20 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 62 games played . Defensively , Stein played 31 games at second base , 14 games at third base , and five games at shortstop . During the 1970 season , the Cardinals assigned Stein to the Double @-@ A level to play with the Arkansas Travelers of the Texas League . In 114 games played that year , he batted .289 with 124 hits , 21 doubles , two triples , and eight home runs . In the field , Stein played second base and outfield . In 1971 , Stein was promoted to the Triple @-@ A level . He spent the entire season with the Tulsa Oilers , where he batted .272 with 50 runs scored , 106 hits , 106 hits , 22 doubles , four triples , eight home runs , and 67 RBIs in 103 games played . Stein pitched a game that season , after Tulsa 's starting pitcher was ejected from the game after throwing the ball at the umpire . In six innings , he gave @-@ up eight hits , and three runs ( all earned ) . He played the majority of the season in the outfield , but also spent limited time at third base , first base , and shortstop . 
 To start the 1972 season , Stein was a member of the Triple @-@ A Tulsa Oilers . With Tulsa that year , he batted .278 with 100 hits , 26 doubles , four triples , five home runs , and 36 RBIs in 103 games played . Stein was a September call @-@ up for the St. Louis cardinals that year . He made his debut in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) on September 6 , 1972 , against the Philadelphia Phillies . He got his first hit in that game , which was a home run in the ninth inning . He played 14 games in the majors that year , batting .314 with two runs scored , 11 hits , one triple , two home runs , and three RBIs . Defensively in the majors , he was positioned at third base , left field , and right field . 
 During spring training in 1973 , the Sarasota Herald @-@ Tribune labeled Stein as the Cardinals candidate for pinch hitting off the bench . He made the Cardinals Opening Day roster that year . He made his season debut on April 6 as a pinch hitter , going hitless in one at @-@ bat against the Pittsburgh Pirates . His first hit of the season came on April 17 , against the Pirates . In August , Stein was sent down to the minor leagues and was replaced on the Cardinals major league roster by outfielder Héctor Cruz . In the minors , he played with the Triple @-@ A Tulsa Oilers , where he batted .289 with 23 hits , two doubles , and one triple in 21 games played . While in the majors that season , Stein compiled a .218 batting average with four runs scored , 12 hits , two doubles , and two RBIs in 32 games played . On defense with the Cardinals , he played right field , left field , third base , and first base . 
 = = = Chicago White Sox = = = 
 On September 25 , Stein was traded by the St. Louis Cardinals to the California Angels in exchange for Jerry <unk> . California then traded Stein to the Chicago White Sox on April 3 , 1974 , before he made an appearance in the Angels organization . In return , the White Sox sent Steve <unk> to California . Stein started the 1974 season in the White Sox minor league system with the Triple @-@ A Iowa Oaks . In 135 games with Iowa , he batted .326 with 107 runs scored , 178 hits , 32 doubles , eight triples , 16 home runs , and 76 RBIs . Stein led the American Association in hits ; was second in runs scored , plate appearances ( 594 ) , at @-@ bats ( 554 ) , and doubles ; and was tied for second in triples . He was called up by Chicago in September . Stein made his season debut on September 13 , against the California Angels , getting no hits in four at @-@ bats . His first hit of the season came the day after , against California . In the majors that year , Stein batted .276 with five runs scored , 12 hits , one double , and five RBIs in 13 games played . 
 Stein spent his first full season in the majors during the 1975 season . His season debut came on April 16 , against the Texas Rangers , where in one at @-@ bat he went hitless . In June , Stein was named the starting third baseman after Bill Melton , who was Chicago 's regular third baseman , was benched for poor hitting . Stein also played back @-@ up for second baseman Jorge Orta over the season . On July 20 , in the second game of a doubleheader against the Milwaukee Brewers , Stein hit his first career grand slam . On the season , Stein batted .270 with 23 runs scored , 61 hits , seven doubles , one triple , three home runs , and 21 RBIs in 76 games played . In the field , he played 28 games at second base , 24 games at second base , and one game in left field . Stein also played 18 games that year at the designated hitter spot in the lineup . 
 Stein played his final season with the Chicago White Sox in 1976 . On August 17 , in the first game of a doubleheader against the Boston Red Sox , he hit a game @-@ winning single in the ninth inning to score Pat Kelly . In August , United Press International noted that it was the first time in his major <unk> career that Stein was getting a chance to start regularly . During the season , he compiled a .268 batting average with 32 runs scored , 105 hits , 15 doubles , two triples , four home runs , and 36 RBIs in 117 games played . <unk> played 58 games at second base , 58 games at third base , one game at first base , one game in right field , and one game at shortstop . He was also the designated hitter in one game during that season . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners = = = 
 During the 1976 Major League Baseball expansion draft , Stein was selected by the Seattle Mariners , who took him with their third pick in the draft . Stein stated he was " glad " that the Mariners drafted him , because he did not like playing at Comiskey Park , the home of his previous team , the Chicago White Sox . He was profiled by the Associated Press during spring training in 1977 , and was interviewed about his new team and his unique versatility in the field . Stein mentioned to the reporter that although he had played a wide verity of positions in the past , he hoped he would get a chance to be the Mariners starting third baseman . In a win against the Boston Red Sox on May 3 , Stein hit two home runs in the same game . In June , Stein commented on how he liked starting every day at third base for the Mariners . The Mariners manager , Darrell Johnson , Praised Stein for playing " good ball " with Seattle . On July 8 , in a game against the Minnesota Twins , Stein had another two @-@ home run performance , his second of the season . In early @-@ September , Stein got hit in the shoulder by a baseball , which was later revealed to have caused a hairline fracture . With the Mariners that year , he batted .259 with 53 runs scored , 144 hits , 26 doubles , five triples , 13 home runs , and 67 RBIs in 151 games played . Defensively , the vast majority of his games ( 147 ) were played at third base , but he also played limited time at shortstop . He led the American League in putouts by a third baseman with 146 . Stein was also fifth in the league in defensive games at third base . 
 Before the start of the 1978 season , Stein re @-@ signed with the Seattle Mariners . His contract meant he was now signed through the 1980 season . In May 1978 , he bruised his left hand , which caused him to miss some playing time . On August 25 , he broke up Dennis Martínez 's potential no @-@ hitter in the seventh inning of a game against the Baltimore Orioles . On August 28 , in a game against the Boston Red Sox , Stein had a season @-@ high four hits . On the season , he batted .261 with 41 runs scored , 105 hits , 24 doubles , four triples , four home runs , and 37 RBIs in 114 games played . In the field , Stein played 67 games at third base , 17 games at second base , and three games at shortstop . His 24 errors at third base was second in the American League . 
 Early into the 1979 season , Stein was placed on the disabled list after suffering a rib injury . Charlie Beamon , Jr. was called up from the minor leagues to replace Stein during his injury . In late June , the Mariners activated Stein from the disabled list . By the time he had returned , the Mariners had already positioned Dan Meyer at his position , so Stein filled in at second base during his first game back . That year , Stein batted .248 with 28 runs scored , 62 hits , nine doubles , two triples , seven home runs , and 27 RBIs in 88 games played . As a fielder , he played 67 games at third base , 17 games at second base , and three games at shortstop . 
 Stein 's final season with the Seattle Mariners would come in 1980 . On April 29 , against the Minnesota Twins , Stein had a season high four hit game . He matched that high on July 26 , against the Toronto Blue Jays . On July 28 , Stein broke up a no @-@ hit bid by Cleveland Indians pitcher Len Barker . In his final season with the Mariners , Stein batted .268 with 16 runs scored , 53 hits , five doubles , one triple , five home runs , and 27 RBIs in 67 games played . Defensively , he played 34 games at third base , 14 games at second base , and eight games at first base . He also played five games that season as Seattle 's designated hitter . 
 = = = Texas Rangers = = = 
 In December 1980 , Stein was signed as a free agent by the Texas Rangers . Stein made his Rangers debut on April 14 , 1981 , against the Cleveland Indians . In that game , he got one hit in two at @-@ bats . In May , Stein set an American League record by recording seven consecutive pinch hits . Through June , Stein had a <unk> batting average . On the season , Stein batted .330 with 21 runs scored , 38 hits , six doubles , two home runs , and 22 RBIs in 53 games played . In the field , he played 20 games at first base , seven games at third base , seven games in left field , three games at second base , one game in right field , and one game at shortstop . 
 On April 16 , 1982 , in a game against the Milwaukee Brewers , Stein hit a game @-@ winning double in the top of the ninth inning . In June , while playing against his former team , the Seattle Mariners , Stein praised their pitching staff . In 85 games that year , Stein batted .239 , the lowest average of his career since the 1972 season where he played with the St. Louis Cardinals . He also compiled 14 runs scored , 44 hits , eight doubles , one home run , and 16 RBIs . In the field , he played 34 games at second base , 28 games at third base , six games at shortstop , two games at first base , and one game in left field . Stein also was the designated hitter during three games . 
 In March 1983 , Stein praised the Texas Rangers new manager , Doug Rader , for working on the game in a " serious " way . On May 18 , in a game against the Cleveland Indians , Stein was brought in as a pinch hitter during the 14th inning , and proceeded to get the game @-@ winning hit for the Rangers . With Texas that year , he batted .310 with 21 runs scored , 72 hits , 15 doubles , one triple , two home runs , and 33 RBIs in 78 games played . Stein played the majority of his games at second base , but also played first base and third base . He was used as the Rangers designated hitter in six contests that year . After the season , Stein spoke out against a transaction that the Rangers made , trading Jim Sundberg to the Milwaukee Brewers , calling him a " mainstay of the organization " . 
 In 1984 , the Associated Press stated that Stein was one of the American League 's best pinch hitters . Early into the season , he injured his wrist , which caused him to miss some playing time . In mid @-@ June , the Rangers activated him from the disabled list . On the season , Stein batted .279 with three runs scored , 12 hits , one double and three RBIs in 27 games played . Stein played 11 games at second base , three games at first base , and three games at third base . He also spent four games as the Rangers designated hitter . 
 Before the 1985 season , it was announced that the Texas Rangers had traded Stein to the Pittsburgh Pirates in exchange for a player to be named later , pending a physical . The Pirates later canceled the trade after team doctors discovered a " probable disc problem " in his back . Rumors then circulated that it was possible that Steins ' career would be ended by the injury . However , Stein did play 44 games with the Rangers that season , batting .253 with five runs scored , 20 hits , three doubles , one triple , one home run , and 12 RBIs . He played 11 games at third base , eight games at first base , three games at second base , and three games in right field . Stein was the team 's designated hitter in six games that year . In his final season in the majors , he earned a salary of $ 250 @,@ 000 ( $ 550 @,@ 046 inflation adjusted ) . At the end of the season , Texas announced that it would not re @-@ sign Stein . Through an agent , Stein commented that if he could not play for Texas in the upcoming season , he would retire . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 In 1987 , Stein coached the Rockledge High School baseball team , leading them a district title with a 17 – 11 record . Stein was hired as the manager of the Class A @-@ Short Season Little Falls Mets of the New York – Penn League in 1988 . Little Falls were minor league affiliates of the New York Mets . In his first professional season as a manager , Stein led Little Falls to a 39 – 36 record . Stein commented that when he became a manager it was difficult to learn pitching after all the years of being a position player . In 1989 , the New York Mets fired Butch Hobson , the manager of the Class @-@ A Columbia Mets , and promoted Stein to that position . At the helm of Colombia that year , Stein led them to a 73 – 67 record . He also served as a player @-@ coach with the Orlando Juice of the Senior Professional Baseball Association in 1989 . 
 Stein continued to manage the Columbia Mets in 1990 , leading them to an 83 – 60 record . The Mets had the best record in the South Atlantic League that season . In 1991 , Stein was hired to be the manager of the Bend Bucks of the Northwest League . The non @-@ affiliated Bucks had a record of 30 – 46 with Stein as the manager . He was hired to be the manager of the Clinton Giants in 1992 . Clinton was the Class @-@ A affiliate of the San Francisco Giants at the time . Stein led Clinton to a 59 – 79 record that year . After considering taking a year off of baseball in 1994 , Stein eventually accepted the managerial position with the independent league Tyler <unk> . 
 He recently relocated and lives in Palm Coast Florida , where he has been an outstanding infielder and intimidating hitter in the Flagler ( County ) Senior Softball League . 
 = Ranavalona I = 
 Ranavalona I ( born <unk> ; 1778 – August 16 , 1861 ) , also known as Ramavo and <unk> @-@ <unk> I , was sovereign of the Kingdom of Madagascar from 1828 to 1861 . After positioning herself as queen following the death of her young husband and second cousin , Radama I , Ranavalona pursued a policy of isolationism and self @-@ sufficiency , reducing economic and political ties with European powers , repelling a French attack on the coastal town of Foulpointe , and taking vigorous measures to eradicate the small but growing Malagasy Christian movement initiated under Radama I by members of the London Missionary Society . She made heavy use of the traditional practice of fanompoana ( forced labor as tax payment ) to complete public works projects and develop a standing army of between 20 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 Merina soldiers , whom she deployed to pacify outlying regions of the island and further expand the realm . The combination of regular warfare , disease , difficult forced labor and harsh measures of justice resulted in a high mortality rate among soldiers and civilians alike during her 33 @-@ year reign . 
 Although greatly obstructed by Ranavalona 's policies , French and British political interests in Madagascar remained undiminished . Divisions between traditionalist and pro @-@ European factions at the queen 's court created opportunities that European intermediaries exploited in an attempt to hasten the succession of Ranavalona 's son , Radama II . The young prince disagreed with many of his mother 's policies and was amenable to French proposals for the exploitation of the island 's resources , as expressed in the Lambert Charter he concluded with a French representative in 1855 . These plans were never successful , however , and Radama II was not to take the throne until 1861 , when Ranavalona died aged 83 . 
 Ranavalona 's European contemporaries generally condemned her policies and characterized her as a tyrant at best and insane at worst . These negative characterizations persisted in foreign scholarly literature until the mid @-@ 1970s . Recent academic research has recast Ranavalona 's actions as those of a queen attempting to expand her empire while protecting Malagasy sovereignty against the encroachment of European cultural and political influence . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Princess Ramavo was born in 1778 at the royal residence at <unk> , about 16 kilometers ( 10 mi ) east of Antananarivo , to Prince <unk> and Princess <unk> . When Ramavo was still a young girl , her father alerted King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) to an assassination plot planned by Andrianjafy , the king 's uncle , whom Andrianampoinimerina had forced from the throne at the royal city of Ambohimanga . In return for saving his life , Andrianampoinimerina betrothed Ramavo to his son , Prince Radama , whom the king designated as his heir . He furthermore declared that any child from this union would be first in the line of succession after Radama . 
 Despite her elevated rank among the royal wives , Ramavo was not the preferred wife of Radama and did not bear him any children . Upon Andrianampoinimerina 's death in 1810 , Radama succeeded his father as king and followed royal custom by executing a number of potential opponents among Ramavo 's relatives , an act that may have strained their relationship . Unable to find satisfaction in her loveless marriage , the neglected Ramavo and other court ladies spent most days socializing and drinking rum with David Griffiths and his fellow missionaries in Griffiths ' home . These visits established a deep friendship between Ramavo and Griffiths that would endure for three decades . 
 = = = Accession to the throne = = = 
 When Radama died without leaving any descendants on July 27 , 1828 , according to local custom , the rightful heir was Rakotobe , the eldest son of Radama 's eldest sister . An intelligent and amiable young man , Rakotobe was the first pupil to have studied at the first school established by the London Missionary Society in Antananarivo on the grounds of the royal palace . Radama died in the company of two trusted courtiers who were favorable to the succession of Rakotobe . However , they hesitated to report the news of Radama 's death for several days , fearing possible reprisals against them for having been involved in denouncing one of the king 's rivals , whose family had a stake in the succession after Radama . During this time , another courtier , a high @-@ ranking military officer named <unk> , discovered the truth and collaborated with other powerful officers - Andriamihaja , Rainijohary and <unk> - to support Ramavo 's claim to the throne . 
 These officers hid Ramavo and one of her friends in a safe location , then secured the support of several influential power brokers , including judges and the keepers of the sampy ( royal idols ) . The officers then rallied the army behind Ramavo , such that on August 11 , 1828 , when she declared herself the successor to Radama on the pretense that he himself had decreed it , there could be no immediate resistance . Ramavo took the throne name Ranavalona ( " folded " , " kept aside " ) , then followed royal custom by systematically capturing and putting to death her political rivals , including Rakotobe , his family and other members of Radama 's family , much as Radama had done to the queen 's own family upon his succession to the throne . Her coronation ceremony took place on June 12 , 1829 . 
 By succeeding her husband , Ranavalona became the first female sovereign of the Kingdom of Imerina since its founding in 1540 . Her rise to power occurred in a cultural milieu that favored men over women in the political sphere . In the traditional culture of Imerina , rulers were specially endowed with the power to innovate in circumvention of established norms and customs . Sovereigns often mobilized innovation through the creation of new forms of kinship , the traditional basis of the political order . Women , however , were associated with the household , a rigid kinship unit in opposition to the innovating role and power of the sovereign , and so were not viewed as suited to rule . Although female rulers had once been common among the Vazimba , described in oral histories as the original inhabitants of Madagascar , this tradition ended in the central highlands with the reign of Andriamanelo ( 1540 @-@ 1575 ) , founder of the Kingdom of Imerina and successor to his Vazimba mother , Queen Rafohy ( 1530 @-@ 1540 ) . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Ranavalona 's 33 @-@ year reign was characterized by her effort to strengthen the domestic authority of the Kingdom of Imerina over subjugated provinces and preserve the political and cultural sovereignty of Madagascar . These policies were enacted in a context of increasing European influence within her kingdom and competing French and English bids for domination over the island . Early in her reign , the queen took incremental steps to distance Madagascar from the purview of European powers , first putting an end to a friendship treaty with Britain , then placing increasing restrictions on the activities of the missionaries of the London Missionary Society , who operated schools where basic education and trade skills were taught in addition to the Christian religion . In 1835 she forbade the practice of Christianity among the Malagasy population , and within a year nearly all foreigners had left her territory . 
 Putting an end to most foreign trade relationships , the queen pursued a policy of self @-@ reliance , made possible through frequent use of the long @-@ standing tradition of fanompoana — forced labor in lieu of tax payments in money or goods . Ranavalona continued the wars of expansion conducted by her predecessor , Radama I , in an effort to extend her realm over the entire island , and imposed strict punishments on those who were judged as having acted in opposition to her will . Due in large part to loss of life throughout the years of military campaigns , high death rates among fanompoana workers , and harsh traditions of justice under her rule , the population of Madagascar is estimated to have declined from around 5 million to 2 @.@ 5 million between 1833 and 1839 , and from 750 @,@ 000 to 130 @,@ 000 between 1829 and 1842 in Imerina . These statistics have contributed to a strongly unfavorable view of Ranavalona 's rule in historical accounts . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 In the tradition of many of her royal Merina predecessors , the queen ruled from the royal Rova compound in Antananarivo . Between 1839 and 1842 , Jean Laborde built the queen a new residence called Manjakamiadana , which became the largest structure on the Rova grounds . The residence was made entirely from wood and bore most of the features of a traditional home of the Merina andriana ( aristocratic class ) , including a central pillar ( andry ) to support the roof . In other ways it showcased distinctly European innovations , as it contained three floors entirely surrounded by wooden verandas and incorporated dormers in the shingled roof . The palace would eventually be encased in stone in 1867 by James Cameron of the London Missionary Society during the reign of Ranavalona II . The original wooden palace of Ranavalona and virtually all other structures of the historic Rova compound were destroyed in a 1995 fire , leaving only the stone shell to mark where her palace had once stood . 
 In many respects , Ranavalona 's rule was a continuation of precedent established under Radama I. Both monarchs encouraged the introduction of new technologies and forms of knowledge from abroad , supported the establishment of an industrialized economy , and adopted measures to professionalize the army . Both viewed foreigners with ambivalence , establishing close personal relationships and drawing upon their expertise while enforcing restrictions on their activities to avert destabilizing changes to existing cultural and political systems . In addition , both contributed to the further development of a complex political bureaucracy that enabled the Merina court to govern remote provinces across an island larger than the Netherlands , Belgium and France combined . 
 Ranavalona maintained the tradition of ruling with the support of advisers drawn largely from the aristocratic class . The queen 's most powerful ministers were also her consorts . Her first chief adviser was a young army officer from <unk> named Andriamihaja , who served as First Minister from 1829 to 1830 . Major @-@ General Andriamihaja most likely fathered the queen 's only son , Prince Rakoto ( later King Radama II ) , who was born eleven months after the death of his official father , King Radama I. In the early years of Ranavalona 's reign , Andriamihaja was the leader of her court 's progressive faction , who favored maintaining the relations with Europe initiated under Radama . The conservative faction was led by the brothers <unk> and Rainiharo , the latter being the official guardian of one of the most powerful royal sampy . These talismans were believed to embody and channel the supernatural powers of the kingship and had played a major role in the spiritual life of the Merina people since at least the 16th century reign of Ralambo . The conservative faction conspired to reduce <unk> 's progressive influence over the queen , and in September 1830 they managed to persuade her while highly intoxicated to sign his death warrant for charges of witchcraft and treason . He was immediately captured in his home and killed . 
 Following Andriamihaja 's death , the influence of Radama 's old guard of progressives was eclipsed by that of conservative advisers at court , who grew ever closer to the queen , eventually resulting in Ranavalona 's marriage to sampy guardian and conservative figurehead Field Marshal Rainiharo ( also called <unk> ) of Ilafy in 1833 . Rainiharo gained initial access to the court through his father , <unk> , a hova ( commoner ) who had exceptionally been accorded the privilege of joining King Andrianampoinimerina 's inner circle of noble advisers . Field Marshal Rainiharo served as the queen 's First Minister from 1830 to 1832 , then Prime Minister and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief from 1832 to 1852 . Upon Rainiharo 's death , the queen wed another conservative , Field Marshal <unk> ( also called Rainijohary ) , who remained Ranavalona 's husband until her death in 1861 . He served as Prime Minister from 1852 to 1862 before being exiled to the royal city of Ambohimanga for his part in a plot against the queen 's son , Radama II . 
 Traditionally , Merina sovereigns relied on the pronouncement of kabary ( oratory ) in public gatherings to communicate policy and reaffirm the relationship between sovereign and public . Due in part to her lack of experience in public speaking and politics , Ranavalona preferred to direct and inform her subordinates through letters that she dictated to missionary @-@ educated court scribes . She strengthened her relationship with the public through occasional kabary and fulfilled the traditional role of the Merina sovereign as bestower of hasina ( ancestral blessings ) by enacting traditional rituals , including the fandroana ( new year ritual of renewal ) , tributes to the royal idols , and offerings of vodiondry and jaka beef at customary occasions . Ranavalona innovated on these traditional rituals by increasing their complexity and symbolism to imbue them with added significance . 
 = = = Preservation and expansion of realm = = = 
 Queen Ranavalona continued the military incursions initiated under Radama I to pacify neighboring kingdoms and maintain their submission to Merina rule . These policies had a strongly negative effect on economic and population growth during her reign . <unk> labor among the population of Imerina could include conscription into the military , enabling the queen to raise a standing army that was estimated at 20 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 soldiers . This army , which was sent on repeated expeditions into neighboring provinces , exacted harsh penalties against communities resistant to Merina domination . Mass executions were common , and those who were spared their lives were commonly brought back to Imerina as slaves ( andevo ) and their valuables seized as booty to increase the wealth of the Crown . Approximately one million slaves entered Imerina from coastal areas between 1820 and 1853 , constituting one @-@ third of the total population in the central highlands and two @-@ thirds of all residents in Antananarivo . 
 According to Madagascar historian Gwyn Campbell , the number of non @-@ Merina who died in violent conflict during the military campaigns of Ranavalona and her predecessor Radama from 1816 to 1853 was estimated at about 60 @,@ 000 . Additionally , a considerable proportion of the population not killed in battle in the subjugated provinces eventually died from famine as a consequence of scorched earth policies . Deaths among the Merina soldiers engaged in military actions were also high , estimated at about 160 @,@ 000 for the period 1820 – 1853 . A further 25 – 50 % of the queen 's soldiers stationed in lowland areas were estimated to have died each year due to diseases such as malaria . Although prevalent in the coastal parts of the island , malaria was uncommon in the high @-@ altitude zone around Antananarivo , and Merina soldiers possessed little natural resistance against it . An average of 4 @,@ 500 soldiers died each year for the greater part of Ranavalona 's reign , contributing to severe depopulation in Imerina . 
 = = = = <unk> ordeal = = = = 
 One of the chief measures by which Ranavalona maintained order within her realm was through the traditional practice of trial by the ordeal of tangena . A poison was extracted from the nut of the native tangena ( <unk> <unk> ) shrub and ingested , with the outcome determining innocence or guilt . If nobles or freemen were compelled to undergo the ordeal , the poison was typically administered to the accused only after dog and rooster stand @-@ ins had already died from the poison 's effects , while among members of the slave class ( andevo ) , the ordeal required them to immediately ingest the poison themselves . The accused would be fed the poison along with three pieces of chicken skin : if all three pieces of skin were vomited up then innocence was declared , but death or a failure to regurgitate all three pieces of skin indicated guilt . According to 19th @-@ century Malagasy historian <unk> , in the eyes of the greater populace , the tangena ordeal was believed to represent a sort of celestial justice in which the public placed their unquestioning faith , even to the point of accepting a verdict of guilt in a case of innocence as a just but unknowable divine mystery . 
 Residents of Madagascar could accuse one another of various crimes , including theft , Christianity and especially witchcraft , for which the ordeal of tangena was routinely obligatory . On average , an estimated 20 to 50 percent of those who underwent the ordeal died . In the 1820s , the tangena ordeal caused about 1 @,@ 000 deaths annually . This average rose to around 3 @,@ 000 annual deaths between 1828 and 1861 . In 1838 , it was estimated that as many as 100 @,@ 000 people in Imerina died as a result of the tangena ordeal , constituting roughly 20 percent of the population . Although outlawed in 1863 , the ordeal continued to be practiced secretly in Imerina and openly in other parts of the island . 
 = = = = Repression of Christianity = = = = 
 Following a visit by Radama I to Madagascar 's first formal school , established in Toamasina in 1818 by members of the London Missionary Society ( LMS ) , the king invited the first Christian artisan missionaries to the capital city to share their knowledge . Beginning in December 1820 , LMS missionaries established workshops in Antananarivo to teach brick @-@ making , European carpentry and other practical skills , and developed a network of public schools where numeracy and English were taught alongside literacy using portions of the Malagasy language Bible . Despite high attendance at the schools , the LMS were initially unsuccessful in converting pupils to Christianity . Near the end of Radama 's reign , the king came to regard the few Malagasy who had been converted as irreverent toward royal authority . He forbade Malagasy people from being baptized or attending Christian services . 
 Ranavalona 's succession initially resulted in a relaxation of state control over Christianity . A printing press , which was imported by LMS missionaries at the end of Radama 's reign , was only effectively put into operation in 1828 . The press was in heaviest use during the first several years of Ranavalona 's reign , when thousands of hymnals and other materials were transcribed and printed . Translation of the New Testament was completed in the second year of her reign , and 3 @,@ 000 copies were printed and distributed between 1829 and 1830 . From the beginning of her reign , Ranavalona forbade the distribution of books within the military to prevent subversion and preserve discipline . She allowed missionaries free rein in operating the printing press , however , and exempted from military service all Malagasy personnel trained to operate the press . In 1835 , translation of the Old Testament was completed and the first copies were printed . The freedom allowed to LMS and Malagasy Christians to print religious materials and teach religion in the state schools during the first six years of Ranavalona 's reign allowed the religion to become firmly established among a small but growing group of converts in and around the capital . In 1831 Ranavalona authorized Malagasy attendance at church services , administration of the sacrament , and baptism of her subjects . Within a year , the first 100 Malagasy were baptized out of an estimated 200 practicing Christians total ; these converts were drawn from all social classes , including slaves , commoners , respected elders , court officials and even sampy guardians , who were considered the bulwarks of traditional culture . 
 The conversion of major religious , political and social leaders sparked a backlash that led Ranavalona to become increasingly wary of the political and cultural effects of Christianity , which she saw as leading the Malagasy to forsake the ancestors and their traditions . In October and November 1831 the queen enacted a ban on Christian marriages , church services and baptisms for soldiers and members of government studying in the Missionary schools , and in December extended the ban on church service attendance to all Malagasy . From 1832 to 1834 , baptisms and church services continued , increasingly in secret . During this time , several Christians each year were charged with witchcraft and exiled or made to undergo the tangena ordeal , and Ranavalona requested the departure of three missionaries , retaining only those whose particular technical skills she viewed as valuable to the state . In 1835 , the queen attempted to shut down the press without directly targeting the LMS by banning Malagasy personnel from working at the printing house . The LMS missionaries , capitalizing on the absence of legal decrees against their own work at the press , managed to continue independently printing and distributing materials . 
 In a kabary speech on February 26 , 1835 , Queen Ranavalona formally forbade the practice of Christianity among her subjects . In her discourse , she was careful to differentiate between her own people , for whom the new religion was forbidden and its practice a capital offense , and foreigners , to whom she permitted freedom of religion and conscience . She furthermore acknowledged the valuable intellectual and technological contributions that European missionaries had made to the advancement of her country , and invited them to continue working to that end on the condition that their proselytizing would cease : 
 " To the English or French strangers : I thank you for the good that you have done in my land and my kingdom , where you have made known European wisdom and knowledge . Do not worry yourselves — I will not change the customs and rites of our ancestors . Nevertheless , whoever breaks the laws of my kingdom will be put to death — whoever he may be . I welcome all wisdom and all knowledge which are good for this country . It would be a waste of time and effort to grab the customs and rites of my ancestors . Concerning religious practice — baptism or assemblies — it is forbidden for my people who inhabit this land to take part whether on Sunday or during the week . Concerning you , foreigners , you can practice according to your own manners and customs . Nevertheless , if skilled handiwork and other practical skills exist , which can profit our people , exercise these skills that good will come . These are my instructions which I make known to you . " 
 The majority of the London Missionary Society missionaries , whose primary activity was teaching Christian theology and literacy at their newly established schools using the Bible as the principal Malagasy @-@ language text , departed the island . James Cameron and other key missionaries preferred to leave rather than remain on the island without authorization to proselytize . The last two remaining missionaries chose to continue teaching practical skills in the hope that the restrictions might loosen , but one year later , after receiving indirect information that the government desired their departure , they shuttered the LMS mission and left Madagascar . 
 Pursuant to the February 26 decree , those who possessed a Bible , worshiped in congregation or continued to profess adherence to Christianity were fined , jailed , manacled , subjected to trial by ordeal , or executed . Lurid accounts of the execution and torture of Christians were reported by missionaries with informants on the island who placed emphasis on what they perceived as the savagery of the Queen 's actions . For instance , they reported the public execution of fifteen Christian leaders near the Queen 's palace who were dangled on ropes 150 feet above a rock @-@ filled ravine before the ropes were cut upon their refusal to renounce Christianity . The Andohalo cathedral was constructed on this outcropping to commemorate early Malagasy Christians martyred at the site . The precise number of Malagasy citizens put to death for religious reasons during Ranavalona 's reign is difficult to state with certainty . British missionary to Madagascar W.E. Cummins ( 1878 ) places the number executed at between sixty and eighty . Far more were required to undergo the tangena ordeal , condemned to hard labor or stripped of their land and property , and many of these died . Persecution of Christians intensified in 1840 , 1849 and 1857 ; in 1849 , deemed the worst of these years by Cummins , 1 @,@ 900 people were fined , jailed or otherwise punished for their Christian faith , of whom 18 were executed . 
 = = = Protection of sovereignty = = = 
 Ranavalona 's reign was marked by a struggle between France and Britain to secure control over Madagascar . The French , who held several small islands off Madagascar , were interested in gaining control over the main island but this move was opposed by the British who had an interest in maintaining a safe passage to India . Ranavalona pursued a policy of self @-@ reliance to limit the influence of these foreign powers . 
 Shortly after taking the throne , Ranavalona annulled the Anglo @-@ Merina treaty that had been concluded between Radama and British envoys , and refused to continue receiving annual payments from Britain in exchange for adherence to the stipulations of the treaty . The most significant of these conditions was the kingdom 's non @-@ participation in the international slave trade , which had historically been a major source of revenue for the kingdoms of Imerina , Betsimisaraka , Sakalava and others across the island . One consequence of the termination of the Anglo @-@ Merina friendship treaty was an end to the delivery of British weaponry , which rendered the queen vulnerable to designs against her from foreign powers and pockets of local resistance alike . This vulnerability was underscored in 1829 when a fleet of six French ships launched an unprovoked attack against the fort of Foulpointe and the nearby town of <unk> on the eastern coast of Madagascar . The queen 's army successfully repelled the French at the next port , forcing the ships to Île Sainte @-@ Marie , where they engaged a diplomatic envoy sent from Antananarivo by Ranavalona . The protracted negotiations ensured the French suffered from the malaria prevalent in coastal areas , until the increasing casualties forced the ships ' withdrawal from Ranavalona 's territory . 
 It came to the Queen 's attention that Frenchman Jean Laborde , who had been shipwrecked off Madagascar in 1832 , was knowledgeable in the production of cannons , muskets and gunpowder . Ranavalona provided him with the labor and materials to establish factories that met the material needs of her army , thereby ending the kingdom 's dependence on Europe for modern weaponry . 
 = = = = Foreign plots = = = = 
 The French were eager to hasten Radama II 's succession in the interest of capitalizing on the Lambert Charter , an 1855 agreement between French representative Joseph @-@ François Lambert and Radama that could only come into effect upon the prince 's succession . The charter guaranteed Lambert and his business associates first rights to the exploitation of many of the island 's commodities and natural resources . According to a British account , Lambert conspired with Jean Laborde and local leaders to persuade Radama II to sign a document written in French — a language in which the prince was not fluent — which Lambert orally translated as containing only an account of the excessive pressures the Queen 's policies were placing on her subjects . Radama , who was sympathetic toward the commoners and interested in easing their burden but suspicious about the letter 's true purpose , reluctantly signed the document under intense pressure from the French . He was not told the letter included a request for French military intervention that could have potentially brought Madagascar under French rule . France did not however intend to take such an action without the accord of their ally , Britain , whose influence had been so well @-@ established on the island , and refused to intercede on behalf of the prince . In the meantime , Radama , who had been made to swear on the Bible not to speak of the letter to anyone , had grown concerned enough to contact a British diplomat , thereby revealing the true circumstances under which the letter had been signed . The British refused to cooperate in the French plot , and an attack was averted . According to Lambert , however , the prince had indeed been an enthusiastic partner in the bid to end Ranavalona 's reign , and his own true feelings about the endeavor had been deliberately misrepresented through a British campaign of propaganda . 
 Having failed to gain the backing of a European state power to place Radama on the throne and bring the treaty into effect , Lambert decided to instigate a coup d 'état independently . He traveled to Ranavalona 's court in May 1857 in the company of the celebrated 19th @-@ century Austrian <unk> Ida Pfeiffer , who became an unwitting participant in the plot . She documented her perspective on these events in one of her late works . According to Pfeiffer , Radama and Lambert had planned to dethrone the queen on June 20 , when ministers and soldiers loyal to Radama would infiltrate the Rova grounds and declare loyalty to the prince and support for a political transition . Pfeiffer blamed the failure of the plot on Rainilaiarivony , then Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the army who reportedly had been unable to ensure the presence of soldiers in the courtyard who were loyal to Radama . According to a British account , however , Radama himself was credited with warning the queen of the plot , in which his cooperation was merely a ploy to entrap the conspirators . This British view claims that Ranavalona deliberately allowed the plot to unfold almost to its conclusion in order to ascertain the loyalties of her members of government . After the plot 's discovery , the Europeans were largely confined to their houses on the palace grounds and prohibited from receiving visitors , until an order was issued to immediately and permanently quit the queen 's territory in late July . 
 = = Succession and death = = 
 While the queen had designated her son , Radama II , as her successor , <unk> and the conservative faction knew of his progressive leanings and tried instead to ensure the queen 's nephew , Ramboasalama , would come to power and maintain loyalties to them and their political agenda . The progressive brothers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony , who were the queen 's co @-@ prime minister and head of the army respectively at the time of her death , supported the succession of Radama and were able to exercise greater influence than Ramboasalama , particularly in ensuring the support of the army for the prince 's claim to the throne . As Ranavalona lay on her death bed , Radama took precautions to ensure his succession would be uncontested , surrounding his residence at the Rova of Antananarivo with several hundred soldiers and sending a member of Ramboasalama 's family to bring him to the Rova to swear a public oath of allegiance to the new king , to whom he submitted . 
 On August 16 , 1861 , Ranavalona died in her sleep at the Manjakamiadana palace in the Rova of Antananarivo . Twelve thousand zebu were slaughtered and their meat distributed to the populace in her honor , and the official mourning period lasted nine months . Her body was laid in a coffin made of silver piastres in a tomb at the royal city of Ambohimanga . During her funeral , a spark accidentally ignited a nearby barrel of gunpowder destined for use in the ceremony , causing an explosion and fire that killed a number of bystanders and destroyed three historic royal residences in the Nanjakana section of the compound where the event was held . In 1897 , French colonial authorities disinterred and moved the queen 's body and the remains of other Merina sovereigns to the tombs at the Rova of Antananarivo in an attempt to desanctify Ambohimanga . Her bones were placed within the tomb of Queen Rasoherina . Her son , Prince Rakoto , succeeded her as King Radama II . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ranavalona 's traditionalist policies were abruptly reversed under the reign of her son , King Radama II . A widespread epidemic of " spirit possession " throughout Imerina followed Radama 's public conversion to Christianity and was popularly attributed to the outraged spirit of Ranavalona I. 
 The queen 's foreign contemporaries strongly condemned her policies and viewed them as the actions of a tyrant or even a madwoman , a characterization that persisted in Western historical literature until the 1970s . Although Ranavalona has traditionally been depicted as a cruel and xenophobic tyrant , in more recent historical analyses she is commonly viewed as an astute politician who effectively protected the political and cultural sovereignty of her nation from European encroachment . In Madagascar today , the Malagasy of the central highlands hold complex and diverse views ranging across this spectrum . Most condemn her reign , in line with negative depictions of Ranavalona in current Malagasy history textbooks ; this view is most common among Malagasy Christians . Others admire her effort to preserve Malagasy traditions and independence . The majority , regardless of their feelings toward her domestic policies , consider her a remarkable figure in Malagasy history and commend her strength as a ruler in a period of tension with European powers . 
 A fictionalized account of Ranavalona and her court appears in the novel Flashman 's Lady by George MacDonald Fraser . The main character , an English soldier and agent named Harry Paget Flashman , becomes Ranavalona 's military adviser and lover . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = National honours = = = 
 Sovereign Grand Master of the Order of the Royal Hawk ( 1828 ) . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Richard Buxton ( botanist ) = 
 Richard Buxton ( 15 January 1786 – 2 January 1865 ) was a British shoemaker and amateur botanist . Born in Prestwich , Lancashire , to a family who lived in humble circumstances , he taught himself to read , and learned the basic principles of botany . Although living as a pauper for most of his life , in 1849 he published A Botanical Guide to the Flowering Plants , Ferns , Mosses and <unk> , Found Indigenous Within Sixteen Miles of Manchester , which became one of the standard texts on the flora then commonly found in the Manchester area . According to his obituary in the Journal of Botany , British and Foreign , Buxton was one of " nature 's gentlemen " and " his true and correct pronunciation of scientific terms have caused many who heard him to believe he was an accomplished classical scholar " . He was acknowledged by the geologist Edward William Binney as " the most profound thinker of his class " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The second of seven children , Richard Buxton was born on 15 January 1786 at Sedgley Hall Farm in the parish of Prestwich , near Manchester , Lancashire . His parents were John and Anne Buxton ( née Horton ) , both from Derbyshire . When he was two years old his family fell on hard times , left their farm and moved to Bond Street in Ancoats , Manchester . John Buxton worked as a labourer for the rest of his life . 
 Richard was a sickly child and his parents ' reduced circumstances meant that his education was somewhat sporadic . In his early years he wandered through the fields and brick yards where he lived , picking wildflowers . His favourites were <unk> Speedwell , Creeping <unk> and Common <unk> . At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to a bat maker ( the maker of children 's small leather shoes ) named James Heap , in Port Street , Manchester . About 18 months later he went to work with James Hyde , with whom he stayed for a number of years . 
 = = Later life = = 
 At the age of 16 , Buxton was illiterate , but with the aid of The Common Spelling Book he taught himself to read . He was unable to understand or pronounce all words correctly and so procured a copy of Jones <unk> Dictionary . He read more books , such as A History of England and Goldsmith 's History of Greece and Rome . Reading occupied all his spare time , although when trade was good he had to work from 6 : 00 am until 9 : 00 pm . He earned about 14 to 15 shillings ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) a week , a good wage for the time , but as cloth was superseding leather in making the tops of children shoes , this did not last . 
 When he was 18 , Buxton returned to work with his old master , James Heap , as a journeyman . Heap often took Buxton on country walks in his spare time . The two collected herbs for diet drinks , either for Heap 's use or to share with his neighbours . They often found plants of whose names they were ignorant , and so Buxton bought a copy of Culpeper 's Complete Herbal . However , as he found the supposedly medicinal properties of the plants fanciful and the descriptions inaccurate , he soon became dissatisfied with it . In 1808 he procured a copy of the superior Meyrick 's Herbal , from which he learned the first principles of the Linnaean system . Buxton soon outgrew this book , and began to borrow or buy as many books on botany as he could . Botanical practice at the time was to collect and dry plants , but as he disliked dead plants and preferred not to remove specimens that could be enjoyed by others , his botanical studies were confined to making observations . 
 From 1821 to 1826 the pressures of work took him away from his botanical rambles , but in spring 1826 he made more frequent excursions . In June that year he was " <unk> " on Kersal Moor when he met John Horsefield , a handloom weaver from Whitefield , who was president of the Prestwich Botanical Society and president of the general botanical meetings held at a number of different places in Lancashire . Buxton had long wished to meet a man such as Horsefield , who was not merely a country herbalist but an excellent scientific botanist . At that time in Lancashire many amateur , working class , naturalists pursued their interests in their spare time , and a number of local societies had been formed . Horsefield introduced him to other local botanists such as James Percival , Thomas Heywood and John Shaw with whom , during the summer of 1826 , he made a number of excursions to Mere Clough in Prestwich , Clifton Moss and Baguley Moor . 
 For several years , for a variety of reasons , Buxton 's study of botany fell by the wayside , but in 1833 he attended a botanical meeting in Prestwich , where he met his old acquaintances . He became a regular attendee at local botanical meetings , including one at Blackley , where he met James Crowther . They became firm friends and , in search of plants , explored Chorlton , Withington , Didsbury and many other regions of Lancashire , Cheshire , Derbyshire , Yorkshire and Wales . 
 In 1839 Buxton was invited to join the natural history class at the Manchester Mechanics ' Institute where he helped compile the Flora <unk> ( 1840 ) along with Leo Hartley Grindon , George Crozier and James Crowther under the editorship of John Bland Wood . He became an acknowledged expert on mosses , and William Hooker , director of the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew was so impressed with his skills that he hoped to employ him as a herbarium assistant . Although this never came about , Hooker gave Buxton a number of botanical books and , at some point , Buxton accepted the position of President of the Manchester Working Men 's Botanical Society . 
 In 1849 , aged 62 , he published a book : A Botanical Guide to the Flowering Plants , Ferns , Mosses and <unk> , Found Indigenous Within Sixteen Miles of Manchester , written with the help of other local botanists and geologist Edward William Binney . <unk> with snatches of poetry and including some autobiographical details , the book gives a complete description of all the plants then found in the area . It encourages other working @-@ class people to explore the " many delightful walks by pleasant streams and through green woods in summertime " and requests landowners " at least to preserve the old footpaths which cross their fields and woods if they should decline to allow fresh ones to be made " . 
 As Buxton 's trade fell into decline he tried to survive by working as a botanical collector and delivering newspapers , but eventually had to rely on a fund set up by Binney for ‘ the relief and encouragement of scientific men in humble life ’ . This situation was compounded when the proceeds from the second edition of his book , published in 1859 , were less than anticipated because of competition from Grindon 's Manchester Flora published in the same year . 
 = = Death = = 
 Buxton died on 2 January 1865 at Limekiln Lane , Ardwick , aged 78 and was buried at St Mary 's , Prestwich , on 5 January . In his obituary in the Manchester Courier , an unnamed " eminent man of science " described him as " probably one of the best British botanists , so far as flowering plants are concerned , that Lancashire has produced " . 
 = 2012 Formula One season = 
 The 2012 Formula One season was the 63rd season of FIA Formula One motor racing . It featured the 2012 FIA Formula One World Championship , a motor racing series for Formula One cars , recognised by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) — the governing body of motorsport — as the highest class of competition for open @-@ wheel racing cars . The championship was contested over twenty rounds , which started in Australia on 18 March and ended in Brazil on 25 November . The 2012 season saw the return of the United States Grand Prix , which was held at the Circuit of the Americas , a purpose @-@ built circuit in Austin , Texas . After being cancelled in 2011 due to civil protests , the Bahrain Grand Prix also returned to the calendar . 
 The early season was tumultuous , with seven different drivers winning the first seven races of the championship ; a record for the series . It was not until the European Grand Prix in June that a driver , Ferrari 's Fernando Alonso , won his second race of the year , and with it , emerged as a championship contender . Alonso maintained his hold on the championship lead for the next seven races , taking his third win in Germany and finishing on the podium in the United Kingdom , Italy and Singapore . However , costly first @-@ lap retirements in Belgium and Japan allowed his rivals to catch up , and defending World Champion Sebastian Vettel — like Alonso , a two @-@ time title winner — took the lead in the sixteenth race of the season . Vettel , too , encountered difficulties throughout the season ; contact with a backmarker left him to finish outside the points in Malaysia , while alternator failures at the European and Italian Grands Prix cost him valuable points and exclusion from qualifying in Abu Dhabi led him to start from the pit lane . Vettel entered the final race of the season with a thirteen @-@ point lead over Alonso . Alonso needed a podium finish to stand any chance of becoming World Drivers ' Champion , but in a race of attrition that finished under the safety car , Vettel finished in sixth place , scoring enough points to win his third consecutive championship , becoming just the third driver in the sport 's sixty @-@ three year history to do so . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Red Bull Racing secured their third consecutive title when Sebastian Vettel finished second at the United States Grand Prix . 
 In addition to seeing seven drivers win the first seven races , the 2012 season broke several records . The calendar for the season included twenty races , breaking the previous record of nineteen , which was first set in 2005 . Six current or former World Drivers ' Champions — Sebastian Vettel , Fernando Alonso , Jenson Button , Lewis Hamilton , Kimi Räikkönen , and Michael Schumacher — started the season , breaking the record of five established in 1970 . 
 = = Teams and drivers = = 
 The following twelve teams and twenty @-@ five race drivers competed in the 2012 Formula One World Championship . The FIA published a provisional entry list on 30 November 2011 , and the grid was finalised on 17 February . 
 = = = Team changes = = = 
 At the November 2011 meeting of the Formula One Commission in Geneva , several teams were given permission to change their constructor names — the name recognised by the FIA as the entity that effectively owns the team , and to which all results for that team are credited — with final approval from the World Motorsports Council granted in December of that year : 
 Lotus became known as Caterham , reflecting team principal Tony Fernandes 's purchase of Caterham Cars . 
 Renault changed its constructor name to Lotus after Lotus Cars expanded its title sponsorship program to include teams in Formula One and support series GP2 and GP3 . 
 Virgin became Marussia , following increased ownership of the team by Russian sports car manufacturer Marussia Motors . 
 As a result of the name changes , Team Lotus and Lotus Renault GP declared that their ongoing dispute over the use of the Lotus name was over after they had reached an " amicable conclusion " . Although the exact terms of the settlement were kept confidential , the joint statement detailed the transfer of the rights to the Lotus and Team Lotus names to Group Lotus 's ownership . 
 Williams announced that they would be using Renault engines for the 2012 and 2013 seasons , with an option to use Renault engines again in 2014 under the next generation of engine regulations . Renault had previously supplied engines to Williams from 1989 to 1997 , when the team won four World Drivers ' Championships and five World Constructors ' Championships . Following their worst season in their thirty @-@ year history — in which they finished ninth in the World Constructors ' Championship with just five points — the team underwent a technical review , employing former McLaren designer Mike Coughlan ( having served his suspension for his role in the 2007 Formula One espionage controversy ) as Chief Designer , and promoting Jason Somerville to Head of Aerodynamics . Likewise , Marussia ( then known as Virgin Racing ) underwent a restructuring , splitting with Wirth Research mid @-@ season after a technical review by Marussia Motors and the board of directors . The team also announced a technical partnership with McLaren that granted them access to McLaren 's testing facilities as well as the purchase of Wirth Research facilities . 
 In the week before the 2011 Indian Grand Prix , Force India announced that the Sahara Group had purchased a 42 @.@ 5 % stake in the team , valued at US $ 100 million . The investment gave the Sahara Group and team principal Vijay Mallya an equal stake in the team , with team director Michiel Mol controlling the remaining 15 % of the team . Under the terms of the sale , the Sahara Group became Force India 's naming @-@ rights sponsor . Mercedes GP also changed the name of their team , announcing that they were to become known as Mercedes AMG . The new name originates from AMG , Mercedes @-@ Benz 's performance and luxury road car brand . 
 HRT team principal Colin Kolles formally left his position , with the team citing the relocation of their headquarters to Spain as the reason for the separation . Former Minardi driver Luis Pérez @-@ Sala took Kolles 's place as team principal . In January 2012 , the team relocated to a new facility in Valencia before settling at a permanent facility in Caja Mágica , Madrid . 
 Peter Sauber formally stepped down from his position as team principal of Sauber F1 in the week before the Korean Grand Prix , appointing the team 's CEO , Monisha Kaltenborn as his successor . Kaltenborn 's appointment made her the first female team principal in the sport 's sixty @-@ three year history . 
 = = = Driver changes = = = 
 The 2012 season saw several driver changes . Lotus chose not to take up an option on Vitaly Petrov 's contract , and did not offer Bruno Senna a new contract . Petrov and Senna were replaced by 2007 World Drivers ' Champion Kimi Räikkönen — returning to the sport after two seasons competing in the World Rally Championship — and reigning GP2 Series champion Romain Grosjean , who also returned to the sport after a two @-@ year absence . Petrov later replaced Jarno Trulli at Caterham ; Trulli 's replacement meant that the opening race of the season would be the first race since the 1973 German Grand Prix to take place without an Italian driver on the grid . Senna joined Williams , the team having previously attempted to secure Räikkönen for the season . Senna replaced Rubens Barrichello , who left Formula One after a record @-@ breaking nineteen seasons . He later moved to IndyCar for the 2012 season , joining KV Racing Technology . 
 Like Räikkönen and Grosjean , Nico Hülkenberg also returned to Formula One , joining Force India alongside Paul di Resta . Adrian Sutil left the team , having spent six years with both Force India and its previous incarnations , Spyker and Midland . He initially sought a drive with Williams , before negotiations collapsed in December 2011 . Sutil was later the subject of criminal action , charged with grievous bodily harm after allegedly assaulting a senior Renault team member with a glass in a Shanghai nightclub following the 2011 Chinese Grand Prix . Sutil was found guilty , and was sentenced to an eighteen @-@ month suspended jail sentence and ordered to pay a € 200 @,@ 000 fine . Despite this , Sutil rejoined Force India for the 2013 season . 
 Scuderia Toro Rosso did not retain Jaime Alguersuari or Sébastien Buemi , instead choosing to replace them with Daniel Ricciardo and 2011 Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 Series runner @-@ up Jean @-@ Éric Vergne . Ricciardo had previously served as the team 's test and reserve driver before being placed at HRT for the 2011 British Grand Prix , while Vergne had completed a limited testing schedule for the team in the second half of the 2011 season . Sébastien Buemi became Red Bull Racing 's testing and reserve driver and will contest the 24 Hours of Le Mans with Toyota , driving a <unk> Hybrid . Alguersuari was offered a seat at HRT , but turned it down and instead joined tyre supplier Pirelli as their test driver , developing tyre compounds for use in racing alongside former Virgin Racing driver Lucas di Grassi . 
 Pedro de la Rosa and Narain Karthikeyan returned to Formula One with HRT . De la Rosa had been without a full @-@ time drive since the 2010 Italian Grand Prix , having spent the majority of the 2011 season as a test driver for McLaren and making one appearance racing for Sauber ; Karthikeyan was dropped by the team before the 2011 British Grand Prix in favour of Ricciardo . He , too , made a one @-@ race appearance at the Indian Grand Prix , before leaving the team until the 2012 season began . Vitantonio Liuzzi , who drove for HRT in 2011 , joined the Indian i1 Super Series . The series was later postponed until 2013 , but Liuzzi was unable to retain his seat with the team . At the launch of the HRT <unk> in March , Liuzzi was confirmed as one of the team 's testing and reserve drivers alongside both former GP2 Series driver Dani Clos and Ma <unk> , the first ever Chinese driver to step into a Formula 1 car . 
 Jérôme d 'Ambrosio left Marussia ( then known as Virgin Racing ) after the 2011 Brazilian Grand Prix . He later joined Lotus F1 as their third driver . Charles Pic — who placed fourth in the 2011 GP2 Series driving for Addax — joined Marussia , replacing d 'Ambrosio . 
 = = = = Mid @-@ season changes = = = = 
 The season only saw one driver change , which was brought about when Lotus driver Romain Grosjean was found by race stewards to be responsible for causing a multi @-@ car pile @-@ up at the start of the Belgian Grand Prix . He was given a one @-@ race ban and a € 50 @,@ 000 fine for his role in the collision , forcing him to miss the Italian Grand Prix . He was replaced by the team 's testing and reserve driver , Jérôme d 'Ambrosio . Grosjean returned to the team for the next round in Singapore . 
 = = Season calendar = = 
 = = = Calendar changes = = = 
 = = = = New and returning races = = = = 
 After the 2011 Bahrain Grand Prix was cancelled , the race was reinstated for the 2012 season with a provisional date in October . The final version of the calendar brought the race forward to April . 
 The German Grand Prix returned to Hockenheim after the 2011 German Grand Prix was held at the Nürburgring , in line with the event 's policy of alternating between venues . 
 In May 2010 , it was announced that Austin , Texas would host the return of the United States Grand Prix , the first since Indianapolis in 2007 . Known as the Circuit of the Americas , the venue will be a brand @-@ new , purpose @-@ built permanent circuit designed by event promoter <unk> <unk> and 1993 Grand Prix Motorcycle World Champion Kevin <unk> with the assistance of German architect and circuit designer Hermann Tilke . In November 2011 , Bernie Ecclestone expressed " minor " doubt over the race going ahead after what he described as " disagreements inside the [ management ] company " and gave the circuit owners and race organisers a deadline of 7 December – coinciding with the meeting of the FIA World Motorsports Council and the release of the final 2012 calendar – to sort out their differences or else risk losing the event entirely . The final calendar included the race , with Ecclestone confirming that a new arrangement had been made , and that the event organisers had paid their circuit sanctioning fees for 2012 . The race was originally scheduled to be held in June , but was moved back to become the penultimate event of the season in response to concerns over the heat of the Texas summer and its effects on teams , drivers and spectators , and the failure of race organisers to meet a key deadline for the race sanctioning fees . 
 = = = = Failed races = = = = 
 The Turkish Grand Prix was removed from the calendar after Formula One Management and the event organisers could not agree on a renewed contract . In August 2011 , organisers of the race revealed that they were negotiating with Bernie Ecclestone to resume their place on the calendar . However , the race was removed from the calendar later that month . 
 = = Changes = = 
 = = = Rule changes = = = 
 = = = = Technical regulations = = = = 
 The 2011 season saw teams running " off @-@ throttle blown diffusers " , which created downforce by forcing fuel through the engine to produce exhaust gases and directing it over the diffuser when the driver was not applying the throttle . This concept was originally banned in incremental phases , with increasingly restrictive rules on what teams could and could not do , with a full ban to be applied from the 2011 British Grand Prix onwards . However , the incremental ban was controversial , with several teams applying for and receiving permission to circumvent the total ban . After discussion between the FIA and engine manufacturers , the original regulations were restored , with the full ban delayed until 2012 . The regulations in 2012 governed the design of the exhaust with the teams agreeing to strict constraints on the position of the exhaust tailpipe . This resulted in the exhaust exiting the bodywork much higher up than in 2011 , and no longer in the vicinity of the diffuser . Several teams , including Williams and Mercedes used the Young Driver Tests in Abu Dhabi as an opportunity to test parts for the 2012 season in the face of the ban . In October 2011 , a clarification to the amended rules was issued , effectively banning " exotic " engine maps ; in November , further amendments were introduced , completely banning the practice of blowing exhaust gasses over parts of the car to improve downforce , following a bid by several teams to allow it under certain conditions . Further amendments were made in February 2012 when Mercedes alerted the FIA to a loophole in the regulations that would allow teams to continue using a partially blown diffuser . The FIA responded by re @-@ writing the software governing the engine 's Electronic Control Unit to close the loophole . 
 At the German Grand Prix in July , Red Bull Racing were referred to race stewards after FIA Technical Delegate Jo Bauer noted that their engine maps had the potential to violate the technical regulations . Red Bull stood accused of manipulating the relationship between the torque produced by the Red Bull RB8 and the degree to which the throttle was open — particularly in medium @-@ speed corners — thereby allowing more air to pass through the exhaust and over the diffuser , generating more downforce . Red Bull were cleared of wrongdoing , as , in the stewards ' words , they had not technically broken any rules , but the FIA announced plans to rewrite the regulations governing throttle mapping so as to outlaw the practice entirely ahead of the Hungarian Grand Prix one week later . The rule changes required teams to submit an engine map used during one of the first four races of the season , which became known as the " reference map " . Any subsequent changes to the throttle map would require the approval of the FIA , provided that the torque output above 6 @,@ 000 rpm was within two percent of the output specified on the reference map . Further changes would be allowed at races with " exceptional atmospheric conditions " , as designated by the FIA . 
 In January 2012 , the FIA banned the use of " reactive ride @-@ height " . The system , first proposed by Lotus in 2010 ( but not applied until 2012 ) , used hydraulic cylinders located in the brake calipers and suspension push @-@ rods to make minute adjustments to the ride height of the car , thereby keeping the ride height at an optimal level throughout the race and providing stability during braking . The FIA initially approved the device as being legal , and several teams , including Ferrari and Williams , submitted plans to the FIA for their own versions of the device before it was banned one week later . The FIA later confirmed that the reactive ride @-@ height systems violated Article 3 @.@ 15 of the technical regulations , which states that " any aerodynamic effect created by the suspension should be incidental to its primary function " and " any device that influences the car 's aerodynamics must remain immobile in relation to the sprung part of the car " and further noted that the system 's primary purpose was achieving aerodynamic gains as opposed to providing stability under braking , and that the use of reactive ride @-@ heights could also be challenged under Article 10 @.@ 2 of the technical regulations , which govern suspension systems . 
 Technical regulations for 2012 include the reprofiling of the car 's nose . The pre @-@ 2012 regulations allowed the nose to be as high as 62 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 24 @.@ 6 in ) above ground , but the revisions to the sporting code lowered the maximum allowable height to 55 centimetres ( 22 in ) 150mm ahead of the front bulkhead . This resulted in cars being launched with a " platypus " nose , as teams designed cars with a visible change in height along the nose assembly of the car . Mercedes AMG team principal Ross Brawn explained the distinctive nose shape as having come about from " several teams " wanting to use their 2011 chassis as the basis for their 2012 cars . 
 Drivers were no longer permitted to have a " joker " gearbox change . Prior to 2012 , drivers were entitled to change their gearboxes once over the course of the season without incurring a five @-@ place grid penalty . This system was abandoned in 2012 , with drivers only being allowed to change gearboxes once every five races . 
 Starting in 2012 , all cars were required to pass their mandatory FIA crash tests before being allowed to take part in pre @-@ season testing . Previously , passing the crash tests was only a requirement prior to the first race of the season . Crash tests for the 2012 season will also be more rigorous than in previous years . 
 At the meeting for the Formula One Commission in Geneva in November 2011 , the use of helium in air guns used to change tyres during pit stops was banned . Despite increasing the rotation speed of the air guns by up to 30 % , the practice of using helium was deemed to be too expensive to continue for the competitive gains it offered . 
 At the 2012 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix , the FIA banned the use of " trick brake " devices , which used a bi @-@ metallic strip that changed shape when heated by the brakes to open or close off braking ducts and improving braking efficiency under certain conditions . This was deemed to be in breach of Article 11 @.@ 4 of the Sporting Regulations , which states that the only permissible changes to the braking system while a car is moving must be directly controlled by the driver . 
 = = = = Sporting regulations = = = = 
 After being banned in 2009 , in @-@ season testing returned in 2012 , with a test held at Mugello on 1 May ahead of the European leg of the 2012 championship . As teams were only be permitted to do fifteen days of testing over the course of the season , the pre @-@ season winter testing schedule was cut back to accommodate the Mugello test . 
 At the September 2011 meeting of the FIA World Motor Sport Council , representatives of the member organisations voted to amend the rules for double @-@ waved yellow flags in all FIA @-@ sanctioned championships . The amendment means that double @-@ waved flags will be shown when a track marshal is working on or beside the circuit . 
 Tyre supplier Pirelli revised their tyre compounds for the 2012 season in an effort to encourage teams to use each of the compounds supplied for individual races . Pirelli predicted that the changes would translate into 0 @.@ 7 seconds ' difference per lap between the harder and softer compounds , down from 1 @.@ 5 seconds per lap in 2011 . According to Pirelli , the hardest tyre compound available is just 31 % harder than the softest compound on offer ; by comparison , the hardest tyres used in 2011 were 70 % harder than the softest . 
 Faced with several constructors applying for name changes , teams requested a clearer definition of what constitutes a " constructor " . Under the rules set out in the Sixth Concorde Agreement , several teams have been forced to compete under names that do not necessarily reflect their ownership – such as Sauber competing as " BMW Sauber " in 2010 , despite BMW withdrawing from the sport at the end of the 2009 season – in order to preserve their status as a current constructor and their claim to a share of the television rights paid to teams that placed in the top ten in the final World Constructors ' Championship standings . 
 At the final meeting of the World Motorsports Commission in December 2011 , a series of amendments to the sporting regulations were published . Chief among these is the re @-@ introduction of a rule that will allow all lapped traffic under the safety car ( which remained the Mercedes @-@ Benz SLS AMG introduced in 2010 . ) to be released from the queue before the car returns to pit lane , allowing the drivers to unlap themselves and to ensure a clean restart . 
 Drivers were not permitted to leave the confines of the circuit without a justifiable reason , following a spate of incidents in 2011 when drivers were sighted using access roads around the circuit to shorten their reconnaissance and in @-@ laps in order to preserve their fuel and tyres . Similarly , drivers will not be allowed to return to the normal racing line should they choose a defensive line going into a corner . 
 Races were run to a maximum four @-@ hour time limit to prevent the indefinite suspension of a race . This will stop the theoretical possibility of a race lasting more than eight hours . This rule was introduced in response to the rain @-@ interrupted 2011 Canadian Grand Prix , which set a record for the longest race in Formula One history , at four hours , four minutes and thirty @-@ nine seconds . 
 Any driver in the pit lane when a race is suspended was permitted to return to the circuit and take up the position on the grid that they were running in at the time of the suspension . 
 At the 2012 British Grand Prix in July , the FIA disabled the use of the Drag Reduction System ( DRS ) during a race while yellow flags were being shown in the same sector as the DRS zone . The move followed an incident at the European Grand Prix in which Michael Schumacher was observed to activate his DRS while yellow flags were being shown . 
 = = = Other changes = = = 
 In July 2011 , a joint broadcasting deal for Formula One in the United Kingdom was announced between Sky Sports and the BBC . The announcement was controversial , being met with highly negative reactions from fans and observers as it had previously been believed that the terms of the Concorde Agreement prevented Formula One from being broadcast exclusively on pay @-@ per @-@ view , but the Agreement did not prevent a shared broadcast such as the proposal made by Sky Sports and the BBC . The controversial nature of the broadcast deal led to the Culture , Media and Sport Committee of the House of Commons calling Bernie Ecclestone and " senior BBC figures " including director @-@ general Mark Thompson to answer questions over the details of the broadcasting arrangement . 
 In December 2011 , Red Bull Racing and Scuderia Ferrari exited FOTA , the Formula One Teams Association , following prolonged debate over the implementation of the controversial Resource Restriction Agreement , though Red Bull team principal Christian Horner reaffirmed his team 's commitment to cost @-@ cutting measures and highlighting the team 's concerns over certain loopholes in the Resource Restriction Agreement that they felt teams and manufacturers would willingly exploit . One week later , Sauber also left the organisation , though the Swiss team did not publicly give a reason for ending their membership . In February 2012 , Red Bull Racing 's sister team Scuderia Toro Rosso was also reported as having left the organisation since the first schism in December . 
 = = Race summaries = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season testing — Jerez de la Frontera and Barcelona = = = 
 The 2012 season was preceded by three test sessions ; one at Jerez de la Frontera and two in Barcelona . These sessions gave the teams and drivers the opportunity to familiarise themselves with their cars , though the teams downplayed the accuracy of testing times as being representative of the running order for the season . At the second test in Barcelona , Lotus F1 discovered a critical fault in the build of their chassis that forced them to miss four days of running , while both HRT and Marussia were unable to complete any mileage with their 2012 cars after both the HRT <unk> and Marussia <unk> failed their crash tests , though both teams were able to complete shakedowns of their cars . 
 = = = Round 1 – Australia = = = 
 The season began in Australia . Jenson Button took an early lead from pole @-@ sitter Lewis Hamilton and the Red Bull cars while the rest of the field was bottle @-@ necked by contact in the first corner . Button remained unchallenged throughout , even after a mid @-@ race safety car to retrieve the stricken Caterham of Vitaly Petrov . Button went on to take his third victory at the Melbourne circuit , ahead of Sebastian Vettel , who profited from the safety car to pass Hamilton . McLaren team principal Martin Whitmarsh later admitted that Button was " more than marginal " on fuel after the team made a mistake in calculating their fuel loads for the race , forcing Button to use a " severe fuel @-@ saving mode " from the eighth lap of the race . Hamilton came under threat from Mark Webber in the late stages of the race , but held on to secure third place . Webber finished fourth – his best result in his home Grand Prix – while Fernando Alonso finished fifth , having endured pressure from Pastor Maldonado for the last half of the race . Maldonado 's race ended when he crossed onto the astroturf on the final lap and spun into the wall . Kimi Räikkönen finished seventh after a poor qualifying session saw him start the race seventeenth , taking advantage of a chaotic final lap to make up two places , while Felipe Massa and Bruno Senna both retired after a bizarre collision that saw their cars tangled up in one another . HRT failed to qualify for the race for the second consecutive season after drivers Pedro de la Rosa and Narain Karthikeyan failed to set a lap time within 107 % of the fastest qualifying time . 
 = = = Round 2 – Malaysia = = = 
 McLaren locked out the front row of the grid for the second race in succession , with Lewis Hamilton once again on pole . Both HRT cars qualified for the race , but filled out the final row of the grid almost two seconds behind Marussia 's Charles Pic in twenty @-@ second position . In the race , Hamilton made a better start than Jenson Button , but his lead was short @-@ lived ; heavy rain interrupted the race , forcing the suspension of the Grand Prix . When the race restarted an hour later , Button was involved in contact with Narain Karthikeyan that forced him to make an unscheduled stop for a new front wing , while Hamilton had a slow pit stop and was held in the lane while other cars passed . Fernando Alonso inherited the lead , with Sauber 's Sergio Pérez a surprise second , having made an early stop for extreme wet weather tyres and then taking advantage of a rush to the pit lane to position himself in third at the restart . As the race wore on , Pérez began to quickly catch Alonso on a drying track . Daniel Ricciardo was the first driver to pit for dry @-@ weather tyres on lap 38 , triggering another round of stops . Sauber and Pérez initially looked as if they had left their stop too late when Pérez emerged from the pits five seconds behind Alonso , but he began catching the two @-@ time World Champion at the same rate as he had before . Pérez closed to within half a second with seven laps to go , but ran wide at turn 14 and lost five seconds , later admitting that it was his mistake . He was unable to close the gap , and Alonso went on to win the race by two seconds , the win giving him a five @-@ point lead in the championship . Pérez was second , taking his first podium and Sauber 's best ever result as an independent team . Hamilton finished third ahead of Mark Webber and Kimi Räikkönen , while Button had to settle for fourteenth . Bruno Senna finished in sixth , scoring more points in a single race than his team scored in 2011 . Sebastian Vettel finished outside the points after making contact with Karthikeyan and developing a puncture . 
 = = = Round 3 – China = = = 
 The championship resumed three weeks later in China , with the lead @-@ in period to the race marked by Lotus F1 protesting the legality of Mercedes 's rear wing design . The FIA rejected the protest , and with Mercedes allowed to continue racing with their car unchanged , Nico Rosberg took his — and the team 's — first pole position since their return to Formula One in 2010 , while a penalty to Lewis Hamilton for a gearbox change promoted Michael Schumacher to second on the grid . Schumacher would ultimately retire from the race after the first round of stops when it was discovered that one of his wheels had not been attached properly . Rosberg took an early lead in the race , and while his attempt to complete the race with only two pit stops came under threat from second @-@ placed Jenson Button , a mistake by Button 's pit crew during his final stop handed Rosberg a nineteen @-@ second advantage over Kimi Räikkönen . Räikkönen was attempting a similar two @-@ stop strategy , but his tyres wore out seven laps from the end of the race , and he lost eleven positions in a single lap . This forced Rosberg to drive conservatively to preserve his tyres while Button recovered from his disastrous pit stop to pass Sebastian Vettel for second . Button was held up by the incumbent World Champion long enough for Rosberg to preserve his tyres , and he became the 103rd person to win a Grand Prix . The result was also Mercedes 's first win as a constructor since Juan Manuel Fangio won the 1955 Italian Grand Prix . Button was second , with Hamilton scoring his third consecutive third place , giving him a two @-@ point championship lead over Button ; Fernando Alonso , who had been leading the championship before the race , finished ninth . After two retirements in the opening rounds of the championship , Romain Grosjean scored his first points in Formula One by finishing sixth . 
 = = = Round 4 – Bahrain = = = 
 In the face of ongoing media speculation and public pressure to cancel the race due to ongoing political instability in Bahrain , the FIA released a statement at the Chinese Grand Prix confirming that the Bahrain Grand Prix would go ahead as planned . The week preceding the Grand Prix saw a renewed wave of protests against the government 's attempts use the race to " tell the outside world that the whole thing is back to normal " , while human rights organisations including Amnesty International criticised the decision to hold the race amid the violent crackdowns . Three days before the race , a group of Force India mechanics travelling in an unmarked hire car were involved in a petrol bombing incident at an impromptu roadblock and were briefly exposed to tear gas fired by security forces . There were no injuries or damage , but two of the mechanics involved chose to leave the country . The team later announced their intentions to race despite the incident . 
 Sebastian Vettel qualified on pole , his first since the 2011 Brazilian Grand Prix . Heikki Kovalainen qualified sixteenth , the second time Caterham ( and its predecessor , Team Lotus ) advanced beyond the first qualifying period in dry conditions . Vettel went on to win the race — becoming the fourth winner in as many races — after spending much of the race defending against Kimi Räikkönen . Having started eleventh , Räikkönen used an extra set of soft tyres to move up through the field . His team @-@ mate , Romain Grosjean , finished third . Grosjean had initially shown the pace to challenge Vettel 's lead , but unlike Räikkönen , he did not have an extra set of fresh tyres , and lost touch with the reigning World Champion after the first set of stops . Lewis Hamilton finished eighth , once again hampered by slow pit stops . He was later involved in an altercation with Nico Rosberg that saw Rosberg referred to the stewards for forcing Hamilton beyond the boundary of the circuit while defending his position , but he escaped without penalty . Hamilton went on to finish eighth , while team @-@ mate Jenson Button was forced to retire two laps from the end of the race after reporting an unusual vibration from the differential . Daniel Ricciardo was involved in early contact that saw the Australian driver slide down the order from sixth at the start to fifteenth by the end of the race , having spent most of the Grand Prix caught behind Vitaly Petrov . Vettel 's win gave him a four @-@ point lead in the championship over Hamilton , while Mark Webber 's fourth consecutive fourth place secured third overall . Red Bull Racing took the lead from McLaren in the World Constructors ' Championship , while Lotus 's double podium moved them into third overall . 
 The decision to hold the race despite the ongoing protests made it one of the most controversial Grands Prix in the sport 's sixty @-@ year history . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season test – Mugello = = = 
 Starting on 1 May , the teams conducted a three @-@ day test at the Mugello Circuit in Italy ahead of the Spanish Grand Prix . The test gave teams the opportunity to assess major aerodynamic upgrades before racing them . HRT elected not to take part in the test , instead choosing to concentrate on establishing themselves at their new headquarters in Madrid . Both Lotus 's trackside operations director Alan <unk> and Red Bull Racing driver Mark Webber questioned the value of testing at the Mugello circuit as the characteristics of the circuit were unlike any of the circuits the championship was due to visit after the test , while Caterham driver Vitaly Petrov was critical of the choice of Mugello as a testing venue as he felt it was not safe enough for Formula One . Petrov 's comments came shortly after Fernando Alonso crashed on the final morning of the test . Red Bull Racing and Lotus team principals Christian Horner and Éric Boullier were also critical of the test as they felt that the costs of conducting in @-@ season testing outweighed any benefits , with Horner stating his opposition to continuing mid @-@ season testing in the future . 
 = = = Round 5 – Spain = = = 
 Following criticism over the sensitivity of their tyre compounds , tyre supplier Pirelli announced changes to their tyre allocation for the Spanish Grand Prix , making pit strategy the focal point of the Grand Prix . Pirelli would later diagnose the problems with the tyre compounds as originating from developing them on a testing chassis that was two years out @-@ of @-@ date at the time . Lewis Hamilton took his third pole of the season , edging out Williams driver Pastor Maldonado by half a second , while Maldonado 's team @-@ mate Bruno Senna was eliminated early when he spun . Hamilton was later excluded from the qualifying results after his car did not have enough fuel to return to the pits for scrutineering , promoting Maldonado to pole position and moving Hamilton to the back of the grid . Fernando Alonso took the lead of the race at the first corner , but Maldonado reclaimed it during the second round of pit stops , when his team forced Ferrari to pit early while Alonso was held up by the Marussia of Charles Pic . Maldonado maintained a lead of seven seconds over Alonso , but a mistake by his crew during the third pit stop cost him time and left him vulnerable to the Ferrari driver in the final stint of the race . Meanwhile , third @-@ placed Kimi Räikkönen moved to an ambitious strategy that would see him attempt to force Maldonado and Alonso to race beyond the life expectancy of their tyres , allowing him to swoop in at the last minute to steal first place . Räikkönen 's strategy failed as Maldonado withstood pressure from Alonso for fifteen laps , winning the race by three seconds . It was Williams 's first win in one hundred and thirty Grand Prix starts ; their previous race win was Juan Pablo Montoya 's victory at the 2004 Brazilian Grand Prix . Lewis Hamilton recovered from twenty @-@ fourth on the grid to finish eighth , while Sebastian Vettel overcame a drive @-@ through penalty and an unscheduled stop for a technical fault that forced his team to replace his front wing to make a late move on Nico Rosberg for sixth place that would preserve his championship lead . 
 = = = Round 6 – Monaco = = = 
 For the second consecutive race , the fastest driver in qualifying did not start the race from pole . Michael Schumacher set the fastest time , but a five @-@ place grid penalty left him sixth overall . Two hours before the race , protests against parts introduced onto the floor of the Red Bull RB8 left team principal Christian Horner with a choice : to change the offending parts and start both cars from the pit lane , guaranteeing that any result the team recorded would be preserved ; or to leave the parts on the car , allowing both drivers to start the race from the positions they qualified in , but risking a post @-@ race exclusion . Horner ultimately chose the latter option , and Mark Webber started from pole , establishing an early lead over Nico Rosberg as a first @-@ corner accident eliminated four cars . The race was run under the constant threat of rain , with drivers trying to extend the life of their tyres to avoid being forced to make an additional stop and falling down the order . The rain never materialised , though Jean @-@ Éric Vergne was observed using a set of intermediate tyres late in the race . The variety of strategies used by the front @-@ runners resulted in the last ten laps being contested with the top six cars running nose @-@ to @-@ tail . Webber visibly faded in the final laps , but held on when the following cars were momentarily pinned behind the slow @-@ moving Heikki Kovalainen . Webber won the race — his second on the streets of Monaco — with Rosberg second and Fernando Alonso third , the result giving Alonso a three @-@ point lead in the championship . Red Bull Racing maintained their lead in the Constructors ' Championship as rival teams chose not to follow through on the threat of their pre @-@ race protest , while Kovalainen finished thirteenth to see Caterham overtake Marussia for tenth place . Elsewhere , Spanish Grand Prix winner Pastor Maldonado was given a ten @-@ place grid penalty for an incident that saw him clip Sergio Pérez . Combined with a five @-@ place penalty for changing his gearbox , Maldonado started from the back row of the grid where he was eliminated in the first @-@ corner accident . 
 = = = Round 7 – Canada = = = 
 One week before the Canadian Grand Prix , the FIA declared the floor used by Red Bull in Monaco to be illegal , forcing the team to change the offending parts for the Canadian Grand Prix . Despite the ruling , the team 's results were kept intact . The team was also forced to change the design of their axles , after FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting felt that holes in the axles contravened the technical regulations . Nevertheless , Sebastian Vettel comfortably took pole position by three @-@ tenths of a second . Vettel controlled the early phase of the race , but was caught and passed by Lewis Hamilton before the first round of stops , while Fernando Alonso slipped through shortly afterwards . All three drivers were using a two @-@ stop strategy at the time , but as Hamilton made his second stop , both Alonso and Vettel shifted to a one @-@ stop strategy , with Alonso 's team resorting to discussing strategy options in his native Spanish to prevent their rivals from overhearing their plans . Hamilton had twenty laps to make up a twelve @-@ second deficit , and he easily reeled Vettel in ; in response , Red Bull pitted the reigning World Champion , and Vettel fell to fifth . Hamilton 's next target was Alonso , whose tyres lost all grip and he fell victim to Hamilton , Romain Grosjean , Sergio Pérez and Vettel in quick succession . Hamilton won the race , becoming the seventh winner in seven races and taking a two @-@ point lead in the championship . Grosjean 's second place saw Lotus take third place in the Constructors ' Championship from Ferrari . Both Grosjean and Pérez expressed surprise at finishing on the podium , while 2011 winner Jenson Button finished sixteenth in what he described as his " worst race in years " and Michael Schumacher suffered a hydraulics failure that left his drag reduction system ( DRS ) device jammed in the open position . 
 = = = Round 8 – Europe = = = 
 Fernando Alonso became the first man to win two races in 2012 at the European Grand Prix in Valencia , scoring his first home win since the 2006 Spanish Grand Prix . Starting eleventh , he was forced to navigate his way through traffic , narrowly avoiding early contact between Bruno Senna and Kamui Kobayashi as Sebastian Vettel broke free of the field to establish a twenty @-@ second lead by the first round of stops . Vettel 's lead was quashed when Heikki Kovalainen and Jean @-@ Éric Vergne made contact , triggering the deployment of the safety car to clear debris from the circuit . Alonso found himself third at the restart and pounced on a mistake by second @-@ placed Romain Grosjean to lead the chase against Vettel . Vettel pulled away once more , but his lead was short @-@ lived as he lost drive and his engine shut down on lap 33 . Grosjean attempted to challenge Alonso , but was forced out of the race with an alternator problem seven laps later , leaving Alonso in the lead , four seconds clear of Lewis Hamilton and Kimi Räikkönen . As the race entered the final laps , Räikkönen forced his way past Hamilton to secure second place , but Pastor Maldonado 's attempts to take third place ended with Hamilton in the barrier and a broken nose for the Williams driver . Maldonado finished tenth , but was given a post @-@ race drive @-@ through penalty and was classified twelfth . Meanwhile , Michael Schumacher and Mark Webber had started to carve their way through the field by virtue of a late pit stop and easily picked off the minor points positions and taking advantage of the Maldonado — Hamilton collision to finish third and fourth behind Alonso and Räikkönen . It was Schumacher 's first podium since the 2006 Chinese Grand Prix . Alonso 's win cemented a twenty @-@ point lead in the championship , whilst Vettel 's retirement relegated him to fourth overall , twenty @-@ six points behind Alonso . 
 = = = Round 9 – Great Britain = = = 
 Difficult conditions greeted the teams upon their arrival at the Silverstone Circuit , as parts of the Midlands received a month 's rainfall in the space of two days . The torrential rain lasted throughout the weekend , forcing qualifying to be suspended for ninety minutes , before race day dawned clear . The circuit was declared dry , allowing the drivers to start on the tyre compound of their choice , with Alonso on the harder tyre streaking away at the start while Paul di Resta crashed at Aintree on the first lap after making contact with Romain Grosjean . As the leaders settled into a rhythm , Pastor Maldonado and Sergio Pérez collided at Brooklands , prompting an angry response from the Mexican driver . Perez 's team mate Kamui Kobayashi also ran into trouble , locking his tyres as he entered his pit box and hitting three members of his pit crew , though none were seriously injured . The race was ultimately decided by the choice of tyre in the first stint as Alonso moved onto the softer option and Webber onto the harder prime for the final phase of the race . Webber caught Alonso with five laps to go , passing him on the Wellington Straight . Webber held on for his second win of the season , with Vettel third and Felipe Massa in fourth , his best result since achieving a podium in South Korea in 2010 . The result meant Webber closed to within thirteen points of Alonso 's championship lead , with both drivers breaking away from third @-@ placed Vettel . After showing early promise in the wet conditions , McLaren went backwards in the dry , losing second place in the Constructors ' Championship to Ferrari and third to Lotus . 
 = = = Round 10 – Germany = = = 
 Limited running in practice and a wet qualifying session meant that teams had to improvise their strategies at the Hockenheimring . Fernando Alonso controlled much of the race from pole position , only relinquishing the lead when he pitted , and he went on to take his third victory of the season . Lewis Hamilton 's one hundredth Grand Prix started with a disaster when he picked up a puncture on the third lap and spent most of the race at the tail end of the field before retiring on lap 56 with a suspension problem . Confusion briefly reigned when Hamilton , in seventeenth place at the time , began lapping faster than the leaders and sought to unlap himself . Sebastian Vettel later claimed that this was a ploy by McLaren to force both him and Alonso to drive defensively against Hamilton , slowing them down enough to allow team @-@ mate Jenson Button to leap @-@ frog them at the second round of stops ; Vettel lost a position to Button , but Alonso was unaffected , as Ferrari pitted him before Hamilton could interfere with his race . Button briefly looked as if he had the pace to pass Alonso for the race lead , but the race was deadlocked in the final twenty laps , and Button began to fade in the final five laps of the race . The race was marked by another technical dispute regarding Red Bull Racing , who were referred to the stewards by FIA Technical Delegate Jo Bauer for what he felt was an illegal engine map in use on the Red Bull RB8 . The stewards elected to take no action against Red Bull , stating that the team had not violated any of the technical regulations , but noted that they did not accept all of the arguments presented by the team when asked to explain . The stewards were less forgiving of Vettel , who ran wide at the hairpin while trying to pass Button and could only complete the pass outside the limits of the circuit . Vettel had twenty seconds added to his race time as a penalty , demoting him to fifth overall . With Button promoted to second , Kimi Räikkönen inherited third place and Kamui Kobayashi was classified a career @-@ best fourth . 
 = = = Round 11 – Hungary = = = 
 As the championship moved into the second half of the season , Fernando Alonso maintained a thirty @-@ four point lead over his nearest rival , Mark Webber , with Sebastian Vettel a further ten points behind . Alonso 's outlook for the race was dour , qualifying sixth and pinning his hopes on a wet race as Lewis Hamilton continued McLaren 's mid @-@ season resurgence , returning to pole position for the first time since the Malaysian Grand Prix . Following an aborted start triggered by Michael Schumacher lining up in the wrong grid position and then shutting his engine off in the confusion , Hamilton and Grosjean lead the field away . After prematurely moving Jenson Button onto a three @-@ stop strategy , McLaren gave Hamilton the order to hold position as the tight confines of the Hungaroring circuit forced the teams to try to make up positions in the pits . This was evidenced by Kimi Räikkönen , who inherited the lead after the first set of stops and produced a series of fast laps that allowed him to rejoin in second , coming dangerously close to team @-@ mate Grosjean under brakes as he emerged from the pit lane . Despite taking two seconds out of Hamilton 's lead within five laps of rejoining the race , Räikkönen was powerless to reel Hamilton in any further . Hamilton won the race , the nineteenth of his career , with Räikkönen second and Grosjean in third . Hamilton 's victory brought with it twenty @-@ five points that put him back in championship contention , while a late decision by Red Bull to move Mark Webber onto a three @-@ stop strategy saw the Australian slip further behind Fernando Alonso , as the Spaniard extended his championship lead to forty points . 
 = = = Round 12 – Belgium = = = 
 The championship resumed one month later in Belgium . Jenson Button qualified on pole and broke away at the start while a four @-@ car pile @-@ up started behind him when Romain Grosjean made contact with Lewis Hamilton and they both slammed into Fernando Alonso and Sergio Pérez , eliminating all four on the spot and triggering the safety car . Kamui Kobayashi 's car was also damaged , and Pastor Maldonado was spun around amidst the chaos . Grosjean was later given a one @-@ race ban for causing the collision , becoming the first driver in eighteen years to be banned from racing . Maldonado retired shortly after the restart with a broken front wing after making contact with Timo Glock , while Narain Karthikeyan spun off at Stavelot mid @-@ way through the race when his wheel came loose . Button controlled the race from the front and was unchallenged throughout , while Sebastian Vettel clawed his way up to second from tenth on the grid . Kimi Räikkönen started and finished third , let down by a conservative pit strategy that forced him to make a second stop late in the race in order to use both compounds of tyre as per the rules — even when it became apparent that Button and Vettel were racing on a one @-@ stop strategy — and Nico Hülkenberg finished in a career @-@ best fourth place . Button 's win allowed him to regain precious ground on the championship fight , while Alonso 's retirement from the race and Vettel 's second place moved the reigning World Champion to within twenty @-@ four points of the championship lead . Scuderia Toro Rosso scored their first points since the Malaysian Grand Prix , with Jean @-@ Éric Vergne and Daniel Ricciardo finishing eighth and ninth respectively . Further down the order , Caterham was summoned to the stewards on charges of an unsafe pit release when Heikki Kovalainen was released directly into the path of Karthikeyan and the team was given a € 10 @,@ 000 fine for the incident . 
 = = = Round 13 – Italy = = = 
 The final race in Europe took place at Monza . Ferrari 's early bid to put Fernando Alonso on pole position by way of using Felipe Massa to offer him a slipstream ended in disaster when Alonso 's rear anti @-@ roll bar failed in the final period of qualifying , leaving the championship leader marooned in tenth while Lewis Hamilton took pole . Hamilton asserted early control over the race , and while Ferrari made significant ground early on to be running second and third — despite losing the data uplink between their cars and the pit wall that provided them with telemetry — it was Sergio Pérez who proved to be Hamilton 's biggest challenge . Starting outside the top ten , Pérez elected to start on the harder compound tyres and complete one stop , producing fastest lap after fastest lap as McLaren 's confidence was broken when Jenson Button 's car was paralysed by a fuel pressure problem . Hamilton would ultimately prevail , but he was forced to push in the final few laps to maintain his lead , and won the race by four seconds as Pérez claimed his third podium of the season with second place . Alonso went on to finish third , benefiting from Button 's retirement and a drive @-@ through penalty for Sebastian Vettel when the reigning World Champion forced him so wide through the Curva Grande that Alonso was forced off the circuit . Bruno Senna later criticised the race stewards for not penalising Paul di Resta for a similar altercation on the approach to the Variante della Roggia early in the race . Meanwhile , with Romain Grosjean serving his suspension , Lotus enlisted former Marussia F1 driver Jérôme d 'Ambrosio as their second driver for the weekend . He qualified sixteenth , and went on to finish thirteenth overall . 
 Red Bull Racing suffered a double retirement , with Vettel falling victim to another alternator failure and Mark Webber spinning violently at the Ascari chicane , with the resultant damage to his tyres sending vibrations through the car that forced him to retire . This allowed Hamilton to leapfrog both drivers and Kimi Räikkönen — who finished the race fifth — to take second place in the World Drivers ' Championship , with the result enabling McLaren to close the gap to Red Bull in the World Constructors ' Championship . 
 = = = Round 14 – Singapore = = = 
 As the teams returned to Asia , the focus shifted to the championship race . Lewis Hamilton put himself in the ideal position to take the fight to Fernando Alonso , qualifying on pole whilst Alonso could only manage fifth place . In the physically most demanding race of the year , the teams jostled for position through the first phase of the Grand Prix , trying to position themselves for the final ten laps . Just as the drivers established a rhythm , Hamilton 's gearbox failed , forcing him out of the race and handing the lead to Sebastian Vettel . The race was shortened by two laps to fit the two @-@ hour time limit for a Grand Prix following a pair of lengthy safety car interventions ; first , Narain Karthikeyan <unk> into the barriers under the grandstands on lap 30 , forcing the safety car to be deployed . The drivers had little opportunity to get comfortable on the restart , as Michael Schumacher misjudged his braking point at the end of the Esplanade Bridge , careening into the back of Jean @-@ Éric Vergne and triggering the safety car for the second time in an accident that was a near mirror @-@ image of his collision with Sergio Pérez in 2011 . He was later given a ten @-@ place grid penalty for the Japanese Grand Prix . Vettel controlled the race from the second restart , beating Jenson Button to the line , for his second win of the season and his first since the Bahrain Grand Prix five months previously . Alonso completed the podium , retaining his championship lead after defending from Paul di Resta late in the race . Elsewhere , a string of retirements — including a late engine problem for Bruno Senna , which left the Brazilian with minor burns to his back — and a series of altercations involving Mark Webber , Nico Hülkenberg , Kamui Kobayashi and Sergio Pérez as they fought over the minor points positions allowed Timo Glock to finish twelfth , the result seeing Marussia retake tenth position in the World Constructors ' Championship from Caterham . 
 = = = Round 15 – Japan = = = 
 Fernando Alonso 's luck finally ran out in Japan ; having spent most of the season profiting from poor results from his rivals when he needed them the most , Alonso was the victim of a dramatic first corner clash , spinning out when he made contact with Kimi Räikkönen and paving the way for his championship rivals to make considerable inroads into his twenty @-@ nine point championship lead . Mark Webber was also caught up in the opening lap melee when he was hit by Romain Grosjean ; Webber was forced to pit straight away , while Grosjean was given a ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty for causing yet another first lap incident . Bruno Senna also ran afoul of the stewards , hitting Nico Rosberg whilst trying to avoid Grosjean and Webber and earning a drive @-@ through penalty for his troubles while Rosberg retired on the spot . Sergio Pérez added his name to the growing list of early retirements when he slid off at the hairpin under brakes and into the gravel trap whilst trying to force his way past a struggling Lewis Hamilton . Sebastian Vettel won the race from pole position , having led every lap of the race and setting the fastest lap time in the process to complete his second Grand Chelem . Felipe Massa finished second , his first podium result since the 2010 Korean Grand Prix , whilst Kamui Kobayashi claimed the first podium of his career — and the first podium for a Japanese driver at the Suzuka Circuit since Aguri Suzuki finished third in 1990 — after withstanding late pressure from Jenson Button . 
 With Alonso retiring and Vettel taking a full twenty @-@ five points for victory , the championship fight became as close as it had been all season long . 
 = = = Round 16 – Korea = = = 
 Sebastian Vettel 's momentum continued one week later in Korea , winning his third consecutive race and taking a six @-@ point championship lead as Fernando Alonso finished third . Vettel overcame pole @-@ sitter Mark Webber at the start , and was aided in building up a lead by first @-@ lap contact between Jenson Button , Nico Rosberg and Kamui Kobayashi that saw Button and Rosberg retire with damage from the collision ; Rosberg pulled over on the approach to the third turn , forcing a protracted yellow flag period as marshalls attempted to retrieve his car . With the sporting regulations banning overtaking while yellow flags were shown , the field was effectively thinned out in the opening laps as drivers were unable to pass one another . Tyre management became the focus of the race , as drivers reported heavy graining , particularly on the right @-@ front tyre , which bore most of the load over a lap of the circuit . Vettel ignored six radio calls from his pit wall cautioning him that a tyre failure was imminent , only backing off just enough in the final few laps to secure victory over Webber by six seconds . The team later denied that there had ever been a problem with Vettel 's tyres . Further down the order , Scuderia Toro Rosso 's Jean @-@ Éric Vergne and Daniel Ricciardo fought their way from sixteenth and twenty @-@ first on the grid to finish eighth and ninth , while Romain Grosjean drove a conservative race to finish seventh , having been warned beforehand by the stewards that another first @-@ lap altercation would likely result in his disqualification from the race . Lewis Hamilton 's day went from bad to worse when an anti @-@ roll bar on his McLaren failed , while the car handled its tyres so poorly that he was forced to make an unscheduled stop in order to make it to the finish , only to tear up a length of astroturf that wreaked havoc on his downforce and he slid down to tenth place , narrowly fending off an opportunistic charge from Sergio Pérez to take the final World Championship point on offer . Button 's retirement and Hamilton 's single point meant that McLaren lost second place in the World Constructors ' Championship to Ferrari , and Hamilton admitted that his bid to be the 2012 World Drivers ' Champion was over . 
 = = = Round 17 – India = = = 
 Ferrari 's strategy for staying in the championship battle saw them introduce upgrades to the <unk> at every remaining race in the season , starting with an extensive revision for the Indian Grand Prix , but whatever advantage they offered was still not enough for Fernando Alonso to catch Sebastian Vettel . Vettel dominated the weekend , setting the fastest time in every practice session before qualifying on pole , and leading every lap of the sixty @-@ lap race , though he was denied his third Grand Chelem when Jenson Button set the fastest lap of the race on the final lap . Fernando Alonso finished second , conceding another seven championship points to Vettel . The Ferrari driver rounded up both McLaren drivers at the start of the race and proceeded to chase down Mark Webber for second , only overtaking the Australian on the long back straight when his car developed a KERS fault fifteen laps from the end that it never recovered from . Webber held off a late challenge from Lewis Hamilton to complete the podium . Further down the order , Kimi Räikkönen finished seventh after spending most of the race trapped behind Felipe Massa , and later claimed that mistakes on Saturday had robbed him of a podium on Sunday , while Pedro de la Rosa retired from the race when he suffered a brake failure that saw him spin into the barriers at Turn 4 . The race was marked by a series of explosive punctures after cars made light contact with one another ; Michael Schumacher 's right @-@ rear tyre deflated on the first lap when he made contact with Jean @-@ Éric Vergne at the first corner ; Sergio Pérez suffered a puncture under similar circumstances when he glanced Daniel Ricciardo 's front wing , with the loose rubber damaging the floor of Pérez 's car enough that he was forced into retirement ; and Pastor Maldonado also had a tyre punctured when he and Kamui Kobayashi touched at speed on the approach to Turn 5 , forcing the Venezuelan to run wide onto the tarmac run @-@ off , but suffering no lasting damage . 
 = = = Round 18 – Abu Dhabi = = = 
 Sebastian Vettel 's dominant run was derailed in Abu Dhabi when his car was found to have insufficient fuel after qualifying and he was subsequently moved to the back of the grid . As Lewis Hamilton led the race away from the start , Vettel started from pit lane and took advantage of a chaotic opening corner that saw Nico Hülkenberg , Paul di Resta , Romain Grosjean and Bruno Senna tangle ; Hülkenberg was forced out , while di Resta and Grosjean pitted with damage . Vettel began to round up the <unk> , Marussias and Caterhams , but his early progress came at the expense of his front wing endplate when he made contact with Senna at Turn 8 switchback . He chose not to pit for the time being , as the race was interrupted by the intervention of the safety car . Nico Rosberg , who had been forced to pit with damage to his front wing , was in the process of overtaking Narain Karthikeyan as Karthikeyan 's car began to fail and the Indian quickly slowed . Rosberg , caught unawares by Karthikeyan 's troubles , was launched over the back of the HRT and into the barrier . During the safety car period , Vettel was forced to pit when he swerved to avoid Daniel Ricciardo and crashed into the polystyrene bollard marking the start of the DRS zone , further damaging his wing . Red Bull Racing took the opportunity to pit him early , with the downside being that Vettel would have to do 42 laps on the soft tyre when supplier Pirelli predicted they could only do 36 . Meanwhile , Hamilton suffered another mechanical failure while leading the race , and was once again forced out , handing the lead to Kimi Räikkönen while Fernando Alonso inherited second . Vettel began to work his way through the field again , but was forced to make a second stop when his tyres started losing grip . He was saved by the second appearance of the safety car moments later , brought about when di Resta forced Sergio Pérez wide ; as Pérez rejoined the circuit , he cut back across the front of Grosjean and the two made contact , which in turn forced Grosjean into the path of Mark Webber . Grosjean and Webber retired , whilst Pérez was given a stop @-@ go penalty . When racing resumed , Räikkönen began to rebuild his lead over Alonso , who was being harried by Jenson Button ; Button himself was being harried by Vettel in fourth . Button and Vettel 's duel allowed Alonso to break free , and he started chasing down Räikkönen in the last five laps . Räikkönen held on to secure his — and Lotus F1 's — first victory of the season . Alonso was second , while Vettel caught and passed Button to complete the podium , keeping a ten @-@ point championship lead in the process . With both Alonso and Vettel finishing on the podium with him , Räikkönen 's win was not enough to keep him in contention for the World Drivers ' Championship , leaving the title to be fought out between Alonso and Vettel over the final two races of the season . 
 = = = Round 19 – United States = = = 
 Despite its troubled construction period , the Circuit of the Americas passed its final FIA inspection on 25 September , allowing the race to go ahead . Sebastian Vettel took his sixth pole position of the season , whilst Alonso struggled throughout qualifying to start the race ninth , which became eighth when Romain Grosjean received a grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change . Amid concerns that drivers starting from even @-@ numbered grid slots would suffer from a lack of grip as they were located off the racing line , Ferrari deliberately broke the seal on Felipe Massa 's gearbox , thereby giving him a five @-@ place grid penalty and promoting Alonso to seventh and the clean side of the grid . Ferrari 's fears were not without merit as the drivers starting from even @-@ number spaces fell behind at the start of the race . Vettel quickly converted pole position into a steady race lead as Lewis Hamilton fought to regain second place from Mark Webber . Moments after Hamilton caught him on lap 17 , the Australian suffered yet another alternator problem , and coasted to a halt . Red Bull Racing team principal Christian Horner later admitted that the team 's perpetual alternator problems were a serious concern with just one race left in the championship , a World Championship at stake and very little time to diagnose and correct the problem . With Webber now out of the running , Hamilton then turned his attentions on Vettel and steadily closed the gap to the lead , overtaking the World Championship leader on lap 42 when Vettel got caught behind Narain Karthikeyan in the meandering first sector , which allowed Hamilton to pass Vettel along the long back straight . Hamilton held onto the lead for the final fourteen laps , but with Vettel never more than a second and a half behind him , Hamilton could not afford to relax , and he won the race by just six tenths of a second . Alonso recovered from seventh to finish third — marking the first time that he , Hamilton and Vettel had stood on the podium together in the one hundred races all three had contested together — and forcing the title fight to extend to the final round in Brazil . Further down the order , Massa overcame his gearbox penalty to finish fourth , while Jenson Button fell from twelfth on the grid to sixteenth at the end of the first lap , using an alternative strategy to claw his way back up to fifth . Michael Schumacher , on the other hand , went backwards ; after qualifying fifth , his Mercedes chewed through its tyres , forcing him to make a second stop that sent him plummeting down the order to finish sixteenth , and a clutch problem during his stop deprived Kimi Räikkönen of the chance to compete with Alonso for the final podium place . Both Marussia drivers out @-@ qualified the Caterhams for the first time , only for Timo Glock and Charles Pic be out @-@ raced by Heikki Kovalainen and Vitaly Petrov , but the Russian team held onto tenth place in the World Constructors ' Championship . Despite losing Webber to an alternator failure , Red Bull collected enough points to secure their third consecutive World Constructors ' Championship title . 
 = = = Round 20 – Brazil = = = 
 The final race of the season was run in conditions that were never quite wet enough for drivers to use wet tyres , but never quite dry enough for slick tyres to provide enough grip . While Jenson Button and Lewis Hamilton fought over the race lead , Sebastian Vettel was involved in a first @-@ lap clash with Bruno Senna that damaged his exhaust and spun him around , relegating him to last place . Senna retired on the spot , as did Sergio Pérez , who was caught in the crossfire . The race was one of attrition , with Pastor Maldonado and Romain Grosjean also crashing out early . Button seized the lead from Hamilton , but soon found himself under pressure from Nico Hülkenberg and lost the lead to the German driver on lap 18 , and second place to Hamilton shortly thereafter . The field stabilised themselves after the first round of stops , with Vettel in the lower points and Fernando Alonso running fourth when he needed a podium to stand any chance of being champion . Hülkenberg spun on lap 48 and lost the lead to Hamilton , but caught the McLaren on lap 54 as they encountered lapped traffic . The two made contact in the first corner , forcing Hamilton out of the race and earning Hülkenberg a drive @-@ through penalty for causing an avoidable accident . In the wake of their collision , Button re @-@ took the lead and held on to the end of the race . Meanwhile , the rain intensified , prompting teams to scramble for tyres . Hülkenberg 's penalty and Hamilton 's retirement promoted Alonso to the podium , which became second place when team @-@ mate Felipe Massa yielded for him . A slow stop for Vettel relegated him to twelfth and swinging the balance of power in Alonso 's favour . In the last ten laps of the race , Vettel began to make his way back up the order until he was seventh , just enough to secure the title , but leaving him vulnerable if the damage he received on the first lap — which by now had left a long crack running along the floor of his car — got worse . Vettel 's seventh became sixth when Michael Schumacher moved aside to let Vettel through . Two laps from the end of the race , Paul di Resta crashed heavily as he came onto the main straight , forcing the deployment of the safety car . Button won the race , with Alonso second and Massa third , but Vettel 's sixth place was enough to secure his third consecutive World Drivers ' Championship . Kimi Räikkönen finished the season third overall , having benefited from Hamilton 's retirement to hold onto the place following a bizarre incident in which he left the circuit and attempted to rejoin by taking to the support paddock pit lane , only to find the way blocked and forcing him to double back and find another way onto the circuit . In his final race in Formula One , Schumacher 's seventh place saw him finish the season in thirteenth place overall ; his worst performance over a season since he contested six rounds during the 1991 season . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari secured second place from McLaren with two cars on the podium , while Kamui Kobayashi 's ninth place was not enough for Sauber to take sixth from Mercedes , and Marussia lost tenth place to Caterham when Vitaly Petrov secured the team 's best result of the season with eleventh place . Nikolai <unk> , Marussia 's director of engineering , later claimed that Charles Pic had deliberately let Petrov through , as Pic had announced his move to Caterham for the 2013 season two days before the race ; however , no action was taken by the FIA in response to these claims . 
 = = = Post @-@ season controversy = = = 
 Three days after the Brazilian Grand Prix , reports began to surface suggesting that Sebastian Vettel 's championship was under threat and that Ferrari would be filing a formal protest against the race results . The challenge centred on a pass Vettel made on Jean @-@ Éric Vergne early in the race . At the time , the first sector of the circuit was under yellow flag conditions following the spin and retirement of Pastor Maldonado at Curva do Sol , the Interlagos circuit 's third corner , which feeds onto the back straight . Vettel overtook Vergne along the straight , which led to claims that the pass was illegal because of the yellow flags . Intense media speculation suggested that the challenge threatened Vettel 's championship because as the race finished behind the safety car , any post @-@ race penalty had the potential to demote him in the race standings , and Vettel would not have enough points to secure the title . Ferrari wrote to the FIA , requesting clarification on the matter . The FIA reviewed the incident and declared that Vettel 's pass was legal as a green flag was being shown by a marshal adjacent to the pit exit , meaning the track was green from that point onward ; the confusion had been caused by a digital board showing a yellow flag on the exit of Curva do Sol some one hundred metres before the marshalling post . Both Ferrari and Red Bull Racing announced that they were satisfied with the ruling , thereby preserving Vettel 's championship . 
 = = Results and standings = = 
 = = = Grands Prix = = = 
 = = = Drivers ' standings = = = 
 Points were awarded to the top 10 classified finishers . 
 Notes : 
 † – Drivers did not finish the Grand Prix , but were classified as they completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Constructors ' standings = = = 
 Notes : 
 † – Cars did not finish the Grand Prix , but were classified as they completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 Official FIA results for the Constructors ' Championship identified the constructors as " Red Bull Racing " , " Scuderia Ferrari " , " Vodafone McLaren Mercedes " , etc . 
 = Typhoon Shanshan ( 2006 ) = 
 Typhoon Shanshan , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Luis , was a strong typhoon that affected parts of East Asia in late September 2006 . The 13th named storm of the 2006 Pacific typhoon season , Typhoon Shanshan was also the seventh typhoon of the year operationally recognised by the Japan Meteorological Agency . In post @-@ operational analysis Shanshan became the eighth typhoon of the year when Typhoon Maria was added to the list . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center considered Shanshan the 13th tropical storm and eighth typhoon of the season , a Category 4 @-@ equivalent typhoon in terms of 1 @-@ minute average wind speed . The name Shanshan was submitted to the naming list by Hong Kong and is a girls ' given name . 
 Shanshan wreaked havoc in Japan , with reports that it caused a tornado which derailed a train . It made landfall first in the Yaeyama Islands , where it caused heavy rains , and later in Kyūshū . The outer bands of Shanshan also affected South Korea . Shanshan also knocked power out to thousands of homes in the two countries , and killed at least eleven people . Damage amounted to $ 2 @.@ 5 billion ( 2006 USD ) , making Shanshan the sixth costliest disaster worldwide in 2006 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 9 , 2006 , the Japan Meteorological Agency identified a tropical depression with 25 @-@ knot 10 @-@ minute average sustained winds about 500 kilometres ( 300 mi ) north @-@ northeast of Yap , near latitude 14 @.@ 0 ° N longitude 139 @.@ 0 ° E. Later that day , the Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) picked up on the tropical depression and started issuing track forecasts for the system . 
 As the system continued to move northwestward , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 14W on the morning of September 10 . Later that day , the tropical depression moved into the PAGASA Area of Responsibility , and was named Luis . As the system continued to strengthen , the JMA upgraded the depression to a storm at 1200 UTC and named it Shanshan , a girls ' given name submitted by Hong Kong . The HKO did the same at the same time , upgrading the depression to a storm . 
 The storm quickly strengthened , being upgraded twice by the JMA on September 11 , at 0600 UTC to a severe tropical storm and at 1800 UTC to a typhoon , becoming the seventh official typhoon of the season . It then took on a more north @-@ northwesterly track , weakening while undergoing an eyewall replacement cycle on September 14 . However , it restrengthened , reaching its maximum intensity of 110 knots ( 205 km / h , 125 mph ) from the JMA and 120 knots ( 220 km / h , 140 mph ) from the JTWC before passing Iriomote on September 15 . Originally expected by the JTWC to pass to the east of Okinawa Island , a subtropical high @-@ pressure ridge south of the main Japanese islands forced the storm to take a more westward track , pushing it towards Taiwan . Shortly later , Shanshan passed directly over Iriomote . 
 PAGASA issued their final advisory later on September 16 . Peak intensity for Typhoon Luis as reported by PAGASA while it was in their area of responsibility was only 80 knots ( 150 km / h , 95 mph ) . Shanshan made landfall on September 17 on the island of Kyūshū . The HKO issued their final track forecast on the weakening typhoon later that day as it passed out of their area of responsibility , with the peak intensity while within HKO 's area of responsibility set at 185 km / h ( 115 mph , 100 kt ) . The JTWC declared the system extratropical shortly after . 
 The JMA downgraded the typhoon to a severe tropical storm at 0000 UTC September 18 . Just before crossing the island of Hokkaidō , according to the JMA 's best @-@ track graphic , Severe Tropical Storm Shanshan became extratropical . The extratropical storm was tracked by the JMA in their high seas marine warnings until September 22 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In anticipation of Typhoon Shanshan , the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau issued a marine warning for all ships in the areas around the north and the east coasts of the island and in the Bashi Channel . Tourists were also asked to avoid the areas due to fears over large waves . The Zhejiang provincial government in the People 's Republic of China also asked all fishermen to return to port and ordered local authorities to help with evacuations of people from areas threatened by the typhoon . 
 In Japan , the United States military and its navy took precautions against the approaching storm . Okinawa was put under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness ( TCCOR ) 1 @-@ E , which means that all outdoor activities are prohibited as there are sustained winds of at least 50 knots ( 95 km / h , 60 mph ) in force , on September 16 , with over 100 flights into and out of Naha International Airport on the island cancelled . Kadena Air Base moved various aircraft to other undisclosed locations in the Pacific . Sasebo Naval Base declared TCCOR 1 @-@ E on September 17 . The USS Harpers Ferry ( LSD @-@ 49 ) and USS Juneau ( LPD @-@ 10 ) both left the base , while the USS Patriot ( MCM @-@ 7 ) was moved to a wet berth . Only one vessel , the USS Tortuga ( LSD @-@ 46 ) remained in port for repairs , because authorities thought that the ship could withstand the storm . Elsewhere in Japan , some flights and Shinkansen bullet trains were delayed or cancelled . In Miyazaki and Hiroshima prefectures , evacuation orders were issued for almost 170 families . In Kyūshū , 10 @,@ 000 people voluntarily evacuated their houses for higher ground . The island 's seven main airports were closed , causing 41 @,@ 900 passengers to be stranded when 357 flights were cancelled . Ahead of an expected landfall on Hokkaidō , the JMA warned residents of the possibility of high winds . 
 Typhoon warnings were issued for Jeju and the southern and eastern coasts of South Korea ahead of the storm . Passenger ships normally serving Jeju Island remained in port . In Busan , ports were closed , and in Ulsan , 1 @,@ 600 ships remained in port . In South Gyeongsang Province , authorities banned departures from the port at <unk> , stranding over 16 @,@ 000 fishing boats . The Korean Coast Guard said that a total of 52 @,@ 000 ships remained at ports across the nation . Mount Jiri was also closed ahead of the storm 's passage through Korea , which was expected to bring up to 100 mm ( 4 inches ) of rain . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 In South Korea , Jeju Island reported 100 mm ( 4 inches ) of rain by September 16 , well before the typhoon hit , while Busan had reported 60 mm ( 2 inches ) . Shanshan knocked out electricity to nearly 4 @,@ 000 homes in southeastern South Korea . A ship off Ulleungdo sank , but no casualties were reported from that incident . A sailor died when trying to dock boats on Jeju @-@ do . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 Shanshan 's effects on Japan and its outlying Pacific islands were widespread . On Iriomote , a peak gust of 69 @.@ 9 metres per second ( 251 km / h , 157 mph ) was recorded , the strongest ever on record since records started in 1972 . On Ishigaki , Okinawa , a peak gust of 67 @.@ 0 m / s ( 241 km / h , 150 mph ) was reported , with rainfall rates of up to 50 mm per hour ( 2 inches per hour ) reported . Over 25 @,@ 000 homes on Ishigaki lost power after 182 utility poles were downed by the storm , and at least 12 people on the island were injured . Eight vessels were reported to have capsized . 
 At Kadena Air Base , 2 inches ( 50 mm ) of rain were reported , with a maximum gust of 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) recorded . Naha International Airport on Okinawa reported a recorded maximum wind gust to 70 mph ( 112 km / h ) . In <unk> , Okinawa , high waves damaged the local port and swept 30 cargo containers to sea , while in Okinawa City , six injuries were reported . One building in the city suffered a wall collapse , and at least 70 houses were damaged . 
 Off Kyūshū , a Maldives @-@ registered car ferry capsized , killing one crew member . A train was derailed , possibly due to a tornado , injuring five people . On the island , an electrician in Fukuoka Prefecture died after an industrial container at his firm fell on top of him , crushing him . A glass entrance of a supermarket in Nobeoka broke on impact with flying debris , killing one person . Elsewhere in the prefecture , a 42 @-@ year @-@ old man died in his bedroom when it was crushed , while an elderly woman farmer died when she was hit by a fallen tree outside a greenhouse . Three other deaths were confirmed on the island . 
 Meanwhile , in Hiroshima Prefecture , a 50 @-@ year @-@ old firefighter was killed when he drowned after being swept away by rising flood waters . A journalist went missing in similar circumstances , and was found dead a few days later . In all , Typhoon Shanshan killed 11 people and injured over 260 others . Shanshan is also credited with US $ 4 @.@ 9 million worth of net losses in the third financial quarter for IPC Holdings , Ltd . 
 = Type II supernova = 
 A Type II supernova ( plural : supernovae or supernovas ) results from the rapid collapse and violent explosion of a massive star . A star must have at least 8 times , and no more than 40 – 50 times , the mass of the Sun ( M ☉ ) to undergo this type of explosion . It is distinguished from other types of supernovae by the presence of hydrogen in its spectrum . Type II supernovae are mainly observed in the spiral arms of galaxies and in H II regions , but not in elliptical galaxies . 
 Stars generate energy by the nuclear fusion of elements . Unlike the Sun , massive stars possess the mass needed to fuse elements that have an atomic mass greater than hydrogen and helium , albeit at increasingly higher temperatures and pressures , causing increasingly shorter stellar life spans . The degeneracy pressure of electrons and the energy generated by these fusion reactions are sufficient to counter the force of gravity and prevent the star from collapsing , maintaining stellar equilibrium . The star fuses increasingly higher mass elements , starting with hydrogen and then helium , progressing up through the periodic table until a core of iron and nickel is produced . Fusion of iron or nickel produces no net energy output , so no further fusion can take place , leaving the nickel @-@ iron core inert . Due to the lack of energy output creating outward pressure , equilibrium is broken and the core is compressed by the overlying mass of the star . 
 When the compacted mass of the inert core exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1 @.@ 4 M ☉ , electron degeneracy is no longer sufficient to counter the gravitational compression . A cataclysmic implosion of the core takes place within seconds . Without the support of the now @-@ imploded inner core , the outer core collapses inwards under gravity and reaches a velocity of up to 23 % of the speed of light and the sudden compression increases the temperature of the inner core to up to 100 billion kelvin . Neutrons and neutrinos are formed via reversed beta @-@ decay , releasing about 1046 joules ( 100 foe ) in a ten @-@ second burst . The collapse of the inner core is halted by neutron degeneracy , causing the implosion to rebound and bounce outward . The energy of this expanding shock wave is sufficient to disrupt the overlying stellar material and accelerate it to escape velocity , forming a supernova explosion . The shock wave and extremely high temperature and pressure rapidly dissipate but are present for long enough to allow for a brief period during which the production of elements heavier than iron occurs . Depending on initial size of the star , the remnants of the core form a neutron star or a black hole . Because of the underlying mechanism , the resulting nova is also described as a core @-@ collapse supernova . 
 There exist several categories of Type II supernova explosions , which are categorized based on the resulting light curve — a graph of luminosity versus time — following the explosion . Type II @-@ L supernovae show a steady ( linear ) decline of the light curve following the explosion , whereas Type II @-@ P display a period of slower decline ( a plateau ) in their light curve followed by a normal decay . Type Ib and Ic supernovae are a type of core @-@ collapse supernova for a massive star that has shed its outer envelope of hydrogen and ( for Type Ic ) helium . As a result , they appear to be lacking in these elements . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Stars far more massive than the sun evolve in more complex ways . In the core of the star , hydrogen is fused into helium , releasing thermal energy that heats the sun 's core and provides outward pressure that supports the sun 's layers against collapse in a process known as stellar or hydrostatic equilibrium . The helium produced in the core accumulates there since temperatures in the core are not yet high enough to cause it to fuse . Eventually , as the hydrogen at the core is exhausted , fusion starts to slow down , and gravity causes the core to contract . This contraction raises the temperature high enough to initiate a shorter phase of helium fusion , which accounts for less than 10 % of the star 's total lifetime . In stars with fewer than eight solar masses , the carbon produced by helium fusion does not fuse , and the star gradually cools to become a white dwarf . White dwarf stars , if they have a near companion , may then become Type Ia supernovae . 
 A much larger star , however , is massive enough to create temperatures and pressures needed to cause the carbon in the core to begin to fuse when the star contracts at the end of the helium @-@ burning stage . The cores of these massive stars become layered like onions as progressively heavier atomic nuclei build up at the center , with an outermost layer of hydrogen gas , surrounding a layer of hydrogen fusing into helium , surrounding a layer of helium fusing into carbon via the triple @-@ alpha process , surrounding layers that fuse to progressively heavier elements . As a star this massive evolves , it undergoes repeated stages where fusion in the core stops , and the core collapses until the pressure and temperature are sufficient to begin the next stage of fusion , reigniting to halt collapse . 
 = = Core collapse = = 
 The factor limiting this process is the amount of energy that is released through fusion , which is dependent on the binding energy that holds together these atomic nuclei . Each additional step produces progressively heavier nuclei , which release progressively less energy when fusing . In addition , from carbon @-@ burning onwards , energy loss via neutrino production becomes significant , leading to a higher rate of reaction than would otherwise take place . This continues until nickel @-@ 56 is produced , which decays radioactively into cobalt @-@ 56 and then iron @-@ 56 over the course of a few months . As iron and nickel have the highest binding energy per nucleon of all the elements , energy cannot be produced at the core by fusion , and a nickel @-@ iron core grows . This core is under huge gravitational pressure . As there is no fusion to further raise the star 's temperature to support it against collapse , it is supported only by degeneracy pressure of electrons . In this state , matter is so dense that further compaction would require electrons to occupy the same energy states . However , this is forbidden for identical fermion particles , such as the electron – a phenomenon called the Pauli exclusion principle . 
 When the core 's mass exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1 @.@ 4 M ☉ , degeneracy pressure can no longer support it , and catastrophic collapse ensues . The outer part of the core reaches velocities of up to 70 @,@ 000 km / s ( 23 % of the speed of light ) as it collapses toward the center of the star . The rapidly shrinking core heats up , producing high @-@ energy gamma rays that decompose iron nuclei into helium nuclei and free neutrons via photodisintegration . As the core 's density increases , it becomes energetically favorable for electrons and protons to merge via inverse beta decay , producing neutrons and elementary particles called neutrinos . Because neutrinos rarely interact with normal matter , they can escape from the core , carrying away energy and further accelerating the collapse , which proceeds over a timescale of milliseconds . As the core detaches from the outer layers of the star , some of these neutrinos are absorbed by the star 's outer layers , beginning the supernova explosion . 
 For Type II supernovae , the collapse is eventually halted by short @-@ range repulsive neutron @-@ neutron interactions , mediated by the strong force , as well as by degeneracy pressure of neutrons , at a density comparable to that of an atomic nucleus . When the collapse stops , the infalling matter rebounds , producing a shock wave that propagates outward . The energy from this shock dissociates heavy elements within the core . This reduces the energy of the shock , which can stall the explosion within the outer core . 
 The core collapse phase is so dense and energetic that only neutrinos are able to escape . As the protons and electrons combine to form neutrons by means of electron capture , an electron neutrino is produced . In a typical Type II supernova , the newly formed neutron core has an initial temperature of about 100 billion Kelvin , 104 times the temperature of the sun 's core . Much of this thermal energy must be shed for a stable neutron star to form , otherwise the neutrons would " boil away " . This is accomplished by a further release of neutrinos . These ' thermal ' neutrinos form as neutrino @-@ antineutrino pairs of all flavors , and total several times the number of electron @-@ capture neutrinos . The two neutrino production mechanisms convert the gravitational potential energy of the collapse into a ten @-@ second neutrino burst , releasing about 1046 joules ( 100 foe ) . 
 Through a process that is not clearly understood , about 1 % , or 1044 joules ( 1 foe ) , of the energy released ( in the form of neutrinos ) is reabsorbed by the stalled shock , producing the supernova explosion . Neutrinos generated by a supernova were observed in the case of Supernova 1987A , leading astrophysicists to conclude that the core collapse picture is basically correct . The water @-@ based <unk> II and <unk> instruments detected <unk> of thermal origin , while the gallium @-@ 71 @-@ based <unk> instrument detected neutrinos ( lepton number = 1 ) of either thermal or electron @-@ capture origin . 
 When the progenitor star is below about 20 M ☉ – depending on the strength of the explosion and the amount of material that falls back – the degenerate remnant of a core collapse is a neutron star . Above this mass , the remnant collapses to form a black hole . The theoretical limiting mass for this type of core collapse scenario is about 40 – 50 M ☉ . Above that mass , a star is believed to collapse directly into a black hole without forming a supernova explosion , although uncertainties in models of supernova collapse make calculation of these limits uncertain . 
 = = Theoretical models = = 
 The Standard Model of particle physics is a theory which describes three of the four known fundamental interactions between the elementary particles that make up all matter . This theory allows predictions to be made about how particles will interact under many conditions . The energy per particle in a supernova is typically one to one hundred and fifty <unk> ( tens to hundreds of MeV ) . The per @-@ particle energy involved in a supernova is small enough that the predictions gained from the Standard Model of particle physics are likely to be basically correct . But the high densities may require corrections to the Standard Model . In particular , Earth @-@ based particle accelerators can produce particle interactions which are of much higher energy than are found in supernovae , but these experiments involve individual particles interacting with individual particles , and it is likely that the high densities within the supernova will produce novel effects . The interactions between neutrinos and the other particles in the supernova take place with the weak nuclear force , which is believed to be well understood . However , the interactions between the protons and neutrons involve the strong nuclear force , which is much less well understood . 
 The major unsolved problem with Type II supernovae is that it is not understood how the burst of neutrinos transfers its energy to the rest of the star producing the shock wave which causes the star to explode . From the above discussion , only one percent of the energy needs to be transferred to produce an explosion , but explaining how that one percent of transfer occurs has proven very difficult , even though the particle interactions involved are believed to be well understood . In the 1990s , one model for doing this involved convective overturn , which suggests that convection , either from neutrinos from below , or infalling matter from above , completes the process of destroying the progenitor star . Heavier elements than iron are formed during this explosion by neutron capture , and from the pressure of the neutrinos pressing into the boundary of the " <unk> " , seeding the surrounding space with a cloud of gas and dust which is richer in heavy elements than the material from which the star originally formed . 
 Neutrino physics , which is modeled by the Standard Model , is crucial to the understanding of this process . The other crucial area of investigation is the hydrodynamics of the plasma that makes up the dying star ; how it behaves during the core collapse determines when and how the " shock wave " forms and when and how it " stalls " and is reenergized . 
 In fact , some theoretical models incorporate a hydrodynamical instability in the stalled shock known as the " Standing Accretion Shock Instability " ( SASI ) . This instability comes about as a consequence of non @-@ spherical perturbations oscillating the stalled shock thereby deforming it . The SASI is often used in tandem with neutrino theories in computer simulations for re @-@ energizing the stalled shock . 
 Computer models have been very successful at calculating the behavior of Type II supernovae when the shock has been formed . By ignoring the first second of the explosion , and assuming that an explosion is started , astrophysicists have been able to make detailed predictions about the elements produced by the supernova and of the expected light curve from the supernova . 
 = = Light curves for Type II @-@ L and Type II @-@ P supernovae = = 
 When the spectrum of a Type II supernova is examined , it normally displays Balmer absorption lines – reduced flux at the characteristic frequencies where hydrogen atoms absorb energy . The presence of these lines is used to distinguish this category of supernova from a Type I supernova . 
 When the luminosity of a Type II supernova is plotted over a period of time , it shows a characteristic rise to a peak brightness followed by a decline . These light curves have an average decay rate of 0 @.@ 008 magnitudes per day ; much lower than the decay rate for Type Ia supernovae . Type II are sub @-@ divided into two classes , depending on the shape of the light curve . The light curve for a Type II @-@ L supernova shows a steady ( linear ) decline following the peak brightness . By contrast , the light curve of a Type II @-@ P supernova has a distinctive flat stretch ( called a plateau ) during the decline ; representing a period where the luminosity decays at a slower rate . The net luminosity decay rate is lower , at 0 @.@ 0075 magnitudes per day for Type II @-@ P , compared to 0 @.@ 012 magnitudes per day for Type II @-@ L. 
 The difference in the shape of the light curves is believed to be caused , in the case of Type II @-@ L supernovae , by the expulsion of most of the hydrogen envelope of the progenitor star . The plateau phase in Type II @-@ P supernovae is due to a change in the opacity of the exterior layer . The shock wave ionizes the hydrogen in the outer envelope – stripping the electron from the hydrogen atom – resulting in a significant increase in the opacity . This prevents photons from the inner parts of the explosion from escaping . When the hydrogen cools sufficiently to recombine , the outer layer becomes transparent . 
 = = Type IIn supernovae = = 
 The " n " denotes narrow , which indicates the presence of intermediate or very narrow width H emission lines in the spectra . In the intermediate width case , the ejecta from the explosion may be interacting strongly with gas around the star – the circumstellar medium . The estimated circumstellar density required to explain the observational properties is much higher than that expected from the standard stellar evolution theory . It is generally assumed that the high circumstellar density is due to the high mass @-@ loss rates of the SN IIn progenitors . The estimated mass @-@ loss rates are typically higher than 10 − 3 M ⊙ yr − 1 . There are indications that they originate as stars similar to Luminous blue variables with large mass losses before exploding . SN <unk> and SN <unk> are famous examples of Type IIn ; SN 2006gy , an extremely energetic supernova , may be another example . 
 = = Type IIb supernovae = = 
 A Type IIb supernova has a weak hydrogen line in its initial spectrum , which is why it is classified as a Type II . However , later on the H emission becomes undetectable , and there is also a second peak in the light curve that has a spectrum which more closely resembles a Type Ib supernova . The progenitor could have been a giant star which lost most of its hydrogen envelope due to interactions with a companion in a binary system , leaving behind the core that consisted almost entirely of helium . As the ejecta of a Type IIb expands , the hydrogen layer quickly becomes more transparent and reveals the deeper layers . The classic example of a Type IIb supernova is Supernova <unk> , while another example is Cassiopeia A. The IIb class was first introduced ( as a theoretical concept ) by <unk> & <unk> 1987 . 
 = = Hypernovae ( <unk> ) = = 
 Hypernovae are a rare type of supernova substantially more luminous and energetic than standard supernovae . Examples are <unk> ( type Ic ) and <unk> ( type IIn ) . Hypernovae are produced by more than one type of event : relativistic jets during formation of a black hole from fallback of material onto the neutron star core , the collapsar model ; interaction with a dense envelope of circumstellar material , the CSM model ; the highest mass pair instability supernovae ; possibly others such as binary and quark star model . 
 Stars with initial masses between about 25 and 90 times the sun develop cores large enough that after a supernova explosion , some material will fall back onto the neutron star core and create a black hole . In many cases this reduces the luminosity of the supernova , and above 90 M ☉ the star collapses directly into a black hole without a supernova explosion . However , if the progenitor is spinning quickly enough the infalling material generates relativistic jets that emit more energy than the original explosion . They may also be seen directly if beamed towards us , giving the impression of an even more luminous object . In some cases these can produce gamma @-@ ray bursts , although not all gamma @-@ ray bursts are from supernovae . 
 In some cases a type II supernova occurs when the star is surrounded by a very dense cloud of material , most likely expelled during luminous blue variable eruptions . This material is shocked by the explosion and becomes more luminous than a standard supernova . It is likely that there is a range of luminosities for these type IIn supernovae with only the brightest qualifying as a hypernova . 
 Pair instability supernovae occur when an oxygen core in an extremely massive star becomes hot enough that gamma rays spontaneously produce electron @-@ positron pairs . This causes the core to collapse , but where the collapse of an iron core causes endothermic fusion to heavier elements , the collapse of an oxygen core creates runaway exothermic fusion which completely <unk> the star . The total energy emitted depends on the initial mass , with much of the core being converted to 56Ni and ejected which then powers the supernova for many months . At the lower end stars of about 140 M ☉ produce supernovae that are long @-@ lived but otherwise typical , while the highest mass stars of around 250 M ☉ produce supernovae that are extremely luminous and also very long lived ; hypernovae . More massive stars die by photodisintegration . Only population III stars , with very low metallicity , can reach this stage . Stars with more heavy elements are more opaque and blow away their outer layers until they are small enough to explode as a normal type Ib / c supernova . It is thought that even in our own galaxy , mergers of old low metallicity stars may form massive stars capable of creating a pair instability supernova . 
 = Pulveroboletus ravenelii = 
 Pulveroboletus ravenelii , commonly known as Ravenel 's bolete or the powdery sulfur bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 1853 , the widely distributed species is known from Asia , Australia , North America , Central America , and South America . Mycorrhizal with oak , the fungus fruits on the ground singly , scattered , or in groups in woods . Fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have convex to flat , yellowish to brownish @-@ red caps up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter . On the cap underside , the pore surface is bright yellow before turning dingy yellow to grayish brown with age ; it stains greenish blue then grayish brown after injury . A cottony and powdery partial veil remains as a ring on the stipe . The mushrooms are edible , and have been used in traditional Chinese medicine and for mushroom dyeing . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described as Boletus ravenelii by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1853 . Specimens were sent to them by American botanist Henry William Ravenel , who collected them in South Carolina . They considered the bolete " a most splendid species closely allied to B. <unk> , and , like that , remarkable for the <unk> veil . " The specific epithet honors Ravenel . William Alphonso Murrill transferred the fungus to the genus Pulveroboletus in 1909 , giving it the name by which it is known today . The mushroom is commonly known as " Ravenel 's bolete " or the " powdery sulfur bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is rounded to convex before flattening with age , and attains a diameter of 1 – 10 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) . Its margin is curved inward when young , and usually has hanging remnants of the partial veil . The surface is dry and initially coated with fine particles , while later it develops fine hairs or small scales that are pressed down flat on the surface ; in maturity the surface usually develops fine cracks or wrinkles . It is bright yellow , later turning to orange @-@ red to brownish red . The flesh is white to pale yellow , and , when cut , will slowly stain pale blue , then dingy yellow to pale brown . Its flesh has been described variously as indistinct , or bitter tasting with an odor of hickory leaves . The pore surface is bright yellow before turning dingy yellow to grayish brown with age . It stains greenish blue then grayish brown after being bruised or injured . The pores , which number about 1 – 3 per millimeter , are angular to almost circular . The tubes comprising the pore surface are 5 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) deep . The yellow stem measures 4 @.@ 5 – 14 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 – 5 @.@ 7 in ) long by 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , and is roughly equal in width throughout or somewhat thicker near the base . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and , above the level of the base , the surface is covered with minute hairs pressed flat against the surface . The partial veil , also bright yellow , is cottony and powdery , and remains as a ring on the upper portion of the stem , although in some specimens it merges gradually with the stipe surface and becomes inconspicuous . There is white mycelium at the stipe base . 
 Pulveroboletus ravenelii produces an olive @-@ grey to olive @-@ brown spore print . Spores are elliptical to oval , smooth , and measure 8 – 10 by 4 – 5 μm . The hyphal tissue in the hymenophore is inamyloid and bilateral , meaning it diverges downward from the flesh toward the edge of the hymenophore , away from a central strand . The tubes have scattered cystidia on the walls ( pleurocystidia ) and abundant cystidia on the edges ( cheilocystidia ) . The hyphae in the cap cuticle are arranged as an ixotrichodermium – long and typically multi @-@ celled , with erect hyphae embedded in a gelatinous matrix . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Pulveroboletus ravenelii grow on the ground singly , scattered , or in groups in woods under conifers . Preferred mycorrhizal plant hosts include pine , hemlock , and rhododendron . Fruiting occurs from July to October . In North America , it is distributed from eastern Canada extending south to the Gulf of Mexico , and west to Texas , Michigan , and California . The bolete was reported from a Mexican beech ( Fagus mexicana ) forest in Hidalgo , Mexico in 2010 . It has also been recorded from Costa Rica and Colombia . In Asia , it has been found in Indonesia and China . It has also been recorded from northeast Australia . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Pulveroboletus ravenelii mushrooms are edible . They have been used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat lumbago , numbed limbs , and as an <unk> . Bioactive compounds that have been identified from the fruit bodies include <unk> A , <unk> B , <unk> acid , and <unk> . Mushrooms are also used in mushroom dyeing to produce the colors yellow , gold , greenish yellow , orange , or olive , depending on the mordant used . 
 = Johnny 's Theme = 
 " Johnny 's Theme " is an instrumental jazz song played as the opening theme of The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson from the show 's inception in 1962 through its finale in 1992 . The piece was composed by Paul Anka and Johnny Carson , based on a previous composition by Anka . It was performed by The Tonight Show Band , which released an arrangement by Tommy Newsom in 1986 as part of its Grammy Award @-@ winning eponymous debut album . The single release also garnered a Grammy nomination . 
 " Johnny 's Theme " has since been released in cover versions and on compilation albums . It has appeared in several films , and been played live in concert by school bands and by amateur and professional musicians , including Doc Severinsen 's Big Band . 
 = = Development and evolution = = 
 = = = 1959 : Two songs = = = 
 " Johnny 's Theme " began life as " Toot Sweet " , a pop instrumental composed in 1959 by Paul Anka and recorded by Tutti 's Trumpets . It was released on Disney 's Buena Vista label as the B @-@ side to The Camarata Strings ' single " Lost In a Fog " . 
 " Tutti " Camarata , who was Annette Funicello 's producer at the time , asked Anka to write some songs for Funicello 's first album to follow her work on The Mickey Mouse Club . Anka added lyrics to " Toot Sweet " and published them under the title " It 's Really Love " , and the song was released as part of Annette Sings Anka . He recorded his own version of " It 's Really Love " that same year for the French film <unk> Femmes ; it was released on seven @-@ inch EPs in France , Italy and Spain . 
 = = = 1962 : Johnny Carson = = = 
 When Johnny Carson , a fan of jazz music , was preparing to take over as the permanent host of The Tonight Show starting in October 1962 , he recognized that he would need a theme song . Carson and Anka had worked together in England on the television special An Evening with Paul Anka in 1961 ; when they happened to meet up again in New York City the following year , Carson manager Al Bruno mentioned needing a theme . 
 Anka created a new instrumental arrangement for " It 's Really Love " and sent a demo to Carson and Ed McMahon , who were in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , making preparations for the show . McMahon said " it was the first time either one of us heard [ the song ] — and magic . " 
 = = = 1962 – 92 : The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson = = = 
 Shortly after sending the demo , Anka received a telephone call and was told that Tonight Show bandleader <unk> Henderson was angry because Carson wanted to use a theme song written by " a 20 @-@ year @-@ old kid " . Anka said he then offered to let Carson write and publish new lyrics in order to claim a songwriter 's credit , along with half of the royalties every time the song was played . Those lyrics were never used on the show . Anka estimated that " Johnny 's Theme " was played live on Carson 's Tonight Show more than 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 times over the course of 30 years . As its original composer , Anka also was paid each time the song was broadcast , earning each man an average of about US $ 200 @,@ 000 per year . 
 The song was retired along with Carson in 1992 ; his iteration of The Tonight Show was called " the last widely public big @-@ band forum " . Incoming bandleader Branford Marsalis composed a more " funky " theme for successor Jay Leno because " a swing tune doesn 't reflect Jay at all [ and ] jazz doesn 't come to mind either . " 
 = = Releases = = 
 Henry Mancini and his orchestra recorded a 2 : 44 arrangement of " Johnny 's Theme " in 1972 for the German EP Theme from Nicholas and Alexandra . A version also appeared as part of Mancini 's 2010 compilation Big Screen , Little Screen . Paul Anka produced a recording by Top Brass for Buddah Records in 1973 . Lawrence Welk and his orchestra performed the song for their 1976 album Nadia 's Theme . 
 Doc Severinsen and the band recorded " Johnny 's Theme " and 12 other tracks for their album The Tonight Show Band , released in 1986 . Amherst Records also released the track as a single , titled " Johnny 's Theme ( The Tonight Show Theme ) " , which debuted at # 27 on the Radio & Records Jazz Top 30 chart . The song has been released on compilations of television themes , the 1995 compilation 25 Years of Chrysalis Music , and The Very Best of Doc Severinsen ( 1998 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Johnny 's Theme " earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Instrumental Performance , losing to " Top Gun Anthem " at the awards presentation in 1987 . The Tonight Show Band was honored for Best Jazz Instrumental Performance , Big Band . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2005 , Doc Severinsen , Carson 's bandleader starting in 1967 , said the song worked so well because it was " accessible . People could understand what it was , and it was associated with Johnny . " Larry King called it " one of the most familiar themes in American television history . " Paul Anka said the song was played for only a short time each night , " but everybody knows it . Simplicity is indeed royal . " 
 The Washington Post in 2008 said the days of the television theme song were fading into nostalgia , though they " used to abound " , with or without lyrics . For example , " Anka 's Tonight Show theme was inseparable from late night and Johnny Carson . " 
 " Johnny 's Theme " has been included in numerous films , including This Is My Life , Isn 't She Great and Talk to Me . The song has been performed live by musicians at varying skill levels , from student to professional . Iowa State Cyclones men 's basketball coach Johnny Orr came onto the court pumping his fist as the pep band played " Johnny 's Theme " before games at the Hilton Coliseum . Orr 's tenure ran from 1980 to 1994 . 
 Doc Severinsen has kept the song alive on tour . His Big Band opened its shows by playing the theme in its entirety , " just to let you know who we are . " Severinsen and The Roots played " Johnny 's Theme " during a 2015 episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon . 
 = Blue Velvet ( film ) = 
 Blue Velvet is a 1986 American mystery film , written and directed by David Lynch . Blending psychological horror with film noir , the film stars Kyle MacLachlan , Isabella Rossellini , Dennis Hopper and Laura Dern . The title is taken from Bobby Vinton 's 1963 song of the same name . Although initially receiving a divided critical response , the film is now widely acclaimed as one of the greatest films of the 1980s , and earned Lynch his second Academy Award nomination for Best Director . As an example of a director casting against the norm , Blue Velvet is also noted for re @-@ launching Hopper 's career and for providing Rossellini with a dramatic outlet beyond the work as a fashion model and a cosmetics spokeswoman , something for which she had until then been known . 
 After the commercial and critical failure of Lynch 's Dune ( 1984 ) , he made attempts at developing a more " personal story " , somewhat characteristic of the surrealist style he displayed in his debut Eraserhead ( 1977 ) . The screenplay of Blue Velvet had been passed around multiple times in the late 1970s and early 1980s , with many major studios declining it because of its strong sexual and violent content . The independent studio De Laurentiis Entertainment Group , owned at the time by Italian film producer Dino De Laurentiis , agreed to finance and produce the film . 
 Since its initial theatrical release , Blue Velvet has achieved cult status , generated significant academic attention with regard to its thematic symbolism and is widely regarded as one of Lynch 's best works . The film is consistently ranked among the greatest American films of all time by various publications , including Sight & Sound , Time Magazine , Entertainment Weekly and BBC Magazine . In 2008 , Blue Velvet was chosen by the American Film Institute as one of the greatest mystery films ever made . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jeffrey Beaumont ( Kyle MacLachlan ) returns to his logging home town of Lumberton , North Carolina from Oak Lake College after his father suffers a near @-@ fatal stroke . While walking home from the hospital , he cuts through a vacant lot and discovers a severed ear . Jeffrey takes the ear to police detective John Williams ( George Dickerson ) and becomes reacquainted with the detective 's daughter , Sandy ( Laura Dern ) . She tells him details about the ear case and a suspicious woman , Dorothy Vallens ( Isabella Rossellini ) , who may be connected to the case . Increasingly curious , Jeffrey enters Dorothy 's apartment by posing as an exterminator , and while Dorothy is distracted by a man dressed in a yellow suit at her door ( whom Jeffrey later refers to as the Yellow Man ) , Jeffrey steals her spare key . 
 Jeffrey and Sandy attend Dorothy 's nightclub act , in which she sings " Blue Velvet " , and leave early so Jeffrey can sneak into her apartment to snoop . He hurriedly hides in a closet when she returns home . However , Dorothy , wielding a knife , discovers him and threatens to kill him . Believing his curiosity is merely sexual and aroused by his voyeurism , Dorothy makes Jeffrey undress at knifepoint and begins to <unk> him before their encounter is interrupted by a knock at the door . Dorothy hides Jeffrey in the closet . From there he witnesses the visitor , Frank Booth ( Dennis Hopper ) , inflict his bizarre sexual proclivities — which include inhaling an unidentified gas ( possibly amyl nitrite ) , dry humping , and sadomasochism — upon Dorothy . Frank is an extremely foul @-@ mouthed , violent sociopath whose orgasmic climax is a fit of both pleasure and rage . He continually refers to her as " Mommy " and to himself as both the " Daddy " and the " Baby " , who " want to fuck . " Frank has kidnapped Dorothy 's husband and son to force her to perform sexual favors ; to " Do it for van Gogh . " When Frank leaves , a sad and desperate Dorothy tries to seduce Jeffrey again and demands that he hit her , but when he refuses , she tells him to leave . When Jeffrey moves to leave , she asks him to stay , though he leaves anyway . 
 Jeffrey relays his experience to Sandy , asking her why there are people like Frank . Sandy in turn tells him of a wonderful dream she had about robins that she interprets as a sign of hope for humanity . Jeffrey and Sandy find themselves attracted to each other , though Sandy has a boyfriend . 
 Jeffrey again visits Dorothy 's apartment and she tells him that although she knows nothing about him , she has been yearning for him . Jeffrey attends another of Dorothy 's performances at the club , where she sings the same song . At the club , Jeffrey spots Frank in the audience fondling a piece of blue velvet fabric he cut from Dorothy 's robe . Jeffrey follows Frank and spends the next few days spying on him . Shortly afterwards , two men that Jeffrey calls the Well @-@ Dressed Man and the Yellow Man exit an industrial building that Frank frequently visits . Jeffrey concludes the men are criminal associates of Frank , and tells his new findings to Sandy . The two briefly kiss , though she feels uncomfortable about going any further . Jeffrey immediately visits Dorothy again , and the two have sex . However , when he refuses to hit her , she pressures him , becoming more emotional . In a blind rage he knocks her backwards and is instantly horrified , but Dorothy derives pleasure from it . 
 Afterwards , Frank catches Dorothy and Jeffrey together and forces them both to accompany him to the apartment of Ben ( Dean Stockwell ) , his suave , effeminate partner in crime who is holding Dorothy 's son . Ben lip @-@ syncs a performance of Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " , sending Frank into maudlin sadness , then rage . Frank takes Jeffrey to a lumber yard and when he molests Dorothy , Jeffrey stands up to Frank by punching him . Frank 's cronies drag Jeffrey out of the car and Frank kisses Jeffrey 's face , intimidates him , and then savagely beats him to the overture of " In Dreams " . Jeffrey wakes the next day at the same place and walks home , overcome with guilt and despair . He goes to the police station , where he notices that Sandy 's father 's partner is the Yellow Man — an officer named Lieutenant Detective Tom Gordon ( Fred Pickler ) . Later , at Sandy 's home , her father is amazed by Jeffrey 's story , but warns Jeffrey to stop his amateur sleuthing lest he endanger himself and the investigation . Jeffrey and Sandy go to a dance together and profess their love , only to be confronted by Sandy 's boyfriend . A confrontation is averted when the group finds Dorothy — naked , battered , and distressed — on Jeffrey 's front lawn . Barely conscious , Dorothy reveals her intimacy with Jeffrey , causing Sandy to become upset and to slap Jeffrey , although she later forgives him . 
 Jeffrey insists on returning to Dorothy 's apartment and tells Sandy to immediately send the police there , including her father . At Dorothy 's apartment , Jeffrey finds Dorothy 's husband ( Don Vallens ) , who is dead from a gunshot to the head and identifiable by his missing ear , as well as the Yellow Man ( Gordon ) , who bears a gruesome head wound and appears to have suffered a crude lobotomy . When Jeffrey tries to leave , he sees the Well @-@ Dressed Man coming up the stairs and recognizes him as Frank in disguise . Jeffrey talks to Detective Williams over the Yellow Man 's police radio , but lies about his location inside the apartment . Frank enters the apartment and brags about hearing Jeffrey 's location over his own police radio . While Frank searches for him in the wrong room , Jeffrey retrieves the Yellow Man 's gun and hides in the same closet in which he hid during his first visit to the apartment . Frank fires sporadically , knocking over the dead Yellow Man , who had still been standing up , and when he opens the closet door , Jeffrey fatally shoots him in the head . Detective Williams , gun drawn , enters with Sandy a moment later . Jeffrey and Sandy now go ahead with their relationship and note the unusual appearance of robins in their town . A montage sequence ends the film , which shows Dorothy and her son reunited . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The film 's story originated from three ideas that crystallized in the filmmaker 's mind over a period of time starting as early as 1973 . The first idea was only " a feeling " and the title Blue Velvet , Lynch told Cineaste in 1987 . The second idea was an image of a severed , human ear lying in a field . " I don 't know why it had to be an ear . Except it needed to be an opening of a part of the body , a hole into something else ... The ear sits on the head and goes right into the mind so it felt perfect " , Lynch remarked in an interview . The third idea was Bobby Vinton 's classic rendition of the song Blue Velvet and " the mood that came with that song a mood , a time , and things that were of that time . " Lynch eventually spent two years writing two drafts , which , he stated , were not very good . The problem with them , Lynch has said , was that " there was maybe all the unpleasantness in the film but nothing else . A lot was not there . And so it went away for a while . " 
 After completing The Elephant Man ( 1980 ) , Lynch met producer Richard Roth over coffee . Roth had read and enjoyed Lynch 's Ronnie Rocket script , but did not think it was something he wanted to produce . He asked Lynch if the filmmaker had any other scripts , but the director only had ideas . " I told him I had always wanted to sneak into a girl 's room to watch her into the night and that , maybe , at one point or another , I would see something that would be the clue to a murder mystery . Roth loved the idea and asked me to write a treatment . I went home and thought of the ear in the field . " Production was announced in August 1984 . Lynch wrote two more drafts before he was satisfied with the script of the film . Conditions at this point were ideal for Lynch 's film : he had cut a deal with Dino De Laurentiis that gave him complete artistic freedom and final cut privileges , with the stipulation that the filmmaker take a cut in his salary and work with a budget of only $ 6 million . This deal meant that Blue Velvet was the smallest film on the De Laurentiis ' slate . Consequently , Lynch would be left mostly unsupervised during production . " After Dune I was down so far that anything was up ! So it was just a euphoria . And when you work with that kind of feeling , you can take chances . You can experiment . " Because the material was completely different from anything that would be considered mainstream at the time , Laurentiis had to start his own company to distribute it . 
 The cast of Blue Velvet included several then @-@ relatively unknown actors . Isabella Rossellini had gained some exposure before the film for her Lancôme ads in the early 1980s and for being the daughter of actress Ingrid Bergman and Italian film director Roberto Rossellini . Dennis Hopper was the biggest " name " in the film , having starred in Easy Rider ( 1969 ) , while Kyle MacLachlan had played the central role in Lynch 's critical and commercial failure Dune ( 1984 ) , a science fiction epic based on the novel . MacLachlan later became a recurring collaborator with Lynch , who remarked : " Kyle plays innocents who are interested in the mysteries of life . He 's the person you trust enough to go into a strange world with . " Dennis Hopper — said to be Lynch 's third choice — accepted the role , reportedly having exclaimed , " I 've got to play Frank ! I am Frank ! " as Hopper confirmed in the Blue Velvet " making @-@ of " documentary The Mysteries of Love , produced for the 2002 special edition . For the role of Dorothy Vallens , Lynch met Isabella Rossellini at a restaurant , and she accepted the role . Laura Dern , then just nineteen years old , was cast after various successful actresses at the time turned it down , including Molly Ringwald . 
 The scene in which Dorothy appears naked outside was inspired by a real @-@ life experience Lynch had during childhood when he and his brother saw a naked woman walking down a neighborhood street at night . The experience was so traumatic to the young Lynch that it made him cry , and he had never forgotten it . Principal photography of Blue Velvet began in February 1986 and completed in April . The film was shot at EUE / Screen Gems studio in Wilmington , North Carolina , which also provided the exterior scenes of Lumberton . The scene with a raped and battered Dorothy proved to be particularly challenging . Several townspeople arrived to watch the filming with picnic baskets and rugs , against the wishes of Rossellini and Lynch . However , they continued filming as normal , and when Lynch yelled cut , the townspeople had left . As a result , police told Lynch they were no longer permitted to shoot in any public areas of Wilmington . 
 Lynch 's original rough cut ran for approximately four hours . He was contractually obligated to deliver a two @-@ hour movie by De Laurentiis and cut many small subplots and character scenes . He also made cuts at the request of the MPAA . For example , when Frank slaps Dorothy after the first rape scene , the audience was supposed to see Frank actually hitting her . Instead , the film cuts away to Jeffrey in the closet , wincing at what he has just seen . This cut was made to satisfy the MPAA 's concerns about violence . Lynch thought that the change only made the scene more disturbing . Lynch announced in a radio interview on January 18 , 2011 , that footage from the deleted scenes , long thought lost , had been discovered . It later appeared on the 2011 special edition Blu @-@ ray disc release of the film . The final cut produced by Lynch runs for just under two hours . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Despite Blue Velvet 's initial appearance as a mystery , the film operates on a number of thematic levels . The film owes a large debt to 1950s film noir , containing and exploring such conventions as the femme fatale ( Dorothy Vallens ) , a seemingly unstoppable villain ( Frank Booth ) , and the questionable moral outlook of the hero ( Jeffrey Beaumont ) , as well as its unusual use of shadowy , sometimes dark cinematography . Blue Velvet represents and establishes Lynch 's famous " askew vision , " and introduces several common elements of Lynch 's work , some of which would later become his trademarks , including distorted characters , a polarized world , and debilitating damage to the skull or brain . Perhaps the most significant " Lynchian " trademark in the film is the depiction of unearthing a dark underbelly in a seemingly idealized small town ; Jeffrey even proclaims in the film that he is " seeing something that was always hidden " , alluding to the film 's plot central idea . Lynch 's characterization of films , symbols , and motifs have become well @-@ known , and his particular style , characterised largely in Blue Velvet for the first time , has been written about extensively using descriptions like " dreamlike " , " <unk> " , " dark " , and " oddball " . Red curtains also show up in key scenes , specifically in Dorothy 's apartment , which have since become a Lynch trademark . The film has been compared to Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho ( 1960 ) because of its stark treatment of psychotic evil . The premise of both films is curiosity , leading to an investigation that draws the lead characters into a hidden , voyeuristic underworld of crime . 
 The film 's thematic framework hearkens back to Poe , James , and early gothic fiction , as well as films such as Shadow of a Doubt ( 1943 ) and The Night of the Hunter ( 1955 ) and the entire notion of film noir . Lynch has called it a " film about things that are hidden — within a small city and within people . " Like many other Lynch films , Blue Velvet is immersed in pop culture imagery , both from the 1950s and the 1960s , as well as the 1980s . 
 Feminist psychoanalytic film theorist Laura Mulvey argues that Blue Velvet establishes a metaphorical Oedipal family — " the child " , Jeffrey Beaumont , and his " parents " , Frank Booth and Dorothy Vallens — through deliberate references to film noir and its underlying Oedipal theme . The resulting violence , she claims , can be read as symbolic of domestic violence within real families . For instance , Frank 's violent acts can be seen to reflect the different types of abuse within families , and the control he has over Dorothy might represent the hold an abusive husband has over his wife . Michael Atkinson reads Jeffrey as an innocent youth who is both horrified by the violence inflicted by Frank , but also tempted by it as the means of possessing Dorothy for himself . Atkinson takes a Freudian approach to the film ; considering it to be an expression of the traumatised innocence which characterises Lynch 's work . He claims that " Dorothy represents the sexual force of the mother [ figure ] because she is forbidden and because she becomes the object of the unhealthy , infantile impulses at work in Jeffrey 's subconscious " . 
 = = = Symbolism = = = 
 Symbolism is used very heavily in Blue Velvet . The most consistent symbolism in the film is an insect motif introduced at the end of the first scene , when the camera zooms in on a well @-@ kept suburban lawn until it unearths a swarming underground nest of disgusting bugs . This is generally recognized as a metaphor for the seedy underworld that Jeffrey will soon discover under the surface of his own suburban , <unk> paradise . The severed ear he finds is being overrun by black ants . The bug motif is recurrent throughout the film , most notably in the bug @-@ like gas mask that Frank wears , but also the excuse that Jeffrey uses to gain access to Dorothy 's apartment : he claims to be an insect exterminator . One of Frank 's sinister accomplices is also consistently identified through the yellow jacket he wears , possibly reminiscent of the name of a type of wasp . Finally , a robin eating a bug on a fence becomes a topic of discussion in the last scene of the film . The robin , mentioned earlier by Sandy when she recounted her dream , represents love conquering evil . 
 The severed ear that Jeffrey discovers is also a key symbolic element , leading Jeffrey into danger . Indeed , just as Jeffrey 's troubles begin , the audience is treated to a nightmarish sequence in which the camera zooms into the canal of the severed , decomposing ear . Notably , the camera does not reemerge from the ear canal until the end of the film . When Jeffrey finally comes through his hellish ordeal unscathed , the ear canal shot is replayed , only in reverse , zooming out through Jeffrey 's own ear as he relaxes in his yard on a summer day . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Blue Velvet soundtrack was supervised by Angelo Badalamenti ( who makes a brief cameo appearance as the pianist at the Slow Club where Dorothy performs ) . The soundtrack makes heavy usage of vintage pop songs , such as Bobby Vinton 's " Blue Velvet " and Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " , juxtaposed with an orchestral score inspired by Shostakovich . During filming , Lynch placed speakers on set and in streets and played Shostakovich to set the mood he wanted to convey . The score makes direct quotations from Shostakovich 's 15th Symphony , which Lynch had been listening to regularly while writing the screenplay . Lynch had originally opted to use " Song To The Siren " by This Mortal Coil during the scene in which Sandy and Jeffrey share a dance , however he could not obtain the rights for the song at the time . He would go onto use this song in Lost Highway , eleven years later . 
 Entertainment Weekly ranked Blue Velvet 's soundtrack on its list of the 100 Greatest Film Soundtracks , at the 100th position . Critic John Alexander wrote , " the haunting soundtrack accompanies the title credits , then weaves through the narrative , accentuating the noir mood of the film " . Lynch worked with music composer Angelo Badalamenti for the first time in this film and asked him to write a score that had to be " like Shostakovich , be very Russian , but make it the most beautiful thing but make it dark and a little bit scary " . Badalamenti 's success with Blue Velvet would lead him to contribute to all of Lynch 's future full @-@ length films until Inland Empire . Also included in the sound team was long time Lynch collaborator Alan Splet , a sound editor and designer who had won an Academy Award for his work on The Black Stallion ( 1979 ) , and been nominated for Never Cry Wolf ( 1983 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Blue Velvet premiered in competition at the Montréal World Film Festival in August 1986 , and at the Toronto Film Festival on September 12 , 1986 , and a few days later in the United States . It debuted commercially in both countries on September 19 , 1986 , in 98 theatres across the United States . In its opening weekend , the film grossed a total of $ 789 @,@ 409 . It eventually expanded to another fifteen theatres , and domestically grossed a total of $ 8 @,@ 551 @,@ 228 . It was also released internationally , in Australia , most of West Germany , China , Canada , Hong Kong , and Japan , followed by subsequent video releases . The film performed well overseas , grossing $ 900 @,@ 000 in Australia , and $ 450 @,@ 139 in Hong Kong . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Blue Velvet received critical acclaim in the United States upon its release and currently has a " certified fresh " score of 94 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 62 reviews with an average rating of 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 . The critical consensus states " If audiences walk away from this subversive , surreal shocker not fully understanding the story , they might also walk away with a deeper perception of the potential of film storytelling . " The film also has a score of 75 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 14 critics indicating " Generally favorable reviews . " 
 Paul Attanasio of The Washington Post said " the film showcases a visual stylist utterly in command of his talents " and that Angelo Badalamenti " contributes an extraordinary score , slipping seamlessly from slinky jazz to violin figures to the romantic sweep of a classic Hollywood score " , but claimed that Lynch " isn 't interested in communicating , he 's interested in parading his personality . The movie doesn 't progress or deepen , it just gets weirder , and to no good end . " The New York Times critic Janet Maslin expressed her admiration for the film , and directed much praise toward the performances of Hopper and Rossellini : " Mr. Hopper and Miss Rossellini are so far outside the bounds of ordinary acting here that their performances are best understood in terms of sheer lack of inhibition ; both give themselves entirely over to the material , which seems to be exactly what 's called for . " She called it " an instant cult classic . " Maslin concluded by saying that Blue Velvet " is as fascinating as it is freakish . It confirms Mr. Lynch 's stature as an innovator , a superb technician , and someone best not encountered in a dark alley . " Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times called the film " the most brilliantly disturbing film ever to have its roots in small @-@ town American life . " She called it " shocking , visionary , rapturously controlled . " 
 Looking back in his Guardian / Observer review , critic Philip French wrote , " The film is wearing well and has attained a classic status without becoming respectable or losing its sense of danger . " Peter Travers , film critic for Rolling Stone , named Blue Velvet the best film of the 1980s , and referred to the film as an " American masterpiece . " Film critic Gene Siskel included Blue Velvet on his list of the best films of 1986 , at the fifth spot . 
 But Blue Velvet was not without its detractors . A general criticism from U.S. critics was the film 's often vulgar approach to sexuality and violence , which they claimed detracted from the film 's serious side . One of the film 's detractors , Roger Ebert , film critic of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , supported that view ; although he praised Isabella Rossellini 's performance as being " convincing and courageous " , he criticized how she was depicted in the film , even accusing David Lynch of misogyny : " degraded , slapped around , humiliated and undressed in front of the camera . And when you ask an actress to endure those experiences , you should keep your side of the bargain by putting her in an important film " . During an online Q & A session in 2007 , Ebert said he still had negativity regarding how Rossellini was depicted but said he should re @-@ visit Blue Velvet and that David Lynch was a good director . In a tweet honoring David Lynch 's birthday , Ebert later revealed though he views Lynch as a great director , his feelings remain unchanged about Blue Velvet . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Lynch was nominated for a Best Director Oscar for the film . Isabella Rossellini won an Independent Spirit Award for the Best Female Lead in 1987 . David Lynch and Dennis Hopper won a Los Angeles Film Critics Association award in 1987 for Blue Velvet in categories Best Director ( Lynch ) and Best Supporting Actor ( Hopper ) . In 1987 , National Society of Film Critics awarded Best Film , Best Director ( David Lynch ) , Best Cinematography ( Frederick Elmes ) , and Best Supporting Actor ( Dennis Hopper ) awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although it initially gained a relatively small theatrical audience in North America and was met with controversy over its artistic merit , Blue Velvet soon became the center of a " national firestorm " in 1986 , and over time achieved status as an American classic . In the late 1980s , and early 1990s , after its release on videotape , the film became a widely known cult film , well known for its dark depiction of a suburban America . Followed by myriad VHS , Laserdisc and DVD releases , the film became increasingly well @-@ known among American audiences . It marked the entrance of David Lynch into the Hollywood mainstream and the comeback of Dennis Hopper after a significant hiatus from work . Hopper 's performance and the character of Frank Booth itself has left an imprint on popular culture , with countless tributes , cultural references and parodies . The success of the film alone has helped propel Hollywood mainstream toward more graphic displays of previously censored themes , a similar case to Psycho ( 1960 ) , to which Blue Velvet has been frequently compared . It has become one of the most significant , well @-@ recognized films of its era , spawning countless imitations and parodies in media . The film 's dark , stylish and erotic production design has served as a benchmark for a number of films , parodies and even Lynch 's own later work , notably Twin Peaks ( 1990 – 91 ) , and Mulholland Drive ( 2001 ) . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine cited it as one of the most " influential American films " , as did Michael Atkinson , who dedicated a book to the film 's themes and motifs . 
 Blue Velvet now frequently appears in various critical assessments of all @-@ time great films , also ranked as one of the greatest films of the 1980s , one of the best examples of American surrealism and one of the finest examples of David Lynch 's work . In a poll of two American critics ranking the " most outstanding films of the decade " , Blue Velvet was placed third and fourth , behind Raging Bull ( 1980 ) , E.T. The Extra Terrestrial ( 1982 ) and the German film Wings of Desire ( 1987 ) . An Entertainment Weekly book special released in 1999 ranked Blue Velvet at thirty @-@ seventh greatest films of all time . The film was ranked by The Guardian in its list of the 100 Greatest Films . Film Four 's ranked it on their list of 100 Greatest Films . In a 2007 poll of the online film community held by Variety , Blue Velvet came in at the ninety @-@ fifth greatest film of all time . Total Film ranked Blue Velvet as one of the all @-@ time best films in both a critics list and a public poll , in 2006 and 2007 , respectively . In December 2002 , a UK film critics poll in Sight & Sound ranked the film fifth on their list of the 10 Best Films of the Last 25 Years . In a special Entertainment Weekly issue , 100 new film classics were chosen from 1983 to 2008 : Blue Velvet was ranked at fourth . 
 In addition to Blue Velvet 's various " all @-@ time greatest films " rankings , the American Film Institute has awarded the film three honors in its lists : ninety @-@ sixth on 100 Years ... 100 Thrills in 2001 , selecting cinema 's most thrilling moments and ranked Frank Booth thirty @-@ sixth of the 50 greatest villains in 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains in 2003 . In June 2008 , the AFI revealed its " Ten top Ten " — the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1 @,@ 500 people from the creative community . Blue Velvet was acknowledged as the eighth best film in the mystery genre . Premiere magazine listed Frank Booth , played by Dennis Hopper , as the fifty @-@ fourth on its list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time , calling him one of " the most monstrously funny creations in cinema history " . The film was ranked eighty @-@ fourth on Bravo Television 's four @-@ hour program 100 Scariest Movie Moments ( 2004 ) . It is frequently sampled musically and an array of bands and solo artists have taken their names and inspiration from the film . In August 2012 , Sight & Sound unveiled their latest list of the 250 greatest films of all time , with Blue Velvet ranking at sixty @-@ ninth . 
 Blue Velvet was also nominated for the following AFI lists : 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 " In Dreams " 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) 
 Blue Velvet was released on Blu @-@ ray on November 8 , 2011 , in a special 25th anniversary edition featuring never @-@ before @-@ seen deleted scenes . The film had previously been released on DVD in 1999 and 2002 by MGM Home Entertainment . In early 2015 , it was announced that a feature @-@ length documentary film entitled " Blue Velvet Revisited " , made up exclusively of behind the scenes footage , was in production for Autumn 2015 release . The film is based on extensive unreleased footage shot on set in 1985 by German filmmaker Peter Braatz , at David Lynch 's invitation . Cult With No Name , <unk> and John Foxx were commissioned to provide the soundtrack for the film ( which was released in October 2015 ) , and a collection of previously unreleased photos is also to be published . 
 Inspired by the film , baroque pop singer Lana Del Rey recorded a cover version of Bobby Vinton 's classic rendition of the song " Blue Velvet " in 2012 . Used to endorse clothing line H & M , a music video accompanied the track and aired as a television commercial . Filmed in Post @-@ war Americana , the video drew influence from Lynch and Blue Velvet . In the video , Del Rey plays the role of Dorothy Vallens , performing a private concert similar to the scene where Ben ( Dean Stockwell ) pantomimes " In Dreams " for Frank Booth . Del Rey 's version , however , has her lip @-@ synching " Blue Velvet " when a little person dressed as Frank Sinatra approaches and unplugs a hidden <unk> , revealing Del Rey as a fraud . When Lynch heard of the music video , he praised it , telling <unk> : " Lana Del Rey , she 's got some fantastic charisma and — this is a very interesting thing — it 's like she 's born out of another time . She 's got something that 's very appealing to people . And I didn 't know she was influenced by me ! " 
 " Now It 's Dark " , a song by American heavy metal band Anthrax on their 1988 album State of Euphoria , was directly inspired by the film , and specifically the character of Frank Booth . The same phrase appeared in the liner notes of Rush 's album Roll the Bones , and drummer Neil Peart later explained that " The phrase occurs in David Lynch 's comedy classic Blue Velvet . " 
 = Is Google Making Us Stupid ? = 
 " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? What the Internet is doing to our brains " ( alternatively " Is Google Making Us <unk> ? " ) is a magazine article by technology writer Nicholas G. Carr highly critical of the Internet 's effect on cognition . It was published in the July / August 2008 edition of The Atlantic magazine as a six @-@ page cover story . Carr 's main argument is that the Internet might have detrimental effects on cognition that diminish the capacity for concentration and contemplation . Despite the title , the article is not specifically targeted at Google , but more at the cognitive impact of the Internet and World Wide Web . Carr expanded his argument in The <unk> : What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains , a book published by W. W. Norton in June 2010 . 
 The essay was extensively discussed in the media and the blogosphere , with reactions to Carr 's argument being polarised . At the Britannica Blog , a part of the discussion focused on the apparent bias in Carr 's argument toward literary reading . In Carr 's view , reading on the Internet is generally of a shallower form in comparison with reading from printed books in which he believes a more intense and sustained form of reading is exercised . Elsewhere in the media , the Internet 's impact on memory retention was discussed ; and , at the online scientific magazine Edge , several argued that it was ultimately the responsibility of individuals to monitor their Internet usage so that it does not impact their cognition . 
 While long @-@ term psychological and neurological studies have yet to yield definitive results justifying Carr 's argument , a few studies have provided glimpses into the changing cognitive habits of Internet users . A UCLA study led some to wonder whether a breadth of brain activity — which was shown to occur while users performed Internet searches in the study 's functional MRI scans — actually facilitated reading and cognition or possibly overburdened the mind ; and what quality of thought could be determined by the additional presence of brain activity in regions known to control decision @-@ making and complex reasoning skills . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the publication of Carr 's Atlantic essay , critics had long been concerned about the potential for electronic media to supplant literary reading . In 1994 , American academic Sven Birkerts published a book titled The Gutenberg Elegies : The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age , consisting of a collection of essays that declaimed against the declining influence of literary culture — the tastes in literature that are favored by a social group — with a central premise among the essays asserting that alternative delivery formats for the book are inferior to the paper incarnation . Birkerts was spurred to write the book after his experience with a class he taught in the fall of 1992 , where the students had little appreciation for the literature he had assigned them , stemming from , in his opinion , their <unk> for the variety of skills involved in deep reading . In " Perseus Unbound " , an essay from the book , Birkerts presented several reservations toward the application of interactive technologies to educational instruction , cautioning that the " long @-@ term cognitive effects of these new processes of data absorption " were unknown and that they could yield " an expansion of the short @-@ term memory banks and a correlative <unk> of long @-@ term memory " . 
 In 2007 , developmental psychologist Maryanne Wolf took up the cause of defending reading and print culture in her book Proust and the Squid : The Story and Science of the Reading Brain , approaching the subject matter from a scientific angle in contrast to Birkerts ' cultural @-@ historical angle . A few reviewers were critical of Wolf for only touching upon the Internet 's potential impact on reading in her book ; however , in essays published concurrent with the book 's release she elaborated upon her worries . In an essay in The Boston Globe , Wolf expressed her grave concern that the development of knowledge in children who are heavy users of the Internet could produce mere " decoders of information who have neither the time nor the motivation to think beneath or beyond their googled universes " , and cautioned that the web 's " immediacy and volume of information should not be confused with true knowledge " . In an essay published by Powell 's Books , Wolf contended that some of the reading brain 's strengths could be lost in future generations " if children are not taught first to read , and to think deeply about their reading , and only then to e @-@ read " . Preferring to maintain an academic perspective , Wolf firmly asserted that her speculations have not yet been scientifically verified but deserved serious study . 
 In Carr 's 2008 book The Big Switch : <unk> the World , From Edison to Google , the material in the final chapter , " <unk> " , provided a basis for his later Atlantic magazine article titled " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " The inspiration to write " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " came from the difficulties Carr found he had in remaining engaged with not only books he had to read but even books that he found very interesting . This is sometimes called deep reading , a term coined by academic Sven Birkerts in his book The Gutenberg Elegies and later defined by developmental psychologist Maryanne Wolf with an added cognitive connotation . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 At the start of the essay , Carr says that his recent difficulties with concentrating while reading books and long articles may be due to spending a lot of time on the Internet . He posits that regular Internet usage may have the effect of diminishing the capacity for concentration and contemplation . He prefaces his argument with a couple of anecdotes from bloggers on their changing reading habits , as well as the findings of a 2008 University College London study titled " Information Behaviour of the Researcher of the Future " which suggests the emergence of new types of reading . He cites Maryanne Wolf , an expert on reading , for her expertise on the role of media and technology in learning written languages . Carr raises the point that unlike speech , which is an innate ability hardwired into the human brain , the ability to read has to be taught in order for the brain to rearrange its original parts for the task of interpreting symbols into words . He acknowledges that his argument does not yet have the backing of long @-@ term neurological and psychological studies . Carr further draws on Wolf 's work , particularly her 2007 book Proust and the Squid , to relate his argument to the way in which neural circuits in the reading brain are specifically shaped by the demands particular to each written language , such as Chinese , Japanese , and alphabet @-@ based scripts . Therefore , Carr purports that the neural circuitry shaped by regular Internet usage can also be expected to be different from that shaped by the reading of books and other page @-@ based written material . 
 Carr begins his argument by reasoning how the capacity to concentrate may be weakened by regular Internet usage . He mentions a historical example involving Friedrich Nietzsche 's usage of a typewriter , a fairly new technology in the 1880s . According to German scholar Friedrich A. <unk> , Nietzsche 's prose style changed when he started using a typewriter , which he had adopted because of his developing difficulty with writing by hand due to failing eyesight . Carr proceeds to explain that scientific research in the field of neuroplasticity as of 2008 has demonstrated that the brain 's neural circuitry can in fact be rewired . In the humanities , sociologist Daniel Bell coined the term " intellectual technologies " to describe those technologies that extend the brain 's cognitive faculties , and Carr states that he believes that the human brain adopts the qualities of these intellectual technologies . In discussing the mechanical clock , Carr deliberates upon the benefits and losses that are characteristic of new technologies . Then , Carr ventures that the cognitive impact of the Internet may be far more encompassing than any other previous intellectual technology because the Internet is gradually performing the services of most intellectual technologies , thus replacing them . Carr finally contends that the prevalent style of presentation for much of the Internet 's content may significantly hinder the capacity to concentrate due to the many distractions that often surround the Internet 's content , in the form of ads and obtrusive notifications . Additionally , he claims that these detrimental effects on concentration are compounded by traditional media because they are gradually adopting a style of presentation for their content that mimics the Internet , in order to remain competitive as consumer expectations change . 
 Carr also theorizes that the capacity to contemplate may diminish as computer algorithms unburden an Internet user 's brain of much of the painstaking knowledge work — the manipulation of abstract information and knowledge — that was previously done manually . In comparing the Internet with Frederick Winslow Taylor 's management system for industrial efficiency , Carr makes the point that back then some workers complained that they felt they were becoming mere automatons due to the systemic application of <unk> — a theory of management that analyzes and synthesizes workflow processes , improving labor productivity . Carr selects Google as a prime example of a company in which computer engineers and software designers have applied <unk> to the knowledge industry , delivering increasingly robust information that may have the effect of minimizing opportunities to ponder ambiguities . Additionally , he argues that the Internet 's dominant business model is one that thrives as companies either collect information on users or deliver them advertisements , therefore companies capitalize on users who move from link to link rather than those who engage in sustained thought . 
 Finally , Carr places his skepticism in a historical context , reflecting upon how previous detractors of technological advances have fared . While often correct , Carr points out that <unk> such as Socrates ' concerns about written language and the 15th @-@ century Venetian editor <unk> <unk> 's concerns about printed works failed to anticipate the benefits that these technologies might hold for human knowledge . As an afterthought , a 2005 essay by playwright Richard Foreman is excerpted for its lament of the waning of the " highly educated and articulate personality " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Carr 's essay was widely discussed in the media both critically and in passing . While English technology writer Bill Thompson observed that Carr 's argument had " succeeded in provoking a wide @-@ ranging debate " , Damon Darlin of The New York Times quipped that even though " [ everyone ] has been talking about [ the ] article in The Atlantic magazine " , only " [ s ] ome subset of that group has actually read the 4 @,@ 175 @-@ word article , by Nicholas Carr . " The controversial online responses to Carr 's essay were , according to Chicago Tribune critic Steve Johnson , partly the outcome of the essay 's title " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " , a question that the article proper doesn 't actually pose and that he believed was " perfect fodder for a ' don 't @-@ be @-@ ridiculous ' blog post " ; Johnson challenged his readers to carefully consider their online responses in the interest of raising the quality of debate . 
 Many critics discussed the merits of Carr 's essay at great length in forums set up formally for this purpose at online hubs such as the Britannica Blog and publisher John Brockman 's online scientific magazine Edge , where the roster of names quickly took on the semblance of a Who 's Who of the day 's Internet critics . Calling it " the great digital literacy debate " , British @-@ American entrepreneur and author Andrew Keen judged the victor to be the American reader , who was blessed with a wide range of compelling writing from " all of America 's most articulate Internet luminaries " . 
 Book critic Scott Esposito pointed out that Chinese characters are incorrectly described as ideograms in Carr 's essay , an error that he believed undermined the essay 's argument . The myth that Chinese script is ideographic had been effectively debunked in scholar John DeFrancis ' 1984 book The Chinese Language : Fact and Fantasy ; DeFrancis classifies Chinese as a logosyllabic writing system . Carr acknowledged that there was a debate over the terminology of ' ideogram ' , but in a response to Esposito he explained that he had " decided to use the common term " and quoted The Oxford American Dictionary to demonstrate that they likewise define Chinese characters as instances of ideograms . 
 Writer and activist Seth Finkelstein noted that predictably several critics would label Carr 's argument as a Luddite one , and he was not to be disappointed when one critic later maintained that Carr 's " contrarian stance [ was ] slowly forcing him into a caricature of Luddism " . Then , journalist David Wolman , in a Wired magazine piece , described as " moronic " the assumption that the web " hurts us more than it helps " , a statement that was preceded by an overview of the many technologies that had been historically denounced ; Wolman concluded that the solution was " better schools as well as a renewed commitment to reason and scientific rigor so that people can distinguish knowledge from garbage " . 
 Several prominent scientists working in the field of neuroscience supported Carr 's argument as scientifically plausible . James Olds , a professor of computational neuroscience , who directs the Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study at George Mason University , was quoted in Carr 's essay for his expertise , and upon the essay 's publication Olds wrote a letter to the editor of The Atlantic in which he reiterated that the brain was " very plastic " — referring to the changes that occur in the organization of the brain as a result of experience . It was Olds ' opinion that given the brain 's plasticity it was " not such a long stretch to Carr 's meme " . One of the pioneers in neuroplasticity research , Michael Merzenich , later added his own comment to the discussion , stating that he had given a talk at Google in 2008 in which he had asked the audience the same question that Carr asked in his essay . Merzenich believed that there was " absolutely no question that our brains are engaged less directly and more shallowly in the synthesis of information , when we use research strategies that are all about ' efficiency ' , ' secondary ( and out @-@ of @-@ context ) referencing ' , and ' once over , lightly ' " . Another neuroscientist , Gary Small , director of UCLA 's Memory & Aging Research Center , wrote a letter to the editor of The Atlantic in which he stated that he believed that " brains are developing circuitry for online social networking and are adapting to a new multitasking technology culture " . 
 = = = Testimonials and refutations = = = 
 In the media , there were many testimonials and refutations given by journalists for the first part of Carr 's argument regarding the capacity for concentration ; treatments of the second part of Carr 's argument regarding the capacity for contemplation , were , however , far rarer . Although columnist Andrew Sullivan noted that he had little leisure time at his disposal for contemplation compared with when he grew up , the anecdotes provided by journalists that indicated a deficiency in the capacity to contemplate were described only in the context of third parties , such as columnist Margaret Wente 's anecdote about how one consultant had found a growing tendency in her clients to provide ill @-@ considered descriptions for their technical problems . 
 Columnist Leonard Pitts of The Miami Herald described his difficulty sitting down to read a book , in which he felt like he " was getting away with something , like when you slip out of the office to catch a matinee " . Technology evangelist Jon Udell admitted that , in his " retreats " from the Internet , he sometimes struggled to settle into " books , particularly fiction , and particularly in printed form " . He found portable long @-@ form audio to be " transformative " , however , because he can easily achieve " sustained attention " , which makes him optimistic about the potential to " reactivate ancient traditions , like oral storytelling , and rediscover their powerful neural effects " . 
 Also writing in The Atlantic , a year after Carr , the futurist Jamais Cascio argued that human cognition has always evolved to meet environmental challenges , and that those posed by the internet are no different . He described the ' skimming ' referred to by Carr as a form of attention deficit caused by the immaturity of filter algorithms : " The trouble isn ’ t that we have too much information at our fingertips , but that our tools for managing it are still in their infancy ... many of the technologies that Carr worries about were developed precisely to help us get some control over a flood of data and ideas . Google isn ’ t the problem ; it ’ s the beginning of a solution . " . Cascio and Carr 's articles have been discussed together in several places . Pew Research used them to form a tension @-@ pair question survey that was distributed to noted academics . Most responded in detail ; concurring with the proposition " Carr was wrong : Google does not make us stupid " . In The <unk> of Everything , <unk> tended to side with Carr . However , he thought both arguments relied too much on determinism : Carr in thinking that an over @-@ reliance on internet tools will inevitably cause the brain to atrophy , and Cascio in thinking that getting smarter is the necessary outcome of the evolutionary pressures he describes . In From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg Naughton noted that , while many agreed Carr had hit on an important subject , his conclusions were not widely supported . 
 <unk> contesting Carr 's argument , journalist John Battelle praised the virtues of the web : " [ W ] hen I am deep in search for knowledge on the web , jumping from link to link , reading deeply in one moment , skimming hundreds of links the next , when I am pulling back to formulate and reformulate queries and devouring new connections as quickly as Google and the Web can serve them up , when I am performing bricolage in real time over the course of hours , I am ' feeling ' my brain light up , I and [ sic ] ' feeling ' like I 'm getting smarter " . Web journalist Scott Rosenberg reported that his reading habits are the same as they were when he " was a teenager plowing [ his ] way through a shelf of Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky " . In book critic Scott Esposito 's view , " responsible adults " have always had to deal with distractions , and , in his own case , he claimed to remain " fully able to turn down the noise " and read deeply . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In critiquing the rise of Internet @-@ based computing , the philosophical question of whether or not a society can control technological progress was raised . At the online scientific magazine Edge , Wikipedia co @-@ founder Larry Sanger argued that individual will was all that was necessary to maintain the cognitive capacity to read a book all the way through , and computer scientist and writer Jaron Lanier rebuked the idea that technological progress is an " autonomous process that will proceed in its chosen direction independently of us " . Lanier echoed a view stated by American historian Lewis Mumford in his 1970 book The Pentagon of Power , in which Mumford suggested that the technological advances that shape a society could be controlled if the full might of a society 's free will were employed . Lanier believed that technology was significantly hindered by the idea that " there is only one axis of choice " which is either pro- or anti- when it comes to technology adoption . Yet Carr had stated in The Big Switch that he believed an individual 's personal choice toward a technology had little effect on technological progress . According to Carr , the view expressed by Mumford about technological progress was incorrect because it regarded technology solely as advances in science and engineering rather than as an influence on the costs of production and consumption . Economics were a more significant consideration in Carr 's opinion because in a competitive marketplace the most efficient methods of providing an important resource will prevail . As technological advances shape society , an individual might be able to resist the effects but his lifestyle will " always be lonely and in the end futile " ; despite a few holdouts , technology will nevertheless shape economics which , in turn , will shape society . 
 = = = A focus on literary reading = = = 
 The selection of one particular quote in Carr 's essay from pathologist Bruce Friedman , a member of the faculty of the University of Michigan Medical School , who commented on a developing difficulty reading books and long essays and specifically the novel War and Peace , was criticized for having a bias toward narrative literature . The quote failed to represent other types of literature , such as technical and scientific literature , which had , in contrast , become much more accessible and widely read with the advent of the Internet . At the Britannica Blog , writer Clay Shirky <unk> observed that War and Peace was " too long , and not so interesting " , further stating that " it would be hard to argue that the last ten years have seen a decrease in either the availability or comprehension of material on scientific or technical subjects " . Shirky 's comments on War and Peace were derided by several of his peers as verging on philistinism . In Shirky 's defense , inventor W. Daniel Hillis asserted that , although books " were created to serve a purpose " , that " same purpose can often be served by better means " . While Hillis considered the book to be " a fine and admirable device " , he imagined that clay tablets and scrolls of papyrus , in their time , " had charms of their own " . Wired magazine editor Kevin Kelly believed that the idea that " the book is the apex of human culture " should be resisted . And Birkerts differentiated online reading from literary reading , stating that in the latter the reader is directed within themselves and enters " an environment that is nothing at all like the open @-@ ended information zone that is cyberspace " in which he feels psychologically fragmented . 
 = = = Coping with abundance = = = 
 Several critics theorized about the effects of the shift from scarcity to abundance of written material in the media as a result of the technologies introduced by the Internet . This shift was examined for its potential to lead individuals to a superficial comprehension of many subjects rather than a deep comprehension of just a few subjects . According to Shirky , an individual 's ability to concentrate had been facilitated by the " relatively empty environment " which had ceased to exist when the wide availability of the web proliferated new media . Although Shirky acknowledged that the unprecedented quantity of written material available on the web might occasion a sacrifice of the cultural importance of many works , he believed that the solution was " to help make the sacrifice worth it " . In direct contrast , Sven Birkerts argued that " some deep comprehension of our inheritance [ was ] essential " , and called for " some consensus vision among those <unk> of what our society and culture might be shaped toward " , warning against allowing the commercial marketplace to dictate the future standing of traditionally important cultural works . While Carr found solace in Shirky 's conceit that " new forms of expression " might emerge to suit the Internet , he considered this conceit to be one of faith rather than reason . In a later response , Shirky continued to expound upon his theme that " technologies that make writing abundant always require new social structures to accompany them " , explaining that Gutenberg 's printing press led to an abundance of cheap books which were met by " a host of inventions large and small " , such as the separation of fiction from non @-@ fiction , the recognition of talents , the listing of concepts by indexes , and the practice of noting editions . 
 = = = Impact of the web on memory retention = = = 
 As a result of the vast stores of information made accessible on the web , one hundred critics pointed to a decrease in the desire to recall certain types of information , indicating , they believed , a change in the process of recalling information , as well as the types of information that are recalled . According to Ben Worthen , a Wall Street Journal business technology blogger , the growing importance placed on the ability to access information instead of the capacity to recall information straight from memory would , in the long term , change the type of job skills that companies who are hiring new employees would find valuable . Due to an increased reliance on the Internet , Worthen speculated that before long " the guy who remembers every fact about a topic may not be as valuable as the guy who knows how to find all of these facts and many others " . Evan Ratliff of Salon.com wondered if the usage of gadgets to recall phone numbers , as well as geographical and historical information , had the effect of releasing certain cognitive resources that in turn strengthened other aspects of cognition . Drawing parallels with <unk> memory — a process whereby people remember things in relationships and groups — Ratliff mused that perhaps the web was " like a spouse who is around all the time , with a particular knack for factual memory of all varieties " . Far from conclusive , these ruminations left the web 's impact on memory retention an open question . 
 = = Themes and motifs = = 
 = = = Effect of technology on the brain 's neural circuitry = = = 
 In the essay , Carr introduces the discussion of the scientific support for the idea that the brain 's neural circuitry can be rewired with an example in which philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche is said to have been influenced by technology . According to German scholar Friedrich A. <unk> in his book Gramophone , Film , Typewriter , Nietzsche 's writing style became more aphoristic after he started using a typewriter . Nietzsche began using a Malling @-@ Hansen Writing Ball because of his failing eyesight which had disabled his ability to write by hand . The idea that Nietzsche 's writing style had changed for better or worse when he adopted the typewriter was disputed by several critics . Kevin Kelly and Scott Esposito each offered alternate explanations for the apparent changes . Esposito believed that " the brain is so huge and amazing and enormously complex that it 's far , far off base to think that a few years of Internet media or the acquisition of a typewriter can fundamentally rewire it . " In a response to Esposito 's point , neuroscientist James Olds stated that recent brain research demonstrated that it was " pretty clear that the adult brain can re @-@ wire on the fly " . In The New York Times it was reported that several scientists believed that it was certainly plausible that the brain 's neural circuitry may be shaped differently by regular Internet usage compared with the reading of printed works . 
 Although there was a consensus in the scientific community about how it was possible for the brain 's neural circuitry to change through experience , the potential effect of web technologies on the brain 's neural circuitry was unknown . On the topic of the Internet 's effect on reading skills , Guinevere F. Eden , director of the Center for the Study of Learning at Georgetown University , remarked that the question was whether or not the Internet changed the brain in a way that was beneficial to an individual . Carr believed that the effect of the Internet on cognition was detrimental , weakening the ability to concentrate and contemplate . Olds cited the potential benefits of computer software that specifically targets learning disabilities , stating that among some neuroscientists there was a belief that neuroplasticity @-@ based software was beneficial in improving receptive language disorders . Olds mentioned neuroscientist Michael Merzenich , who had formed several companies with his peers in which neuroplasticity @-@ based computer programs had been developed to improve the cognitive functioning of kids , adults and the elderly . In 1996 , Merzenich and his peers had started a company called Scientific Learning in which <unk> research had been used to develop a computer training program called Fast ForWord that offered seven brain exercises that improved language impairments and learning disabilities in children . Feedback on Fast ForWord showed that these brain exercises even had benefits for autistic children , an unexpected spillover effect that Merzenich has attempted to harness by developing a modification of Fast ForWord specifically designed for autism . At a subsequent company that Merzenich started called <unk> Science , Fast ForWord @-@ like brain exercises and other techniques were developed with the aim of sharpening the brains of elderly people by retaining the plasticity of their brains . 
 = = = HAL in 2001 : A Space Odyssey = = = 
 In Stanley Kubrick 's 1968 science fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey , astronaut David Bowman slowly disassembles the mind of an artificial intelligence named HAL by sequentially unplugging its memory banks . Carr likened the emotions of despair expressed by HAL as its mind is disassembled to his own , at the time , cognitive difficulties in engaging with long texts . He felt as if someone was " tinkering with [ his ] brain , remapping the neural circuitry , reprogramming the memory " . HAL had also been used as a metaphor for the " ultimate search engine " in a PBS interview with Google co @-@ founder Sergey Brin as noted in Carr 's book The Big Switch , and also Brin 's TED talk . Brin was comparing Google 's ambitions of building an artificial intelligence to HAL , while dismissing the possibility that a bug like the one that led HAL to murder the occupants of the fictional spacecraft Discovery One could occur in a Google @-@ based artificial intelligence . Carr observed in his essay that throughout history technological advances have often necessitated new metaphors , such as the mechanical clock engendering the simile " like clockwork " and the age of the computer engendering the simile " like computers " . Carr concluded his essay with an explanation as to why he believed HAL was an appropriate metaphor for his essay 's argument . He observed that HAL showed genuine emotion as his mind was disassembled while , throughout the film , the humans onboard the space station appeared to be automatons , thinking and acting as if they were following the steps of an algorithm . Carr believed that the film 's prophetic message was that as individuals increasingly rely on computers for an understanding of their world their intelligence may become more machinelike than human . 
 = = Developing view of how Internet use affects cognition = = 
 After the publication of Carr 's essay , a developing view unfolded in the media as sociological and neurological studies surfaced that were relevant to determining the cognitive impact of regular Internet usage . Challenges to Carr 's argument were made frequently . As the two most outspoken detractors of electronic media , Carr and Birkerts were both appealed to by Kevin Kelly to each formulate a more precise definition of the faults they perceived regarding electronic media so that their beliefs could be scientifically verified . While Carr firmly believed that his skepticism about the Internet 's benefits to cognition was warranted , he cautioned in both his essay and his book The Big Switch that long @-@ term psychological and neurological studies were required to definitively ascertain how cognition develops under the influence of the Internet . 
 Scholars at University College London conducted a study titled " Information Behaviour of the Researcher of the Future " , the results of which suggested that students ' research habits tended towards skimming and scanning rather than in @-@ depth reading . The study provoked serious reflection among educators about the implications for educational instruction . 
 In October 2008 , new insights into the effect of Internet usage on cognition were gleaned from the results , reported in a press release , of a study conducted by UCLA 's Memory and Aging Research Center that had tested two groups of people between the ages of 55 and 76 years old ; only one group of which were experienced web users . While they had read books or performed assigned search tasks their brain activity had been monitored with functional MRI scans , which revealed that both reading and web search utilize the same language , reading , memory , and visual regions of the brain ; however , it was discovered that those searching the web stimulated additional decision @-@ making and complex reasoning regions of the brain , with a two @-@ fold increase in these regions in experienced web users compared with inexperienced web users . Gary Small , the director of the UCLA center and lead investigator of the UCLA study , concurrently released the book <unk> : Surviving the Technological Alteration of the Modern Mind , co @-@ authored with Gigi <unk> , with the press release . 
 While one set of critics and bloggers used the UCLA study to dismiss the argument raised in Carr 's essay , another set took a closer look at the conclusions that could be drawn from the study concerning the effects of Internet usage . Among the reflections concerning the possible interpretations of the UCLA study were whether greater breadth of brain activity while using the Internet in comparison with reading a book improved or impaired the quality of a reading session ; and whether the decision @-@ making and complex reasoning skills that are apparently involved in Internet search , according to the study , suggest a high quality of thought or simply the use of puzzle solving skills . Thomas <unk> , in InformationWeek , observed that the study 's findings regarding the cognitive impact of regular Internet usage were inconclusive and stated that " it will take time before it 's clear whether we should mourn the old ways , celebrate the new , or learn to stop worrying and love the Net " . 
 = Jon Lieber = 
 Jonathan Ray Lieber ( born April 2 , 1970 ) is a former Major League Baseball ( MLB ) pitcher . He stands 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) tall and weighs 240 pounds ( 110 kg ) . He played for the Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1994 – 1998 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 1999 – 2002 and 2008 ) , New York Yankees ( 2004 ) , and Philadelphia Phillies ( 2005 – 2007 ) . He batted left @-@ handed and threw right @-@ handed , and utilized a fastball , a slider , and a changeup for his pitches . In a 14 @-@ season career , Lieber compiled a 131 – 124 record with 1 @,@ 553 strikeouts and a 4 @.@ 27 ERA in 2 @,@ 198 innings pitched . 
 Lieber attended the University of South Alabama , helping them win the Sun Belt Conference Championship . He was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the second round of the 1992 Major League Baseball Draft , but he was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates the following season before even throwing a pitch in the major leagues . He made his debut in 1994 and was named the Pirates ' Opening Day starter in 1995 , but it was not until 1997 that he became a full @-@ time major league starter . He was traded to the Chicago Cubs following the 1998 season . In 2000 , he led the National League ( NL ) with 251 innings pitched . He had his best season in 2001 , winning 20 games while losing just six . Lieber underwent Tommy John surgery in 2002 and missed the entire 2003 season . In 2004 , he pitched for the New York Yankees , reaching the playoffs for the only time in his career . He signed with the Philadelphia Phillies in 2005 and tied for fifth in the NL with 17 wins . Injuries cut into his playing time over the next three years ; he finished his career as a reliever with the Cubs in 2008 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Lieber was born in Council Bluffs , Iowa . He graduated from Abraham Lincoln High School in Council Bluffs in 1988 . Lieber initially attended Iowa Western Community College in 1989 and 1990 before transferring to the University of South Alabama . Over the next two years , Lieber experienced great success for South Alabama . He posted 12 – 5 records for them both of his years there , and he led the team in earned run average ( ERA ) and strikeouts both years . He was selected by the Chicago Cubs in the ninth round of the 1991 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft , but he did not sign . In 1992 , he helped South Alabama win the Sun Belt Conference Championship . 
 Lieber received several honors following his senior season . These included the Sun Belt Conference Player of the Year award , a third @-@ team All @-@ America selection by the American Baseball Coaches Association , an all @-@ region award , and an all @-@ league award ( his second ) . In 2013 , he was inducted into the Mobile Sports Hall of Fame . He was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the second round of the 1992 draft , and this time , he signed . 
 = = = Minor Leagues ( 1992 – 94 ) = = = 
 Lieber began his professional career with the A short season Eugene Emeralds of the Northwest League . In five starts with the Emeralds , he had a 3 – 0 record , a 1 @.@ 16 ERA , 23 strikeouts , 22 walks , and 26 hits allowed in 31 innings pitched . He also appeared in seven games ( six starts ) for the Baseball City Royals of the A @-@ Advanced Florida State League , posting a 3 – 3 record , a 4 @.@ 65 ERA , 19 strikeouts , eight walks , and 45 hits allowed in 31 innings pitched . 
 In 1993 , the Royals switched their A @-@ Advanced affiliate to the Wilmington Blue Rocks of the Carolina League . Lieber began the season with Wilmington , posting a 9 – 3 record , a 2 @.@ 67 ERA , 89 strikeouts , nine walks , 125 hits allowed , and 114 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 17 games ( 16 starts ) . He was promoted to the AA Memphis Chicks of the Southern League on July 11 , where he posted a 2 – 1 record and a 6 @.@ 86 ERA in four starts . On July 31 , seeking pitching help as they contended for the playoffs , the Royals traded Lieber and Dan Miceli to the Pittsburgh Pirates for their closer , Stan Belinda . The Pirates assigned Lieber to the Southern League 's Carolina Mudcats ; in six starts , he had a 4 – 2 record , a 3 @.@ 97 ERA , 28 strikeouts , 10 walks , and 39 hits allowed in 34 innings pitched . 
 Lieber made three starts with the Mudcats in 1994 , posting a 2 – 0 record , a 1 @.@ 29 ERA , 21 strikeouts , two walks , and 13 hits allowed in 21 innings . He also made three starts for the Buffalo Bisons of the Triple @-@ A American Association , posting a 1 – 1 record , a 1 @.@ 69 ERA , 21 strikeouts , one walk , and 16 hits allowed in 21 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1994 – 98 ) = = = 
 Lieber was called up by the Pirates in May 1994 to join their starting rotation . In his first major league start on May 15 , he gave up one run in six innings but took the loss as the Philadelphia Phillies defeated the Pirates 1 – 0 . He earned his first career win five days later , pitching eight shutout innings in a 6 – 0 victory over the Montreal Expos . In 17 starts with the Pirates , Lieber had a 6 – 7 record , a 3 @.@ 73 ERA , 71 strikeouts , 25 walks , and 116 hits allowed in 108 2 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 Following Lieber 's rookie season , Pirates ' manager Jim Leyland named Lieber the team 's Opening Day starter for 1995 . Like many of the young Pirates ' pitchers that year , Lieber struggled ; he was optioned to the Calgary Cannons of the Triple @-@ A Pacific Coast League on June 18 after going 2 – 7 with a 7 @.@ 48 ERA . In 14 starts with Calgary , Lieber had a 1 – 5 record , a 7 @.@ 01 ERA , 34 strikeouts , 19 walks , and 122 hits allowed in 77 innings pitched . He was recalled by the Pirates on September 5 when rosters expanded but was used mostly as a relief pitcher for the rest of the year . In 21 games ( 12 starts ) , Lieber compiled a 4 – 7 record , a 6 @.@ 32 ERA , 45 strikeouts , 14 walks , and 103 hits allowed in 72 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 Lieber remained in the bullpen to begin the 1996 season . In his first 34 games , he posted a 4 @.@ 21 ERA . In July , he returned to the starting rotation following the release of Zane Smith . As a starter , Lieber posted a 7 – 2 record with a 3 @.@ 91 ERA , emerging as the Pirates ' ace by the end of the year . In 51 games ( 15 starts ) in 1996 , Lieber posted a 9 – 5 record , a 3 @.@ 99 ERA , 94 strikeouts , 28 walks , and 156 hits allowed in 142 innings pitched . 
 Lieber became the Pirates ' Opening Day starter again in 1997 . On June 30 , he threw his only complete game of the year , striking out 10 while allowing one run on five hits in a 3 – 1 victory over the Chicago White Sox . Lieber was inconsistent in 1997 , amassing several winning streaks and several losing streaks during the season . In 33 games ( 32 starts ) , he had an 11 – 14 record , a 4 @.@ 49 ERA , 160 strikeouts , 51 walks , and 193 hits allowed in 188 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was third in the NL in losses ( behind Mark Leiter 's 17 and teammate Steve Cooke 's 15 ) ; however , he tied Mike Hampton for the most runs batted in by a major league pitcher with eight . 
 In 1998 , Lieber was the Pirates ' fourth starter . He had a 5 – 10 record over his first 17 starts , partly because he received 15 total runs of support in the losses over that time . Lieber had an 8 – 13 record with a 3 @.@ 90 ERA before getting placed on the disabled list ( DL ) for the first time in his career on August 21 due to a left oblique muscle strain . He returned from the DL on September 15 but posted a 10 @.@ 80 ERA over his last two starts . In 29 games ( 28 starts ) , Lieber posted an 8 – 14 record , a 4 @.@ 11 ERA , 138 strikeouts , 40 walks , and 182 hits allowed in 171 innings pitched . He was tied with seven other pitchers for fifth in the league in losses . Following the season , Lieber was traded to the Chicago Cubs for Brant Brown . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Lieber began 1999 as the Cubs ' third starter . Prior to the All @-@ Star break , he had an 8 – 3 record with a 3 @.@ 26 ERA ( seventh @-@ best in the NL ) . From April 29 to May 8 , he was on the DL with a right eye contusion . He threw his first major league shutout on May 14 , striking out seven in a 9 – 0 victory over the Atlanta Braves . Lieber went 0 – 8 with a 5 @.@ 71 ERA in his first 13 starts following the All @-@ Star Break before earning wins in his final two starts of the year . In 31 starts , Lieber compiled a 10 – 11 record , a 4 @.@ 07 ERA , and 46 walks in 203 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was tied for tenth in the league with 226 hits allowed ( along with teammate Steve Trachsel ) , but he finished eighth in the league with 186 strikeouts and tied with six other players for ninth in the league with three complete games . 
 In 2000 , Lieber was the Cubs ' Opening Day starter . From June 28 to August 14 , he won a career @-@ high six consecutive decisions . On July 3 , he threw a shutout , allowing two hits in a 3 – 0 victory over the Pirates . In his next start , on July 8 , he had 12 strikeouts and threw a complete game in a 9 – 2 win over the White Sox . Lieber was 12 – 7 with a 4 @.@ 12 ERA through his first 29 starts ; however , he went 0 – 4 in September with a 5 @.@ 88 ERA . In 35 starts ( tied for the NL lead with Randy Johnson , Kevin Millwood , Tom Glavine , and Greg Maddux ) , Lieber had a 12 – 11 record , a 4 @.@ 41 ERA , and 54 walks . He tied Darryl Kile for ninth in the league with 192 strikeouts , he led the league with 251 innings pitched , he ranked third in the league with 248 hits allowed ( behind Liván Hernández 's 254 and José Lima 's 251 ) , and he tied Maddux for third with six complete games ( behind Johnson 's and Curt Schilling 's eight ) . 
 Lieber 's most productive season came in 2001 . On May 24 , he one @-@ hit the Cincinnati Reds , 3 – 0 , ending the team 's NL @-@ record streak of 208 games in a row without being shut out , throwing just 78 pitches . From June 16 to July 15 , he won six straight games . He was named an All @-@ Star for the first and only time in his career . In his final start of the season on October 3 , he allowed five runs in six innings but still earned his 20th win of the season as the Cubs beat the Reds 13 – 7 . In 34 starts , Lieber recorded a career @-@ high 20 victories to go with just six losses , posted a 3 @.@ 80 ERA , and struck out 148 as opposed to 41 walks . His 20 wins ranked fourth in the league ( behind Matt Morris 's and Schilling 's 22 and Johnson 's 21 ) , his 232 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched ranked fifth in the league , and his five complete games tied for second in the league with Javier Vázquez ( behind Johnson 's six ) . He finished fourth in the NL Cy Young Award vote , behind Johnson , Schilling , and Morris . 
 Lieber 's 2002 season was curtailed by right elbow problems , which plagued him all year . On August 1 , facing the San Diego Padres , Lieber allowed two runs in seven innings but received a no @-@ decision in an 8 – 7 Cubs ' victory . He was placed on the DL with right elbow tendinitis the next day , and he underwent Tommy John surgery on August 8 , ending his season . In 21 starts , Lieber compiled a 6 – 8 record , a 3 @.@ 70 ERA , 87 strikeouts , 12 walks , and 153 hits allowed in 141 innings pitched . He still managed to tie Randy Wolf , Brett Tomko , Pedro <unk> , and teammate Matt Clement for tenth in the league with three complete games . After the season , he became a free agent . 
 While on the Cubs , Lieber became the only Major League pitcher to give up a hit to a one handed player when he gave up not just one hit , but two to Jim Abbott , also allowing Abbott to drive in three RBIs . 
 = = = Other teams ( 2004 – 08 ) = = = 
 Lieber signed a two @-@ year contract with the New York Yankees following the 2002 season . He missed the 2003 season recovering from his injury , although he did make two minor league rehab appearances . Lieber began the 2004 season on the DL with a strained abductor muscle in his right thigh . He returned to the major leagues on May 1 , allowing three runs in seven innings in a 12 – 4 victory over the Kansas City Royals . Through August 1 , he had a 7 – 7 record with a 5 @.@ 06 ERA . From then on , Lieber went 7 – 1 with a 3 @.@ 21 ERA . On September 14 , he took a no @-@ hitter into the seventh inning against the Boston Red Sox and allowed three runs in 8 1 ⁄ 3 innings in a 14 – 4 victory . In 27 starts , Lieber posted a 14 – 8 record , a 4 @.@ 33 ERA , 102 strikeouts , 18 walks , and 216 hits allowed in 176 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His 14 wins tied with eight other pitchers for eighth in the American League ( AL ) and tied with Javier Vázquez for the most by a Yankee as well as being the largest win total by an ex @-@ 20 game winner returning from a full @-@ season layoff since 1946 . 
 Dave Caldwell of the New York Times wrote on September 3 that Lieber would " probably end up in the bullpen " in the playoffs , but less than a month later , Mark <unk> of MLB.com wrote that Lieber " has suddenly become one of the most important cogs in the Yankees ' postseason machine " due an injury to Kevin Brown and late @-@ season struggles by Vázquez . Lieber started Game 2 of the AL Division Series against the Minnesota Twins . He allowed three runs over 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings and was in line for the win , but he received a no @-@ decision in a 12 @-@ inning , 7 – 6 Yankee victory . The Yankees won the series in four games . In Game 2 of the AL Championship Series against the Red Sox , Lieber allowed one run and three hits in seven innings , earning the win in a 3 – 1 victory . In Game 6 , he allowed four runs in 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings and took the loss in a 4 – 2 defeat . The Red Sox become the first MLB team in history to overcome a 3 – 0 series deficit , winning in seven games . 2004 would be Lieber 's only playoff experience , as well as his only stint in the AL . 
 Before the 2005 season , Lieber signed as a free agent with the Philadelphia Phillies for three years and $ 24 million with a team option for the fourth year . He was named the Phillies ' Opening Day starter in 2005 . He won his first four starts with the team . From May 12 through June 30 , Lieber had a 3 – 7 record and a 7 @.@ 48 ERA . 8 – 8 by the end of that stretch , he managed to post a 9 – 5 record and a 3 @.@ 32 ERA to finish the season . Lieber gave up one run in eight innings on July 21 but took the loss as the Los Angeles Dodgers defeated the Phillies 1 – 0 . On September 22 , he threw eight shutout innings in a 4 – 0 victory over the Braves . Lieber finished the season with a 17 – 13 record , a 4 @.@ 20 ERA , 149 strikeouts , 41 walks , and 223 hits allowed in 218 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Lieber led the team with 17 wins , which tied with Andy Pettitte for fifth in the league . He tied with six other pitchers for the league lead with 35 starts . 
 Lieber lost his first four starts of the season in 2006 for the first time in his career . On May 13 , he took a perfect game into the seventh inning against Cincinnati before allowing a two @-@ out single to Adam Dunn ; he threw 8 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in a 2 – 0 victory . He was on the DL from May 30 to July 6 with a groin injury . Before going on the DL , he had a 3 – 5 record and a 5 @.@ 79 ERA . He posted a 6 @.@ 75 ERA in his first five starts after returning from the DL , but he posted a 3 @.@ 38 in his final 11 starts . On August 16 , he threw his first shutout since 2001 against the New York Mets , allowing five hits in a 3 – 0 victory . In 27 starts , Lieber compiled a 9 – 11 record , a 4 @.@ 93 ERA , 100 strikeouts , 24 walks , and 196 hits allowed in 168 innings pitched . 
 Lieber began 2007 on the DL with a strained right oblique , and when he was activated on April 9 , he was placed in the bullpen . After two relief outings , he returned to the rotation on April 20 when Brett Myers was moved to the bullpen . On June 9 , he struck out 11 and allowed three hits in a 4 – 0 shutout of the Royals . At the time , he was 3 – 4 with a 3 @.@ 72 ERA , but he allowed 14 runs ( 13 earned ) over his next two starts , both losses . On June 23 , Lieber was placed on the DL with a ruptured tendon in his right foot , which ended his tenure with the Phillies . In 14 games ( 12 starts ) , he had a 3 – 6 record , a 4 @.@ 73 ERA , 54 strikeouts , 22 walks , and 91 hits allowed in 78 innings . The Phillies reached the playoffs , but Lieber was left off their postseason roster because of his injury . 
 On January 16 , 2008 , Lieber signed a one @-@ year contract with the Chicago Cubs . He competed for the starting rotation but failed to earn a spot and was placed in the bullpen as the Cubs ' long reliever . From July 18 to September 1 , he was on the DL with a right foot injury . He appeared in his final major league game on September 5 , giving up four runs in two innings in a 10 – 2 loss to Cincinnati . In 26 games ( one start ) , Lieber posted a 2 – 3 record , a 4 @.@ 05 ERA , 27 strikeouts , six walks , and 59 hits allowed in 46 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . The Cubs reached the playoffs , but Lieber was left off the playoff roster for the second year in a row . 
 Lieber retired after the 2008 season wanting to spend more time with his family . In his 14 @-@ year career , Lieber had a 131 – 124 record , a 4 @.@ 27 ERA , 1 @,@ 553 strikeouts , 422 walks , 2 @,@ 388 hits allowed , and 2 @,@ 198 innings pitched in 401 games ( 327 starts ) . His strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratio of 3 @.@ 680 ranks 11th all @-@ time among major league pitchers as of 2013 . 
 = = = Pitching style = = = 
 Lieber threw three pitches : a fastball , a slider , and a changeup . The slider was the pitch Lieber often used to get outs and was most successful against right @-@ handed batters . The changeup darted away from batters . Lieber was not a hard thrower ( his fastball was in the low 90 mph range ) ; he relied on controlling his pitches to have success . 
 = = = Personal = = = 
 Lieber married Jessica Conway on September 18 , 1992 . The couple has one daughter : Jillian ( born October 22 , 1997 ) , and three sons : Jared ( born July 27 , 2000 ) , Justin ( born May 8 , 2003 ) , and Jonah ( born June 1 , 2007 ) . They live in Mobile , Alabama . Lieber enjoys hunting as a hobby . 
 = Destiny Fulfilled = 
 Destiny Fulfilled is the fifth and final studio album by American R & B trio Destiny 's Child . It was released on November 10 , 2004 in by Columbia Records and Sony Urban Music . A comeback release , it marked the return of Destiny 's Child after the group went into hiatus , which allowed each member to release solo albums . Unlike their previous material , this record saw each member equally contributing to the songwriting and production . Destiny 's Child further worked with frequent collaborators such as Rockwilder , Swizz Beatz and Rodney Jerkins as well as several new producers . 
 For the album 's theme , the members drew inspiration from the conversations they had during the first week of recording when they discussed about the happenings in their lives while being apart . Composed mostly of mid @-@ tempo songs and ballads that are subsequent continuations of each other , altogether telling one complete story , Destiny Fulfilled is an R & B album . It was released to generally mixed reviews among music critics who criticized its mid @-@ tempo ballads and lyrical content . The album was commercially successful ; it reached number two on the US Billboard 200 , and has since been certified triple platinum in that region . It was also successful in different countries worldwide receiving certifications in Australia , Canada , Germany and the United Kingdom among others . 
 As part of the album 's promotion , the group performed songs from it on numerous award ceremonies and televised appearances in the US and Europe . They further embarked on the tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It in 2005 with 67 dates across four continents worldwide . Destiny Fulfilled spawned four singles — the lead single " Lose My Breath " , " Soldier " , " Girl " and " Cater 2 U " . After the tour , the band disbanded which made Destiny Fulfilled their last studio album . 
 = = Background = = 
 While recording their third studio album Survivor in late 2000 , Beyoncé announced that Destiny 's Child would be on a hiatus that would allow each member to release a solo album , which they hoped would further increase interest in the group . The idea of solo releases emanated from the group 's manager , Beyoncé 's father , Mathew Knowles . Kelly Rowland further explained in an interview that Destiny 's Child has been present in the media for a long time and they wanted to " give the public eye a rest from DC for a minute " . During that same interview , she acknowledged that the trio would return to the studio in fall 2003 to start with the work on a new album . 
 Two members of the group , Beyoncé and Rowland each released one album , while Michelle Williams released two . While each member achieved domestic success , Beyoncé 's had been regarded as the most successful with the release of Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) , which enjoyed international commercial success and acclaim . This , along with their other ongoing projects , led to speculation over the disbandment of Destiny 's Child . Amidst rumors and speculations , Rowland announced in 2004 their return to the studio to record what would become their fourth and final album . The group claimed that the reunion was destined to happen , and that their affinity to each other kept them together . 
 Right in the making of the album , they planned to part ways after their fourteen @-@ year career to facilitate their continued pursuit in individual aspirations . Beyoncé has noted that their destinies were already fulfilled ; however , Destiny 's Child claimed that naming the album Destiny Fulfilled was not a coincidence of sort . Beyoncé has said that " the group felt it still had something to offer musically " with the album before adding : " We did this record for ourselves , not to sell a million the first week out ... That doesn 't mean as much to us as just the fact that three friends got back together to do another record . That was our destiny . " . Rowland commented : " We were like , ' You know what , we 're getting older and we want to end on a high note . ' We want to give our fans a great final record " . Beyoncé , also commented regarding the finality of their career : " Who knows what will happen in three , five or 10 years ? The main thing is that we maintain our friendship and that we do it because we want to – not because it 's a good business move . " 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 Production of the album began in summer of 2004 with Destiny 's Child taking help from frequent collaborators including Rockwilder , Swizz Beatz and Rodney Jerkins . The group worked on the album within a period of three weeks . Jerkins , who had worked with Beyoncé for her solo album Dangerously in Love , concerned how he would manage the production , saying , " How is this going to work ? ' Cause Beyoncé , she blew up solo , so how 's it going to work in a group together ? " . He stated that once he got inside the studio , however , his skepticism vanished as he saw the group 's " excitement being back in the studio together " , calling the process " natural " . The members of the group stated that the first week of recording was spent solely on conversations about the happenings in their lives while being apart from each other as they hadn 't spent <unk> time for a long period . This further inspired them to record the conversations and use it as the main theme of the record . 
 Differing from Survivor in that previously Beyoncé had taken an active role in writing and producing , Destiny Fulfilled saw each member contributing inputs culled from personal experiences and individual opinions and points of view not dependent from the others ' . In most cases , producers of the album would send them a CD containing a track that would be the group 's basis in the songwriting process ; without the producer 's supervision of which part to sing , that formed a new direction of their style different from their previous records . The traditional approach where each member sang one verse and chimed in the chorus was replaced ; in some songs in Destiny Fulfilled , their vocals were alternated in every line of the lyrics , a technique similar to hip hop artists . Destiny 's Child took the role of executive producing alongside their manager , Mathew Knowles . Beyoncé , who vocally produced the songs , commented that it was important for her to make sure their voices were audible and identifiable . Taking it as one of her goals , the group decided to focus on mid @-@ tempo songs and on few dance numbers and ballads — which they considered people cannot sing with . Beyoncé elaborated " We wanted to make sure that the songs would be something that we were proud of 10 years from now , 20 years from now . We wanted it to be something that people can really feel an emotion to . Up @-@ tempo songs can do that , but they more make you wanna dance . " As Rowland was recently engaged in the time of the writing of the album , it further influenced her songwriting . She also cited that being apart from the group had an impact on the album as well : " All of us have been in three different places ... so there 's a lot to talk about , a lot that 's gone on , personally . I think it 's important to talk about that on this new record , to put what we 've been going through separately into the new record . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 During an interview with MTV , Beyoncé stated that the songs put altogether tell a complete story and noted that each song was a subsequent continuation to the next one . She concluded , " [ The album continues with ] this whole journey of this group of women trying to find love . And truly they find it because they love themselves and find it in themselves . It 's friendship , it 's love , it 's maturity and growth , and it 's everything that we wanted it to be . " For the music of the album , the group tried challenging themselves , working with different arrangements , trying to create an original sound ; to succeed in this , they were influenced by The Emotions , Jodeci and SWV mixing elements of their music . Destiny Fulfilled is predominantly an R & B concept album tracing a woman 's relationship journey . Critics further found elements of soul music , dance and hip @-@ hop . The album is mostly composed of mid and <unk> balladry following the opening two songs ; Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian felt that the ballads showcased " the girliness in the trio , musically and lyrically " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine found elements of middle of the road music in the ballads . 
 The album opens with the up @-@ tempo dance song " Lose My Breath " , a track detailing a man full of empty promises to a woman . It is musically complete with military , marching @-@ band drums and keyboard stabs and the backing track contains various sound effects . " Soldier " , the second track with T.I. and Lil Wayne , the only featured artists on the album , contains elements from Southern hip hop and Crunk & B. Unsatisfied and unfulfilled with the lover from the opening song , the protagonists ask for a decent soldier , further singing about finding a gangster . After finding the soldier , the third song , the R & B number " Cater 2 U " , lyrically is about submissively serving the man considered as such . Inspired by him , the protagonists sing about doing various things to make him happy musically accompanied by synthesizer as the song builds a crescendo . 
 The fourth song " T @-@ Shirt " is complete with inorganic drum sounds , guitar and backwards loop as the trio sings about sleeping in bed with their man 's T @-@ shirt , " craving his presence , and <unk> his scent " . " Is She the Reason " is an R & B ballad which was noted to have a similar chord progression to materials by The Beatles , which lyrically speaks on being in competition with another woman for her mans love & attention . It contains a trumpet @-@ laden sample from Melba Moore 's song " I Don 't Know No One Else to Turn To " . The next song , " Girl " was noted for its Motown influence and a theme talking about friendship . " If " , complete with strings , lyrically talks about men who don 't appreciate their female lovers until their relationship ends and they realize their mistakes . " Free " was described as a " soul classic from 1975 " with critics also noting elements of 1970s funk music , as the trio speaks on being " set free " after being in a relationship where her lover never tending to her desires like she does for him . The midtempo number " Through with Love " was noted for having an " angry " nature as it talks about a break @-@ up . It contains an undulating piano line as the members of the group sing with restrained vocals and later religious redemption with elements of gospel . In " Love " , " capital L kicks the daylights out of the forces of fear , doubt and disappointment " , as the group " thank [ s ] God for love " . They further sing about how people " can 't truly love another until [ they ] love God and then [ themselves ] " . They further proclaim that they have found love and are " madly in it " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The track listing of Destiny Fulfilled was revealed on October 15 , 2004 . The album was first released in Japan on November 10 , 2004 . It was released on November 16 , 2004 , in North America via Columbia Records . Although the original release was intended to be one day earlier , Columbia Records was concerned about " potential for Internet leaks and ' burned ' CD counterfeits " that could " lead consumers to experience inferior and incomplete versions of the album " which led to the postponement of Destiny Fulfilled . 
 The group performed " Lose My Breath " on ABC 's 2004 National Football League " Opening Kickoff " special after its online release on September 9 , 2004 , to break their yearlong hiatus . On October 25 , 2004 , they appeared at the Radio Music Awards in Las Vegas performing the song with an a cappella jazz opening . The following month they performed three songs from their previous albums and finished with " Lose My Breath " on The Oprah Winfrey Show where they also sat down for an interview with Oprah Winfrey . On November 8 , 2004 , the trio appeared on Total Request Live ( TRL ) and performed the song along with " Say My Name " . They went to the German entertainment TV show Wetten , dass .. ? on November 13 , 2004 , and performed " Lose My Breath " . At BET 's 106 & Park Destiny 's Child performed " Soldier " on November 15 , 2004 . They also performed the song on CBS 's The Early Show on December 8 , 2004 . In early February 2005 they gave another performance of " Soldier " at the British show Top of the Pops . At the 2005 NBA All @-@ Star Game on February 20 , 2005 , they sang both " Soldier " and " Lose My Breath " . They performed the latter song again at the 2005 ESPY Awards on July 13 with the ceremony being aired on ESPN four days later . " Cater 2 U " was performed on June 28 during the 2005 BET Awards in Los Angeles . 
 When the advanced release date of the album was announced , the group confirmed the initial dates of their worldwide tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It in connection with Destiny Fulfilled 's promotion . Promotions of the tour were aired over the radio and television across the United States and the group further collaborated with McDonald 's , which served as its sponsor . The tour 's set list included songs from Destiny Fulfilled as well as Destiny 's Child 's previous albums and songs from the solo albums of each member performed individually . Numerous costume changes occurred throughout the show ; the concert exhibited products from Beyoncé 's clothing line from the House of Deréon , a company she co @-@ founded with her mother Tina Knowles . A performance from the tour was filmed in Atlanta on July 15 , 2005 , and the DVD Destiny 's Child Live in Atlanta chronicling the concert was released on March 28 , 2006 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The album 's lead single , " Lose My Breath " , premiered on AOL Music on September 9 , 2004 and it was released on September 21 . Its high @-@ mark debut at number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 prior to its release gave the album an early boost . The single peaked at number three on the chart for the week ending November 6 , 2004 giving the group their ninth top ten single . " Lose My Breath " topped the Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the week ending January 8 , 2005 and was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on April 28 , 2005 selling 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was also successful across Europe , peaking at number one on the European Hot 100 Singles chart for the week ending December 4 , 2004 spending four consecutive weeks on top . It managed to top the charts in Belgium , Ireland , Italy and Switzerland and it further appeared in the top ten in almost every other chart . The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) used the song as the music for their introductory montage at the 2004 NBA Playoffs and through the first few weeks of the 2005 NBA Playoffs . 
 " Soldier " , released on December 7 , 2004 , peaked at the third position on the Billboard Hot 100 chart becoming the band 's tenth top ten single on that chart . It further became the second single from the album to top the Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the week ending February 26 , 2005 . The RIAA gave it a gold certification for selling 500 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . " Soldier " further peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart , number 3 on the ARIA Charts in Australia and appeared in the top 20 in many European countries . The third single from the album , " Girl " was released on May 2 , 2005 in the UK and on May 17 in the US . It was successful on the ARIA Chart peaking at number five and number six both on the UK Singles Chart and the New Zealand Singles Chart in addition to appearing in other European charts . In the US , it peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart becoming the lowest charting single there from the album . The fourth and final single from Destiny Fulfilled was " Cater 2 U " released in the US and Italy only beginning on June 14 , 2005 . It peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number three on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs further being certified gold by the RIAA . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Destiny Fulfilled received mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 52 based on 17 reviews . Dimitri Ehrlich of Vibe magazine complimented the production of the album , saying that it " showcases advanced production values " with " impressive " songwriting and vocal abilities and concluded that it " offers divine satisfaction " . A writer of Billboard felt that Destiny Fulfilled worked as " a testament to Beyoncé 's evolving multiple talents " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic praised Rowland 's and Williams ' abilities as vocalists and their contributions to the choruses , but felt that Beyoncé " steals every song on Destiny Fulfilled " further commending her for sounding " larger than life even when she 's quiet " ; however he concluded , " as a whole , the album winds up sounding too reserved and heavy @-@ handed , which makes it a disappointment " . Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club wrote in his review that " Destiny Fulfilled sounds distant and detached " further criticizing its mid @-@ tempo ballads for sounding " uninterrupted at best , uninspired at worst " . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times commented that it is " a surprisingly perfunctory disc that never quite justifies its existence " . Alan Ranta of Tiny Mix Tapes doubted Beyoncé 's lyrical sincerity , saying , " the success of this album depends once again on the complete suspension of die @-@ hard fans ' disbelief that Beyoncé ' Your Ad Here ' Knowles could ever actually truly love another human being as much as she loves herself and her possessions . " 
 Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian commented that the lead vocals of the songs were likely to be sung by each member equally , noting that it made the album a " democratic " one ; however she criticized them for squandering " the extent of their talents " on the album . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly also noticed its " overall air of democracy at work " and noted that Destiny Fulfilled " often moves at a molasses @-@ like pace , weighted down with a preponderance of exquisitely executed but ultimately dull ballads " . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone magazine echoed his comments , saying , " In all but a couple of songs , the verses are divided into three sections , with Beyonce leading things off , followed by Rowland , then Williams " . She noted that after a couple of upbeat songs , " the album slumps into an endless string of overwrought R & B ballads where the only saving grace is ... these ladies can harmonize like nobody 's business . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine has commented that the ballads of the album build into " the same sort of standoffish sexual supply @-@ and @-@ demand bartering that has marred their worst tracks " . Most of the critics questioned why Beyoncé had to return to Destiny 's Child after achieving the most success among the members of the group . Henderson lambasted Beyoncé to performing again with the group with the " full intention " of taking advantage to bolster her " <unk> " status to superstardom . In May 2006 , Destiny Fulfilled was listed at number 24 on a list titled " The 50 Worst Albums Ever ! " complied by Q magazine . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album won in the category for Favorite Soul / R & B Album at the 2005 American Music Awards where Destiny 's Child also won the Favorite Soul / R & B Band award . At the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards Destiny Fulfilled received an award for Best R & B / Soul Album while " Soldier " received Best R & B / Soul Single . The album was nominated in the category for Best Contemporary R & B Album at the 48th Grammy Awards in 2006 but it lost to Mariah Carey 's The Emancipation of Mimi . Its singles " Soldier " and " Cater 2 U " further received nominations in three different categories at the same ceremony . The previous year , " Lose My Breath " was nominated in the category for Best R & B Vocal Performance by a Duo Or Group at the 47th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the album debuted at number 19 on the Billboard 200 for the week ending November 27 , 2004 for amassing sales of 61 @,@ 000 copies prior to a whole tracking week . In its first official week of sales , Destiny Fulfilled sold over 497 @,@ 000 copies , with an increase of 713 % compared to its early sales ; the album 's chart position rocketed to number two on the Billboard 200 for the week ending December 4 , 2004 . In the same week , it debuted at number one on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart becoming the group 's second chart topper following Survivor in 2001 . After being removed from the top position for three consecutive weeks , Destiny Fulfilled returned to number one for the week ending January 1 , 2005 . On January 14 , 2005 it was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . It emerged as the seventh best @-@ selling album and third best @-@ selling R & B album in 2005 . As of October 2009 , the album has sold 3 @.@ 1 million copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . It was ranked at number 133 on the decade @-@ end chart of the best @-@ selling albums in that country for the period between 2000 and 2009 . The album peaked at number 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart and was awarded platinum certification by Music Canada selling 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the UK , Destiny Fulfilled debuted at number five on the UK Albums Chart on November 27 , 2004 which also became its peak position in that country . Having spent a total of 21 weeks on the chart , it became the group 's third album to enter the top ten in the UK until 2005 and the fourth one in their entire career . On November 19 , 2004 , the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified it platinum for selling 300 @,@ 000 copies . On the Irish Albums Chart , Destiny Fulfilled debuted and peaked at number 6 on November 18 , 2004 becoming Destiny 's Child third consecutive top ten album in Ireland . It was also successful in other European countries , peaking at number 3 on the German Albums Chart , further being certified platinum in that region . In France , Destiny Fulfilled peaked at number nine in its first week on November 14 , 2004 . It was last seen on the country 's albums chart at number 163 on September 3 , 2005 . 
 On the Australian ARIA Albums Chart , Destiny Fulfilled debuted at number 11 on November 28 , 2004 , a position which later became its peak . Spending a total of 31 weeks through 2004 and 2005 ascending and descending the chart , the album was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies in that region . In New Zealand , Destiny Fulfilled peaked at number 21 on April 25 , 2005 and the Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) awarded it with a gold certification for 7 @,@ 500 copies sold . In Japan , the album debuted and peaked at number four on the Oricon chart due to the success of " Lose My Breath " which reached number one on the singles chart there . The album has sold over 625 @,@ 000 copies there and was certified double platinum by Oricon making it Destiny 's Child 's biggest success there to date . It won in the category Rock / Pop Album of the Year International at the 19th Japan Gold Disc Award in 2005 organized by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . Destiny Fulfilled was named the eighth best @-@ selling album of 2004 worldwide by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) . 
 = = Disbandment = = 
 In a visit at the Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona , Spain on July 11 , 2005 , Rowland announced before 16 @,@ 000 spectators that Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It would be Destiny 's Child last tour together , revealing their formal disbandment . After their final North American leg , the group parted ways . In a statement released to MTV , the band said that the tour had provided them the opportunity to depart from Destiny 's Child on a " high note " . They also talked about the moment when the group started their musical endeavor and their realizations of pursuing individual careers after working together for several years . Destiny 's Child thanked fans for their support while not closing the chance of seeing them continuing each member 's goals in music , film , and television . In another interview they explained that their disbandment was planned during the making of the album . While in the studio , they discussed individual aspirations and realized that remaining as a group would prevent them in pursuing those interests . Rowland revealed that they wanted to break up while they were still successful and " friends [ with each other ] " . Beyoncé , however , emphasized that Destiny Fulfilled would not be their last album and disclosed the idea of a possible reunion . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Wal @-@ Mart exclusive DVD 
 A Wal @-@ Mart exclusive DVD titled " Fan Pack " was released on November 9 , 2004 a week before the release of Destiny Fulfilled . It was available at Wal @-@ Mart only for a limited time . 
 Notes 
 " Is She the Reason " samples " I Don 't Know No One Else to Turn To " as performed by Melba Moore . 
 " Girl " samples " Ocean of Thoughts and Dreams " as written by Don Davis and Eddie Robinson and performed by The Dramatics . 
 " Game Over " samples " Flashback " as performed by Dee Dee Sharp . 
 " If " samples " Inseparable " as written by Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy and performed by Natalie Cole . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Destiny Fulfilled . 
 Production 
 Vocal producers : Sean Garrett , Solange Knowles , Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams 
 Vocal editing : Sam Thomas , Rommel Nino Villanueva 
 Mixing : Andrew Dawson , Vincent Dilorenzo , Tony Maserati , Dave Pensado , Dexter Simmons , Phil Tan 
 A & R : Theresa LaBarbera Whites , Huy Nguyen 
 Production coordination : Candice Childress 
 Design : Alice Butts , Ian <unk> 
 Art direction : Alice Butts , Ian <unk> 
 Photography : Fabrizio Ferri 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Peak positions = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Moses Hardy = 
 Moses Hardy ( January 6 , 1894 – December 7 , 2006 ) was , at age 112 , the last surviving black veteran of World War I and one of the last surviving American veterans of that war . The son of former slaves , Hardy was born in 1894 and lived a religious and farming life until he signed up to serve overseas in World War I in July 1918 . He served in the segregated <unk> infantry , which was assigned a variety of manual labor and support tasks . Hardy himself served as a scout , supplying the front line troops when necessary . Though Hardy did experience combat , he was never seriously injured and rarely discussed his experiences concerning the fighting . Instead , he preferred to recount stories about the food , the bravery of the soldiers and the weather in France . 
 After the war , he took on a variety of jobs including school bus driver , farmer , deacon and cosmetics salesman , the latter of which he performed well past his 100th birthday . He received the Victory Medal , a special medal from the Mississippi National Guard and the French Légion d 'honneur . In 1999 , the Mississippi Legislature adopted a resolution recognizing him as an outstanding citizen of Mississippi . At the time of his death , at the age of 112 , he was recognized as the oldest combat veteran ever , the oldest male ever recorded in Mississippi and the second @-@ oldest man and World War I veteran in the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hardy was born in Aberdeen , Mississippi in 1894 . Hardy 's parents , Morris Hardy — born in the 1840s — and Nancy Hardy , were former slaves who after the Civil War had purchased 265 acres ( 1 @.@ 07 km2 ) of land in Mississippi from a Chickasaw Native American for a dollar . The Hardy family was a deeply religious one , and Moses would later recount that Exodus 20 : 12 , which instructed one to honor their parents , was his favorite Bible passage and one which he lived by . Hardy was married once , to a woman by the name of Fannie Marshall , with whom he would end up having eight children . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Hardy 's service in France lasted from July 1918 to July 1919 , and included thirty @-@ nine combat days . As an African American , he served in a segregated army unit , the <unk> Pioneer Infantry , which was commanded by white officers . Although the unit 's purpose was to provide support for engineer regiments , it was also an infantry unit that was equipped to fight if necessary . The unit focused mainly of the tasks of stevedores , such as unloading cargo from ships , but also performed other manual labor tasks , such as cooking and organizing burials . Hardy 's outfit was armed solely with rifles , instead of standard @-@ issue machine guns . After the war , Hardy 's division was responsible for cleaning up the battlefields and removing the dead . 
 Hardy himself admitted to his family that he was " scared to death " when he first arrived overseas , but believed that the soldiers were fed something to make them brave , which he referred to as " brave pills " . After a short time in the military , he claimed that he was not afraid of anything that he experienced from then on . Even in the heat of battle , Hardy professed that he would get " wound up " at times , but never frightened . He recalled many strange experiences with food and drink , such as getting used to drinking green water from canteens and eating <unk> , which he found to be surprisingly filling . To go with this , there was often little more than small tins of ham or chicken and occasionally coffee to drink and pudding or pie for dessert . Hardy also witnessed many of his friends get killed in action , and relied on his faith in God to get him through the toughest times . 
 Hardy often acted as a scout who would help bring supplies to troops on the front line . On September 25 , 1918 , he was present at the Meuse River during a mustard gas attack and , at some point during the war , he received an injury to his knee . Hardy rarely spoke about the fighting itself , and preferred to talk about France 's weather when asked about his experiences overseas . 
 = = Post @-@ World War I = = 
 Throughout the years , he received the Victory Medal , the Occupational Medal from the Mississippi Army National Guard , an honourable discharge ( which he had not received upon leaving the army ) and the French Légion d 'honneur . In 1999 , when he was 105 years old , the Mississippi Legislature adopted a resolution recognizing him as an outstanding citizen of Mississippi . At the time , he was known as the oldest living World War I veteran , as Emiliano Mercado del Toro had not yet been discovered . He was interviewed by Treehouse Productions in 2006 as part of their Living History Project , a radio tribute to the last surviving World War I veterans that was hosted by Walter Cronkite . Though he could not speak coherently , his son Haywood Hardy , himself 80 years old at the time , recalled some of the stories that his father had told him . 
 Hardy did not serve in World War II and instead drove a school bus , farmed and sold <unk> and wigs for " Lucky Heart " cosmetics until his retirement . He reportedly continued to go door @-@ to @-@ door for several years past his centenary , even resorting to phone sales when his children hid the keys of his 1972 Chevrolet Caprice . The youngest of his eight children , Jean Dukes , was born in the late 1940s . He also served as a deacon and superintendent of a Sunday School class at Mount Olive Church for over 75 years . His son claimed that , until about four years before he died , his father was healthy enough to drive his car into town every day . Hardy 's longevity was also credited to a daily meal that consisted of cabbage , corn bread , butter milk , potatoes and Dr Pepper , and the fact that he never drank alcohol or smoked in his life . Until a few years before his death , it was claimed that Hardy had never had a seriously ill day in his life and that he never took medicine , as it only made him sick . Hardy lived on his own until 2004 when his legs weakened and he found it almost impossible to walk . He was placed in a rest home , but was still able to feed himself and pass the days watching The Oprah Winfrey Show and The Price Is Right . 
