 During the 1980s , each of the future members of Tool moved to Los Angeles . Both Paul D 'Amour and Adam Jones wanted to enter the film industry , while Maynard James Keenan found employment remodeling pet stores after having studied visual arts in Michigan . Danny Carey and Keenan performed for Green Jellÿ , and Carey played with Carole King and Pigmy Love Circus . 
 Keenan and Jones met through a mutual friend in 1989 . After Keenan played a tape recording for Jones of his previous band project , Jones was so impressed by his voice that he eventually talked his friend into forming their own band . They started jamming together and were on the lookout for a drummer and a bass player . Carey happened to live above Keenan and was introduced to Jones by Tom Morello , an old high school friend of Jones and former member of Electric Sheep . Carey began playing in their sessions because he " felt kinda sorry for them , " as other invited musicians were not showing up . Tool 's lineup was completed when a friend of Jones introduced them to bassist D 'Amour . Early on , the band fabricated the story that they formed because of the <unk> " <unk> " . Although " <unk> " was also cited as an inspiration for the band 's name , Keenan later explained their intentions differently : " Tool is exactly what it sounds like : It 's a big dick . It 's a wrench . ... we are ... your tool ; use us as a catalyst in your process of finding out whatever it is you need to find out , or whatever it is you 're trying to achieve . " 
 After almost two years of practicing and performing locally in the Los Angeles area , the band was approached by record companies , and eventually signed a record deal with Zoo Entertainment . In March 1992 , Zoo published the band 's first effort , Opiate . Described by the band as " slam and bang " heavy music and the " hardest sounding " six songs they had written to that point , the EP included the singles " Hush " and " Opiate " . The band 's first music video , " Hush " , promoted their dissenting views about the then @-@ prominent Parents Music Resource Center and its advocacy of the censorship of music . The video featured the band members naked with their genitalia covered by parental advisory stickers and their mouths covered by duct tape . The band began touring with Rollins Band , Fishbone , and Rage Against the Machine to positive responses , which <unk> Garza of RIP Magazine summarized in September 1992 as a " buzz " and " a strong start " . 
 = = = Undertow ( 1993 – 95 ) = = = 
 The following year , at a time when alternative rock and grunge was at its height , Tool released their first full @-@ length album , Undertow ( 1993 ) . It expressed more diverse dynamics than Opiate and included songs the band had chosen not to publish on their previous release , when they had opted for a heavier sound . The band began touring again as planned , with an exception in May 1993 . Tool was scheduled to play at the Garden Pavilion in Hollywood but learned at the last minute that the venue belonged to L. Ron Hubbard 's Church of Scientology , which was perceived as a clash with " the band 's ethics about how a person should not follow a belief system that constricts their development as a human being . " Keenan " spent most of the show <unk> @-@ ing like a sheep at the audience . " 
 Tool later played several concerts during the Lollapalooza festival tour , and were moved from the second stage to the main stage by their manager and the festival co @-@ founder Ted Gardner . At the last concert of Lollapalooza in Tool 's hometown Los Angeles , comedian Bill Hicks introduced the band . Hicks had become a friend of the band members and an influence on them after being mentioned in Undertow 's liner notes . He jokingly asked the audience of 10 @,@ 000 people to stand still and help him look for a lost contact lens . The boost in popularity gained from these concerts helped Undertow to be certified gold by the RIAA in September 1993 and to achieve platinum status in 1995 , despite being sold with a censored album cover by distributors such as Wal @-@ Mart . The single " Sober " became a hit single by March 1994 and won the band Billboard 's " Best Video by a New Artist " award for the accompanying stop motion music video . 
 With the release of Tool 's follow @-@ up single " Prison Sex " , the band again became the target of censorship . The song 's lyrics and video dealt with child abuse , which sparked controversial reactions ; Keenan 's lyrics begin with : " It took so long to remember just what happened . I was so young and vestal then , you know it hurt me , but I 'm breathing so I guess I 'm still alive ... I 've got my hands bound and my head down and my eyes closed and my throat wide open . " The video was created primarily by guitarist Adam Jones , who saw it as his " surrealistic interpretation " of the subject matter . And while some contemporary journalists praised the video and described the lyrics as " metaphoric " , the American branch of MuchMusic asked Keenan to represent the band in a hearing . It deemed the music video too graphic and obscene , and MTV stopped airing it after a few showings . 
 In September 1995 , the band started writing and recording their second studio album . At that time Tool experienced its only lineup change to date , with bassist D 'Amour leaving the band amicably to pursue other projects . Justin Chancellor , a member of former tourmates Peach , eventually replaced D 'Amour , having been chosen over competitors such as Kyuss ' Scott Reeder , Filter 's Frank Cavanaugh , Pigmy Love Circus 's E. Shepherd Stevenson , and <unk> 's Marco Fox . 
 = = = Ænima ( 1996 – 2000 ) = = = 
 On September 17 , 1996 , Tool released their second full @-@ length album , Ænima ( / <unk> / ) . It was certified triple platinum by the RIAA on March 4 , 2003 . D 'Amour left Tool and Chancellor came on board during the recording of the album . The band enlisted the help of producer David Bottrill , who had produced some of King Crimson 's albums , while Jones collaborated with Cam de Leon to create Ænima 's Grammy @-@ nominated artwork . 
 The album was dedicated to stand @-@ up comedian Bill Hicks , who had died two and a half years earlier . The band intended to raise awareness about Hicks 's material and ideas , because they felt that Tool and Hicks " were resonating similar concepts " . In particular , Ænima 's final track " Third Eye " is preceded by a clip of Hicks ' performances , and the lenticular casing of the Ænima album packaging as well as the chorus of the title track " <unk> " make reference to a sketch from Hicks 's Arizona Bay , in which he contemplates the idea of Los Angeles falling into the Pacific Ocean . 
 The first single , " <unk> " , garnered limited airplay . It was shortened by radio programmers , MTV ( U.S. ) renamed the music video of " <unk> " to " Track No. 1 " due to offensive connotations , and the lyrics of the song were altered . Responding to fan complaints about censorship , Matt Pinfield of MTV 's 120 Minutes expressed regret on air by waving his fist in front of his face while introducing the video and explaining the name change . 
 A tour began in October 1996 , two weeks after Ænima 's release . Following numerous appearances in the United States and Europe , Tool headed for Australia and New Zealand in late March 1997 . April 1 of that year saw the first of several April Fools ' pranks related to the band . Kabir Akhtar , webmaster of the band 's semi @-@ official <unk> , The Tool Page , wrote that " at least three of the band are listed in critical condition " after a tour bus accident on a highway . This hoax gained wide attention and was eventually exposed on radio and MTV . Akhtar later posted an apology , claiming that The Tool Page " will not indulge itself in such outlandish pranks in the future " — a claim that would be belied by later April Fools ' pranks . 
 Eventually returning to the United States , Tool appeared at Lollapalooza ' 97 in July , this time as a headliner , where they gained critical praise from The New York Times : 
 Tool was returning in triumph to Lollapalooza after appearing among the obscure bands on the festival 's smaller stage in 1993 . Now Tool is the prime attraction for a festival that 's struggling to maintain its purpose ... Tool uses taboo @-@ breaking imagery for hellfire moralizing in songs that swerve from bitter reproach to nihilistic condemnation . Its music has refined all the troubled majesty of grunge . 
 Notwithstanding a decline in popularity of alternative rock music during the mid @-@ 1990s in the United States , Ænima eventually matched Tool 's successful debut album in sales . The progressive @-@ influenced Ænima landed the band at the head of the alternative metal genre : It featured the Grammy Award @-@ winning " <unk> " and appeared on several " Best Albums of 1996 " lists , with notable examples being those of Kerrang ! and Terrorizer . 
 A legal battle that began the same year interfered with the band 's working on another release . Volcano Entertainment — the successor of Tool 's by @-@ then defunct label Zoo Entertainment — alleged contract violations by Tool and filed a lawsuit . According to Volcano , Tool had violated their contract when the band looked at offers from other record labels . After Tool filed a countersuit stating that Volcano had failed to use a renewal option in their contract , the parties settled out of court . In December 1998 Tool agreed to a new contract , a three @-@ record joint venture deal . In 2000 , the band dismissed their long @-@ time manager Ted Gardner , who then sued the band over his commission on this lucrative agreement . 
 During this time , Keenan joined the band A Perfect Circle , which was founded by long @-@ time Tool guitar tech Billy Howerdel , while Jones joined The Melvins ' Buzz Osborne and Carey drummed with Dead Kennedys ' Jello Biafra on side projects . Although there were rumors that Tool were breaking up , Chancellor , Jones , and Carey were working on new material while waiting for Keenan to return . In 2000 , the Salival box set ( CD / VHS or CD / DVD ) was released , effectively putting an end to the rumors . The CD contained one new original track , a cover of Led Zeppelin 's " No Quarter " , a live version of Peach 's " You Lied " , and revised versions of old songs . The VHS and the DVD each contained four music videos , plus a bonus music video for " Hush " on the DVD . Although Salival did not yield any singles , the hidden track " Maynard 's Dick " ( which dates back to the Opiate era ) briefly found its way to FM radio when several DJs chose to play it on air under the title " Maynard 's Dead " . 
 = = = Lateralus ( 2001 – 05 ) = = = 
 In January 2001 , Tool announced a new album , Systema Encéphale , along with a 12 @-@ song track list containing titles such as " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " Musick " , and " <unk> " . File @-@ sharing networks such as Napster were flooded with bogus files bearing the titles ' names . At the time , Tool members were outspokenly critical of file @-@ sharing networks in general due to their impact on artists that are dependent on record sales to continue their careers . Keenan said during an interview with NY Rock in 2000 , " I think there are a lot of other industries out there that might deserve being destroyed . The ones who get hurt by MP3s are not so much companies or the business , but the artists , people who are trying to write songs . " 
 A year later , the band revealed that the new album was actually titled Lateralus ; the name Systema Encéphale and the track list had been a ruse . Lateralus and the corresponding tours would take Tool a step further toward art rock and progressive rock territory . Rolling Stone wrote in an attempt to summarize the album that " Drums , bass and guitars move in jarring cycles of <unk> and near @-@ silent death march ... The prolonged running times of most of Lateralus ' thirteen tracks are misleading ; the entire album rolls and stomps with <unk> purpose . " Joshua Klein of The A.V. Club expressed his opinion that Lateralus , with its 79 minutes and relatively complex and long songs — topped by the ten @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute music video for " Parabola " — posed a challenge to fans and music programming alike . 
 The album became a worldwide success , reaching No.1 on the U.S. Billboard 200 albums chart in its debut week . Tool received their second Grammy Award for the best metal performance of 2001 for the song " Schism " . During the band 's acceptance speech , drummer Carey stated that he would like to thank his parents ( for putting up with him ) and Satan , and bassist Chancellor concluded : " I want to thank my dad for doing my mom . " 
 Extensive touring throughout 2001 and 2002 supported Lateralus and included a personal highlight for the band : a 10 @-@ show joint mini @-@ tour with King Crimson in August 2001 . Comparisons between the two were made , MTV describing the bands as " the once and future kings of progressive rock " . Keenan stated of the minitour : " For me , being on stage with King Crimson is like Lenny Kravitz playing with Led Zeppelin , or Britney Spears onstage with Debbie Gibson . " 
 Although the end of the tour in November 2002 seemed to signal the start of another hiatus for the band , they did not become completely inactive . While Keenan recorded and toured with A Perfect Circle , the other band members released an interview and a recording of new material , both exclusive to the fan club . On April 1 , 2005 , the official Tool website announced that " Maynard has found Jesus " and would be abandoning the recording of the new Tool album temporarily and possibly permanently . Kurt Loder of MTV contacted Keenan via email to ask for a confirmation and received a nonchalant confirmation . When Loder asked again , Keenan 's response was simply " heh heh . " On April 7 the official site announced , " Good news , April fools fans . The writing and recording is back under way . " 
 Work continued on the follow @-@ up to Lateralus ; meanwhile , a Lateralus vinyl edition and two DVD singles were released , and the band 's official website received a new splash intro by artist Joshua Davis . The " double vinyl four @-@ picture disc " edition of Lateralus was first released as a limited autographed edition exclusively available to fan club members and publicly released on August 23 , 2005 . On December 20 the two DVDs were released , one containing the single " Schism " and the other " Parabola " , a remix by Lustmord , and a music video with commentary by David Yow and Jello Biafra . 
 = = = 10 @,@ 000 Days ( 2006 – 07 ) = = = 
 Fifteen years into the band 's career , Tool had acquired what Dan Epstein of Revolver described as a devoted " cult " following , and as details about the band 's next album emerged , such as the influence of Lateralus tourmates Fantômas and Meshuggah , controversy surrounding the new Tool album surfaced with speculation over song titles and pre @-@ release rumors of leaked songs . Speculation over possible album titles was dismissed with a news item on the official Tool website , announcing that the new album 's name was 10 @,@ 000 Days . Nevertheless , speculation continued , with allegations that 10 @,@ 000 Days was merely a " decoy " album to fool audiences . The rumor was proven false when a leaked copy of the album was distributed via <unk> networks a week prior to its official release . 
 The album opener , " Vicarious " , premiered on U.S. radio stations on April 17 , 2006 . The album premiered on May 2 in the U.S. and debuted at the top spots of various international charts . 10 @,@ 000 Days sold 564 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week in the U.S. and was number one on the Billboard 200 charts , doubling the sales of Pearl Jam 's self @-@ titled album , its closest competitor . However , 10 @,@ 000 Days was received less favorably by critics than its predecessor Lateralus had been . 
 Prior to the release of 10 @,@ 000 Days , a tour kicked off at Coachella on April 30 . The touring schedule was similar to the Lateralus tour of 2001 ; supporting acts were Isis and Mastodon . During a short break early the next year , after touring Australia and New Zealand , drummer Carey suffered a biceps tear during a skirmish with his girlfriend 's dog , casting uncertainty on the band 's upcoming concerts in North America . Carey underwent surgery on February 21 and several performances had to be postponed . Back on tour by April , Tool appeared on June 15 as a headliner at the Bonnaroo Music Festival with a guest appearance from Rage Against the Machine 's Tom Morello on " Lateralus " . Meanwhile , " Vicarious " was a nominee for Best Hard Rock Performance and 10 @,@ 000 Days won Best Recording Package at the 49th Grammy Awards . The music video for " Vicarious " was released on DVD on December 18 . 
 = = = Hiatus and upcoming fifth studio album ( 2008 – present ) = = = 
 Chancellor stated in May 2007 that the band would probably continue their tour until early 2008 and then " take some time off " . He added that the band had already written some new material and would surely release another album at some point . He speculated about the possibility of a " band movie " , something the band has considered for a long time . Ideas ranged from " a narrative story in a surreal fashion with as much money and special effects as possible " to " pockets of all of that or something that 's live or the band playing " . Although Carey stated that the necessary know @-@ how was at hand due to the band 's connections to artists working in the movie business , Jones dismissed the idea , saying " It 's just talk right now . " 
 The band 's 2009 summer tour began on July 18 in Commerce City , Colorado , at the Mile High Music Festival . They headlined Lollapalooza 2009 and a show on August 22 for the Epicenter Festival in Pomona , California . Their Tool Winter Tour played dates across the U.S. and Canada in January and February 2012 . The band played at Ozzfest Japan on May 12 , 2013 . Meanwhile , Tool members have pursued their own musical projects . Keenan has toured extensively with Puscifer , which he describes as involving a series of musical ideas he did not have an opportunity to explore with Tool or A Perfect Circle . 
 Keenan and Carey offered conflicting reports on whether or not their next album would surface in 2013 , though Carey later conceded that " early 2014 " seemed more likely . By May 2013 , Keenan stated that he had actively joined the writing process as enough instrumental material had been written . On March 6 , 2014 , Crave Online reported that Jones had said the new album was complete and on track for a 2014 release . The following day , Tool released an official statement to Rolling Stone , explaining that Jones was joking . 
 On July 15 , 2014 , Carey and Jones informed Rolling Stone that family commitments and an ongoing lawsuit are the key reasons for the delayed fifth album . Carey said to the music publication that one untitled track is " pretty much done " and explained in regard to the band 's legal issue : 
 But the point is , we 're fighting the good fight ... We 're going to trial and we want to crush them [ an insurance company ] . But every time we 've gotten close to going to trial , it gets postponed and we 've wasted money and time and it has just drained our creative energy . We bought an insurance policy for peace of mind , but instead we would have been better off if we never had it and just dealt with the original lawsuit . 
 In March 2015 , Jones revealed that the lawsuit had been settled in the band 's favor , and as such , the band was turning their focus towards recording the album . He said that he hoped the album would be finished before the end of 2015 but emphasized that the band would not rush their work to meet an arbitrary deadline . 
 In January 2016 , Tool undertook a tour of the United States . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Tool was described by Patrick Donovan of The Age as " the thinking person 's metal band . Cerebral and visceral , soft and heavy , melodic and abrasive , tender and brutal , familiar and strange , western and eastern , beautiful and ugly , taut yet sprawling and epic , they are a tangle of contradictions . " Tool has gained critical praise from the International Herald Tribune 's C.B. Liddell for their complex and ever @-@ evolving sound . Describing their general sound , AllMusic refers to them as " grinding , post @-@ Jane 's Addiction heavy metal " , and The New York Times sees similarities to " Led Zeppelin 's heaving , battering guitar riffs and Middle Eastern modes " . Their 2001 work Lateralus was compared by Allmusic to Pink Floyd 's Meddle ( 1971 ) , but thirty years later and altered by " Tool 's impulse to cram every inch of infinity with hard guitar meat and absolute dread " . Tool had been labelled as post @-@ metal in 1993 and 1996 , as well as in 2006 , after the term came into popularity . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 A component of Tool 's song repertoire relies on the use of unusual time signatures . For instance , Chancellor describes the time signature employed on the first single from Lateralus , " Schism " , as " six " and " six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half " and that it later " goes into all kinds of other times " . Further examples include the album 's title track , which also displays shifting rhythms , as does 10 @,@ 000 Days : " Wings for Marie ( Pt 1 ) " and " 10 @,@ 000 Days ( Wings Pt 2 ) " . 
 Beyond this aspect of the band 's sound , each band member experiments within his wide musical scope . Bass Player magazine described Chancellor 's bass playing as a " thick midrange tone , guitar @-@ style techniques , and elastic versatility " . As an example of this , the magazine mentioned the use of a wah effect by hammering " the notes with the left hand and using the bass 's tone controls to get a tone sweep " , such as on the song " The Patient " , from Lateralus . 
 Completing the band 's rhythm section , drummer Carey uses polyrhythms , tabla @-@ style techniques , and the incorporation of custom electronic drum pads to trigger samples , such as prerecorded tabla and <unk> sounds . 
 Keenan 's ability as a vocalist has been characterized more subjectively by the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer : After his performance during an Alice in Chains reunion concert in 2005 , freelancer Travis Hay saw him as " a natural fit at replacing Layne Staley " . Regarding his role in A Perfect Circle and Tool , The New York Times wrote that " both groups rely on Mr. Keenan 's ability to dignify emotions like lust , anger and disgust , the honey in his voice adding a touch of profundity " . 
 According to Guitar Player magazine , Jones does not rely on any one particular guitar @-@ playing technique but rather combines many techniques . For example , Allmusic wrote that he " alternately <unk> [ es ] power chords , scratchy noise , chiming arpeggios , and a quiet minimalism " in " Sober " . Additionally , the band uses forms of instrumental experimentation , like the use of a " pipe bomb microphone " ( a guitar pickup mounted inside a brass cylinder ) and a talk box guitar solo on " Jambi " . 
 The band puts an emphasis on the sound of their songs and attempts to reduce the effect lyrics can have on the perception of songs by not releasing song lyrics with any album . Lyrical arrangements are often given special attention , such as in " Lateralus " . The number of syllables per line in the lyrics to " Lateralus " correspond to an arrangement of the Fibonacci numbers and the song " Jambi " uses and makes a reference to the common metrical foot iamb . The lyrics on Ænima and Lateralus focus on philosophy and spirituality — specific subjects range from organized religion in " Opiate " , to evolution and Jungian psychology in " Forty @-@ Six & 2 " and transcendence in " Lateralus " . On 10 @,@ 000 Days , Keenan wanted to explore issues more personal to him : the album name and title track refer to the twenty @-@ seven years during which his mother suffered from complications of a stroke until her death in 2003 . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The band has named the group Melvins as an influence on its development , but the most @-@ publicized influence is progressive rock pioneer group King Crimson . Longtime King Crimson member Robert Fripp has downplayed any influence his band had on Tool . In an interview , Fripp touched on how the two bands relate to each other , stating " Do you hear the influence ? There 's just one figure where I hear an influence , just one . It was a piece we were developing that we dropped . And it 's almost exactly the same figure : three note arpeggio with a particular accent from the guitar . So I do not think you could have heard it . That 's the only thing . " He also said , " I happen to be a Tool fan . The members of Tool have been generous enough to suggest that Crimson has been an influence on them . Adam Jones asked me if I could detect it in their music , and I said I couldn ’ t . I can detect more Tool influence in King Crimson , than I can hear King Crimson in Tool . " In describing their wide range of styles , critics have noted that they are " influenced as much by Pink Floyd as by the Sex Pistols " . Other reported influences of the band include Rush , Helmet , Faith No More and Jane 's Addiction . 
 Writers Harvey Newquist and Rich Maloof attribute to Tool an influence on modern metal in their book The New Metal Masters . Sean Richardson of The Boston Phoenix sees System of a Down , Deftones , and Korn as examples of Tool 's " towering influence " on the genre . Keenan 's unique style of singing has been seen as heavily influencing artists such as Pete Loeffler of Chevelle , Benjamin Burnley of Breaking Benjamin , Will Martin of Earshot , and Fred Durst of Limp Bizkit . 
 = = Visual arts = = 
 Part of Tool 's work as a band is to incorporate influences of other works of art in their music videos , live shows , and album packaging . Adam Jones doubles as the band 's art director and director of their music videos . Another expression of this is an official website " dedicated to the arts and influences " on the band . 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 The band has released nine music videos but made personal appearances in only the first two , which the band states is to prevent people from " latching onto the personalities involved rather than listening to the music . " With the exception of " Hush " and " Vicarious " all of Tool 's music videos feature stop motion animation to some extent . The videos are created primarily by Adam Jones , often in collaboration with artists such as Chet Zar , Alex Grey , and <unk> <unk> . 
 The " Sober " music video in particular attracted much attention . Jones explained that it doesn 't contain a storyline , but that his intentions were to summon personal emotions with its imagery . Rolling Stone described this imagery as " evil little men dwell in a dark dungeon with meat coursing through pipes in the wall " and called it a " groundbreaking " , " epic " clip . Billboard voted it " Best Video by a New Artist " . 
 The video for " Vicarious " was released on DVD on December 18 , 2007 . The video is the first by Tool to be produced entirely through the use of CGI . 
 = = = Album artwork = = = 
 Jones is responsible for most of the band 's artwork concepts . Their album Undertow features a ribcage sculpture by Jones on its cover and photos contributed by the band members . Later albums included artwork by collaborating artists : Ænima and Salival featured works by Cam de Leon ; Lateralus and 10 @,@ 000 Days were created with the help of Alex Grey . The releases garnered positive critical reception , with a music journalist of the Associated Press attributing to the band a reputation for innovative album packaging . 
 Both Ænima and 10 @,@ 000 Days were nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Recording Package , but while the former failed to win in 1997 , the latter did win in 2007 . Jones created packaging for 10 @,@ 000 Days that features a pair of stereoscopic lenses for viewing 3 @-@ D artwork and photos . Jones , a lifelong fan of stereoscopic photography , wanted the packaging to be unique and to reflect the 1970s artwork he appreciates . 
 = = = Live shows = = = 
 Following their first tours in the early 1990s , Tool has performed as a headline act in world tours and major festivals such as Lollapalooza ( 1997 and 2009 ) , Coachella ( 1999 and 2006 ) , Voodoo Fest ( 2001 ) , Download Festival ( 2006 ) , Roskilde ( 2001 and 2006 ) , Big Day Out ( 2007 and 2011 ) , Bonnaroo ( 2007 ) , All Points West Music & Arts Festival ( 2009 ) , and Epicenter ( 2009 ) . They have been joined on stage by numerous artists such as Buzz Osborne and Scott Reeder on several occasions ; Tom Morello and Zack de la Rocha during their 1991 tour ; Layne Staley in Hawaii , 1993 ; Tricky , Robert Fripp , Mike Patton , Dave Lombardo , Brann <unk> of Mastodon , and experimental arts duo <unk> <unk> during their 2001 – 02 Lateralus tour ; and Kirk Hammett , Phil Campbell , Serj Tankian , and Tom Morello during their 2006 – 07 tour . They have covered songs by Led Zeppelin , Ted Nugent , Peach , Kyuss , the Dead Kennedys , and the Ramones . 
 Live shows on Tool 's headline tour incorporate an unorthodox stage setting and video display . Keenan and Carey line up in the back on elevated platforms , while Jones and Chancellor stand in the front , toward the sides of the stage . Keenan often faces the backdrop or the sides of the stage rather than the audience . No followspots or live cameras are used ; instead , the band employs extensive backlighting to direct the focus away from the band members and toward large screens in the back and the crowd . Breckinridge Haggerty , the band 's live video designer , says that the resulting dark spaces on stage " are mostly for Maynard " . He explains , " [ a ] lot of the songs are a personal journey for him and he has a hard time with the glare of the lights when he 's trying to reproduce these emotions for the audience . He needs a bit of personal space , and he feels more comfortable in the shadows . " The big screens are used to play back " looped clips that aren 't tracked to a song like a music video . The band has never used any sort of timecode . They ’ ve always made sure the video can change on @-@ the @-@ fly , in a way that can be improvised . ... The show is never the same twice . " During the 10 @,@ 000 Days tour , the video material consisted of over six hours of material , created by Jones , his wife <unk> Grace , Chet Zar , Meats Meier , and Haggerty . Some of the material created by Zar has been released on his DVD Disturb the Normal . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Undertow ( 1993 ) 
 Ænima ( 1996 ) 
 Lateralus ( 2001 ) 
 10 @,@ 000 Days ( 2006 ) 
 = = Grammy awards and nominations = = 
 = Ontario Highway 71 = 
 King 's Highway 71 , commonly referred to as Highway 71 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The 194 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 121 mi ) route travels concurrently with Highway 11 for 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from the Fort Frances @-@ International Falls International Bridge in Fort Frances , where it continues south as US Route 53 ( US 53 ) and US Route 71 ( US 71 ) in Minnesota . At Chapple , Highway 11 continues west while Highway 71 branches north and travels 154 kilometres ( 96 mi ) to a junction with Highway 17 just east of Kenora . Highway 71 is part of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway for its entire length . 
 The current routing of Highway 71 was created out of a route renumbering that took place on April 1 , 1960 , to extend Highway 11 from Thunder Bay to Rainy River . The portion of the highway that is concurrent with Highway 11 follows the Cloverleaf Trail , which was constructed by the end of 1880s and improved over the next several decades . The portion between Highway 11 and Highway 17 follows the Heenan Highway , which was constructed to connect the Rainy River region with Kenora and the remainder of Ontario 's road network ; before its opening the area was accessible only via the United States . Both highways were incorporated into the provincial highway system in 1937 following the merger of the Department of Highways ( DHO ) and the Department of Northern Development . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 71 connects the Rainy River region with the Trans @-@ Canada Highway near Kenora . The first 65 kilometres ( 40 mi ) of the highway traverses the largest pocket of arable land in northern Ontario . Following that , the route suddenly enters the Canadian Shield , where the land is unsuitable for agricultural development . 
 The highway begins at the international bridge in Fort Frances ; within the United States , the road continues south as US 53 and US 71 in Minnesota . From the bridge , it proceeds along Central Avenue , encountering Highway 11 one block north . The two routes travel north concurrently to 3 Street West , where both turn west . At the Fort Frances Cemetery , the route branches southwest and exits Fort Frances after splitting with the Colonization Road ( Highway 602 ) . It follows the old Cloverleaf Trail west through Devlin , where it intersects Highway 613 , and Emo , where it merges with the Colonization Road . Approximately six kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) west of Emo , in the Manitou Rapids First Nations Reserve , Highway 71 branches north , while Highway 11 continues west to Rainy River . 
 North of the Manitou Rapids Reserve , Highway 71 presses through a large swath of land mostly occupied by horse and cattle ranches . It intersects Highway 600 and Highway 615 , both of which have historical connections to Highway 71 . The highway passes through Finland and enters the Boreal Forest , descending into the Canadian Shield over the course of a kilometre and a half ( approximately one mile ) . From this point to its northern terminus , the highway crosses through rugged and isolated terrain , curving around lakes , rivers and mountains on its northward journey . It passes through the community of <unk> Lake before crossing between Rainy River District and Kenora District midway between there and Nestor Falls . 
 North of Nestor Falls , the highway travels along the eastern shore of Lake of the Woods , providing access to Crow Lake , as well as to Whitefish Bay just southeast of Sioux Narrows . Here the route crosses the Sioux Narrows Bridge , the last part of the highway to be constructed and a formidable engineering obstacle in the 1930s . North of Sioux Narrows , the highway meanders northward through an uninhabited region , zigzagging among the numerous lakes that dot Kenora District and crossing the Black River . It provides access to Eagle <unk> and Rushing River Provincial Parks several kilometres south of its northern terminus at Highway 17 , four kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) east of the split with Highway 17A and 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) east of downtown Kenora . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 71 was created out of a renumbering of several highways in the Rainy River District during the late 1950s as Highway 11 was extended west of Thunder Bay . The history of the route is tied to the two major highways in Rainy River District : the Cloverleaf Trail and the Heenan Highway . 
 The Cloverleaf Trail , the older of the two roads , was initially developed as the Rainy River colonization road . A line was blazed as early as 1875 , possibly as part of the Dawson Trail , and improved in 1885 into a trail . This initial trail followed the Rainy River west from Fort Frances to Lake of the Woods ; Highway 602 now follows the road between Fort Frances and Emo . In 1911 , James Arthur Mathieu was elected as a Member of Provincial Parliament ( MPP ) in the Rainy River riding . As a lumber merchant , Mathieu promoted improved road access in the region . Between 1911 and 1915 , he oversaw construction of the gravel Cloverleaf Trail between Fort Frances and Rainy River . 
 The Heenan Highway would become the first Canadian link to the Rainy River area ; before its opening in the mid @-@ 1930s , the only way to drive to the area was via the United States . In 1922 , Kenora MPP Peter Heenan and Dr. McTaggart approached the government to lobby for construction of a road between Nestor Falls and Kenora . Nestor Falls was the northernmost point accessible by road from the Rainy River area . Heenan would become the Minister of Lands and Forests in Mitch Hepburn 's cabinet . This provided the impetus for construction to begin in 1934 . Unlike the Cloverleaf Trail , the Fort Frances – Kenora Highway , as it was known prior to its opening , was constructed through the rugged terrain of the Canadian Shield . Rocks , forests , lakes , muskeg , and insects served as major obstacles during construction of the 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) highway , which progressed from both ends . By late 1935 , the only remaining gap in the road was the Sioux Narrows Bridge . Construction on this bridge was underway by March 1936 ; it was rapidly assembled using old @-@ growth Douglas fir from British Columbia ( BC ) as the main structural members . These timbers were cut in BC , and shipped to be built on @-@ site like a jig @-@ saw puzzle . The bridge was completed on June 15 , 1936 , completing the link between Fort Frances and Kenora . 
 On July 1 , 1936 , Premier Mitch Hepburn attended a ceremony in front of the Rainy Lake Hotel in Fort Frances . On a rainy afternoon , at 5 : 30 p.m. , Peter Heenan handed Hepburn a pair of scissors with which to cut the ribbon crossing the road and declare the highway open . Hepburn , addressing the crowd that was gathered , asked " What would you say if we call it the Heenan Highway , what would you think of that ? " . The crowd cheered and Hepburn cut the ribbon . 
 The Cloverleaf Trail and the Heenan Highway were assumed by the DHO shortly after its merger with the Department of Northern Development . Following the merger , the DHO began assigning trunk roads throughout northern Ontario as part of the provincial highway network . Highway 71 was assigned on September 1 , 1937 , along the Cloverleaf Trail . The portion of the Heenan Highway lying within Kenora District was designated as Highway 70 on the same day . The portion within Rainy River District was designated as Highway 70 on September 29 . 
 The original route of Highway 70 split in two south of Finland ; Highway 70 turned east to Off Lake Corner , then south to Emo , while Highway 70A turned west to Black Hawk then south to Barwick . The northern end of the highway was also concurrent with Highway 17 for 21 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 13 @.@ 5 mi ) into Kenora , and the southern end concurrent with Highway 71 for 37 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 23 @.@ 0 mi ) between Emo and Fort Frances . During 1952 , the highway was extended south from its split to Highway 71 , midway between Barwick and Emo . By 1953 , the new road was opened and informally designated as the new route of Highway 70 . The old routes were decommissioned on February 8 , and the new route designated several weeks later on March 10 , 1954 . Both forks were later redesignated as Highway 600 and Highway 615 . 
 Throughout the mid- to late 1950s , a new highway was constructed west from Thunder Bay towards Fort Frances . Initially this road was designated as Highway 120 . In 1959 , it was instead decided to make this new link a westward extension of Highway 11 ; a major renumbering took place on April 1 , 1960 : Highway 11 was established between Rainy River and Fort Frances , Highway 71 was truncated west of the Highway 70 junction , and the entirety of Highway 70 was renumbered as Highway 71 . This established the current routing of the highway . 
 Although now rebuilt as a steel structure , the original Sioux Narrows Bridge was considered to be the longest single span wooden bridge in the world , at 64 metres ( 210 ft ) . The original bridge remained in place until 2003 , when an engineering inspection revealed that 78 % of the structure had failed . A temporary bridge was erected while a new structure was built . The new bridge was completed in November 2007 , incorporating the old timber truss as a decorative element . A ribbon cutting ceremony to dedicate the bridge was held on July 1 , 2008 , 72 years after the original dedication by Mitch Hepburn . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 71 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Bird migration = 
 Bird migration is the regular seasonal movement , often north and south along a flyway , between breeding and wintering grounds . Many species of bird migrate . Migration carries high costs in predation and mortality , including from hunting by humans , and is driven primarily by availability of food . It occurs mainly in the northern hemisphere , where birds are funnelled on to specific routes by natural barriers such as the Mediterranean Sea or the Caribbean Sea . 
 Historically , migration has been recorded as much as 3 @,@ 000 years ago by Ancient Greek authors including Homer and Aristotle , and in the Book of Job , for species such as storks , turtle doves , and swallows . More recently , Johannes Leche began recording dates of arrivals of spring migrants in Finland in 1749 , and scientific studies have used techniques including bird ringing and satellite tracking . Threats to migratory birds have grown with habitat destruction especially of stopover and wintering sites , as well as structures such as power lines and wind farms . 
 The Arctic tern holds the long @-@ distance migration record for birds , travelling between Arctic breeding grounds and the Antarctic each year . Some species of tubenoses ( Procellariiformes ) such as albatrosses circle the earth , flying over the southern oceans , while others such as Manx shearwaters migrate 14 @,@ 000 km ( 8 @,@ 700 mi ) between their northern breeding grounds and the southern ocean . Shorter migrations are common , including altitudinal migrations on mountains such as the Andes and Himalayas . 
 The timing of migration seems to be controlled primarily by changes in day length . Migrating birds navigate using celestial cues from the sun and stars , the earth 's magnetic field , and probably also mental maps . 
 = = Historical views = = 
 Records of bird migration were made as much as 3 @,@ 000 years ago by the Ancient Greek writers Hesiod , Homer , Herodotus and Aristotle . The Bible also notes migrations , as in the Book of Job ( 39 : 26 ) , where the inquiry is made : " Is it by your insight that the hawk hovers , spreads its wings southward ? " The author of Jeremiah ( 8 : 7 ) wrote : " Even the stork in the heavens knows its seasons , and the turtle dove , the swift and the crane keep the time of their arrival . " 
 Aristotle noted that cranes traveled from the steppes of Scythia to marshes at the headwaters of the Nile . Pliny the Elder , in his Historia Naturalis , repeats Aristotle 's observations . 
 = = = Swallow migration versus hibernation = = = 
 Aristotle however suggested that swallows and other birds hibernated . This belief persisted as late as 1878 , when Elliott Coues listed the titles of no less than 182 papers dealing with the hibernation of swallows . Even the " highly observant " Gilbert White , in his posthumously published 1789 The Natural History of Selborne , quoted a man 's story about swallows being found in a chalk cliff collapse " while he was a schoolboy at Brighthelmstone " , though the man denied being an eyewitness . However , he also writes that " as to swallows being found in a torpid state during the winter in the Isle of Wight or any part of this country , I never heard any such account worth attending to " , and that if early swallows " happen to find frost and snow they immediately withdraw for a time — a circumstance this much more in favour of hiding than migration " , since he doubts they would " return for a week or two to warmer latitudes " . 
 It was not until the end of the eighteenth century that migration as an explanation for the winter disappearance of birds from northern climes was accepted . Thomas Bewick 's A History of British Birds ( Volume 1 , 1797 ) mentions a report from " a very intelligent master of a vessel " who , " between the islands of Minorca and Majorca , saw great numbers of Swallows flying northward " , and states the situation in Britain as follows : 
 Swallows frequently roost at night , after they begin to congregate , by the sides of rivers and pools , from which circumstance it has been erroneously supposed that they retire into the water . 
 Bewick then describes an experiment which succeeded in keeping swallows alive in Britain for several years , where they remained warm and dry through the winters . He concludes : 
 These experiments have since been amply confirmed by ... M. Natterer , of Vienna ... and the result clearly proves , what is in fact now admitted on all hands , that Swallows do not in any material instance differ from other birds in their nature and propensities [ for life in the air ] ; but that they leave us when this country can no longer furnish them with a supply of their proper and natural food ... 
 = = General patterns = = 
 Migration is the regular seasonal movement , often north and south , undertaken by many species of birds . Bird movements include those made in response to changes in food availability , habitat , or weather . Sometimes , journeys are not termed " true migration " because they are irregular ( nomadism , invasions , irruptions ) or in only one direction ( dispersal , movement of young away from natal area ) . Migration is marked by its annual seasonality . Non @-@ migratory birds are said to be resident or sedentary . Approximately 1800 of the world 's 10 @,@ 000 bird species are long @-@ distance migrants . 
 Many bird populations migrate long distances along a flyway . The most common pattern involves flying north in the spring to breed in the temperate or Arctic summer and returning in the autumn to wintering grounds in warmer regions to the south . Of course , in the southern hemisphere the directions are reversed , but there is less land area in the far south to support long @-@ distance migration . 
 The primary motivation for migration appears to be food ; for example , some hummingbirds choose not to migrate if fed through the winter . Also , the longer days of the northern summer provide extended time for breeding birds to feed their young . This helps diurnal birds to produce larger clutches than related non @-@ migratory species that remain in the tropics . As the days shorten in autumn , the birds return to warmer regions where the available food supply varies little with the season . 
 These advantages offset the high stress , physical exertion costs , and other risks of the migration . Predation can be heightened during migration : Eleonora 's falcon Falco <unk> , which breeds on Mediterranean islands , has a very late breeding season , coordinated with the autumn passage of southbound passerine migrants , which it feeds to its young . A similar strategy is adopted by the greater noctule bat , which preys on nocturnal passerine migrants . The higher concentrations of migrating birds at stopover sites make them prone to parasites and pathogens , which require a heightened immune response . 
 Within a species not all populations may be migratory ; this is known as " partial migration " . Partial migration is very common in the southern continents ; in Australia , 44 % of non @-@ passerine birds and 32 % of passerine species are partially migratory . In some species , the population at higher latitudes tends to be migratory and will often winter at lower latitude . The migrating birds bypass the latitudes where other populations may be sedentary , where suitable wintering habitats may already be occupied . This is an example of leap @-@ frog migration . Many fully migratory species show leap @-@ frog migration ( birds that nest at higher latitudes spend the winter at lower latitudes ) , and many show the alternative , chain migration , where populations ' slide ' more evenly north and south without reversing order . 
 Within a population , it is common for different ages and / or sexes to have different patterns of timing and distance . Female chaffinches Fringilla <unk> in Eastern Fennoscandia migrate earlier in the autumn than males do . 
 Most migrations begin with the birds starting off in a broad front . Often , this front narrows into one or more preferred routes termed <unk> . These routes typically follow mountain ranges or coastlines , sometimes rivers , and may take advantage of updrafts and other wind patterns or avoid geographical barriers such as large stretches of open water . The specific routes may be genetically programmed or learned to varying degrees . The routes taken on forward and return migration are often different . A common pattern in North America is clockwise migration , where birds flying North tend to be further West , and flying South tend to shift <unk> . 
 Many , if not most , birds migrate in flocks . For larger birds , flying in flocks reduces the energy cost . Geese in a V @-@ formation may conserve 12 – 20 % of the energy they would need to fly alone . Red knots Calidris <unk> and <unk> Calidris alpina were found in radar studies to fly 5 km / h ( 3 @.@ 1 mph ) faster in flocks than when they were flying alone . 
 Birds fly at varying altitudes during migration . An expedition to Mt . Everest found skeletons of northern pintail Anas acuta and black @-@ tailed godwit Limosa <unk> at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) on the Khumbu Glacier . Bar @-@ headed geese Anser indicus have been recorded by GPS flying at up to 6 @,@ 540 metres ( 21 @,@ 460 ft ) while crossing the Himalayas , at the same time engaging in the highest rates of climb to altitude for any bird . Anecdotal reports of them flying much higher have yet to be corroborated with any direct evidence . Seabirds fly low over water but gain altitude when crossing land , and the reverse pattern is seen in landbirds . However most bird migration is in the range of 150 to 600 m ( 490 to 1 @,@ 970 ft ) . Bird strike aviation records from the United States show most collisions occur below 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) and almost none above 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) . 
 Bird migration is not limited to birds that can fly . Most species of penguin ( <unk> ) migrate by swimming . These routes can cover over 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) . Dusky grouse <unk> obscurus perform altitudinal migration mostly by walking . Emus Dromaius novaehollandiae in Australia have been observed to undertake long @-@ distance movements on foot during droughts . 
 = = Long @-@ distance migration = = 
 The typical image of migration is of northern landbirds , such as swallows ( Hirundinidae ) and birds of prey , making long flights to the tropics . However , many Holarctic wildfowl and finch ( <unk> ) species winter in the North Temperate Zone , in regions with milder winters than their summer breeding grounds . For example , the pink @-@ footed goose Anser <unk> migrates from Iceland to Britain and neighbouring countries , whilst the dark @-@ eyed junco <unk> <unk> migrates from subarctic and arctic climates to the contiguous United States and the American goldfinch from taiga to wintering grounds extending from the American South northwestward to Western Oregon . Migratory routes and wintering grounds are traditional and learned by young during their first migration with their parents . Some ducks , such as the garganey Anas <unk> , move completely or partially into the tropics . The European pied flycatcher Ficedula hypoleuca also follows this migratory trend , breeding in Asia and Europe and wintering in Africa . 
 Often , the migration route of a long @-@ distance <unk> bird doesn 't follow a straight line between breeding and wintering grounds . Rather , it could follow a hooked or arched line , with detours around geographical barriers . For most land @-@ birds , such barriers could consist in seas , large water bodies or high mountain ranges , because of the lack of stopover or feeding sites , or the lack of thermal columns for broad @-@ winged birds . 
 The same considerations about barriers and detours that apply to long @-@ distance land @-@ bird migration apply to water birds , but in reverse : a large area of land without bodies of water that offer feeding sites may also be a barrier to a bird that feeds in coastal waters . Detours avoiding such barriers are observed : for example , brent geese Branta <unk> migrating from the Taymyr Peninsula to the Wadden Sea travel via the White Sea coast and the Baltic Sea rather than directly across the Arctic Ocean and northern Scandinavia . 
 = = = In waders = = = 
 A similar situation occurs with waders ( called shorebirds in North America ) . Many species , such as dunlin Calidris alpina and western sandpiper Calidris <unk> , undertake long movements from their Arctic breeding grounds to warmer locations in the same hemisphere , but others such as semipalmated sandpiper C. pusilla travel longer distances to the tropics in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 For some species of waders , migration success depends on the availability of certain key food resources at stopover points along the migration route . This gives the migrants an opportunity to refuel for the next leg of the voyage . Some examples of important stopover locations are the Bay of Fundy and Delaware Bay . 
 Some bar @-@ tailed godwits Limosa lapponica have the longest known non @-@ stop flight of any migrant , flying 11 @,@ 000 km from Alaska to their New Zealand non @-@ breeding areas . Prior to migration , 55 percent of their bodyweight is stored as fat to fuel this uninterrupted journey . 
 = = = In seabirds = = = 
 Seabird migration is similar in pattern to those of the waders and waterfowl . Some , such as the black guillemot <unk> <unk> and some gulls , are quite sedentary ; others , such as most terns and auks breeding in the temperate northern hemisphere , move varying distances south in the northern winter . The Arctic tern Sterna paradisaea has the longest @-@ distance migration of any bird , and sees more daylight than any other , moving from its Arctic breeding grounds to the Antarctic non @-@ breeding areas . One Arctic tern , ringed ( banded ) as a chick on the Farne Islands off the British east coast , reached Melbourne , Australia in just three months from fledging , a sea journey of over 22 @,@ 000 km ( 14 @,@ 000 mi ) . Many <unk> birds breed in the southern hemisphere and migrate north in the southern winter . 
 The most pelagic species , mainly in the ' <unk> ' order Procellariiformes , are great wanderers , and the albatrosses of the southern oceans may circle the globe as they ride the " roaring forties " outside the breeding season . The tubenoses spread widely over large areas of open ocean , but congregate when food becomes available . Many are also among the longest @-@ distance migrants ; sooty shearwaters Puffinus griseus nesting on the Falkland Islands migrate 14 @,@ 000 km ( 8 @,@ 700 mi ) between the breeding colony and the North Atlantic Ocean off Norway . Some Manx shearwaters Puffinus puffinus do this same journey in reverse . As they are long @-@ lived birds , they may cover enormous distances during their lives ; one record @-@ breaking Manx shearwater is calculated to have flown 8 million km ( 5 million miles ) during its over @-@ 50 year lifespan . 
 = = = Diurnal migration in raptors = = = 
 Some large broad @-@ winged birds rely on thermal columns of rising hot air to enable them to soar . These include many birds of prey such as vultures , eagles , and buzzards , but also storks . These birds migrate in the daytime . Migratory species in these groups have great difficulty crossing large bodies of water , since thermals only form over land , and these birds cannot maintain active flight for long distances . Mediterranean and other seas present a major obstacle to soaring birds , which must cross at the narrowest points . Massive numbers of large raptors and storks pass through areas such as the Strait of Messina , Gibraltar , <unk> , and the Bosphorus at migration times . More common species , such as the European honey buzzard <unk> <unk> , can be counted in hundreds of thousands in autumn . Other barriers , such as mountain ranges , can also cause funnelling , particularly of large diurnal migrants . This is a notable factor in the Central American migratory bottleneck . Batumi bottleneck in the Caucasus is one of the heaviest migratory funnels on earth . Avoiding flying over the Black Sea surface and across high mountains , hundreds of thousands of soaring birds funnel through an area around the city of Batumi , Georgia . Birds of prey such as honey buzzards which migrate using thermals lose only 10 to 20 % of their weight during migration , which may explain why they forage less during migration than do smaller birds of prey with more active flight such as falcons , hawks and harriers . 
 = = = Nocturnal migration in smaller insectivorous birds = = = 
 Many of the smaller insectivorous birds including the warblers , hummingbirds and flycatchers migrate large distances , usually at night . They land in the morning and may feed for a few days before resuming their migration . The birds are referred to as passage migrants in the regions where they occur for short durations between the origin and destination . 
 Nocturnal migrants minimize predation , avoid overheating , and can feed during the day . One cost of nocturnal migration is the loss of sleep . Migrants may be able to alter their quality of sleep to compensate for the loss . 
 = = Short @-@ distance and altitudinal migration = = 
 Many long @-@ distance migrants appear to be genetically programmed to respond to changing day length . Species that move short distances , however , may not need such a timing mechanism , instead moving in response to local weather conditions . Thus mountain and moorland breeders , such as wallcreeper <unk> <unk> and white @-@ throated dipper <unk> <unk> , may move only altitudinally to escape the cold higher ground . Other species such as merlin Falco columbarius and Eurasian skylark Alauda arvensis move further , to the coast or towards the south . Species like the chaffinch are much less migratory in Britain than those of continental Europe , mostly not moving more than 5 km in their lives . 
 Short @-@ distance passerine migrants have two evolutionary origins . Those that have long @-@ distance migrants in the same family , such as the common chiffchaff Phylloscopus collybita , are species of southern hemisphere origins that have progressively shortened their return migration to stay in the northern hemisphere . 
 Species that have no long @-@ distance migratory relatives , such as the waxwings Bombycilla , are effectively moving in response to winter weather and the loss of their usual winter food , rather than enhanced breeding opportunities . 
 In the tropics there is little variation in the length of day throughout the year , and it is always warm enough for a food supply , but altitudinal migration occurs in some tropical birds . There is evidence that this enables the migrants to obtain more of their preferred foods such as fruits . 
 <unk> migration is common on mountains worldwide , such as in the Himalayas and the Andes . 
 = = <unk> and dispersal = = 
 Sometimes circumstances such as a good breeding season followed by a food source failure the following year lead to irruptions in which large numbers of a species move far beyond the normal range . Bohemian waxwings Bombycilla garrulus well show this unpredictable variation in annual numbers , with five major arrivals in Britain during the nineteenth century , but 18 between the years 1937 and 2000 . Red crossbills Loxia <unk> too are irruptive , with widespread invasions across England noted in 1251 , 1593 , 1757 , and 1791 . 
 Bird migration is primarily , but not entirely , a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon . This is because land birds in high northern latitudes , where food becomes scarce in winter , leave for areas further south ( including the Southern Hemisphere ) to overwinter , and because the continental landmass is much larger in the Northern Hemisphere . In contrast , among ( pelagic ) seabirds , species of the Southern Hemisphere are more likely to migrate . This is because there is a large area of ocean in the Southern Hemisphere , and more islands suitable for seabirds to nest . 
 = = Physiology and control = = 
 The control of migration , its timing and response are genetically controlled and appear to be a primitive trait that is present even in non @-@ migratory species of birds . The ability to navigate and orient themselves during migration is a much more complex phenomenon that may include both endogenous programs as well as learning . 
 = = = Timing = = = 
 The primary physiological cue for migration are the changes in the day length . These changes are also related to hormonal changes in the birds . In the period before migration , many birds display higher activity or <unk> ( German : migratory restlessness ) , first described by Johann Friedrich Naumann in 1795 , as well as physiological changes such as increased fat deposition . The occurrence of <unk> even in cage @-@ raised birds with no environmental cues ( e.g. shortening of day and falling temperature ) has pointed to the role of <unk> endogenous programs in controlling bird migrations . Caged birds display a preferential flight direction that corresponds with the migratory direction they would take in nature , changing their preferential direction at roughly the same time their wild conspecifics change course . 
 In polygynous species with considerable sexual dimorphism , males tend to return earlier to the breeding sites than their females . This is termed protandry . 
 = = = Orientation and navigation = = = 
 Navigation is based on a variety of senses . Many birds have been shown to use a sun compass . Using the sun for direction involves the need for making compensation based on the time . Navigation has also been shown to be based on a combination of other abilities including the ability to detect magnetic fields ( <unk> ) , use visual landmarks as well as olfactory cues . 
 Long distance migrants are believed to disperse as young birds and form attachments to potential breeding sites and to favourite wintering sites . Once the site attachment is made they show high site @-@ fidelity , visiting the same wintering sites year after year . 
 The ability of birds to navigate during migrations cannot be fully explained by endogenous programming , even with the help of responses to environmental cues . The ability to successfully perform long @-@ distance migrations can probably only be fully explained with an accounting for the cognitive ability of the birds to recognize habitats and form mental maps . Satellite tracking of day migrating raptors such as ospreys and honey buzzards has shown that older individuals are better at making corrections for wind drift . 
 Migratory birds may use two electromagnetic tools to find their destinations : one that is entirely innate and another that relies on experience . A young bird on its first migration flies in the correct direction according to the Earth 's magnetic field , but does not know how far the journey will be . It does this through a radical pair mechanism whereby chemical reactions in special photo pigments sensitive to long wavelengths are affected by the field . Although this only works during daylight hours , it does not use the position of the sun in any way . At this stage the bird is in the position of a boy scout with a compass but no map , until it grows accustomed to the journey and can put its other capabilities to use . With experience it learns various landmarks and this " mapping " is done by <unk> in the trigeminal system , which tell the bird how strong the field is . Because birds migrate between northern and southern regions , the magnetic field strengths at different latitudes let it interpret the radical pair mechanism more accurately and let it know when it has reached its destination . There is a neural connection between the eye and " Cluster N " , the part of the forebrain that is active during migrational orientation , suggesting that birds may actually be able to see the magnetic field of the earth . 
 = = = Vagrancy = = = 
 Migrating birds can lose their way and appear outside their normal ranges . This can be due to flying past their destinations as in the " spring overshoot " in which birds returning to their breeding areas overshoot and end up further north than intended . Certain areas , because of their location , have become famous as <unk> for such birds . Examples are the Point Pelee National Park in Canada , and Spurn in England . 
 Reverse migration , where the genetic programming of young birds fails to work properly , can lead to rarities turning up as vagrants thousands of kilometres out of range . 
 Drift migration of birds blown off course by the wind can result in " falls " of large numbers of migrants at coastal sites . 
 A related phenomenon called " <unk> " involves birds from one region joining similar birds from a different breeding region in the common winter grounds and then migrating back along with the new population . This is especially common in some waterfowl , which shift from one flyway to another . 
 = = = Migration conditioning = = = 
 It has been possible to teach a migration route to a flock of birds , for example in re @-@ introduction schemes . After a trial with Canada geese Branta canadensis , microlight aircraft were used in the US to teach safe migration routes to reintroduced whooping cranes Grus americana . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Birds need to alter their metabolism in order to meet the demands of migration . The storage of energy through the accumulation of fat and the control of sleep in nocturnal migrants require special physiological adaptations . In addition , the feathers of a bird suffer from wear @-@ and @-@ tear and require to be molted . The timing of this molt - usually once a year but sometimes twice - varies with some species molting prior to moving to their winter grounds and others molting prior to returning to their breeding grounds . Apart from physiological adaptations , migration sometimes requires behavioural changes such as flying in flocks to reduce the energy used in migration or the risk of predation . 
 = = Evolutionary and ecological factors = = 
 Migration in birds is highly labile and is believed to have developed independently in many avian lineages . While it is agreed that the behavioral and physiological adaptations necessary for migration are under genetic control , some authors have argued that no genetic change is necessary for migratory behavior to develop in a sedentary species because the genetic framework for migratory behavior exists in nearly all avian lineages . This explains the rapid appearance of migratory behavior after the most recent glacial maximum . 
 Theoretical analyses show that detours that increase flight distance by up to 20 % will often be adaptive on aerodynamic grounds - a bird that loads itself with food to cross a long barrier flies less efficiently . However some species show circuitous migratory routes that reflect historical range expansions and are far from optimal in ecological terms . An example is the migration of continental populations of Swainson 's thrush Catharus <unk> , which fly far east across North America before turning south via Florida to reach northern South America ; this route is believed to be the consequence of a range expansion that occurred about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Detours may also be caused by differential wind conditions , predation risk , or other factors . 
 = = = Climate change = = = 
 Large scale climatic changes , as have been experienced in the past , are expected to have an effect on the timing of migration . Studies have shown a variety of effects including timing changes in migration , breeding as well as population variations . 
 = = Ecological effects = = 
 The migration of birds also aids the movement of other species , including those of ectoparasites such as ticks and lice , which in turn may carry micro @-@ organisms including those of concern to human health . Due to the global spread of avian influenza , bird migration has been studied as a possible mechanism of disease transmission , but it has been found not to present a special risk ; import of pet and domestic birds is a greater threat . Some viruses that are maintained in birds without lethal effects , such as the West Nile Virus may however be spread by migrating birds . Birds may also have a role in the dispersal of propagules of plants and plankton . 
 Some predators take advantage of the concentration of birds during migration . Greater noctule bats feed on nocturnal migrating passerines . Some birds of prey specialize on migrating waders . 
 = = Study techniques = = 
 Early studies on the timing of migration began in 1749 in Finland , with Johannes Leche of Turku collecting the dates of arrivals of spring migrants . 
 Bird migration routes have been studied by a variety of techniques including the oldest , marking . Swans have been marked with a nick on the beak since about 1560 in England . Scientific ringing was pioneered by Hans Christian Cornelius Mortensen in 1899 . Other techniques include radar and satellite tracking . 
 Stable isotopes of hydrogen , oxygen , carbon , nitrogen , and sulphur can establish avian migratory connectivity between wintering sites and breeding grounds . Stable isotopic methods to establish migratory linkage rely on spatial isotopic differences in bird diet that are incorporated into inert tissues like feathers , or into growing tissues such as claws and muscle or blood . 
 An approach to identify migration intensity makes use of upward pointing microphones to record the nocturnal contact calls of flocks flying overhead . These are then analyzed in a laboratory to measure time , frequency and species . 
 An older technique to quantify migration involves observing the face of the moon towards full moon and counting the silhouettes of flocks of birds as they fly at night . 
 Orientation behaviour studies have been traditionally carried out using variants of a setup known as the Emlen funnel , which consists of a circular cage with the top covered by glass or wire @-@ screen so that either the sky is visible or the setup is placed in a planetarium or with other controls on environmental cues . The orientation behaviour of the bird inside the cage is studied quantitatively using the distribution of marks that the bird leaves on the walls of the cage . Other approaches used in pigeon homing studies make use of the direction in which the bird vanishes on the horizon . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Human activities have threatened many migratory bird species . The distances involved in bird migration mean that they often cross political boundaries of countries and conservation measures require international cooperation . Several international treaties have been signed to protect migratory species including the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 of the US. and the African @-@ Eurasian Migratory <unk> Agreement 
 The concentration of birds during migration can put species at risk . Some spectacular migrants have already gone extinct ; during the passenger pigeon 's ( Ectopistes migratorius ) migration the enormous flocks were a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) wide , darkening the sky and 300 miles ( 480 km ) long , taking several days to pass . 
 Other significant areas include stop @-@ over sites between the wintering and breeding territories . A capture @-@ recapture study of passerine migrants with high fidelity for breeding and wintering sites did not show similar strict association with stop @-@ over sites . 
 Hunting along migration routes threatens some bird species . The populations of Siberian cranes ( <unk> <unk> ) that wintered in India declined due to hunting along the route , particularly in Afghanistan and Central Asia . Birds were last seen in their favourite wintering grounds in Keoladeo National Park in 2002 . Structures such as power lines , wind farms and offshore oil @-@ rigs have also been known to affect migratory birds . Other migration hazards include pollution , storms , wildfires , and habitat destruction along migration routes , denying migrants food at stopover points . For example , in the East Asian – Australasian Flyway , up to 65 % of key intertidal habitat at the Yellow Sea migration bottleneck has been destroyed since the 1950s . 
 = Nig Clarke = 
 Jay Justin " Nig " Clarke ( December 15 , 1882 – June 15 , 1949 ) was a Canadian professional baseball player . A catcher , Clarke played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for nine seasons with the Detroit Tigers , Cleveland Naps , St. Louis Browns , Philadelphia Phillies , and Pittsburgh Pirates . In 506 career games , Clarke recorded a batting average of .254 and accumulated 20 triples , six home runs , and 127 runs batted in ( RBI ) . 
 Born in Canada and raised in Michigan , Clarke began his baseball career in 1902 , when he reportedly hit eight home runs while playing for the Corsicana Oil Citys of the Texas League . From there , he spent two more seasons in the minor leagues before the Cleveland Naps signed him to a contract . Aside from a loan to the Detroit Tigers , he played for the Naps for six seasons . Clarke was then traded to the St. Louis Browns , where he played for one season . After several years in the minor leagues , Clarke joined the United States Marine Corps . He returned to the major leagues and played there until 1920 , then continued playing for minor league teams until 1927 . Clarke then retired from the game , rejoined the Marines , and moved to River Rouge , Michigan , where he lived until his death in 1949 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clarke was born in 1882 at Anderdon Township ( now Amherstburg , Ontario ) , Canada . He moved to Detroit , Michigan as a child in April 1888 . He began playing semi @-@ pro baseball in Adrian , Michigan , while studying at Assumption College in Windsor , Ontario , Canada . Early in his career , he was given the nickname of " Nig " by newspapers due to his dark complexion . 
 = = Professional baseball = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Clarke began his professional career in 1902 with the Corsicana Oil Citys in the Texas League . On July 14 , he hit eight home runs in ten at bats in a 51 – 3 victory over the Texarkana <unk> . Because Corsicana 's blue laws forbade Sunday baseball ( or , according to The Sporting News , due to poor attendance in Corsicana ) , the game was played in Ennis , Texas , in a facility that has a right field fence estimated to be 210 feet from home plate along the foul line . While some cast doubt on Clarke 's eight home run game , the feat was later attested to by the official scorer ( under oath ) and by others who observed the game . In a 1940 interview with The Sporting News one of Clarke 's Corsicana teammates claimed : " The right field fence at Ennis wasn 't more than 40 feet back of first base . Nig just pulled eight short flies around and over that wall . I 'm not taking anything away from old Nig 's batting prowess , but that 's the way he hit eight homers that day . Didn 't have to send the ball more than 140 feet at the most . " 
 In 1903 , Clarke played for the Little Rock Travelers in the Southern Association , and had a batting average of .254 in 41 games . While with Little Rock , he clashed with owner Mike Finn , who refused to trade him throughout the season despite Clarke 's demands and trade offers by other teams . After the 1903 season ended , he was traded to the Atlanta Crackers of the same league . With Atlanta , Clarke started off the first half of the season with a .400 batting average before cooling down in the second half . He finished the season with a .264 average in 135 games . 
 = = = Cleveland Naps = = = 
 At the end of the 1904 season , the Cleveland Naps purchased Clarke from Atlanta . The plan was for Clarke to be the third catcher on the roster behind Harry Bemis and Fritz <unk> , and as a result , he only played in a few games during the first half of the season . In August 1905 , Clarke briefly joined the Detroit Tigers after the Cleveland team traveled to Boston without him . He was loaned to Detroit with the understanding that the Naps could reclaim him on one day 's notice . Clarke appeared in only three games for Detroit , compiling a .429 batting average and a home run before being recalled by the Naps . In 45 games between both teams on the season , he had a .208 batting average . 
 Clarke began the 1906 season as the third string catcher . A month into the season , Naps manager Nap Lajoie changed the roster around partially due to Clarke 's hitting , which had improved greatly from last season . To end the year , Clarke compiled a career high batting average of .358 , tying him with George Stone for the American League batting championship . However , Stone was recognized as the batting champion because Clarke had only appeared in only 57 games with 195 plate appearances . Clarke began to wear shin guards early in his career , and was one of the first ballplayers to adopt this layer of protection . 
 After spending the offseason playing winter baseball in Florida with several other major leaguers , Clarke became the everyday catcher for the 1907 season . He started off hitting well , and had a batting average of .381 through the first month of the league , which was second in the American League . He started nearly every game for the Naps until his finger was hit by a foul ball in a game in June , causing him to miss two weeks . By the end of the season , he had stopped playing well , finishing the season with a .269 batting average and six triples in 120 games , as well as a league @-@ leading 25 passed balls . During the offseason , Clarke played winter baseball in Cuba , then returned to Cleveland in March . 
 Clarke spent the 1908 season splitting time at the catcher position with Bemis , as both struggled in spring practice . In September , Clarke sustained an injury in a game against Detroit when the bone of a finger on his right hand was split and he was unable to grow a nail . On October 2 , he caught a perfect game thrown by Addie Joss , which was only the fourth perfect game in MLB history . He finished the year with a .241 batting average and six triples in 97 games . On Thanksgiving night in 1908 , Clarke was married to Mary A. Smith at the home of the bride 's parents in Sandwich , Ontario , Canada . His wife did not like the " Nig " nickname that sports reporters used , and wanted them to simply call him Jay in newspapers . 
 The signing of Ted Easterly and Grover Land gave the Naps four catchers entering spring training . Easterly became the starting catcher and Bemis the backup due to Clarke 's " lack of ambition " , which led to speculation that he could be traded during the season . He finished the season with a .274 batting average in 55 games . During the offseason , St. Louis Browns player @-@ manager Jack O 'Connor attempted to trade for Clarke , but a deal never materialized . Clarke saw little playing time in 1910 due to a bout of typhoid fever , which landed him in the hospital for most of the season . He played 21 games that season , batting .155 . 
 = = = St. Louis Browns and minor leagues = = = 
 On December 14 , 1910 , Cleveland traded Clarke to the St. Louis Browns in exchange for Art Griggs . Clarke split time with Jim Stephens at catcher for the Browns , and appeared in 82 games for the team in 1911 , compiling a .215 batting average . After the 1911 season , was released on waivers to the Washington Senators . The Senators , however , had no interest in him and tried to undo the acceptance , which was overruled by American League president Ban Johnson . Shortly afterwards , he was sold to the Indianapolis Indians in the American Association , where he played from 1912 to 1913 . In 1912 , he hit .266 in 92 games , and the following year he hit .282 in 28 games . 
 Partway through the 1913 season , Clarke was sold to the San Francisco Seals of the Pacific Coast League , where he played from 1913 to 1915 . With San Francisco , he hit .281 and .222 in 1913 and 1914 , respectively . He also played parts of the 1915 season with the Houston Buffaloes of the Texas League and the Memphis Chickasaws of the Southern Association , playing in 81 total games for the three teams . In 1916 , Clarke was traded by Houston to the Mobile Sea Gulls of the Southern Association for Hub Northen . That season , he batted .149 in 20 games before being released . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 On August 1 , 1917 , Clarke enlisted in the United States Marine Corps . While serving , he attained the rank of corporal and served in Brest , France . In 1918 , while serving in the Marine Corps , Clarke filed a military naturalization petition and became a United States citizen ; a year later he was discharged . While serving in the Marines , Clarke stated that he wished he " joined the marine corps twelve years ago and never played ball . " 
 In 1919 , he returned mid @-@ season to the major leagues with the Philadelphia Phillies . He appeared in 26 games , compiling a .242 batting average . He led the National League with a 58 @.@ 8 % caught stealing percentage . Prior to 1919 , only three catchers in major league history had ever compiled a higher caught stealing percentage . In November 1919 , Clarke was selected off waivers by the Pittsburgh Pirates from the Phillies . He appeared in three games for the Pirates and had no hits in seven at bats . He appeared in his final major league game on April 24 , 1920 . 
 After his brief stay in Pittsburgh , the Pirates sent Clarke to Greenville in 1920 . He played next for Toledo and Winston @-@ Salem , and then for the Reading Aces in the International League during the 1922 and 1923 seasons . In 1924 , he played for both Reading and Harrisburg . In 1925 , he played for the Salisbury Indians in the Eastern Shore League . In the spring of 1925 , The Sporting News wrote : " Nig Clarke not only led the league with the bat and the mitt and the arm , he was the very picture of a baseball player . I rather suspect that Nig put away as much corn juice as the next man . In the days of his greatness he was wont to take a couple of <unk> every morning before breakfast . Never seemed to hurt Nig any . " At the end of the season , he was given most valuable player honors for his performance with Salisbury . Clarke concluded his professional baseball career in 1927 with Tulsa . 
 = = Later life = = 
 At the time of the 1920 U.S. Census , Clarke and his wife were living in Detroit . In June 1929 , Clarke rejoined the Marine Corps , serving until August 1932 . At the time of the 1930 U.S. Census , Clarke was stationed at the Quantico Marine Barracks in Prince William County , Virginia . After being discharged from the Marine Corps , Clarke built a house in River Rouge , a suburb of Detroit , where he lived with his mother . In June 1949 , Clarke was found dead at his home in River Rouge . 
 = Logarithm = 
 In mathematics , the logarithm is the inverse operation to exponentiation . That means the logarithm of a number is the exponent to which another fixed value , the base , must be raised to produce that number . In simple cases the logarithm counts repeated multiplication . For example , the base 10 logarithm of 1000 is 3 , as 10 to the power 3 is 1000 ( 1000 
 = 10 × 10 × 10 = 
 103 ) ; the multiplication is repeated three times . More generally , exponentiation allows any positive real number to be raised to any real power , always producing a positive result , so the logarithm can be calculated for any two positive real numbers b and x where b is not equal to 1 . The logarithm of x to base b , denoted logb ( x ) , is the unique real number y such that 
 by 
 = x . 
 For example , as 64 = 
 26 , then : 
 log2 ( 64 ) 
 = 6 
 The logarithm to base 10 ( that is b = 
 10 ) is called the common logarithm and has many applications in science and engineering . The natural logarithm has the number e ( ≈ 2 @.@ 718 ) as its base ; its use is widespread in mathematics and physics , because of its simpler derivative . The binary logarithm uses base 2 ( that is b = 2 ) and is commonly used in computer science . 
 Logarithms were introduced by John Napier in the early 17th century as a means to simplify calculations . They were rapidly adopted by navigators , scientists , engineers , and others to perform computations more easily , using slide rules and logarithm tables . Tedious multi @-@ digit multiplication steps can be replaced by table look @-@ ups and simpler addition because of the fact — important in its own right — that the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the factors : 
 <formula> 
 provided that b , x and y are all positive and b ≠ 1 . The present @-@ day notion of logarithms comes from Leonhard Euler , who connected them to the exponential function in the 18th century . 
 Logarithmic scales reduce wide @-@ ranging quantities to tiny scopes . For example , the decibel is a unit quantifying signal power log @-@ ratios and amplitude log @-@ ratios ( of which sound pressure is a common example ) . In chemistry , pH is a logarithmic measure for the acidity of an aqueous solution . Logarithms are commonplace in scientific formulae , and in measurements of the complexity of algorithms and of geometric objects called fractals . They describe musical intervals , appear in formulas counting prime numbers , inform some models in psychophysics , and can aid in forensic accounting . 
 In the same way as the logarithm reverses exponentiation , the complex logarithm is the inverse function of the exponential function applied to complex numbers . The discrete logarithm is another variant ; it has uses in public @-@ key cryptography . 
 = = Motivation and definition = = 
 The idea of logarithms is to reverse the operation of exponentiation , that is , raising a number to a power . For example , the third power ( or cube ) of 2 is 8 , because 8 is the product of three factors of 2 : 
 <formula> 
 It follows that the logarithm of 8 with respect to base 2 is 3 , so log2 8 = 3 . 
 = = = Exponentiation = = = 
 The third power of some number b is the product of three factors of b . More generally , raising b to the n @-@ th power , where n is a natural number , is done by multiplying n factors of b . The n @-@ th power of b is written bn , so that 
 <formula> 
 Exponentiation may be extended to by , where b is a positive number and the exponent y is any real number . For example , b − 1 is the reciprocal of b , that is , 1 / b . ( For further details , including the formula bm + n = bm · bn , see exponentiation or for an elementary treatise . ) 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 The logarithm of a positive real number x with respect to base b , a positive real number not equal to 1 , is the exponent by which b must be raised to yield x . In other words , the logarithm of x to base b is the solution y to the equation 
 <formula> 
 The logarithm is denoted " logb ( x ) " ( pronounced as " the logarithm of x to base b " or " the base @-@ b logarithm of x " ) . In the equation y = logb ( x ) , the value y is the answer to the question " To what power must b be raised , in order to yield x ? " . This question can also be addressed ( with a richer answer ) for complex numbers , which is done in section " Complex logarithm " , and this answer is much more extensively investigated in the page for the complex logarithm . 
 = = = Examples = = = 
 For example , log2 ( 16 ) 
 = 4 , since 24 = 
 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 
 = 16 . Logarithms can also be negative : 
 <formula> 
 since 
 <formula> 
 A third example : log10 ( 150 ) is approximately 2 @.@ 176 , which lies between 2 and 3 , just as 150 lies between 102 = 
 100 and 103 
 = 1000 . Finally , for any base b , logb ( b ) = 
 1 and logb ( 1 ) 
 = 0 , since b1 = 
 b and b0 = 1 , respectively . 
 = = Logarithmic identities = = 
 Several important formulas , sometimes called logarithmic identities or logarithmic laws , relate logarithms to one another . 
 = = = Product , quotient , power and root = = = 
 The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the numbers being multiplied ; the logarithm of the ratio of two numbers is the difference of the logarithms . The logarithm of the p @-@ th power of a number is p times the logarithm of the number itself ; the logarithm of a p @-@ th root is the logarithm of the number divided by p . The following table lists these identities with examples . Each of the identities can be derived after substitution of the logarithm definitions <formula> or <formula> in the left hand sides . 
 = = = Change of base = = = 
 The logarithm logb ( x ) can be computed from the logarithms of x and b with respect to an arbitrary base k using the following formula : 
 <formula> 
 Typical scientific calculators calculate the logarithms to bases 10 and e . Logarithms with respect to any base b can be determined using either of these two logarithms by the previous formula : 
 <formula> 
 Given a number x and its logarithm logb ( x ) to an unknown base b , the base is given by : 
 <formula> 
 = = Particular bases = = 
 Among all choices for the base , three are particularly common . These are b 
 = 10 , b = 
 e ( the irrational mathematical constant ≈ 2 @.@ 71828 ) , and b = 2 . In mathematical analysis , the logarithm to base e is widespread because of its particular analytical properties explained below . On the other hand , base @-@ 10 logarithms are easy to use for manual calculations in the decimal number system : 
 <formula> 
 Thus , log10 ( x ) is related to the number of decimal digits of a positive integer x : the number of digits is the smallest integer strictly bigger than log10 ( x ) . For example , log10 ( 1430 ) is approximately 3 @.@ 15 . The next integer is 4 , which is the number of digits of 1430 . Both the natural logarithm and the logarithm to base two are used in information theory , corresponding to the use of <unk> or bits as the fundamental units of information , respectively . Binary logarithms are also used in computer science , where the binary system is ubiquitous , in music theory , where a pitch ratio of two ( the octave ) is ubiquitous and the cent is the binary logarithm ( scaled by 1200 ) of the ratio between two adjacent equally @-@ tempered pitches , and in photography to measure exposure values . 
 The following table lists common notations for logarithms to these bases and the fields where they are used . Many disciplines write log ( x ) instead of logb ( x ) , when the intended base can be determined from the context . The notation blog ( x ) also occurs . The " ISO notation " column lists designations suggested by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO 31 @-@ 11 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of logarithm in seventeenth century Europe is the discovery of a new function that extended the realm of analysis beyond the scope of algebraic methods . The method of logarithms was publicly propounded by John Napier in 1614 , in a book titled <unk> <unk> <unk> Descriptio ( Description of the Wonderful Rule of Logarithms ) . Prior to Napier 's invention , there had been other techniques of similar scopes , such as the prosthaphaeresis or the use of tables of progressions , extensively developed by Jost Bürgi around 1600 . 
 The common logarithm of a number is the index of that power of ten which equals the number . Speaking of a number as requiring so many figures is a rough allusion to common logarithm , and was referred to by Archimedes as the " order of a number " . The first real logarithms were heuristic methods to turn multiplication into addition , thus facilitating rapid computation . Some of these methods used tables derived from trigonometric identities . Such methods are called prosthaphaeresis . 
 Invention of the function now known as natural logarithm began as an attempt to perform a quadrature of a rectangular hyperbola by Gregoire de Saint Vincent , a Belgian Jesuit residing in Prague . Archimedes had written The Quadrature of the Parabola in the third century BC , but a quadrature for the hyperbola eluded all efforts until Saint @-@ Vincent published his results in 1647 . The relation that the logarithm provides between a geometric progression in its argument and an arithmetic progression of values , prompted A. A. de <unk> to make the connection of Saint @-@ Vincent ’ s quadrature and the tradition of logarithms in prosthaphaeresis , leading to the term " hyperbolic logarithm " , a synonym for natural logarithm . Soon the new function was appreciated by Christiaan Huygens , <unk> , and James Gregory . The notation Log y was adopted by Leibniz in 1675 , and the next year he connected it to the integral <formula> 
 = = Logarithm tables , slide rules , and historical applications = = 
 By simplifying difficult calculations , logarithms contributed to the advance of science , especially astronomy . They were critical to advances in surveying , celestial navigation , and other domains . Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace called logarithms 
 " ... [ a ] n admirable artifice which , by reducing to a few days the labour of many months , doubles the life of the astronomer , and spares him the errors and disgust inseparable from long calculations . " 
 A key tool that enabled the practical use of logarithms before calculators and computers was the table of logarithms . The first such table was compiled by Henry Briggs in 1617 , immediately after Napier 's invention . Subsequently , tables with increasing scope were written . These tables listed the values of logb ( x ) and bx for any number x in a certain range , at a certain precision , for a certain base b ( usually b 
 = 10 ) . For example , Briggs ' first table contained the common logarithms of all integers in the range 1 – 1000 , with a precision of 14 digits . As the function f ( x ) = 
 bx is the inverse function of logb ( x ) , it has been called the antilogarithm . The product and quotient of two positive numbers c and d were routinely calculated as the sum and difference of their logarithms . The product cd or quotient c / d came from looking up the antilogarithm of the sum or difference , also via the same table : 
 <formula> 
 and 
 <formula> 
 For manual calculations that demand any appreciable precision , performing the lookups of the two logarithms , calculating their sum or difference , and looking up the antilogarithm is much faster than performing the multiplication by earlier methods such as prosthaphaeresis , which relies on trigonometric identities . Calculations of powers and roots are reduced to multiplications or divisions and look @-@ ups by 
 <formula> 
 and 
 <formula> 
 Many logarithm tables give logarithms by separately providing the characteristic and mantissa of x , that is to say , the integer part and the fractional part of log10 ( x ) . The characteristic of 10 · x is one plus the characteristic of x , and their <unk> are the same . This extends the scope of logarithm tables : given a table listing log10 ( x ) for all integers x ranging from 1 to 1000 , the logarithm of <unk> is approximated by 
 <formula> Greater accuracy can be obtained by interpolation . 
 Another critical application was the slide rule , a pair of logarithmically divided scales used for calculation , as illustrated here : 
 The non @-@ sliding logarithmic scale , Gunter 's rule , was invented shortly after Napier 's invention . William Oughtred enhanced it to create the slide rule — a pair of logarithmic scales movable with respect to each other . Numbers are placed on sliding scales at distances proportional to the differences between their logarithms . Sliding the upper scale appropriately amounts to mechanically adding logarithms . For example , adding the distance from 1 to 2 on the lower scale to the distance from 1 to 3 on the upper scale yields a product of 6 , which is read off at the lower part . The slide rule was an essential calculating tool for engineers and scientists until the 1970s , because it allows , at the expense of precision , much faster computation than techniques based on tables . 
 = = Analytic properties = = 
 A deeper study of logarithms requires the concept of a function . A function is a rule that , given one number , produces another number . An example is the function producing the x @-@ th power of b from any real number x , where the base b is a fixed number . This function is written 
 <formula> 
 = = = Logarithmic function = = = 
 To justify the definition of logarithms , it is necessary to show that the equation 
 <formula> 
 has a solution x and that this solution is unique , provided that y is positive and that b is positive and unequal to 1 . A proof of that fact requires the intermediate value theorem from elementary calculus . This theorem states that a continuous function that produces two values m and n also produces any value that lies between m and n . A function is continuous if it does not " jump " , that is , if its graph can be drawn without lifting the pen . 
 This property can be shown to hold for the function f ( x ) 
 = bx . Because f takes arbitrarily large and arbitrarily small positive values , any number y > 0 lies between f ( x0 ) and f ( x1 ) for suitable x0 and x1 . Hence , the intermediate value theorem ensures that the equation f ( x ) = 
 y has a solution . Moreover , there is only one solution to this equation , because the function f is strictly increasing ( for b > 1 ) , or strictly decreasing ( for 0 < b < 1 ) . 
 The unique solution x is the logarithm of y to base b , logb ( y ) . The function that assigns to y its logarithm is called logarithm function or logarithmic function ( or just logarithm ) . 
 The function logb ( x ) is essentially characterized by the above product formula 
 <formula> 
 More precisely , the logarithm to any base b > 1 is the only increasing function f from the positive reals to the reals satisfying f ( b ) = 1 and 
 <formula> 
 = = = Inverse function = = = 
 The formula for the logarithm of a power says in particular that for any number x , 
 <formula> 
 In prose , taking the x @-@ th power of b and then the base @-@ b logarithm gives back x . Conversely , given a positive number y , the formula 
 <formula> 
 says that first taking the logarithm and then <unk> gives back y . Thus , the two possible ways of combining ( or composing ) logarithms and exponentiation give back the original number . Therefore , the logarithm to base b is the inverse function of f ( x ) 
 = bx . 
 Inverse functions are closely related to the original functions . Their graphs correspond to each other upon exchanging the x- and the y @-@ coordinates ( or upon reflection at the diagonal line x = 
 y ) , as shown at the right : a point ( t , u 
 = <unk> ) on the graph of f yields a point ( u , t = 
 <unk> ) on the graph of the logarithm and vice versa . As a consequence , logb ( x ) diverges to infinity ( gets bigger than any given number ) if x grows to infinity , provided that b is greater than one . In that case , logb ( x ) is an increasing function . For b < 1 , logb ( x ) tends to minus infinity instead . When x approaches zero , logb ( x ) goes to minus infinity for b > 1 ( plus infinity for b < 1 , respectively ) . 
 = = = Derivative and antiderivative = = = 
 Analytic properties of functions pass to their inverses . Thus , as f ( x ) 
 = bx is a continuous and differentiable function , so is logb ( y ) . Roughly , a continuous function is differentiable if its graph has no sharp " corners " . Moreover , as the derivative of f ( x ) evaluates to ln ( b ) bx by the properties of the exponential function , the chain rule implies that the derivative of logb ( x ) is given by 
 <formula> 
 That is , the slope of the tangent touching the graph of the base @-@ b logarithm at the point ( x , logb ( x ) ) equals 1 / ( x ln ( b ) ) . 
 The derivative of ln ( x ) is 1 / x ; this implies that ln ( x ) is the unique antiderivative of 1 / x that has the value 0 for x = 
 1 . This is this very simple formula that motivated to qualify as " natural " the natural logarithm ; this is also one of the main reasons of the importance of the constant e . 
 The derivative with a generalised functional argument f ( x ) is 
 <formula> 
 The quotient at the right hand side is called the logarithmic derivative of f . Computing f ' ( x ) by means of the derivative of ln ( f ( x ) ) is known as logarithmic differentiation . The antiderivative of the natural logarithm ln ( x ) is : 
 <formula> 
 Related formulas , such as <unk> of logarithms to other bases can be derived from this equation using the change of bases . 
 = = = Integral representation of the natural logarithm = = = 
 The natural logarithm of t equals the integral of 1 / x dx from 1 to t : 
 <formula> 
 In other words , ln ( t ) equals the area between the x axis and the graph of the function 1 / x , ranging from x 
 = 1 to x = 
 t ( figure at the right ) . This is a consequence of the fundamental theorem of calculus and the fact that derivative of ln ( x ) is 1 / x . The right hand side of this equation can serve as a definition of the natural logarithm . Product and power logarithm formulas can be derived from this definition . For example , the product formula ln ( tu ) 
 = ln ( t ) + ln ( u ) is deduced as : 
 <formula> 
 The equality ( 1 ) splits the integral into two parts , while the equality ( 2 ) is a change of variable ( w = 
 x / t ) . In the illustration below , the splitting corresponds to dividing the area into the yellow and blue parts . <unk> the left hand blue area vertically by the factor t and shrinking it by the same factor horizontally does not change its size . Moving it appropriately , the area fits the graph of the function f ( x ) 
 = 1 / x again . Therefore , the left hand blue area , which is the integral of f ( x ) from t to tu is the same as the integral from 1 to u . This justifies the equality ( 2 ) with a more geometric proof . 
 The power formula ln ( tr ) = 
 r ln ( t ) may be derived in a similar way : 
 <formula> 
 The second equality uses a change of variables ( integration by substitution ) , w 
 = x1 / r . 
 The sum over the reciprocals of natural numbers , 
 <formula> 
 is called the harmonic series . It is closely tied to the natural logarithm : as n tends to infinity , the difference , 
 <formula> 
 converges ( i.e. , gets arbitrarily close ) to a number known as the Euler – Mascheroni constant . This relation aids in analyzing the performance of algorithms such as <unk> . 
 There is also another integral representation of the logarithm that is useful in some situations . 
 <formula> 
 This can be verified by showing that it has the same value at x = 
 1 , and the same derivative . 
 = = = Transcendence of the logarithm = = = 
 Real numbers that are not algebraic are called transcendental ; for example , π and e are such numbers , but <formula> is not . Almost all real numbers are transcendental . The logarithm is an example of a transcendental function . The Gelfond – Schneider theorem asserts that logarithms usually take transcendental , i.e. , " difficult " values . 
 = = Calculation = = 
 Logarithms are easy to compute in some cases , such as log10 ( 1000 ) = 3 . In general , logarithms can be calculated using power series or the arithmetic – geometric mean , or be retrieved from a precalculated logarithm table that provides a fixed precision . Newton 's method , an iterative method to solve equations approximately , can also be used to calculate the logarithm , because its inverse function , the exponential function , can be computed efficiently . Using look @-@ up tables , <unk> @-@ like methods can be used to compute logarithms if the only available operations are addition and bit shifts . Moreover , the binary logarithm algorithm calculates lb ( x ) recursively based on repeated squarings of x , taking advantage of the relation 
 <formula> 
 = = = Power series = = = 
 Taylor series 
 For any real number z that satisfies 0 < z < 2 , the following formula holds : 
 <formula> 
 This is a shorthand for saying that ln ( z ) can be approximated to a more and more accurate value by the following expressions : 
 <formula> 
 For example , with z 
 = 1 @.@ 5 the third approximation yields 0 @.@ <unk> , which is about 0 @.@ 011 greater than ln ( 1 @.@ 5 ) = 
 0 @.@ <unk> . This series approximates ln ( z ) with arbitrary precision , provided the number of summands is large enough . In elementary calculus , ln ( z ) is therefore the limit of this series . It is the Taylor series of the natural logarithm at z 
 = 1 . The Taylor series of ln z provides a particularly useful approximation to ln ( 1 + z ) when z is small , | z | < 1 , since then 
 <formula> 
 For example , with z = 
 0 @.@ 1 the first @-@ order approximation gives ln ( 1 @.@ 1 ) ≈ 0 @.@ 1 , which is less than 5 % off the correct value 0 @.@ 0953 . 
 More efficient series 
 Another series is based on the area hyperbolic tangent function : 
 <formula> 
 for any real number z > 0 . Using the Sigma notation , this is also written as 
 <formula> 
 This series can be derived from the above Taylor series . It converges more quickly than the Taylor series , especially if z is close to 1 . For example , for z 
 = 1 @.@ 5 , the first three terms of the second series approximate ln ( 1 @.@ 5 ) with an error of about 3 × 10 − 6 . The quick convergence for z close to 1 can be taken advantage of in the following way : given a low @-@ accuracy approximation y ≈ ln ( z ) and putting 
 <formula> 
 the logarithm of z is : 
 <formula> 
 The better the initial approximation y is , the closer A is to 1 , so its logarithm can be calculated efficiently . A can be calculated using the exponential series , which converges quickly provided y is not too large . Calculating the logarithm of larger z can be reduced to smaller values of z by writing z = 
 a · 10b , so that ln ( z ) = ln ( a ) + b · ln ( 10 ) . 
 A closely related method can be used to compute the logarithm of integers . From the above series , it follows that : 
 <formula> 
 If the logarithm of a large integer n is known , then this series yields a fast converging series for log ( n + 1 ) . 
 = = = Arithmetic – geometric mean approximation = = = 
 The arithmetic – geometric mean yields high precision approximations of the natural <unk> ln ( x ) is approximated to a precision of 2 − p ( or p precise bits ) by the following formula ( due to Carl Friedrich Gauss ) : 
 <formula> 
 Here M ( x , y ) denotes the arithmetic – geometric mean of x and y . It is obtained by repeatedly calculating the average ( x + y ) / 2 ( arithmetic mean ) and <unk> ( x * y ) ( geometric mean ) of x and y then let those two numbers become the next x and y . The two numbers quickly converge to a common limit which is the value of M ( x , y ) . m is chosen such that 
 <formula> 
 to insure the required precision . A larger m makes the M ( x , y ) calculation take more steps ( the initial x and y are farther apart so it takes more steps to converge ) but gives more precision . The constants π and ln ( 2 ) can be calculated with quickly converging series . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Logarithms have many applications inside and outside mathematics . Some of these occurrences are related to the notion of scale invariance . For example , each chamber of the shell of a nautilus is an approximate copy of the next one , scaled by a constant factor . This gives rise to a logarithmic spiral . Benford 's law on the distribution of leading digits can also be explained by scale invariance . Logarithms are also linked to self @-@ similarity . For example , logarithms appear in the analysis of algorithms that solve a problem by dividing it into two similar smaller problems and patching their solutions . The dimensions of self @-@ similar geometric shapes , that is , shapes whose parts resemble the overall picture are also based on logarithms . Logarithmic scales are useful for quantifying the relative change of a value as opposed to its absolute difference . Moreover , because the logarithmic function log ( x ) grows very slowly for large x , logarithmic scales are used to compress large @-@ scale scientific data . Logarithms also occur in numerous scientific formulas , such as the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation , the <unk> equation , or the Nernst equation . 
 = = = Logarithmic scale = = = 
 Scientific quantities are often expressed as logarithms of other quantities , using a logarithmic scale . For example , the decibel is a unit of measurement associated with logarithmic @-@ scale quantities . It is based on the common logarithm of ratios — 10 times the common logarithm of a power ratio or 20 times the common logarithm of a voltage ratio . It is used to quantify the loss of voltage levels in transmitting electrical signals , to describe power levels of sounds in acoustics , and the absorbance of light in the fields of spectrometry and optics . The signal @-@ to @-@ noise ratio describing the amount of unwanted noise in relation to a ( meaningful ) signal is also measured in decibels . In a similar vein , the peak signal @-@ to @-@ noise ratio is commonly used to assess the quality of sound and image compression methods using the logarithm . 
 The strength of an earthquake is measured by taking the common logarithm of the energy emitted at the quake . This is used in the moment magnitude scale or the Richter magnitude scale . For example , a 5 @.@ 0 earthquake releases 32 times ( 101 @.@ 5 ) and a 6 @.@ 0 releases 1000 times ( 103 ) the energy of a 4 @.@ 0 . Another logarithmic scale is apparent magnitude . It measures the brightness of stars logarithmically . Yet another example is pH in chemistry ; pH is the negative of the common logarithm of the activity of hydronium ions ( the form hydrogen ions H + take in water ) . The activity of hydronium ions in neutral water is 10 − 7 mol · L − 1 , hence a pH of 7 . Vinegar typically has a pH of about 3 . The difference of 4 corresponds to a ratio of 104 of the activity , that is , vinegar 's hydronium ion activity is about 10 − 3 mol · L − 1 . 
 <unk> ( log @-@ linear ) graphs use the logarithmic scale concept for visualization : one axis , typically the vertical one , is scaled logarithmically . For example , the chart at the right compresses the steep increase from 1 million to 1 trillion to the same space ( on the vertical axis ) as the increase from 1 to 1 million . In such graphs , exponential functions of the form f ( x ) 
 = a · bx appear as straight lines with slope equal to the logarithm of b . Log @-@ log graphs scale both axes logarithmically , which causes functions of the form f ( x ) = 
 a · <unk> to be depicted as straight lines with slope equal to the exponent k . This is applied in visualizing and analyzing power laws . 
 = = = Psychology = = = 
 Logarithms occur in several laws describing human perception : Hick 's law proposes a logarithmic relation between the time individuals take to choose an alternative and the number of choices they have . Fitts 's law predicts that the time required to rapidly move to a target area is a logarithmic function of the distance to and the size of the target . In psychophysics , the Weber – Fechner law proposes a logarithmic relationship between stimulus and sensation such as the actual vs. the perceived weight of an item a person is carrying . ( This " law " , however , is less precise than more recent models , such as the Stevens ' power law . ) 
 Psychological studies found that individuals with little mathematics education tend to estimate quantities logarithmically , that is , they position a number on an unmarked line according to its logarithm , so that 10 is positioned as close to 100 as 100 is to 1000 . Increasing education shifts this to a linear estimate ( positioning 1000 10x as far away ) in some circumstances , while logarithms are used when the numbers to be plotted are difficult to plot linearly . 
 = = = Probability theory and statistics = = = 
 Logarithms arise in probability theory : the law of large numbers dictates that , for a fair coin , as the number of coin @-@ tosses increases to infinity , the observed proportion of heads approaches one @-@ half . The fluctuations of this proportion about one @-@ half are described by the law of the iterated logarithm . 
 Logarithms also occur in log @-@ normal distributions . When the logarithm of a random variable has a normal distribution , the variable is said to have a log @-@ normal distribution . Log @-@ normal distributions are encountered in many fields , wherever a variable is formed as the product of many independent positive random variables , for example in the study of turbulence . 
 Logarithms are used for maximum @-@ likelihood estimation of parametric statistical models . For such a model , the likelihood function depends on at least one parameter that must be estimated . A maximum of the likelihood function occurs at the same parameter @-@ value as a maximum of the logarithm of the likelihood ( the " log likelihood " ) , because the logarithm is an increasing function . The log @-@ likelihood is easier to maximize , especially for the multiplied likelihoods for independent random variables . 
 Benford 's law describes the occurrence of digits in many data sets , such as heights of buildings . According to Benford 's law , the probability that the first decimal @-@ digit of an item in the data sample is d ( from 1 to 9 ) equals log10 ( d + 1 ) − log10 ( d ) , regardless of the unit of measurement . Thus , about 30 % of the data can be expected to have 1 as first digit , 18 % start with 2 , etc . Auditors examine deviations from Benford 's law to detect fraudulent accounting . 
 = = = Computational complexity = = = 
 Analysis of algorithms is a branch of computer science that studies the performance of algorithms ( computer programs solving a certain problem ) . Logarithms are valuable for describing algorithms that divide a problem into smaller ones , and join the solutions of the <unk> . 
 For example , to find a number in a sorted list , the binary search algorithm checks the middle entry and proceeds with the half before or after the middle entry if the number is still not found . This algorithm requires , on average , log2 ( N ) comparisons , where N is the list 's length . Similarly , the merge sort algorithm sorts an unsorted list by dividing the list into halves and sorting these first before merging the results . Merge sort algorithms typically require a time approximately proportional to N · log ( N ) . The base of the logarithm is not specified here , because the result only changes by a constant factor when another base is used . A constant factor is usually disregarded in the analysis of algorithms under the standard uniform cost model . 
 A function f ( x ) is said to grow logarithmically if f ( x ) is ( exactly or approximately ) proportional to the logarithm of x . ( Biological descriptions of organism growth , however , use this term for an exponential function . ) For example , any natural number N can be represented in binary form in no more than log2 ( N ) + 1 bits . In other words , the amount of memory needed to store N grows logarithmically with N. 
 = = = Entropy and chaos = = = 
 Entropy is broadly a measure of the disorder of some system . In statistical thermodynamics , the entropy S of some physical system is defined as 
 <formula> 
 The sum is over all possible states i of the system in question , such as the positions of gas particles in a container . Moreover , pi is the probability that the state i is attained and k is the Boltzmann constant . Similarly , entropy in information theory measures the quantity of information . If a message recipient may expect any one of N possible messages with equal likelihood , then the amount of information conveyed by any one such message is quantified as log2 ( N ) bits . 
 Lyapunov exponents use logarithms to gauge the degree of <unk> of a dynamical system . For example , for a particle moving on an oval billiard table , even small changes of the initial conditions result in very different paths of the particle . Such systems are chaotic in a deterministic way , because small measurement errors of the initial state predictably lead to largely different final states . At least one Lyapunov exponent of a deterministically chaotic system is positive . 
 = = = Fractals = = = 
 Logarithms occur in definitions of the dimension of fractals . Fractals are geometric objects that are self @-@ similar : small parts reproduce , at least roughly , the entire global structure . The Sierpinski triangle ( pictured ) can be covered by three copies of itself , each having sides half the original length . This makes the Hausdorff dimension of this structure ln ( 3 ) / ln ( 2 ) ≈ 1 @.@ 58 . Another logarithm @-@ based notion of dimension is obtained by counting the number of boxes needed to cover the fractal in question . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Logarithms are related to musical tones and intervals . In equal temperament , the frequency ratio depends only on the interval between two tones , not on the specific frequency , or pitch , of the individual tones . For example , the note A has a frequency of 440 Hz and B @-@ flat has a frequency of 466 Hz . The interval between A and B @-@ flat is a semitone , as is the one between B @-@ flat and B ( frequency 493 Hz ) . Accordingly , the frequency ratios agree : 
 <formula> 
 Therefore , logarithms can be used to describe the intervals : an interval is measured in semitones by taking the base @-@ 21 / 12 logarithm of the frequency ratio , while the base @-@ 21 / 1200 logarithm of the frequency ratio expresses the interval in cents , hundredths of a semitone . The latter is used for finer encoding , as it is needed for non @-@ equal temperaments . 
 = = = Number theory = = = 
 Natural logarithms are closely linked to counting prime numbers ( 2 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 11 , ... ) , an important topic in number theory . For any integer x , the quantity of prime numbers less than or equal to x is denoted π ( x ) . The prime number theorem asserts that π ( x ) is approximately given by 
 <formula> 
 in the sense that the ratio of π ( x ) and that fraction approaches 1 when x tends to infinity . As a consequence , the probability that a randomly chosen number between 1 and x is prime is inversely proportional to the number of decimal digits of x . A far better estimate of π ( x ) is given by the offset logarithmic integral function Li ( x ) , defined by 
 <formula> 
 The Riemann hypothesis , one of the oldest open mathematical conjectures , can be stated in terms of comparing π ( x ) and Li ( x ) . The Erdős – Kac theorem describing the number of distinct prime factors also involves the natural logarithm . 
 The logarithm of n factorial , n ! = 1 · 2 · ... · n , is given by 
 <formula> 
 This can be used to obtain Stirling 's formula , an approximation of n ! for large n . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 = = = Complex logarithm = = = 
 The complex numbers a solving the equation 
 <formula> 
 are called complex logarithms . Here , z is a complex number . A complex number is commonly represented as z 
 = x + iy , where x and y are real numbers and i is the imaginary unit . Such a number can be visualized by a point in the complex plane , as shown at the right . The polar form encodes a non @-@ zero complex number z by its absolute value , that is , the distance r to the origin , and an angle between the x axis and the line passing through the origin and z . This angle is called the argument of z . The absolute value r of z is 
 <formula> 
 The argument is not uniquely specified by z : both φ and φ ' = 
 φ + 2π are arguments of z because adding 2π radians or 360 degrees to φ corresponds to " winding " around the origin counter @-@ clock @-@ wise by a turn . The resulting complex number is again z , as illustrated at the right . However , exactly one argument φ satisfies − π < φ and φ ≤ π . It is called the principal argument , denoted Arg ( z ) , with a capital A. ( An alternative normalization is 0 ≤ Arg ( z ) < 2π . ) 
 Using trigonometric functions sine and cosine , or the complex exponential , respectively , r and φ are such that the following identities hold : 
 <formula> 
 This implies that the a @-@ th power of e equals z , where 
 <formula> 
 φ is the principal argument Arg ( z ) and n is an arbitrary integer . Any such a is called a complex logarithm of z . There are infinitely many of them , in contrast to the uniquely defined real logarithm . If n = 0 , a is called the principal value of the logarithm , denoted Log ( z ) . The principal argument of any positive real number x is 0 ; hence Log ( x ) is a real number and equals the real ( natural ) logarithm . However , the above formulas for logarithms of products and powers do not generalize to the principal value of the complex logarithm . 
 The illustration at the right depicts Log ( z ) . The discontinuity , that is , the jump in the hue at the negative part of the x- or real axis , is caused by the jump of the principal argument there . This locus is called a branch cut . This behavior can only be circumvented by dropping the range restriction on φ . Then the argument of z and , consequently , its logarithm become multi @-@ valued functions . 
 = = = <unk> of other exponential functions = = = 
 Exponentiation occurs in many areas of mathematics and its inverse function is often referred to as the logarithm . For example , the logarithm of a matrix is the ( multi @-@ valued ) inverse function of the matrix exponential . Another example is the p @-@ adic logarithm , the inverse function of the p @-@ adic exponential . Both are defined via Taylor series analogous to the real case . In the context of differential geometry , the exponential map maps the tangent space at a point of a manifold to a neighborhood of that point . Its inverse is also called the logarithmic ( or log ) map . 
 In the context of finite groups exponentiation is given by repeatedly multiplying one group element b with itself . The discrete logarithm is the integer n solving the equation 
 <formula> 
 where x is an element of the group . Carrying out the exponentiation can be done efficiently , but the discrete logarithm is believed to be very hard to calculate in some groups . This asymmetry has important applications in public key cryptography , such as for example in the Diffie – Hellman key exchange , a routine that allows secure exchanges of cryptographic keys over unsecured information channels . Zech 's logarithm is related to the discrete logarithm in the multiplicative group of non @-@ zero elements of a finite field . 
 Further logarithm @-@ like inverse functions include the double logarithm ln ( ln ( x ) ) , the super- or hyper @-@ 4 @-@ logarithm ( a slight variation of which is called iterated logarithm in computer science ) , the Lambert W function , and the <unk> . They are the inverse functions of the double exponential function , tetration , of f ( w ) = <unk> , and of the logistic function , respectively . 
 = = = Related concepts = = = 
 From the perspective of group theory , the identity log ( cd ) 
 = log ( c ) + log ( d ) expresses a group isomorphism between positive reals under multiplication and reals under addition . Logarithmic functions are the only continuous isomorphisms between these groups . By means of that isomorphism , the Haar measure ( Lebesgue measure ) dx on the reals corresponds to the Haar measure dx / x on the positive reals . In complex analysis and algebraic geometry , differential forms of the form <unk> / f are known as forms with logarithmic poles . 
 The <unk> is the function defined by 
 <formula> 
 It is related to the natural logarithm by <unk> ( z ) = 
 − ln ( 1 − z ) . Moreover , Lis ( 1 ) equals the Riemann zeta function ζ ( s ) . 
 = Hannah Buckling = 
 Hannah Buckling ( born 3 June 1992 in Sydney , Australia ) is an Australian water polo centre back . She attended the Wenona Girls School and is currently attending the University of Sydney while working on a Bachelor of Science . She started playing water polo as a twelve @-@ year @-@ old . She played club water polo for the Sydney Northern Beaches Breakers and as a junior player represented New South Wales in national competitions and Australia in international competitions . She plays for the Sydney Uni Lions in the National Water Polo League . As s representative of Australia on the junior and senior level , she had her first international cap during the 2008 Australian Junior Tour at the Pythia Cup . She was a member of the Australian side that finished third at the 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . As a member of the senior team , she competed at the 2011 Canada Cup and helped the team take home gold . She is one of seventeen players vying for thirteen spots to go to 2012 Summer Olympics as a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Buckling was born on 3 June 1992 in Sydney , but calls Mosman , New South Wales her hometown . Her grandfather represented Wales as a member of the Wales School Boy team in rugby union . She attended Wenona Girls School located in North Sydney , New South Wales . She is currently working on a Bachelor of Science at the University of Sydney . She is 177 cm ( 5 ft 10 in ) tall , weights 75 kilograms ( 165 lb ) and is right handed . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Buckling prefers to wear cap number six and plays in the centre back position . She started playing water polo as a twelve @-@ year @-@ old in Year 7 at Wenona Girls School . In 2011 , she was named a Sydney Uni Sport & Fitness / St Andrew ’ s College Foundation Awards winner because of her water polo . She has a water polo scholarship from the New South Wales Institute of Sport . 
 = = = Club and state representative teams = = = 
 When she was Buckling , she joined the Sydney Northern Beaches Breakers water polo team who continue to be her water polo club . One of her club team mates was another future national team member , Emily Scott . Buckling gave Scott advice related to future planning for water polo playing . While playing the sport casually on school and club level , she got a new coach at the Breakers , Jamie Ryan . Ryan helped elevate Buckling 's intensity at practice and become a more serious player . In 2007 , she was a member of the New South Wales development squad and competed on the 2007 16 & Under National Championships Girls where she scored 15 goals in the competition . In 2008 , she again represented New South Wales at the 2008 16 & Under National Championships Girls where she scored 13 goals . At the 18 & Under National Championships Girls in 2008 , she scored only 8 goals . In 2009 , at the 18 & Under Girls National Championship and a member of the New South Wales side , she scored 8 goals . That same year , as a member of New South Wales team at the 20 & Under National Championships Junior Women , she scored 8 goals . In 2010 , she scored 18 goals in the 18 & Under Girls National Championship and 6 goals in the 20 & Under National Championships Junior Women . In 2011 , she scored 8 goals in the 20 & Under Junior Women National Championships . That year , her team finished second at the Perth , Western Australia held event . In 2011 , her training consisted of going to the pool every morning , and doing training at the gym three times a week . During the summer , she would compete in up to three games a week . During the winter , she would compete in an average of one game a week . 
 = = = National Water Polo League = = = 
 Buckling plays for the Sydney Uni Lions of the National Water Polo League . In 2011 , her first year in the league , she wore cap number 14 and fifteen total goals for the season . Her largest single goal came was on 15 March against the Fyfe Adelaide Jets . During the 2012 season , she wore cap number four . As of 3 March , she had scored sixteen goals in the season . 
 = = = Junior national team = = = 
 Within 20 months of having Ryan be her coach on her local club side and as a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old , she made the Australian u @-@ 17 team with her first international appearance for Australia occurring at the 2008 Australian Junior Tour at the Pythia Cup in Greece where her team was runners @-@ up . The tour also included stops in Italy and Hungary . In 2010 , she was a member of the under @-@ 19 women 's national water polo team that did a European tour . In 2010 , as a member of the junior national team , she was a member of the team that toured California and part of the squad that competed in international friendlies against the United States , New Zealand and Canada . She was part of the junior national team again in 2011 and in July , she was invited to be part of the training squad for the junior national squad that was training in Perth in preparation for the Junior World Championships . She was a member of the Australian side that finished third at the 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 Buckling is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . At the 2011 Canada Cup , she scored a goal in the first period in the gold medal match against China that the Australian team ended up winning . She competed in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Stingers . She scored a goal in a Stingers 8 – 7 win over the United States . In 2011 , her goal was to make the national team and compete at the 2016 Summer Olympics . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made on 13 June . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . 
 = Flaws and All = 
 " Flaws and All " is a song by American recording artist Beyoncé , included on the 2007 deluxe edition of her second studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . It was composed by Ne @-@ Yo , Shea Taylor , Beyoncé and Solange Knowles , while Beyoncé Knowles and Taylor produced it . In the R & B song , Beyoncé shows appreciation for the love given by her man , who sees through all of her flaws and loves her unconditionally . " Flaws and All " received positive reviews from critics , who lauded Beyoncé 's emotion and vulnerability on the track . Some critics also noted that the song was better than some of the songs on the standard edition of B 'Day . 
 The music video was directed by Cliff Watts and Beyoncé for B 'Day Anthology Video Album ( 2007 ) . It features clips of a B 'Day promotional ad by Wal @-@ Mart pieced together , in which Beyoncé does not lip @-@ sync the words of the song , but instead acts as if it were an everyday scenario . Beyoncé explained the concept for the video was to show a different side to her , that the paparazzi does not show and that fans would not normally see . Beyoncé performed " Flaws and All " on The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) , and the song was included on the live album The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) . It was also sung live on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in 2008 and during Beyoncé 's show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in May 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Flaws and All " was written by Ne @-@ Yo , Shea Taylor , Beyoncé Knowles and her sister Solange Knowles . The R & B song was produced by Beyoncé Knowles and Taylor , and mixed by Jean @-@ Marie Horvat at Oz Recording Studios , Valencia , California . " Flaws and All " was recorded by Jim Caruana , Shane Woodley and Robert " LB " Dorsey at Roc the Mic studio , New York City . Although the song was originally included on the re @-@ release of B 'Day , it was additionally included on compilation albums . In 2007 the song was included on Tyler Perry 's Why Did I Get Married ? soundtrack . In 2008 , Beyoncé released the song on a compilation album dedicated to karaoke performances titled Beyoncé Karaoke Hits , Vol . I. Author <unk> <unk> references the song in a memoir titled My Life 's Journey ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly named the song as his favorite addition to the deluxe edition of B 'Day , stating , " Better is ' Flaws and All ' , a ballad in which B [ eyoncé ] expresses melismatic gratitude that workaholic bitches ( her words ! ) merit love too . " Rory Dollard of Metro also wrote that the song was better than some of the tracks on the original track listing of B 'Day . While reviewing the deluxe edition of B 'Day , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine praised the song , calling it a " surprise gem [ which ] sound [ s ] downright subtle " . BET included the song in its list of the " Top 10 Feel Good R & B Songs " , ranked at number nine . Discussing their choice , they stated " ' Flaws and All ' ... revealed Beyoncé at her most vulnerable . The song showed that even a superstar can struggle with insecurities and be in need of someone to love her . " Bobby Reed of Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted that the lyrics could also refer to " the way fans worship Beyonce " . Anthony Venutolo of New Jersey On @-@ Line noted that the song talks about true love . Destiny 's Child bandmate Kelly Rowland discussed the track during Billboard 's " Woman of the Year " spread for Beyoncé . She stated " Beyoncé is a true artist who brings it every time . My favorite song will always be ' Flaws and All . ' So much feeling , so beautiful ; her voice sounds amazing . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Flaws and All " was directed by Cliff Watts and Beyoncé . The video for the song was shot on inexpensive Super 8 film during the two @-@ week <unk> for the B 'Day Anthology Video Album ( 2007 ) . Critics have noted that Beyoncé emulates Marilyn Monroe , Brigitte Bardot and Barbra Streisand throughout the clip . During an interview with MTV on a " Beyoncé : Behind the B 'Day Music Videos " , MTV commented on Beyoncé 's appearance in the music video stating that she acts like " a goofball " and " it also feels like we get to see the real [ her ] . " Beyoncé replied , " I 'm way different in my everyday life . My personal life and my celebrity life — I 've separated them so much it 's like two different people . But I 'm pretty balanced . I 'm over the top and I 'm natural . " 
 In an interview with Vibe , Beyoncé explained that the concept for the video in depth after being questioned as an " everyday woman . " " I don 't sing any of the song . The whole time it 's like a silent movie and I 'm being myself . I 'm not performing . I reveal a side of myself no one 's ever seen . I 'm silly and goofy and not ... trying to be a diva , or trying to be a star – just me . " The video features a black and white theme and a grainy film texture . Beyoncé does not lip @-@ sync the lyrics but acts out parts of the song and poses . Several of the scenes used in the video had been shot in 2006 for a B 'Day promotional ad by Wal @-@ Mart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed the song on multiple occasions , including the song as part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) . Beyoncé cried during the performance , and was then embraced by a male dancer dressed as an angel . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly praised Beyoncé 's performance of the song stating " The true defibrillator moment , all freakum dress changes aside , is ' Flaws and All ' , during which Beyoncé weeps real tears ( nightly , according to reports from earlier overseas shows ) while apologizing for being such a bitch . That 's a rare campy , melodramatic performance in an otherwise energized two hours . " The performance also caught the attention of The New York Times writer Jon Pareles who stated , " Along the way the concert was a showcase for her consistently expanding music , from the kinetic dance beats of songs like ' Get Me Bodied ' to dramatic ballads like ' Flaws and All ' , which Beyoncé sang wide @-@ eyed in a video close @-@ up . " J. Freedom du Lac of The Washington Post wrote that during the performance she was offering a " litany of her own ' imperfections ' that her lover embraces unconditionally " . John Aizlewood from the Daily Mail criticized the angel embrace at the end of the " Flaws and All " performance as being the weakest part of The Beyoncé Experience set . A writer of The Times also gave a mixed review for the performance of the song , saying that " Her attempt at an introspective ballad , Flaws and All , was less convincing . " Anthony Venutolo of New Jersey On @-@ Line wrote that the performance was " silly " . The performance of the song in Los Angeles on September 2 , 2007 was taped and included on The Beyoncé Experience Live . The performance of the song was also shown independently at MTV.com and was released via digital download at the iTunes Store on November 19 , 2007 . 
 Beyoncé performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on November 25 , 2008 while promoting her third album I Am ... Sasha Fierce . In May , 2012 , she performed " Flaws and All " as a part of her revue show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . While reviewing the show , Ben Ratliff of The New York Times wrote , " She has a fast @-@ reacting face , and opens her eyes wide to look astonished , touched , or grateful . ( She did this especially during ' Flaws and All , ' which she dedicated to her fans : ' I don 't know why you love me / And that 's why I love you . ' ) " A writer for Vibe magazine listed the performance of the song in the five notable moments from the concerts , saying that Beyoncé " had the camera zoom in on her face the whole time , showing the crowd her own ' flaws , ' allowing the crowd to connect to her " . " Flaws and All " was also included on the live album Live in Atlantic City ( 2013 ) which was filmed during the revue . In 2013 , Beyoncé added the song to the set list of her worldwide The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . During the performance she dedicated the song to her fans , the <unk> . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day Deluxe Edition liner notes . 
 = Geothermal energy = 
 Geothermal energy is thermal energy generated and stored in the Earth . Thermal energy is the energy that determines the temperature of matter . The geothermal energy of the Earth 's crust originates from the original formation of the planet and from radioactive decay of materials ( in currently uncertain but possibly roughly equal proportions ) . The geothermal gradient , which is the difference in temperature between the core of the planet and its surface , drives a continuous conduction of thermal energy in the form of heat from the core to the surface . The adjective geothermal originates from the Greek roots <unk> ( ge ) , meaning earth , and <unk> ( thermos ) , meaning hot . 
 Earth 's internal heat is thermal energy generated from radioactive decay and continual heat loss from Earth 's formation . Temperatures at the core – mantle boundary may reach over 4000 ° C ( 7 @,@ 200 ° F ) . The high temperature and pressure in Earth 's interior cause some rock to melt and solid mantle to behave plastically , resulting in portions of mantle convecting upward since it is lighter than the surrounding rock . Rock and water is heated in the crust , sometimes up to 370 ° C ( 700 ° F ) . 
 From hot springs , geothermal energy has been used for bathing since Paleolithic times and for space heating since ancient Roman times , but it is now better known for electricity generation . Worldwide , 11 @,@ 700 megawatts ( MW ) of geothermal power is online in 2013 . An additional 28 gigawatts of direct geothermal heating capacity is installed for district heating , space heating , spas , industrial processes , desalination and agricultural applications in 2010 . 
 Geothermal power is cost @-@ effective , reliable , sustainable , and environmentally friendly , but has historically been limited to areas near tectonic plate boundaries . Recent technological advances have dramatically expanded the range and size of viable resources , especially for applications such as home heating , opening a potential for widespread exploitation . Geothermal wells release greenhouse gases trapped deep within the earth , but these emissions are much lower per energy unit than those of fossil fuels . As a result , geothermal power has the potential to help mitigate global warming if widely deployed in place of fossil fuels . 
 The Earth 's geothermal resources are theoretically more than adequate to supply humanity 's energy needs , but only a very small fraction may be profitably exploited . Drilling and exploration for deep resources is very expensive . Forecasts for the future of geothermal power depend on assumptions about technology , energy prices , subsidies , and interest rates . Pilot programs like <unk> 's customer opt in Green Power Program show that customers would be willing to pay a little more for a renewable energy source like geothermal . But as a result of government assisted research and industry experience , the cost of generating geothermal power has decreased by 25 % over the past two decades . In 2001 , geothermal energy costs between two and ten US cents per kWh . 
 = = History = = 
 Hot springs have been used for bathing at least since Paleolithic times . The oldest known spa is a stone pool on China 's Lisan mountain built in the Qin Dynasty in the 3rd century BC , at the same site where the Huaqing Chi palace was later built . In the first century AD , Romans conquered Aquae Sulis , now Bath , Somerset , England , and used the hot springs there to feed public baths and underfloor heating . The admission fees for these baths probably represent the first commercial use of geothermal power . The world 's oldest geothermal district heating system in <unk> @-@ Aigues , France , has been operating since the 14th century . The earliest industrial exploitation began in 1827 with the use of geyser steam to extract boric acid from volcanic mud in Larderello , Italy . 
 In 1892 , America 's first district heating system in Boise , Idaho was powered directly by geothermal energy , and was copied in Klamath Falls , Oregon in 1900 . A deep geothermal well was used to heat greenhouses in Boise in 1926 , and geysers were used to heat greenhouses in Iceland and Tuscany at about the same time . Charlie Lieb developed the first downhole heat exchanger in 1930 to heat his house . Steam and hot water from geysers began heating homes in Iceland starting in 1943 . 
 In the 20th century , demand for electricity led to the consideration of geothermal power as a generating source . Prince Piero <unk> Conti tested the first geothermal power generator on 4 July 1904 , at the same Larderello dry steam field where geothermal acid extraction began . It successfully lit four light bulbs . Later , in 1911 , the world 's first commercial geothermal power plant was built there . It was the world 's only industrial producer of geothermal electricity until New Zealand built a plant in 1958 . In 2012 , it produced some 594 megawatts . 
 Lord Kelvin invented the heat pump in 1852 , and Heinrich Zoelly had patented the idea of using it to draw heat from the ground in 1912 . But it was not until the late 1940s that the geothermal heat pump was successfully implemented . The earliest one was probably Robert C. Webber 's home @-@ made 2 @.@ 2 kW direct @-@ exchange system , but sources disagree as to the exact timeline of his invention . J. Donald Kroeker designed the first commercial geothermal heat pump to heat the Commonwealth Building ( Portland , Oregon ) and demonstrated it in 1946 . Professor Carl Nielsen of Ohio State University built the first residential open loop version in his home in 1948 . The technology became popular in Sweden as a result of the 1973 oil crisis , and has been growing slowly in worldwide acceptance since then . The 1979 development of <unk> pipe greatly augmented the heat pump ’ s economic viability . 
 In 1960 , Pacific Gas and Electric began operation of the first successful geothermal electric power plant in the United States at The Geysers in California . The original turbine lasted for more than 30 years and produced 11 MW net power . 
 The binary cycle power plant was first demonstrated in 1967 in the USSR and later introduced to the US in 1981 . This technology allows the generation of electricity from much lower temperature resources than previously . In 2006 , a binary cycle plant in Chena Hot Springs , Alaska , came on @-@ line , producing electricity from a record low fluid temperature of 57 ° C ( 135 ° F ) . 
 = = Direct Usage = = 
 = = Electricity = = 
 The International Geothermal Association ( IGA ) has reported that 10 @,@ 715 megawatts ( MW ) of geothermal power in 24 countries is online , which was expected to generate 67 @,@ 246 GWh of electricity in 2010 . This represents a 20 % increase in online capacity since 2005 . IGA projects growth to 18 @,@ 500 MW by 2015 , due to the projects presently under consideration , often in areas previously assumed to have little exploitable resource . 
 In 2010 , the United States led the world in geothermal electricity production with 3 @,@ 086 MW of installed capacity from 77 power plants . The largest group of geothermal power plants in the world is located at The Geysers , a geothermal field in California . The Philippines is the second highest producer , with 1 @,@ 904 MW of capacity online . Geothermal power makes up approximately 27 % of Philippine electricity generation . 
 Geothermal electric plants were traditionally built exclusively on the edges of tectonic plates where high temperature geothermal resources are available near the surface . The development of binary cycle power plants and improvements in drilling and extraction technology enable enhanced geothermal systems over a much greater geographical range . Demonstration projects are operational in Landau @-@ Pfalz , Germany , and Soultz @-@ sous @-@ Forêts , France , while an earlier effort in Basel , Switzerland was shut down after it triggered earthquakes . Other demonstration projects are under construction in Australia , the United Kingdom , and the United States of America . 
 The thermal efficiency of geothermal electric plants is low , around 10 – 23 % , because geothermal fluids do not reach the high temperatures of steam from boilers . The laws of thermodynamics limits the efficiency of heat engines in extracting useful energy . Exhaust heat is wasted , unless it can be used directly and locally , for example in greenhouses , timber mills , and district heating . System efficiency does not materially affect operational costs as it would for plants that use fuel , but it does affect return on the capital used to build the plant . In order to produce more energy than the pumps consume , electricity generation requires relatively hot fields and specialized heat cycles . Because geothermal power does not rely on variable sources of energy , unlike , for example , wind or solar , its capacity factor can be quite large – up to 96 % has been demonstrated . The global average was 73 % in 2005 . 
 = = Types = = 
 Geothermal energy comes in either vapor @-@ dominated or liquid @-@ dominated forms . Larderello and The Geysers are vapor @-@ dominated . Vapor @-@ dominated sites offer temperatures from 240 to 300 ° C that produce superheated steam . 
 = = = Liquid @-@ dominated plants = = = 
 Liquid @-@ dominated reservoirs ( <unk> ) were more common with temperatures greater than 200 ° C ( 392 ° F ) and are found near young volcanoes surrounding the Pacific Ocean and in rift zones and hot spots . Flash plants are the common way to generate electricity from these sources . Pumps are generally not required , powered instead when the water turns to steam . Most wells generate 2 @-@ <unk> . Steam is separated from liquid via cyclone separators , while the liquid is returned to the reservoir for reheating / reuse . As of 2013 , the largest liquid system is Cerro Prieto in Mexico , which generates 750 MWe from temperatures reaching 350 ° C ( 662 ° F ) . The Salton Sea field in Southern California offers the potential of generating 2000 MWe . 
 Lower temperature <unk> ( 120 – 200 ° C ) require pumping . They are common in extensional terrains , where heating takes place via deep circulation along faults , such as in the Western US and Turkey . Water passes through a heat exchanger in a Rankine cycle binary plant . The water vaporizes an organic working fluid that drives a turbine . These binary plants originated in the Soviet Union in the late 1960s and predominate in new US plants . Binary plants have no emissions . 
 = = = Thermal energy = = = 
 Lower temperature sources produce the energy equivalent of 100M BBL per year . Sources with temperatures of 30 – 150 ° C are used without conversion to electricity as district heating , greenhouses , fisheries , mineral recovery , industrial process heating and bathing in 75 countries . Heat pumps extract energy from shallow sources at 10 – 20 ° C in 43 countries for use in space heating and cooling . Home heating is the fastest @-@ growing means of exploiting geothermal energy , with global annual growth rate of 30 % in 2005 and 20 % in 2012 . 
 Approximately 270 petajoules ( PJ ) of geothermal heating was used in 2004 . More than half went for space heating , and another third for heated pools . The remainder supported industrial and agricultural applications . Global installed capacity was 28 GW , but capacity factors tend to be low ( 30 % on average ) since heat is mostly needed in winter . Some 88 PJ for space heating was extracted by an estimated 1 @.@ 3 million geothermal heat pumps with a total capacity of 15 GW . 
 Heat for these purposes may also be extracted from co @-@ generation at a geothermal electrical plant . 
 Heating is cost @-@ effective at many more sites than electricity generation . At natural hot springs or geysers , water can be piped directly into radiators . In hot , dry ground , earth tubes or downhole heat exchangers can collect the heat . However , even in areas where the ground is colder than room temperature , heat can often be extracted with a geothermal heat pump more cost @-@ effectively and cleanly than by conventional furnaces . These devices draw on much shallower and colder resources than traditional geothermal techniques . They frequently combine functions , including air conditioning , seasonal thermal energy storage , solar energy collection , and electric heating . Heat pumps can be used for space heating essentially anywhere . 
 Iceland is the world leader in direct applications . Some 92 @.@ 5 % of its homes are heated with geothermal energy , saving Iceland over $ 100 million annually in avoided oil imports . Reykjavík , Iceland has the world 's biggest district heating system . Once known as the most polluted city in the world , it is now one of the cleanest . 
 = = = Enhanced geothermal = = = 
 Enhanced geothermal systems ( EGS ) actively inject water into wells to be heated and pumped back out . The water is injected under high pressure to expand existing rock fissures to enable the water to freely flow in and out . The technique was adapted from oil and gas extraction techniques . However , the geologic formations are deeper and no toxic chemicals are used , reducing the possibility of environmental damage . Drillers can employ directional drilling to expand the size of the reservoir . 
 Small @-@ scale EGS have been installed in the Rhine <unk> at Soultz @-@ sous @-@ Forêts in France and at Landau and <unk> in Germany . 
 = = Economics = = 
 Geothermal power requires no fuel ( except for pumps ) , and is therefore immune to fuel cost fluctuations . However , capital costs are significant . Drilling accounts for over half the costs , and exploration of deep resources entails significant risks . A typical well doublet ( extraction and injection wells ) in Nevada can support 4 @.@ 5 megawatts ( MW ) and costs about $ 10 million to drill , with a 20 % failure rate . 
 In total , electrical plant construction and well drilling cost about € 2 – 5 million per MW of electrical capacity , while the break – even price is 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 10 € per kW · h . Enhanced geothermal systems tend to be on the high side of these ranges , with capital costs above $ 4 million per MW and break – even above $ 0 @.@ 054 per kW · h in 2007 . Direct heating applications can use much shallower wells with lower temperatures , so smaller systems with lower costs and risks are feasible . Residential geothermal heat pumps with a capacity of 10 kilowatt ( kW ) are routinely installed for around $ 1 – 3 @,@ 000 per kilowatt . District heating systems may benefit from economies of scale if demand is geographically dense , as in cities and greenhouses , but otherwise piping installation dominates capital costs . The capital cost of one such district heating system in Bavaria was estimated at somewhat over 1 million € per MW . Direct systems of any size are much simpler than electric generators and have lower maintenance costs per kW · h , but they must consume electricity to run pumps and compressors . Some governments subsidize geothermal projects . 
 Geothermal power is highly scalable : from a rural village to an entire city . 
 The most developed geothermal field in the United States is The Geysers in Northern California . 
 Geothermal projects have several stages of development . Each phase has associated risks . At the early stages of reconnaissance and geophysical surveys , many projects are cancelled , making that phase unsuitable for traditional lending . Projects moving forward from the identification , exploration and exploratory drilling often trade equity for financing . 
 = = Resources = = 
 The Earth 's internal thermal energy flows to the surface by conduction at a rate of 44 @.@ 2 terawatts ( TW ) , and is replenished by radioactive decay of minerals at a rate of 30 TW . These power rates are more than double humanity ’ s current energy consumption from all primary sources , but most of this energy flow is not recoverable . In addition to the internal heat flows , the top layer of the surface to a depth of 10 meters ( 33 ft ) is heated by solar energy during the summer , and releases that energy and cools during the winter . 
 Outside of the seasonal variations , the geothermal gradient of temperatures through the crust is 25 – 30 ° C ( 77 – 86 ° F ) per kilometer of depth in most of the world . The conductive heat flux averages 0 @.@ 1 MW / km2 . These values are much higher near tectonic plate boundaries where the crust is thinner . They may be further augmented by fluid circulation , either through magma conduits , hot springs , hydrothermal circulation or a combination of these . 
 A geothermal heat pump can extract enough heat from shallow ground anywhere in the world to provide home heating , but industrial applications need the higher temperatures of deep resources . The thermal efficiency and profitability of electricity generation is particularly sensitive to temperature . The most demanding applications receive the greatest benefit from a high natural heat flux , ideally from using a hot spring . The next best option is to drill a well into a hot aquifer . If no adequate aquifer is available , an artificial one may be built by injecting water to hydraulically fracture the bedrock . This last approach is called hot dry rock geothermal energy in Europe , or enhanced geothermal systems in North America . Much greater potential may be available from this approach than from conventional tapping of natural aquifers . 
 Estimates of the potential for electricity generation from geothermal energy vary sixfold , from <unk> depending on the scale of investments . Upper estimates of geothermal resources assume enhanced geothermal wells as deep as 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) , whereas existing geothermal wells are rarely more than 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) deep . Wells of this depth are now common in the petroleum industry . The deepest research well in the world , the Kola <unk> borehole , is 12 kilometres ( 7 mi ) deep . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to the Geothermal Energy Association ( <unk> ) installed geothermal capacity in the United States grew by 5 % , or 147 @.@ 05 MW , ce the last annual survey in March 2012 . This increase came from seven geothermal projects that began production in 2012 . <unk> also revised its 2011 estimate of installed capacity upward by 128 MW , bringing current installed U.S. geothermal capacity to 3 @,@ 386 MW . 
 Myanmar Engineering Society has identified at least 39 locations capable of geothermal power production and some of these hydrothermal reservoirs lie quite close to Yangon which is a significant underutilized resource . 
 = = <unk> and sustainability = = 
 Geothermal power is considered to be renewable because any projected heat extraction is small compared to the Earth 's heat content . The Earth has an internal heat content of 1031 joules ( 3 · 1015 TW · hr ) , approximately 100 billion times current ( 2010 ) worldwide annual energy consumption . About 20 % of this is residual heat from planetary accretion , and the remainder is attributed to higher radioactive decay rates that existed in the past . Natural heat flows are not in equilibrium , and the planet is slowly cooling down on geologic timescales . Human extraction taps a minute fraction of the natural outflow , often without accelerating it . 
 Geothermal power is also considered to be sustainable thanks to its power to sustain the Earth ’ s intricate ecosystems . By using geothermal sources of energy present generations of humans will not endanger the capability of future generations to use their own resources to the same amount that those energy sources are presently used . Further , due to its low emissions geothermal energy is considered to have excellent potential for mitigation of global warming . 
 Even though geothermal power is globally sustainable , extraction must still be monitored to avoid local depletion . Over the course of decades , individual wells draw down local temperatures and water levels until a new equilibrium is reached with natural flows . The three oldest sites , at Larderello , Wairakei , and the Geysers have experienced reduced output because of local depletion . Heat and water , in uncertain proportions , were extracted faster than they were replenished . If production is reduced and water is <unk> , these wells could theoretically recover their full potential . Such mitigation strategies have already been implemented at some sites . The long @-@ term sustainability of geothermal energy has been demonstrated at the <unk> field in Italy since 1913 , at the Wairakei field in New Zealand since 1958 , and at The Geysers field in California since 1960 . 
 Falling electricity production may be boosted through drilling additional supply boreholes , as at <unk> and Ohaaki . The Wairakei power station has been running much longer , with its first unit commissioned in November 1958 , and it attained its peak generation of <unk> in 1965 , but already the supply of high @-@ pressure steam was faltering , in 1982 being derated to intermediate pressure and the station managing <unk> . Around the start of the 21st century it was managing about <unk> , then in 2005 two <unk> <unk> systems were added , boosting the station 's output by about <unk> . Detailed data are unavailable , being lost due to re @-@ organisations . One such re @-@ organisation in 1996 causes the absence of early data for <unk> ( started 1996 ) , and the gap in 1996 / 7 for Wairakei and Ohaaki ; half @-@ hourly data for Ohaaki 's first few months of operation are also missing , as well as for most of Wairakei 's history . 
 = = Environmental effects = = 
 Fluids drawn from the deep earth carry a mixture of gases , notably carbon dioxide ( CO 
 2 ) , hydrogen sulfide ( H 
 2S ) , methane ( CH 
 4 ) and ammonia ( NH 
 3 ) . These pollutants contribute to global warming , acid rain , and noxious smells if released . Existing geothermal electric plants emit an average of 122 kilograms ( 269 lb ) of CO 
 2 per megawatt @-@ hour ( MW · h ) of electricity , a small fraction of the emission intensity of conventional fossil fuel plants . Plants that experience high levels of acids and volatile chemicals are usually equipped with emission @-@ control systems to reduce the exhaust . 
 In addition to dissolved gases , hot water from geothermal sources may hold in solution trace amounts of toxic elements such as mercury , arsenic , boron , and antimony . These chemicals precipitate as the water cools , and can cause environmental damage if released . The modern practice of injecting cooled geothermal fluids back into the Earth to stimulate production has the side benefit of reducing this environmental risk . 
 Direct geothermal heating systems contain pumps and compressors , which may consume energy from a polluting source . This parasitic load is normally a fraction of the heat output , so it is always less polluting than electric heating . However , if the electricity is produced by burning fossil fuels , then the net emissions of geothermal heating may be comparable to directly burning the fuel for heat . For example , a geothermal heat pump powered by electricity from a combined cycle natural gas plant would produce about as much pollution as a natural gas condensing furnace of the same size . Therefore , the environmental value of direct geothermal heating applications is highly dependent on the emissions intensity of the neighboring electric grid . 
 Plant construction can adversely affect land stability . Subsidence has occurred in the Wairakei field in New Zealand . In <unk> im Breisgau , Germany , tectonic uplift occurred instead , due to a previously isolated anhydrite layer coming in contact with water and turning into gypsum , doubling its volume . Enhanced geothermal systems can trigger earthquakes as part of hydraulic fracturing . The project in Basel , Switzerland was suspended because more than 10 @,@ 000 seismic events measuring up to 3 @.@ 4 on the Richter Scale occurred over the first 6 days of water injection . 
 Geothermal has minimal land and freshwater requirements . Geothermal plants use 3 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 sq mi ) per gigawatt of electrical production ( not capacity ) versus 32 square kilometres ( 12 sq mi ) and 12 square kilometres ( 4 @.@ 6 sq mi ) for coal facilities and wind farms respectively . They use 20 litres ( 5 @.@ 3 US gal ) of freshwater per MW · h versus over 1 @,@ 000 litres ( 260 US gal ) per MW · h for nuclear , coal , or oil . 
 = = Legal frameworks = = 
 Some of the legal issues raised by geothermal energy resources include questions of ownership and allocation of the resource , the grant of exploration permits , exploitation rights , royalties , and the extent to which geothermal energy issues have been recognized in existing planning and environmental laws . Other questions concern overlap between geothermal and mineral or petroleum tenements . Broader issues concern the extent to which the legal framework for encouragement of renewable energy assists in encouraging geothermal industry innovation and development . 
 = Izzie Stevens = 
 Isobel Katherine " Izzie " Stevens , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actress Katherine Heigl from 2005 to 2010 . Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , Izzie worked her way up to resident level , while her relationships with her colleagues Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) formed a focal point of the series . 
 Heigl was critical of the character 's development during the show 's fourth season , particularly her romance with George . She declined to put herself forward for the 2008 Emmy Awards , citing insufficient material in the role . After speculation that Izzie would be killed off in the fifth season , the character was diagnosed with Stage 4 metastatic melanoma . She married Alex in the series ' one @-@ hundredth episode , and afterwards , her tumor was successfully removed . Izzie made her final appearance in the sixth season , leaving Seattle after Alex ended their relationship . Heigl requested to be released from her contract 18 months early , in order to spend more time with her family . In January 2012 , Heigl reported that she would like to return to Grey 's Anatomy to give closure to her character , however , Rhimes confirmed that there were no plans to have the character return at that time and has since stated that she has no plans to ever <unk> Izzie 's storyline again . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Izzie appears in the first episode of Grey 's Anatomy , meeting fellow interns Meredith Grey , Cristina Yang , Alex Karev , and George O 'Malley . She and George move in with Meredith and become best friends . Izzie 's boyfriend , hockey player Hank ( Jonathan Scarfe ) , struggles to accept her new role as a surgeon , and the two break up . Izzie is hurt when Alex exposes her past as a lingerie model . However , the two later go on to begin a friendship and then a romance . Alex experiences sexual dysfunction with Izzie and cheats on her with nurse Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) . When Izzie finds out , she breaks up with him , though they briefly reunite following a bomb incident at the hospital . Izzie reveals while treating a pregnant teenager that she had a daughter at the age of 16 and gave up for adoption . Izzie falls in love with cardiothoracic patient Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) , and the two become engaged . When Denny 's condition deteriorates , Izzie deliberately worsens his health further by cutting his LVAD wire to move him up the donor register . Although Denny receives a new heart , he has a stroke hours later and dies . Izzie is the sole beneficiary of Denny 's will , inheriting $ 8 @.@ 7 million . She uses the money to open a free clinic at the hospital : the Denny Duquette Memorial Clinic . 
 Izzie disapproves of George 's relationship and marriage to orthopedic resident Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . She and George sleep together , and attempt to keep their liaison a secret . George and resident Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) are the only people aware that Izzie gave birth to a daughter at the age of sixteen ; ultimately the child was given up for adoption . He supports Izzie when her daughter Hannah ( Liv Hutchings ) , diagnosed with leukemia , arrives at Seattle Grace Hospital in need of a bone marrow transplant from Izzie . Izzie 's feelings for George grow , and she reveals that she has fallen in love with him . When Callie discovers George has been unfaithful , the two separate , and George and Izzie embark on a short @-@ lived relationship , only to discover there is no real chemistry between them . 
 Izzie supports Alex when he discovers his new girlfriend has psychiatric problems , and convinces him to have her committed . She is also handed primary responsibility for the clinic , as Bailey cuts back on her responsibilities . Izzie and Alex go on to rekindle their relationship , though Izzie is concerned when she begins hallucinating Denny . She discovers she has metastatic melanoma ( Stage IV ) which has spread to her liver , skin , and brain , causing the hallucinations . Her survival chances are estimated at only 5 % . She is admitted to Seattle Grace as a patient , and Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) successfully removes a tumor from her brain . Izzie spends her time in the hospital planning Meredith and Derek 's wedding , but when her condition worsens and Derek discovers a second brain tumor , they give the ceremony to Izzie and Alex , who marry in front of all their friends . The procedure to remove the second tumor from Izzie 's brain causes her to lose her short @-@ term memory , and although she soon regains it , she flatlines moments later . The fifth season ends with her friends ignoring her DNR order and attempting to resuscitate her , transposed with images of Izzie in an elevator encountering George , who has been in an accident and is also currently <unk> . Though George dies , Izzie is resuscitated and recovers enough to return to work . 
 Izzie makes a treatment error that endangers the life of a patient , and is fired from the hospital 's surgical program . Believing Alex is partially to blame , she writes him a Dear John letter and leaves . Izzie later learns that Alex was not responsible for her lost job , and returns to make amends with him , but Meredith informs her that Alex is moving on . Izzie informs Alex that she no longer has cancer . Although he is pleased , Alex officially breaks up with Izzie , telling her that he loves her but deserves better . She leaves Seattle to start fresh . Several episodes later , Alex informs Meredith that Izzie sent divorce papers , which he signs in the episode " How <unk> " . In the sixth season finale , Alex is shot and asks for Izzie . Imagining that Meredith 's half @-@ sister Lexie ( Chyler Leigh ) is Izzie , he apologizes and asks her never to leave him again . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Izzie was created by Grey 's Anatomy producer Shonda Rhimes , with actress Katherine Heigl cast in the role . Heigl originally wanted to play Izzie as a brunette , but was requested to retain her natural blond for the part . Heigl 's comprehension of medical procedures and terminology is slight ; the actress explained that while she has an admiration for doctors , she is not as fascinated by medicine as other cast members . When Kate Walsh 's character Addison Montgomery left Grey 's Anatomy to launch the spin @-@ off show Private Practice , Heigl disclosed that she had hoped for a spin @-@ off for Izzie . 
 Heigl declined to put her name forward for consideration at the 2008 Emmy Awards , claiming that she had been given insufficient material on the series to warrant a nomination . Following Heigl 's statement , speculation arose that her character would suffer a brain tumor and be killed off Grey 's Anatomy , substantiated by the announcement Jeffrey Dean Morgan would return to the series as Denny , who died at the end of season two . ABC 's entertainment president Steve McPherson denied the rumor , stating : " There is an unbelievable storyline for her this year , which is really central to everything that 's going to go on this season " . 
 Speculation resumed , however , when Dean Morgan returned to the show for a second time in its fifth season . Cast member James Pickens , Jr. announced that both Heigl and T.R. Knight were set to depart from the show , but he later retracted his comment . During the course of the fifth season , Izzie was diagnosed with metastatic melanoma ( Stage IV ) which spread to her liver , skin and brain . Following the show 's one @-@ hundredth episode wrap party , Heigl revealed she did not know if Izzie would survive , as no one on the production team would disclose her character 's fate to her . It was confirmed in June 2009 that Heigl would return as Izzie for the show 's sixth season . Heigl 's appearances in the season were sporadic , seeing Izzie depart and return twice . Although she was scheduled to appear in the final five episodes of the season , Heigl requested that she be released from her contract 18 months early , and made her final appearance on January 21 , 2010 . Heigl explained that she wanted to spend more time with her family , and did not think it would be respectful to Grey 's Anatomy viewers to have Izzie return and depart yet again . 
 In August 2010 , Rhimes stated that she did not feel Izzie 's character arc — specifically her relationship with Alex — had fully concluded , and hoped to give proper closure to their relationship in the seventh season . She later confirmed that she had intended to kill off Izzie off @-@ screen , but opted against this a day later as she felt that it would destroy Alex , rather than give him closure . Instead , she concluded : " I 'm open to seeing Izzie again . So if she [ Katherine ] were to come back , we would be thrilled to [ wrap up her story ] . But if she doesn 't , we 'll just move on . " Heigl also went on to say in October 2010 that the character returning to show looks bleak because , " that chapter is closed , and it 's sad . And it 's hard . " She also felt that Izzie coming back to the show would , " just feel manipulative . " 
 However , in January 2012 , Heigl stated in an interview that she has asked the producers if she could return to the show to give closure to Izzie 's storyline : " I 've told them I want to [ return ] , " she said . " I really , really , really want to see where [ Izzie ] is . I just want to know what happened to her and where she went and what she 's doing now . My idea is that she actually like figures it out , and finds some success and does really well in a different hospital . She was always floundering you know , and so she was always one step behind the eight ball and I want to see that girl take some power back . " She later went on to say that she regrets leaving the show , " Oh yeah , sometimes , yeah . You miss it . I miss my friends . It was a great work environment ... and it becomes a family . I spent six years together with these people every day ... you grow up together , in a way , " and again commented on Izzie possibly returning to the show , " I always felt that if they wanted me to come back and sort of wrap up that storyline ... I want them to know that I 'm down with it if they want me to , but I completely understand if it doesn 't necessarily work ... They 've got a lot of story lines going on there . " But in March 2012 , Shonda Rhimes said that there are no plans at the moment for the character to return , " I think it was really nice to hear her appreciating the show . At the same time we are on a track we have been planning . The idea of changing that track is not something we are interested in right now . " Three years later , Rhimes said she has completely moved on from the idea of Izzie coming back , “ I ’ m done with that story . I ’ ve turned that idea over in my mind a thousand times and thought about how it would go . And I don ’ t think so . ” 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Heigl believes that the Grey 's Anatomy writers incorporate much of the actors ' personalities into their roles , and that Izzie is a " super moral " version of herself . Episode " Bring the Pain " , which aired as the fifth episode of the second season , was originally intended to be the final episode of the first season . Rhimes explained that Izzie 's character in this episode came " full circle " from her role in the pilot : " Izzie , so vulnerable and underestimated when we first meet her , is the girl who removes her heart from her sleeve in " Bring the Pain " . " Discussing Izzie 's personality in a 2006 Cosmopolitan interview , Heigl assessed that she is " immensely kind " and patient . When Denny died in the season two episode " Losing My Religion " , Rhimes discussed the impact it had on Izzie , noting that Izzie is forced to abandon her idealism , which in turn leads to her letting go of medicine . In the aftermath of Denny 's death , Heigl came to believe that Izzie was not cut out to be a doctor . Executive producer Betsy Beers explained , however , that Denny 's death served to make Izzie more mature , and Heigl affirmed that " At the beginning of the [ third ] season they were trying to show how lost Izzie was . She lost her optimism . She realizes now that life is difficult , but she still tries very hard to see the best in people . " In order to demonstrate Izzie 's dislike of George 's love @-@ interest Callie , Rhimes penned a scene which she deemed one of her favorite moments on the show , in which Callie urinates in front of a stunned Izzie and Meredith . Rhimes assessed that : " I love that Mer and Izzie respond with all the trauma of having viewed a car crash [ ... ] the point is Callie pees and Izzie tortures her a tiny bit about the hand washing and that made me overjoyed because that ’ s the kind of thing people do . " 
 Discussing Izzie 's relationship with Alex in a 2006 Cosmopolitan interview , Heigl assessed that " Even when Alex was a complete dirtbag to her [ Izzie ] , she forgave him and gave him another chance . And he really screwed her over . [ ... ] To go for a guy like that is to say I want to be damaged . ' " Writer Stacy McKee deemed Izzie 's moving on from Alex to patient Denny Duquette " karma " , as Alex previously treated Izzie badly , yet as he begins to realize his true feelings , he is forced to watch her embark on a romance with " the undeniably handsome - and totally charming " Denny . Series writer Blythe Robe commented on Izzie and Denny : " I love the way Izzie lights up when she 's around him . I love their relationship because it 's so pure and honest and completely game free . " Writer Elizabeth Klaviter noted at this time the way Izzie " seems to be sacrificing her reputation because of her feelings for Denny . " When Izzie deliberately worsened Denny 's condition to move him up the transplant list , series writer Mark Wilding questioned the morality of the actions , asking : " is Izzie bad for doing it ? Is she tremendously irresponsible ? She cut the LVAD wire for love so does that make her action understandable ? " 
 Rhimes discussed costuming choices in the scene which saw the interns gather around Denny 's deathbed , explaining : " Meredith and George and Cristina and Callie and Alex are all dressed , not for a prom , but for a funeral . Everyone in dark colors , everyone dressed <unk> . As if they were in mourning . Only Izzie is in happy pink . Only Izzie looks like she didn ’ t know this was coming . " Following Denny 's death , Heigl approached Rhimes to ask when her character would next have a romantic liaison . Rhimes explained that " Izzie doesn 't sleep around " . Heigl expressed a desire for Izzie to reunite with Alex , explaining : " I believe on some level , there 's a connection between Izzie and Alex . He can do honorable things even though he 's cutting and sarcastic . I would like to ultimately see them together , if not this season , then next . " 
 Yahoo ! Voices wrote that Stevens in the third season " has become more condescending and passive aggressive herself , more than anyone else . " Heigl was critical of her character 's development in the show 's fourth season , particularly her affair with George , which she deemed " a ratings ploy " . Heigl explained : " They really hurt somebody , and they didn 't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it . I have a really hard time with that kind of thing . I 'm maybe a little too black and white about it . I don 't really know Izzie very well right now . She 's changed a lot . " Attempting to rationalise Izzie 's actions , Heigl later assessed that : 
 People who are so infallible , perfect and moral tend to be the first to slip and fall . But I would love to see how she deals with the consequences of what she 's done , because what ’ s interesting is when people make decisions that shake their world , they suddenly have to go , ' Woo , I didn 't know I was capable of this . ' I 'd like to see Izzie take some culpability . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Heigl was nominated for the " Best Supporting Actress in a TV Series " award at the 2007 and 2008 Golden Globe Awards for her role as Izzie . She was named " Favorite Female TV Star " at the 34th People 's Choice Awards , and awarded " Outstanding Supporting Actress In A Drama Series " at the 2007 Emmy Awards . Prior to the ceremony , considering Heigl 's chances of winning the Emmy , Variety 's Stuart Levine assessed of her performance : " Heigl has little difficulty reaching Izzie 's highest highs and lowest lows . Showrunner Shonda Rhimes puts a lot of pressure on Heigl to carry many intense storylines , and she 's up to the challenge . " Levine also noted , however : " There are times when Izzy becomes completely irrational during crisis situations , which may bother some . " Fox News included Izzie in its list of " The Best TV Doctors For Surgeon General " . The character was listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest Female Doctors on TV " and in BuzzFeed 's " 16 Hottest Doctors On Television " . 
 During the show 's third season , the New York Post 's Robert Rorke deemed Izzie to be " the heart and soul " of Grey 's Anatomy . He deemed her the show 's heroine , and wrote that : " Izzie is a welcome , calming presence , despite the devastation she experienced when she failed to save her patient and fiance Denny Duquette . [ ... ] Besides the formidable Dr. Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , Izzie seems to be the only adult intern at Seattle Grace ; the character has achieved a depth lacking in her fellow interns . " Eyder Peralta of The Houston Chronicle was critical of Izzie 's ethics in cutting Denny 's LVAD wire , writing that she " should not be practising medicine " and stating : " That 's the reason I don 't watch Grey 's Anatomy , anymore , because the super hot blond chick can make an earth @-@ shattering , fatal decision and she doesn 't get canned . " 
 The season four romance between Izzie and George proved unpopular with viewers , and resulted in a fan backlash among Alex and Izzie fans . The return of Izzie 's deceased fiancé Denny and the resumption of their romance during the show 's fifth season also proved unpopular with fans , and was deemed " the world 's worst storyline " by Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times . McNamara was also critical of the episode " Now or Never " , which saw Izzie flatline following neurosurgery , opining that Izzie ought to die . The episode in which Izzie married long @-@ term love Alex received 15 @.@ 3 million viewers , the largest television audience of the night . 
 Izzie 's cancer storyline received a mixed response from the medical community . Otis Brawley , chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society , commented that Izzie 's treatment options were unrealistic . Whereas in the show she was offered the drug interleukin @-@ 2 , in reality the drug is never recommended to patients when melanoma has spread to the brain , as it can cause bleeding and strokes . Brawley explained that such patients would instead be offered <unk> . Conversely however , Tim Turnham , executive director of the <unk> Research Foundation , praised Grey 's Anatomy for bringing about greater public awareness of melanoma , stating : " We welcome the national spotlight Grey 's Anatomy has created for melanoma and its efforts to encourage viewers to learn more about the importance of prevention , early detection and research . " 
 = Altair = 
 Altair ( α Aquilae , α Aql ) is the brightest star in the constellation Aquila and the twelfth brightest star in the night sky . It is currently in the G @-@ cloud — a nearby accumulation of gas and dust known as an interstellar cloud . Altair is an A @-@ type main sequence star with an apparent visual magnitude of 0 @.@ 77 and is one of the vertices of the Summer Triangle ( the other two vertices are marked by Deneb and Vega ) . It is 16 @.@ 7 light @-@ years ( 5 @.@ 13 parsecs ) from Earth and is one of the closest stars visible to the naked eye . 
 Altair rotates rapidly , with a velocity at the equator of approximately 286 km / s . This is a significant fraction of the star 's estimated breakup speed of 400 km / s . A study with the Palomar Testbed Interferometer revealed that Altair is not spherical , but is flattened at the poles due to its high rate of rotation . Other interferometric studies with multiple telescopes , operating in the infrared , have imaged and confirmed this phenomenon . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Altair is located 16 @.@ 7 light @-@ years ( 5 @.@ 13 parsecs ) from Earth and is one of the closest stars visible to the naked eye . Along with Beta Aquilae and Gamma Aquilae , it forms the well @-@ known line of stars sometimes referred to as the Family of Aquila or Shaft of Aquila . 
 Altair is a type @-@ A main sequence star with approximately 1 @.@ 8 times the mass of the Sun and 11 times its luminosity . Altair possesses an extremely rapid rate of rotation ; it has a rotational period of approximately 9 hours . For comparison , the equator of the Sun requires a little more than 25 days for a complete rotation . This rapid rotation forces Altair to be oblate ; its equatorial diameter is over 20 percent greater than its polar diameter . 
 Satellite measurements made in 1999 with the Wide Field Infrared Explorer showed that the brightness of Altair fluctuates slightly , varying by just a few thousandths of a magnitude with several different periods less than 2 hours . As a result , it was identified in 2005 as a Delta Scuti variable star . Its light curve can be approximated by adding together a number of sine waves , with periods that range between 0 @.@ 8 and 1 @.@ 5 hours . It is a weak source of coronal X @-@ ray emission , with the most active sources of emission being located near the star 's equator . This activity may be due to convection cells forming at the cooler equator . 
 = = = <unk> and surface temperature = = = 
 The angular diameter of Altair was measured <unk> by R. Hanbury Brown and his co @-@ workers at Narrabri Observatory in the 1960s . They found a diameter of 3 milliarcseconds . Although Hanbury Brown et al. realized that Altair would be rotationally flattened , they had insufficient data to experimentally observe its oblateness . Altair was later observed to be flattened by infrared interferometric measurements made by the Palomar Testbed Interferometer in 1999 and 2000 . This work was published by G. T. van Belle , David R. Ciardi and their co @-@ authors in 2001 . 
 Theory predicts that , owing to Altair 's rapid rotation , its surface gravity and effective temperature should be lower at the equator , making the equator less luminous than the poles . This phenomenon , known as gravity darkening or the von Zeipel effect , was confirmed for Altair by measurements made by the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer in 2001 , and analyzed by Ohishi et al . ( 2004 ) and Peterson et al . ( 2006 ) . Also , A. <unk> de Souza et al . ( 2005 ) verified gravity darkening using the measurements made by the Palomar and Navy interferometers , together with new measurements made by the <unk> instrument at the VLTI . 
 Altair is one of the few stars for which a direct image has been obtained . In 2006 and 2007 , J. D. Monnier and his coworkers produced an image of Altair 's surface from 2006 infrared observations made with the <unk> instrument on the CHARA array interferometer ; this was the first time the surface of any main @-@ sequence star , apart from the Sun , had been imaged . The false @-@ color image was published in 2007 . The equatorial radius of the star was estimated to be 2 @.@ 03 solar radii , and the polar radius 1 @.@ 63 solar radii — a 25 % increase of the stellar radius from pole to equator . The polar axis is inclined by about 60 ° to the line of sight from the Earth . 
 = = Etymology , mythology , and culture = = 
 The name Altair has been used since medieval times . It is an abbreviation of the Arabic phrase <unk> <unk> , al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ’ ir ( " English : the flying eagle " ) . The term Al <unk> Al <unk> appeared in Al Achsasi al Mouakket 's catalogue , which was translated into Latin as Vultur Volans . This name was applied by the Arabs to the asterism of α , β , and γ Aquilae and probably goes back to the ancient Babylonians and Sumerians , who called α Aquilae the eagle star . The spelling <unk> has also been used . Medieval astrolabes of England and Western Europe depicted Altair and Vega as birds . 
 The Koori people of Victoria also knew Altair as <unk> , the wedge @-@ tailed eagle , and β and γ Aquilae are his two wives the black swans . The people of the Murray River knew the star as <unk> . The Murray River was formed when <unk> the hunter speared <unk> , a giant Murray cod , who , when wounded , churned a channel across southern Australia before entering the sky as the constellation Delphinus . 
 In Chinese , the asterism consisting of α , β , and γ Aquilae is known as <unk> ( <unk> ; lit . " river drum " ) . Altair is thus known as <unk> er ( <unk> ; lit . " river drum two " , meaning the " second star of the drum at the river " ) . 
 However , Altair is better known by its other names : <unk> xing ( <unk> ) or <unk> xing ( <unk> ) , translated as the cowherd star . These names are an allusion to a love story , The Weaver Girl and the <unk> , in which <unk> ( represented by Altair ) and his two children ( represented by β and γ Aquilae ) are separated from respectively their wife and mother <unk> ( represented by Vega ) by the Milky Way . They are only permitted to meet once a year , when magpies form a bridge to allow them to cross the Milky Way . 
 The people of Micronesia called Altair as Mai @-@ lapa , " big / old breadfruit " , while the Māori people called this star as <unk> @-@ te @-@ rangi , " pillar of heaven " . 
 In Western astrology , the star Altair was ill @-@ omened , portending danger from reptiles . 
 Japan Airlines 's <unk> 777 @-@ 200 <unk> was named Altair . 
 Altair Airlines was a regional airline that operated out of Philadelphia from 1966 to 1982 . 
 The NASA Constellation Program announced Altair as the name of the Lunar Surface Access Module ( <unk> ) on December 13 , 2007 . The Russian @-@ made <unk> Be @-@ 200 Altair seaplane is also named after the star . 
 The Altair 8800 was one of the first microcomputers intended for home use . 
 Altair is the name of three United States navy ships : USS Altair ( AD @-@ 11 ) , USS Altair ( AK @-@ 257 ) and USNS Altair ( T @-@ AKR @-@ 291 ) . 
 Altair is the name of a 1919 poem by Karle Wilson Baker . 
 <unk> Ibn @-@ La <unk> is named after the star itself , who would become Master Assassin , then Mentor and become a legend in the history of the Assassins in the Assassin 's Creed series . 
 = = Visual companions = = 
 The bright primary star has the multiple star designation WDS <unk> + <unk> and has three faint visual companion stars , WDS <unk> + <unk> , C , and D. Component B is not physically close to A but merely appears close to it in the sky . 
 = Poultry = 
 Poultry ( / <unk> / ) are domesticated birds kept by humans for the eggs they produce , their meat , their feathers , or sometimes as pets . These birds are most typically members of the superorder <unk> ( fowl ) , especially the order Galliformes ( which includes chickens , quails and turkeys ) and the family Anatidae , in order Anseriformes , commonly known as " waterfowl " and including domestic ducks and domestic geese . Poultry also includes other birds that are killed for their meat , such as the young of pigeons ( known as squabs ) but does not include similar wild birds hunted for sport or food and known as game . The word " poultry " comes from the French / Norman word <unk> , itself derived from the Latin word pullus , which means small animal . 
 The domestication of poultry took place several thousand years ago . This may have originally been as a result of people hatching and rearing young birds from eggs collected from the wild , but later involved keeping the birds permanently in captivity . Domesticated chickens may have been used for cockfighting at first and quail kept for their songs , but soon it was realised how useful it was having a captive @-@ bred source of food . Selective breeding for fast growth , egg @-@ laying ability , conformation , plumage and docility took place over the centuries , and modern breeds often look very different from their wild ancestors . Although some birds are still kept in small flocks in extensive systems , most birds available in the market today are reared in intensive commercial enterprises . Poultry is the second most widely eaten type of meat globally and , along with eggs , provides nutritionally beneficial food containing high @-@ quality protein accompanied by a low proportion of fat . All poultry meat should be properly handled and sufficiently cooked in order to reduce the risk of food poisoning . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The word " poultry " comes from the Middle English " <unk> " , from Old French <unk> , from <unk> , poultry dealer , from <unk> , pullet . The word " pullet " itself comes from Middle English <unk> , from Old French <unk> , both from Latin pullus , a young fowl , young animal or chicken . The word " fowl " is of Germanic origin ( cf . Old English <unk> , German Vogel , Danish Fugl ) . 
 " Poultry " is a term used for any kind of domesticated bird , captive @-@ raised for its utility , and traditionally the word has been used to refer to wildfowl ( Galliformes ) and waterfowl ( Anseriformes ) . " Poultry " can be defined as domestic fowls , including chickens , turkeys , geese and ducks , raised for the production of meat or eggs and the word is also used for the flesh of these birds used as food . The Encyclopædia Britannica lists the same bird groups but also includes guinea fowl and squabs ( young pigeons ) . In R. D. Crawford 's Poultry breeding and genetics , squabs are omitted but Japanese quail and common pheasant are added to the list , the latter frequently being bred in captivity and released into the wild . In his 1848 classic book on poultry , Ornamental and Domestic Poultry : Their History , and Management , Edmund Dixon included chapters on the peafowl , guinea fowl , mute swan , turkey , various types of geese , the <unk> duck , other ducks and all types of chickens including bantams . In colloquial speech , the term " fowl " is often used near @-@ synonymously with " domesticated chicken " ( Gallus gallus ) , or with " poultry " or even just " bird " , and many languages do not distinguish between " poultry " and " fowl " . Both words are also used for the flesh of these birds . Poultry can be distinguished from " game " , defined as wild birds or mammals hunted for food or sport , a word also used to describe the flesh of these when eaten . 
 = = Chickens = = 
 Chickens are medium @-@ sized , chunky birds with an upright stance and characterised by fleshy red combs and wattles on their heads . Males , known as cocks , are usually larger , more boldly coloured , and have more exaggerated plumage than females ( hens ) . Chickens are gregarious , omnivorous , ground @-@ dwelling birds that in their natural surroundings search among the leaf litter for seeds , invertebrates , and other small animals . They seldom fly except as a result of perceived danger , preferring to run into the undergrowth if approached . Today 's domestic chicken ( Gallus gallus domesticus ) is mainly descended from the wild red junglefowl of Asia , with some additional input from grey junglefowl . Domestication is believed to have taken place between 7 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago , and what are thought to be fossilized chicken bones have been found in northeastern China dated to around 5 @,@ 400 BC . Archaeologists believe domestication was originally for the purpose of cockfighting , the male bird being a doughty fighter . By 4 @,@ 000 years ago , chickens seem to have reached the Indus Valley and 250 years later , they arrived in Egypt . They were still used for fighting and were regarded as symbols of fertility . The Romans used them in divination , and the Egyptians made a breakthrough when they learned the difficult technique of artificial incubation . Since then , the keeping of chickens has spread around the world for the production of food with the domestic fowl being a valuable source of both eggs and meat . 
 Since their domestication , a large number of breeds of chickens have been established , but with the exception of the white Leghorn , most commercial birds are of hybrid origin . In about 1800 , chickens began to be kept on a larger scale , and modern high @-@ output poultry farms were present in the United Kingdom from around 1920 and became established in the United States soon after the Second World War . By the mid @-@ 20th century , the poultry meat @-@ producing industry was of greater importance than the egg @-@ laying industry . Poultry breeding has produced breeds and strains to fulfil different needs ; light @-@ framed , egg @-@ laying birds that can produce 300 eggs a year ; fast @-@ growing , fleshy birds destined for consumption at a young age , and utility birds which produce both an acceptable number of eggs and a well @-@ fleshed carcase . Male birds are unwanted in the egg @-@ laying industry and can often be identified as soon as they are hatch for subsequent culling . In meat breeds , these birds are sometimes castrated ( often chemically ) to prevent aggression . The resulting bird , called a capon , has more tender and flavorful meat , as well . 
 A bantam is a small variety of domestic chicken , either a miniature version of a member of a standard breed , or a " true bantam " with no larger counterpart . The name derives from the town of Bantam in Java where European sailors bought the local small chickens for their shipboard supplies . Bantams may be a quarter to a third of the size of standard birds and lay similarly small eggs . They are kept by small @-@ holders and hobbyists for egg production , use as broody hens , ornamental purposes , and showing . 
 = = = Cockfighting = = = 
 Cockfighting is said to be the world 's oldest spectator sport and may have originated in Persia 6 @,@ 000 years ago . Two mature males ( cocks or roosters ) are set to fight each other , and will do so with great vigour until one is critically injured or killed . Breeds such as the <unk> were developed in the Indian subcontinent for their aggressive behaviour . The sport formed part of the culture of the ancient Indians , Chinese , Greeks , and Romans , and large sums were won or lost depending on the outcome of an encounter . Cockfighting has been banned in many countries during the last century on the grounds of cruelty to animals . 
 = = Ducks = = 
 Ducks are medium @-@ sized aquatic birds with broad bills , eyes on the side of the head , fairly long necks , short legs set far back on the body , and webbed feet . Males , known as drakes , are often larger than females ( simply known as ducks ) and are differently coloured in some breeds . Domestic ducks are omnivores , eating a variety of animal and plant materials such as aquatic insects , molluscs , worms , small amphibians , <unk> , and grasses . They feed in shallow water by dabbling , with their heads underwater and their tails upended . Most domestic ducks are too heavy to fly , and they are social birds , preferring to live and move around together in groups . They keep their plumage waterproof by preening , a process that spreads the secretions of the preen gland over their feathers . 
 Clay models of ducks found in China dating back to 4000 BC may indicate the domestication of ducks took place there during the Yangshao culture . Even if this is not the case , domestication of the duck took place in the Far East at least 1500 years earlier than in the West . Lucius Columella , writing in the first century BC , advised those who sought to rear ducks to collect wildfowl eggs and put them under a broody hen , because when raised in this way , the ducks " lay aside their wild nature and without hesitation breed when shut up in the bird pen " . Despite this , ducks did not appear in agricultural texts in Western Europe until about 810 AD , when they began to be mentioned alongside geese , chickens , and peafowl as being used for rental payments made by tenants to landowners . 
 It is widely agreed that the mallard ( Anas platyrhynchos ) is the ancestor of all breeds of domestic duck ( with the exception of the Muscovy duck ( <unk> moschata ) , which is not closely related to other ducks ) . Ducks are farmed mainly for their meat , eggs , and down . As is the case with chickens , various breeds have been developed , selected for egg @-@ laying ability , fast growth , and a well @-@ covered carcase . The most common commercial breed in the United Kingdom and the United States is the Pekin duck , which can lay 200 eggs a year and can reach a weight of 3 @.@ 5 kg ( 7 @.@ 7 lb ) in 44 days . In the Western world , ducks are not as popular as chickens , because the latter produce larger quantities of white , lean meat and are easier to keep intensively , making the price of chicken meat lower than that of duck meat . While popular in haute cuisine , duck appears less frequently in the mass @-@ market food industry . However , things are different in the East . Ducks are more popular there than chickens and are mostly still herded in the traditional way and selected for their ability to find sufficient food in harvested rice fields and other wet environments . 
 = = Geese = = 
 The greylag goose ( Anser anser ) was domesticated by the Egyptians at least 3000 years ago , and a different wild species , the swan goose ( Anser <unk> ) , domesticated in Siberia about a thousand years later , is known as a Chinese goose . The two hybridise with each other and the large knob at the base of the beak , a noticeable feature of the Chinese goose , is present to a varying extent in these hybrids . The hybrids are fertile and have resulted in several of the modern breeds . Despite their early domestication , geese have never gained the commercial importance of chickens and ducks . 
 Domestic geese are much larger than their wild counterparts and tend to have thick necks , an upright posture , and large bodies with broad rear ends . The greylag @-@ derived birds are large and fleshy and used for meat , while the Chinese geese have smaller frames and are mainly used for egg production . The fine down of both is valued for use in pillows and padded garments . They forage on grass and weeds , supplementing this with small invertebrates , and one of the attractions of rearing geese is their ability to grow and thrive on a grass @-@ based system . They are very gregarious and have good memories and can be allowed to roam widely in the knowledge that they will return home by dusk . The Chinese goose is more aggressive and noisy than other geese and can be used as a guard animal to warn of intruders . The flesh of meat geese is dark @-@ coloured and high in protein , but they deposit fat subcutaneously , although this fat contains mostly monounsaturated fatty acids . The birds are killed either around 10 or about 24 weeks . Between these ages , problems with dressing the carcase occur because of the presence of developing pin feathers . 
 In some countries , geese and ducks are force @-@ fed to produce livers with an exceptionally high fat content for the production of foie gras . Over 75 % of world production of this product occurs in France , with lesser industries in Hungary and Bulgaria and a growing production in China . Foie gras is considered a luxury in many parts of the world , but the process of feeding the birds in this way is banned in many countries on animal welfare grounds . 
 = = Turkeys = = 
 Turkeys are large birds , their nearest relatives being the pheasant and the guineafowl . Males are larger than females and have spreading , fan @-@ shaped tails and distinctive , fleshy wattles , called a snood , that hang from the top of the beak and are used in courtship display . Wild turkeys can fly , but seldom do so , preferring to run with a long , <unk> gait . They roost in trees and forage on the ground , feeding on seeds , nuts , berries , grass , foliage , invertebrates , lizards , and small snakes . 
 The modern domesticated turkey is descended from one of six subspecies of wild turkey ( Meleagris gallopavo ) found in the present Mexican states of Jalisco , Guerrero and Veracruz . Pre @-@ Aztec tribes in south @-@ central Mexico first domesticated the bird around 800 BC , and Pueblo Indians inhabiting the Colorado Plateau in the United States did likewise around 200 BC . They used the feathers for robes , blankets , and ceremonial purposes . More than 1 @,@ 000 years later , they became an important food source . The first Europeans to encounter the bird misidentified it as a guineafowl , a bird known as a " turkey fowl " at that time because it had been introduced into Europe via Turkey . 
 Commercial turkeys are usually reared indoors under controlled conditions . These are often large buildings , purpose @-@ built to provide ventilation and low light intensities ( this reduces the birds ' activity and thereby increases the rate of weight gain ) . The lights can be switched on for 24 @-@ hrs / day , or a range of step @-@ wise light regimens to encourage the birds to feed often and therefore grow rapidly . Females achieve slaughter weight at about 15 weeks of age and males at about 19 . Mature commercial birds may be twice as heavy as their wild counterparts . Many different breeds have been developed , but the majority of commercial birds are white , as this improves the appearance of the dressed carcass , the pin feathers being less visible . Turkeys were at one time mainly consumed on special occasions such as Christmas ( 10 million birds in the United Kingdom ) or Thanksgiving ( 60 million birds in the United States ) . However , they are increasingly becoming part of the everyday diet in many parts of the world . 
 = = Quail = = 
 The quail is a small to medium @-@ sized , cryptically coloured bird . In its natural environment , it is found in bushy places , in rough grassland , among agricultural crops , and in other places with dense cover . It feeds on seeds , insects , and other small invertebrates . Being a largely ground @-@ dwelling , gregarious bird , domestication of the quail was not difficult , although many of its wild instincts are retained in captivity . It was known to the Egyptians long before the arrival of chickens and was depicted in hieroglyphs from <unk> BC . It migrated across Egypt in vast flocks and the birds could sometimes be picked up off the ground by hand . These were the common quail ( Coturnix <unk> ) , but modern domesticated flocks are mostly of Japanese quail ( Coturnix japonica ) which was probably domesticated as early as the 11th century AD in Japan . They were originally kept as songbirds , and they are thought to have been regularly used in song contests . 
 In the early 20th century , Japanese breeders began to selectively breed for increased egg production . By 1940 , the quail egg industry was flourishing , but the events of World War II led to the complete loss of quail lines bred for their song type , as well as almost all of those bred for egg production . After the war , the few surviving domesticated quail were used to rebuild the industry , and all current commercial and laboratory lines are considered to have originated from this population . Modern birds can lay upward of 300 eggs a year and countries such as Japan , India , China , Italy , Russia , and the United States have established commercial Japanese quail farming industries . Japanese quail are also used in biomedical research in fields such as genetics , embryology , nutrition , physiology , pathology , and toxicity studies . These quail are closely related to the common quail , and many young hybrid birds are released into the wild each year to replenish dwindling wild populations . 
 = = Other poultry = = 
 Guinea fowl originated in southern Africa , and the species most often kept as poultry is the helmeted guineafowl ( <unk> meleagris ) . It is a medium @-@ sized grey or speckled bird with a small naked head with colourful wattles and a knob on top , and was domesticated by the time of the ancient Greeks and Romans . Guinea fowl are hardy , sociable birds that subsist mainly on insects , but also consume grasses and seeds . They will keep a vegetable garden clear of pests and will eat the ticks that carry Lyme disease . They happily roost in trees and give a loud vocal warning of the approach of predators . Their flesh and eggs can be eaten in the same way as chickens , young birds being ready for the table at the age of about four months . 
 A squab is the name given to the young of domestic pigeons that are destined for the table . Like other domesticated pigeons , birds used for this purpose are descended from the rock pigeon ( Columba livia ) . Special utility breeds with desirable characteristics are used . Two eggs are laid and incubated for about 17 days . When they hatch , the squabs are fed by both parents on " pigeon 's milk " , a thick secretion high in protein produced by the crop . <unk> grow rapidly , but are slow to fledge and are ready to leave the nest at 26 to 30 days weighing about 500 g ( 18 oz ) . By this time , the adult pigeons will have laid and be incubating another pair of eggs and a prolific pair should produce two squabs every four weeks during a breeding season lasting several months . 
 = = Poultry farming = = 
 Worldwide , more chickens are kept than any other type of poultry , with over 50 billion birds being raised each year as a source of meat and eggs . Traditionally , such birds would have been kept extensively in small flocks , foraging during the day and housed at night . This is still the case in developing countries , where the women often make important contributions to family livelihoods through keeping poultry . However , rising world populations and urbanization have led to the bulk of production being in larger , more intensive specialist units . These are often situated close to where the feed is grown or near to where the meat is needed , and result in cheap , safe food being made available for urban communities . Profitability of production depends very much on the price of feed , which has been rising . High feed costs could limit further development of poultry production . 
 In free @-@ range husbandry , the birds can roam freely outdoors for at least part of the day . Often , this is in large enclosures , but the birds have access to natural conditions and can exhibit their normal behaviours . A more intensive system is <unk> , in which the birds have access to a fenced yard and poultry house at a higher stocking rate . Poultry can also be kept in a barn system , with no access to the open air , but with the ability to move around freely inside the building . The most intensive system for egg @-@ laying chickens is battery cages , often set in multiple tiers . In these , several birds share a small cage which restricts their ability to move around and behave in a normal manner . The eggs are laid on the floor of the cage and roll into troughs outside for ease of collection . Battery cages for hens have been illegal in the EU since January 1 , 2012 . 
 Chickens raised intensively for their meat are known as " broilers " . Breeds have been developed that can grow to an acceptable carcass size ( 2 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 lb ) ) in six weeks or less . Broilers grow so fast , their legs cannot always support their weight and their hearts and respiratory systems may not be able to supply enough oxygen to their developing muscles . Mortality rates at 1 % are much higher than for less @-@ intensively reared laying birds which take 18 weeks to reach similar weights . Processing the birds is done automatically with conveyor @-@ belt efficiency . They are hung by their feet , stunned , killed , bled , scalded , plucked , have their heads and feet removed , eviscerated , washed , chilled , drained , weighed , and packed , all within the course of little over two hours . 
 Both intensive and free @-@ range farming have animal welfare concerns . In intensive systems , cannibalism , feather pecking and vent pecking can be common , with some farmers using beak trimming as a preventative measure . Diseases can also be common and spread rapidly through the flock . In extensive systems , the birds are exposed to adverse weather conditions and are vulnerable to predators and disease @-@ carrying wild birds . Barn systems have been found to have the worst bird welfare . In Southeast Asia , a lack of disease control in free @-@ range farming has been associated with outbreaks of avian influenza . 
 = = Poultry shows = = 
 In many countries , national and regional poultry shows are held where enthusiasts exhibit their birds which are judged on certain phenotypical breed traits as specified by their respective breed standards . The idea of poultry exhibition may have originated after cockfighting was made illegal , as a way of maintaining a competitive element in poultry husbandry . Breed standards were drawn up for egg @-@ laying , meat @-@ type , and purely ornamental birds , aiming for uniformity . Sometimes , poultry shows are part of general livestock shows , and sometimes they are separate events such as the annual " National Championship Show " in the United Kingdom organised by the Poultry Club of Great Britain . 
 = = Poultry as food = = 
 = = = Trade = = = 
 Poultry is the second most widely eaten type of meat in the world , accounting for about 30 % of total meat production worldwide compared to pork at 38 % . Sixteen billion birds are raised annually for consumption , more than half of these in industrialised , factory @-@ like production units . Global broiler meat production rose to 84 @.@ 6 million tonnes in 2013 . The largest producers were the United States ( 20 % ) , China ( 16 @.@ 6 % ) , Brazil ( 15 @.@ 1 % ) and the European Union ( 11 @.@ 3 % ) . There are two distinct models of production ; the European Union supply chain model seeks to supply products which can be traced back to the farm of origin . This model faces the increasing costs of implementing additional food safety requirements , welfare issues and environmental regulations . In contrast , the United States model turns the product into a commodity . 
 World production of duck meat was about 4 @.@ 2 million tonnes in 2011 with China producing two thirds of the total , some 1 @.@ 7 billion birds . Other notable duck @-@ producing countries in the Far East include Vietnam , Thailand , Malaysia , Myanmar , Indonesia and South Korea ( 12 % in total ) . France ( 3 @.@ 5 % ) is the largest producer in the West , followed by other EU nations ( 3 % ) and North America ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) . China was also by far the largest producer of goose and guinea fowl meat , with a 94 % share of the 2 @.@ 6 million tonne global market . 
 Global egg production was expected to reach 65 @.@ 5 million tonnes in 2013 , surpassing all previous years . Between 2000 and 2010 , egg production was growing globally at around 2 % per year , but since then growth has slowed down to nearer 1 % . 
 = = = Cuts of poultry = = = 
 Poultry is available fresh or frozen , as whole birds or as joints ( cuts ) , bone @-@ in or deboned , seasoned in various ways , raw or ready cooked . The meatiest parts of a bird are the flight muscles on its chest , called " breast " meat , and the walking muscles on the legs , called the " thigh " and " drumstick " . The wings are also eaten ( Buffalo wings are a popular example in the United States ) and may be split into three segments , the meatier " <unk> " , the " <unk> " ( also called the " flat " ) , and the wing tip ( also called the " flapper " ) . In Japan , the wing is frequently separated , and these parts are referred to as <unk> ( <unk> @-@ moto " wing base " ) and <unk> ( <unk> @-@ saki " wing tip " ) . 
 Dark meat , which avian <unk> refer to as " red muscle " , is used for sustained activity — chiefly walking , in the case of a chicken . The dark colour comes from the protein myoglobin , which plays a key role in oxygen uptake and storage within cells . White muscle , in contrast , is suitable only for short bursts of activity such as , for chickens , flying . Thus , the chicken 's leg and thigh meat are dark , while its breast meat ( which makes up the primary flight muscles ) is white . Other birds with breast muscle more suitable for sustained flight , such as ducks and geese , have red muscle ( and therefore dark meat ) throughout . Some cuts of meat including poultry expose the microscopic regular structure of intracellular muscle fibrils which can diffract light and produce iridescent colours , an optical phenomenon sometimes called structural colouration . 
 = = Health and disease ( humans ) = = 
 Poultry meat and eggs provide nutritionally beneficial food containing protein of high quality . This is accompanied by low levels of fat which have a favourable mix of fatty acids . Chicken meat contains about two to three times as much polyunsaturated fat as most types of red meat when measured by weight . However , for boneless , skinless chicken breast , the amount is much lower . A 100 @-@ g serving of baked chicken breast contains 4 g of fat and 31 g of protein , compared to 10 g of fat and 27 g of protein for the same portion of broiled , lean skirt steak . 
 A 2011 study by the Translational Genomics Research Institute showed that 47 % of the meat and poultry sold in United States grocery stores was contaminated with Staphylococcus aureus , and 52 % of the bacteria concerned showed resistance to at least three groups of antibiotics . Thorough cooking of the product would kill these bacteria , but a risk of cross @-@ contamination from improper handling of the raw product is still present . Also , some risk is present for consumers of poultry meat and eggs to bacterial infections such as Salmonella and Campylobacter . Poultry products may become contaminated by these bacteria during handling , processing , marketing , or storage , resulting in food @-@ borne illness if the product is improperly cooked or handled . 
 In general , avian influenza is a disease of birds caused by bird @-@ specific influenza A virus that is not normally transferred to people ; however , people in contact with live poultry are at the greatest risk of becoming infected with the virus and this is of particular concern in areas such as Southeast Asia , where the disease is endemic in the wild bird population and domestic poultry can become infected . The virus possibly could mutate to become highly virulent and infectious in humans and cause an influenza pandemic . 
 Bacteria can be grown in the laboratory on nutrient culture media , but viruses need living cells in which to replicate . Many vaccines to infectious diseases can be grown in fertilised chicken eggs . Millions of eggs are used each year to generate the annual flu vaccine requirements , a complex process that takes about six months after the decision is made as to what strains of virus to include in the new vaccine . A problem with using eggs for this purpose is that people with egg allergies are unable to be immunised , but this disadvantage may be overcome as new techniques for cell @-@ based rather than egg @-@ based culture become available . Cell @-@ based culture will also be useful in a pandemic when it may be difficult to acquire a sufficiently large quantity of suitable sterile , fertile eggs . 
 = Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees = 
 Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees , 468 U.S. 491 ( 1984 ) , is a 4 @-@ to @-@ 3 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that a New Jersey state gaming law requiring union leaders to be of good moral character was not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act ( NLRA ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1976 , New Jersey amended their state constitution to permit casino gambling in Atlantic City . 
 On June 2 , 1977 , Governor Brendan Byrne signed the Casino Control Act ( N.J. Stat . Ann . Section 5 : 12 @-@ 1 et seq . ) into law . The act established the New Jersey Casino Control Commission and instituted comprehensive regulation of casino gambling — including the regulation of labor unions representing gaming industry employees . In an attempt to forestall organized crime influence over labor unions , Sections 86 and 93 of the act imposed certain qualifications on officials of labor organizations representing casino industry workers . Among these qualifications were that the official be of " good moral character , " not been convicted of certain felonies , and was not associated with organized crime . If a labor union 's leaders did not meet these criteria , the union was prohibited from collecting or receiving dues from its members and from administering pension and welfare funds . 
 Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union Local 54 represented about 12 @,@ 000 workers , 10 @,@ 000 of whom were employed in Atlantic City casinos . Almost all of these casino workers had been organized since the legalization of gambling in the state . 
 On May 13 , 1981 , the Casino Control Commission found that Frank Gerace , president of Local 54 , and Frank Materio , the local 's grievance manager , were associated with organized crime . The commission also ruled that Karlos <unk> , the union 's business agent , was ineligible to be a union officer or agent because he had previously been convicted of extortion . The commission also found that union officers refused to cooperate with Casino Control Commission investigators , and held stock in Resorts International , Inc . ( which owned one of the casinos in which Local 54 represented workers ) . Both actions contravened state regulations . The commission feared that Local 54 was being influenced by <unk> " Little Nicky " <unk> , a reputed leader of the <unk> organized crime " family " based in Philadelphia . 
 National and state AFL @-@ CIO officials , fearing the New Jersey law might open the door to extensive new state regulation of labor unions , asked Local 54 to test the New Jersey law in court . After a regulatory appeal , the Casino Control Commission unanimously rejected the union 's contention that the law was unconstitutional and preempted by the NLRA . 
 Local 54 then filed suit in federal district court , seeking a permanent injunction prohibiting enforcement of the act . At trial , the union argued that the law infringed on its members ' constitutional right of freedom of association and was preempted by federal labor law . The state countered that the regulation was a permissible infringement of the freedom of association because keeping criminal elements out of the gaming industry was a compelling governmental interest . 
 On March 22 , 1982 , the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey held ( 536 F. Supp . 317 , ( 1982 ) ) that the New Jersey statute was not unconstitutionally vague and did not <unk> infringe on union members ' First Amendment rights . 
 The union appealed . 
 While the appeal was pending , the Casino Control Commission ordered Gerace and Materio to vacate their union positions . The commission demanded that both men relinquish their union offices by October 12 , 1982 , or the local would not be permitted to collect dues or administer its pension plan . 
 On June 30 , 1983 , a three @-@ judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit ruled ( 709 F.2d 815 ( 1983 ) ) 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 that the district court had erred . The appellate court granted the union 's injunction , finding that Section 93 of the act was preempted by Section 7 of the NLRA . The Court of Appeals relied heavily on the Supreme Court 's decision in Hill v. Florida ex rel . Watson , 325 U.S. 538 ( 1945 ) , when it concluded that Section 7 conferred " an unfettered right on employees to choose the officials of their own bargaining representatives . " 
 The state sought a rehearing en banc , but the entire court of appeals refused to rehear the case after it deadlocked in a 5 @-@ to @-@ 5 vote . 
 The state appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court , which granted certiorari ( 464 U.S. 990 ( 1983 ) ) . 
 = = Decision = = 
 Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court , in which Chief Justice Burger and Justices Harry Blackmun and William Rehnquist joined . Justice Byron White , joined by Justices Lewis F. Powell , Jr. and John Paul Stevens , dissented . Justices William J. Brennan , Jr. and Thurgood Marshall did not participate in the hearing or decision of the case . 
 = = = Majority opinion = = = 
 Justice O 'Connor concluded that Section 7 of the NLRA did not contain explicit pre @-@ emptive language nor indicate congressional intent to usurp a state role in labor @-@ management relations . " [ A ] <unk> consideration for the vitality of our federal system and for a rational allocation of functions belies any easy inference that Congress intended to deprive the States of their ability to retain jurisdiction over such matters . " 
 O 'Connor then rejected the appellate court 's reading of Hill v. Florida ex rel . Watson . Subsequent to Hill , O 'Connor noted , Congress had enacted the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act ( the " Landrum @-@ Griffin Act " ) . Section 504 ( a ) of the Landrum @-@ Griffin Act explicitly barred from office for a five @-@ year period union officers convicted of any number of crimes . By enacting Section 504 ( a ) , O 'Connor concluded , Congress " unmistakably indicated that the right of employees to select the officers of their bargaining representatives is not absolute ... " Citing the plurality opinion in De <unk> v. <unk> , 363 U.S. 144 ( 1960 ) , O 'Connor noted that the Court had previously held that the Landrum @-@ Griffin Act had not preempted the role of state legislation in regulating union officials . 
 O 'Connor next addressed the New Jersey statute 's enforcement mechanism . O 'Connor recognized the continuing controlling nature of Hill in this regard , and acknowledged that questions of constitutionality and preemption must " be assessed independently in terms of its potential conflict with the federal enactment . " O 'Connor concluded , however , that the record was too incomplete on this issue , and remanded the issue to the appellate court so that it could order further proceedings . 
 = = = Dissenting opinion = = = 
 Justice White , writing for the dissent , argued that the linkage between Section 93 and Section 86 of the New Jersey act rendered the act preempted by federal law . If Section 86 merely imposed qualifications on union officials , White concluded , the law would not be preempted by the NLRA . But the act went far beyond that , and imposed sweeping penalties on the union . For the dissent , this proved critical : 
 It is not clear what portion of the statute the Court upholds since it expressly refuses to decide whether the dues prohibition and fund administration provisions are valid . Section 93 ( b ) does nothing more than impose those two restrictions on unions whose officials are disqualified under the criteria set forth in § 86 . It does not , by its terms , provide a mechanism for disqualifying any union officer . Therefore , while it appears that the Court holds that a State is free to disqualify certain individuals from acting as union officials as long as it does not impose sanctions on the union itself , it is not clear that anything in § 93 ( b ) enables the State to do that . 
 White noted that although Section 7 of the NLRA granted employees the absolute right to choose collective bargaining representatives of their choosing , that right was not coextensive with the less absolute right to determine who should serve as officers in that organization . In the current case , White noted , the workers had chosen an organization rather than an individual as their collective bargaining agent . White agreed with the majority that the state can <unk> impose qualifications on the officers of Local 54 . But the language of Section 7 of the NLRA as well as the Court 's ruling in Hill permitted the state to impose sanctions only on the officers , not on the union . <unk> with the relatively untrammeled right of the union to carry out its duties as collective bargaining agent was impermissible as a matter of federal law : 
 Allowing the State to so restrict the union 's conduct infringes on the employees ' right to bargain collectively through the representative of their own choosing because it prevents that representative from functioning as a collective @-@ bargaining agent . ... A union which cannot sustain itself financially obviously cannot effectively engage in collective @-@ bargaining activities on behalf of its members . 
 The record , White noted , was quite clear in showing that Local 54 would not be able to function if either of the Casino Control Commission 's sanctions were imposed . Thus , White would have overturned the statute on grounds of preemption under Section 7 of the NLRA : 
 I am willing to hold that , as a matter of law , a statute like § 93 ( b ) , which prohibits a union from collecting dues from its members , impairs the union 's ability to represent those members to such an extent that it infringes on their § 7 right to bargain through the representative of their choice . 
 = = Consequences of the ruling = = 
 Gerace resigned shortly after the Supreme Court 's ruling . However , Local 54 immediately rehired Gerace as a $ 48 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ year " consultant . " The Casino Control Commission declared this " a subterfuge . " The gaming commission declined to impose either of its statutory sanctions , and instead sought a court injunction forcing Gerace to resign his consultancy . In November 1984 , a New Jersey state superior court ruled that the gaming commission had the right to force Gerace 's resignation . Gerace initially fought the court 's order , but eventually resigned after concluding that the continuing legal battle would " be disruptive to the operation of the union . " Materio and <unk> also resigned , but were later hired by the union as business agents to handle non @-@ casino related matters . 
 Five years after the ruling in Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees Union an academic study concluded that the Casino Control Act had been only marginally successful in preventing or eliminating organized crime influence in New Jersey 's casino unions . The study noted that the law had not been used since its initial 1981 enforcement action , and that many union officials were merely rehired as consultants rather than as elected officers . The state gaming commission never again attempted to use its two statutory sanctions against any union , and relied instead on the threat of injunctions to remove officials it suspected of links to organized crime . 
 = Section Thirty @-@ four of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms = 
 Section 34 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is the last section of Canada 's Charter of Rights , which is entrenched in the Constitution Act , 1982 . Section 34 provides guidance for the legal citation of the Charter . 
 The section has been interpreted by Canadian writers , who have analyzed both its intention and its meaning . Because the section affirms the name of the Charter and thus entrenches it in the Constitution Act , it came into focus in 1994 when a Member of Parliament ( MP ) proposed to change the name of the Charter . 
 = = Text = = 
 Under the heading " Citation , " the section reads : 
 = = Function = = 
 Section 34 , as part of the Constitution Act , 1982 , came into force on April 17 , 1982 . According to the government of Canada , section 34 's function " simply " relates to citation . The section clarifies that the first 34 sections of the Constitution Act , 1982 may be collectively called the " Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , " which is an " official name . " This would be the name of the English version . The French version of section 34 states " <unk> de la <unk> partie : <unk> <unk> des droits et <unk> . " 
 In 1982 , constitutional scholar Peter Hogg suggested that the section also clarifies the size and scope of the Charter . Only section 34 and the sections that come before it compose the Charter . The next sections of the Constitution Act , 1982 , including section 35 ( which affirms Aboriginal rights ) and section 36 ( which affirms equalization payments ) , are thus not Charter rights . This is significant , since section 1 of the Constitution Act , 1982 allows for limits on Charter rights , so it cannot apply to sections 35 or 36 . However , this also means that a " judicial remedy " under section 24 of the Act is not available for sections 35 or 36 , since section 24 refers only to the Charter . 
 = = Discussion = = 
 Canadian poet George Elliott Clarke once analyzed section 34 , calling it " bland legalese . " He wrote it was " reassuring " because it was dull , signalling neither fear nor excitement . Thus , it seemed to imply the Charter of Rights was not a radical constitutional change , despite the fact that it was potentially revolutionary for a constitutional monarchy . In considering the name Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Clarke felt the first word , " Canadian , " hinted at Canadian nationalism . He then compared this to the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the United States Bill of Rights , saying that those documents were written by men who had just emerged from conflict and still remembered it , and thus Canada could be duller . However , he noted there was some drama in the Charter in that it was written when there was a threat of Quebec separatism , and section 27 ( multiculturalism ) , section 25 ( Aboriginal rights ) , and section 15 ( 2 ) ( affirmative action ) of the Charter could change the country . 
 In 1994 , the Canadian House of Commons debated changing the name of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms to the Canadian Charter of Rights , Freedoms and Responsibilities . As Parliamentary Secretary Russell MacLellan pointed out , this would have to be done through a constitutional amendment , particularly to section 34 , since section 34 " establishes the charter 's title . The charter 's title is thus part of the Constitution . " MacLellan believed the amending formula needed would be the one requiring the support of seven provincial governments representing at least half of Canada 's population . Edmonton Southwest MP Ian McClelland had suggested the change , believing it to be necessary because " I felt we were becoming a nation of entitlement . " MacLellan replied that " The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is and aspires to be a statement by Canadians about the rights and freedoms which we as Canadians deeply value in our democratic society . " MacLellan added that section 1 implied a need for responsibilities , so " It is not necessary to change the title of this charter to emphasize the integral relationship between the individual 's rights and his or her responsibility to the rest of society . " 
 = Willie wagtail = 
 The willie ( or willy ) wagtail ( Rhipidura leucophrys ) is a passerine bird native to Australia , New Guinea , the Solomon Islands , the Bismarck Archipelago , and Eastern Indonesia . It is a common and familiar bird throughout much of its range , living in most habitats apart from thick forest . Measuring 19 – 21 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 1 ⁄ 2 – 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) in length , the willie wagtail is contrastingly coloured with almost entirely black upperparts and white underparts ; the male and female have similar plumage . 
 Three subspecies are recognised ; Rhipidura leucophrys leucophrys from central and southern Australia , the smaller R. l. <unk> from northern Australia , and the larger R. l. melaleuca from New Guinea and islands in its vicinity . It is unrelated to the true wagtails of the genus Motacilla ; it is a member of the fantail genus Rhipidura and is a part of a " core <unk> " group that includes true crows and ravens , drongos and birds of paradise . Within this group , fantails are placed either in the family Dicruridae , alongside drongos , or in their own small family , <unk> . 
 The willie wagtail is insectivorous and spends much time chasing prey in open habitat . Its common name is derived from its habit of wagging its tail horizontally when foraging on the ground . Aggressive and territorial , the willie wagtail will often harass much larger birds such as the laughing kookaburra and wedge @-@ tailed eagle . It has responded well to human alteration of the landscape and is a common sight in urban lawns , parks , and gardens . It was widely featured in Aboriginal folklore around the country as either a bringer of bad news or a stealer of secrets . 
